The Struggle of the Nations (Maspero, 1896)
===========================================
Gaston Maspero — The Struggle of the Nations: Egypt, Syria, and Assyria, translated by M. L. McClure (London, 1896), public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (struggleofnation00maspuoft). Raw OCR, not proofread.


3-

D

n

o
ni

. -_D


iJ ru

THE

STRUGGLE

OF   THE    NATIONS

EGYPT,     SYRIA,

AND

ASSYRIA

BY

G:  MASPERO

HON,    D.C.L,    AND    FELLOW   OF    QUEEN'S   COLLEGE,    OXFORD
MEMBER   OF   THE    INSTITUTE,    AND    PKOFESSOK   AT   THE    COLLEGE   OF   FRANCE

EDITED   BY

A.    H.    SAYCE

PKOFESSOK   OK    ASSYKIOLOCY,    OXFOKU

TRANSLATED   BV   M.   L.   McCLURE

ME5IBEU   OF   THE    CO.MMITTIOE   OF   THE    EGYPT    EXPLORATION    FUND

WITH  MAP,   THREE  COLOURED   PLATES,   AND  OVER  400   ILLUSTRATIONS.


LONDON  ,---^

SOCIETY    FOR   PROMOTING   CHRISTIAN    KNOWLEDGE
NORTHUMBEKLANU   AVENUE,    W.C.
1896


[published  undkr  the  direction  of  the  general  literature

committee.]


ElEaRONIC  VERSION
AVAILABLE     ^


EDITOR'S  PREFACE


It  is  my  pleasant  lot  to  introduce  to  the  English  reader  another  volume  of
Professor  Maspero's  important  work.  It  is  no  longer  the  Dawn  of  Civiliza-
tion in  which  we  find  ourselves,  but  the  full  light  of  an  advanced  culture.
The  nations  of  the  ancient  East  are  no  longer  each  pursuing  an  isolated
existence,  and  sej^arately  developing  the  seeds  of  civilization  and  culture
on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Nile.  Asia  and  Africa  have  met  in
mortal  combat.  Babylonia  has  carried  its  empire  to  the  IVontiers  of  Egypt,
and  Egypt  itself  has  been  held  in  bondage  by  the  Hyksos  strangers  from
Asia.  In  return,  Egypt  has  driven  back  the  wave  of  invasion  to  the  borders
of  Mesopotamia,  has  substituted  an  empire  of  its  own  in  Syria  for  that  of
the  Babylonians,  and  has  forced  the  Babylonian  king  to  treat  with  its  Pharaoh
on  equal  terms.  In  the  track  of  war  and  diplomacy  have  come  trade  and
commerce  ;  Western  Asia  is  covered  with  roads,  along  which  the  merchant
and  the  courier  travel  incessantly,  and  the  whole  civilised  world  of  the  Orient
is  knit  together  in  a  common  literary  culture  and  common  commercial
interests.

The  age  of  isolation  has  thus  been  succeeded  by  an  age  of  intercourse,  partly
military  and  antagonistic,  partly  literary  and  peaceful.  Professor  Maspero
j)aints  for  us  this  age  of  intercourse,  describes  its  rise  and  character,  its  decline
and  fall.  For  the  unity  of  Eastern  civilization  was  again  shattered.  The
Hittites  descended  from  tiie  ranges  of  the  Taurus  upon  the  Egyptian  province
of  Nortliern  Syria,  and  cut  off  the  Semites  of  the  west  from  those  of  the  east.
'I'he  Israelites  poured  over  the  Jordan  out  of  Edom  and  Moab,  and  took
possession  of  Canaan,  while  Babylonia  itself,  for  so  many  centuries  the  ruling
power  of  the  Oriental  world,  had  to  make  way  for  its  upstart  rival  Assyria.
The  old  imperial  powers  were  exhausted  and  played  out,  and  it  needed  time
before  the  new  forces  which  were  to  take  their  place  could  acquire  suflicieut
strength  for  their  work.

As  usual,  Professor  Maspero  has  been  careful  to  embody  in  his  history  the

a  2


iv  EDITOR'S   PREFACE.

very  latest  discoveries  ami  iuformation.  Notice,  it  will  be  found,  has  Iteen
taken  even  of  the  stda  of  Meneptah,  disinterred  last  spring  by  Professor
Petrie,  on  which  the  name  of  the  Israelites  is  engraved.  Other  discoveries  of
the  past  year  which  relate  to  the  period  covered  by  the  Bawn  of  Civilization
must  wait  to  be  noticed  until  a  new  edition  of  that  volume  is  called  for.  Thus,
at  Elephantine,  I  found  last  winter,  on  a  granite  boulder,  an  inscription  of
Khufuankh — whose  sarcophagus  of  red  granite  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful
objects  in  the  Gizeh  Museum — which  carries  back  the  history  of  the  island  to
the  age  of  the  pyramid-builders  of  the  fourth  dynasty.  The  boulder  was
subsequently  concealed  under  the  southern  side  of  the  city-wall,  and  hs
fragments  of  inscribed  papyrus  coeval  with  the  sixth  dynasty  have  been
discovered  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  on  one  of  whicli  mention  is  made
of  '•  this  domain  "  of  Pepi  II.,  it  would  seem  that  the  town  of  Elephantine
must  have  been  founded  between  the  period  of  the  fourth  dynasty  and  that  of
the  sixth.  Manetho  is  therefore  justified  in  making  the  fifth  and  sixth
dynasties  of  Elephantine  origin.

It  is  in  Babylonia,  however,  that  the  most  startling  discoveries  have  been
made.  At  Telle,  M.  de  Sarzec  has  found  a  library  of  more  than  thirty  thousand
tablets,  all  neatly  arranged,  piled  in  order  one  on  the  other,  and  belonging  to
the  age  of  Gudea  (b.c.  2700).  Many  more  tablets  of  an  early  date  have  been
unearthed  at  Abu-Habba  (Sippara)  and  Jokha  (Isin)  by  Dr.  Seheil,  working
for  the  Turkish  government.  But  the  most  important  finds  have  been  at
Nififer,  the  ancient  iSTippur,  in  Northern  Babylonia,  where  the  American  ex-
pedition has  at  last  brought  to  a  close  its  long  work  of  systematic  excavation.
Here  Mr.  Haynes  has  dug  down  to  the  very  foundations  of  the  great  temple
of  El-lil,  and  the  chief  liistorical  results  of  his  labours  have  been  publislied
by  Professor  Hilprecht  (in  The  Babylonian  Expedition  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pt.  2,  1890).

About  midway  between  the  summit  and  the  bottom  of  the  mound,
Mr.  Haynes  laid  bare  a  pavement  constructed  of  huge  bricks  stamped  with  the
names  of  Sargon  of  Akkad  and  his  son  Naram-Siu.  He  found  also  the  ancient
wall  of  the  city,  which  had  been  built  by  Naram-Sin,  13'75  metres  wide.  The
debris  of  ruined  buildings  which  lies  below  the  pavement  of  Sargon  is  as  much
as  9'2.5  metres  in  deptli,  while  that  above  it,  the  topmost  stratum  of  which
brings  us  down  to  the  Christian  era,  is  only  11  metres  in  height.  We  may
form  some  idea  from  this  of  the  enormous  age  to  which  the  history  of
Babylonian  culture  and  writing  reaches  back.  In  fact,  Professor  Hilprecht
quotes  with  approval  Mr.  Haynes's  words :  "  We  must  cease  to  apply  the
adjective  'earliest'  to  the  time  of  Sargon,  or  to  any  age  or  epoch  within  a


EDITOR'S   PREFACE.  V

thousand  years  of  his  advanced  civilization."  "The  golden  age  of  Babylonian
history  seems  to  include  the  reign  of  Sargon  and  of  Ur-Gur."

Many  of  the  inscriptions  which  belong  to  this  remote  age  of  human  culture
have  been  published  by  Professor  Hilprecht.  Among  them  is  a  long  inscription,
in  132  lines,  engraved  on  multitudes  of  large  stone  vases  presented  to  the
temple  of  El-lil  by  a  certain  Lugal-zaggisi.  Lugal-zaggisi  was  the  son  of
Ukus,  the  patesi  or  high  priest  of  the  "  Land  of  the  Bow,"  as  Mesopotamia,
with  its  Bedawin  inhabitants,  was  called.  He  not  only  conquered  Babylonia,
then  known  as  Kengi,  "  the  land  of  canals  and  reeds,"  but  founded  an  empire
which  extended  from  the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Mediterranean.  This  was
centuries  before  Sargon  of  Akkad  followed  in  his  footsteps.  Erech  became  the
capital  of  Lugal-zaggisi's  empire,  and  doubtless  received  at  this  time  its
Sumerian  title  of  "  the  city  "  jwr  excellence.

For  a  long  while  previously  there  had  been  war  between  Babylonia  and
the  "  Land  of  the  Bow,"  whose  rulers  seem  to  have  established  tliemselves  in
the  city  of  Kis.  At  one  time  we  find  the  Babylonian  prince  En-sag(sag)-ana
capturing  Kis  and  its  king ;  at  another  time  it  is  a  king  of  Kis  who  makes
oiferings  to  the  god  of  Nippur,  in  gratitude  for  his  victories.  To  this  period
belongs  the  famous  "  Stela  of  the  Vultures  "  found  at  Telle,  on  whicli  is  depicted
the  victory  of  E-dingir-ana-gin,  the  King  of  Lagas  (Telle),  over  the  Semitic
hordes  of  the  Land  of  the  Bow.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  recent  discoveries
have  shown  how  correct  Professor  Maspero  has  been  in  assigning  the  kings  of
Lagas  to  a  period  earlier  than  that  of  Sargon  of  Akkad.

Professor  Hilprecht  would  place  E-dingir-ana-gin  after  Lugal-zaggisi,  and
see  in  the  Stela  of  the  Vultures  a  monument  of  the  revenge  taken  by  the
Sumerian  rulers  of  Lagas  for  the  conquest  of  the  country  by  the  inhabitants  of
the  north.  But  it  is  equally  possible  that  it  marks  the  successful  reaction  of
Chaldsea  against  the  power  established  by  Lugal-zaggisi.  However  this  may
be,  the  dynasty  of  Lagas  (to  which  Professor  Hilprecht  has  lately  added  a  new
king,  En-Khegal)  reigned  in  peace  for  some  time,  and  belonged  to  the  same
age  as  the  first  dynasty  of  Ur.  This  was  founded  by  a  certain  Lugal-kigub-
nidudu,  whose  inscriptions  have  been  found  at  Niifer.  The  dynasty  whicli
arose  at  Ur  in  later  days  (cir.  B.C.  2700),  under  Ur-Gur  and  Diingi,  which  has
hitherto  been  known  as  "  the  first  dynasty  of  Ur,"  is  thus  dethroned  from  its
position,  and  becomes  the  second.  The  succeeding  dynasty,  which  also  made
Ur  its  capital,  and  whose  kings,  Ine-Siu,  Pur-Sin  II.,  and  Gimil-Sin,  were  the
immediate  predecessors  of  the  first  dynasty  of  Babylon  (to  which  Khanimurabi
belonged),  must  henceforth  be  termed  the  third.

Aniong    the    latest   acquisitions    from   Tello    are    the    seals  of   the  patesi,


VI  EDITOR'S   Pit EB' ACE.

Lugal-usnmgal,  which  finally  remove  all  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  "  Sargaui,
king  of  the  city,"  with  the  famous  Sargon  of  Akkad.  The  historical  accuracy
of  Sargon's  annals,  moreover,  have  been  fully  vindicated.  Not  only  have  the
American  excavators  found  the  contemporary  monuments  of  him  and  his  son
Narara-Sin,  but  also  tablets  dated  in  the  years  of  his  campaigns  against  "  the
land  of  the  Amorites."  In  short,  Sargon  of  Akkad,  so  lately  spoken  of  as
"a  half-mythical"  personage,  has  now  emerged  into  the  full  glare  of  authentic
history.

That  the  native  chronologists  had  sufficient  material  for  reconstructing
the  p>ast  history  of  their  country,  is  also  now  clear.  The  early  Babylonian
contract-tablets  are  dated  by  events  which  officially  distinguished  the  several
years  of  a  king's  reign,  and  tablets  have  been  discovered  comjjiled  at  the  close
of  a  reign  which  give  year  by  year  the  events  which  thus  characterised  them.
One  of  these  tablets,  for  example,  from  the  excavations  at  Niffer,  begins  with
the  words:  (1)  "The  year  when  Pur-Sin  (II.)  becomes  king.  (2)  Tlie  year
when  Pur-Sin  the  king  conquers  Urbilium,"  and  ends  with  "tlie  year  when
Gimil-Sin  becomes  King  of  Ur,  and  conquers  the  land  of  Zabsali"  in  the
Lebanon.

Of  special  interest  to  the  biblical  student  are  the  di.scoveries  made  by
Mr.  Pinches  among  some  of  the  Babylonian  tablets  which  have  recently  been
acquired  by  the  British  Museum.  Four  of  them  relate  to  no  less  a  personage
than  Kudur-Laghghamar  or  Chedor-laomer,  "  King  of  Elam,"  as  well  as  to
Eri-Aku  or  Arioch,  King  of  Larsa,  and  his  son  Dur-makh-ilani ;  to  Tudghula  or
Tid'al,  the  son  of  Gazza[ni],  and  to  their  war  against  Babylon  in  the  time  of
Khammu[rabi].  In  one  of  the  texts  the  question  is  asked,  "  Who  is  the  son  of
a  king's  daughter  who  has  sat  on  the  throne  of  royalty  ?  Dur-makh-ilani,  the
son  of  Eri-Aku,  the  son  of  the  lady  Kur  .  .  .  has  sat  on  the  throne  of  royalty,"
from  which  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred  that  Eri-Aku  was  the  son  of  Kudur-
Laghghamar's  daughter  ;  and  in  another  we  read,  "  Who  is  Kudur-Laghghamar,
the  doer  of  mischief?  He  has  gathered  together  the  Umman  Manda,  has
devastated  the  land  of  Bel  (Babylonia),  and  [has  marched]  at  their  side."  The
Umman  Manda  were  the  "  Barbarian  Hordes  "  of  the  Kurdish  mountains,  on
the  northern  frontier  of  Elam,  and  the  name  corresponds  with  that  of  the
Goyyim  or  "  nations "  in'  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Genesis.  We  here  see
Kudur-Laghghamar  acting  as  their  suzerain  lord.  Unfortunately,  all  four
tablets  are  in  a  shockingly  broken  condition,  and  it  is  therefore  difRcult  to
discover  in  them  a  continuous  sense,  or  to  determine  their  precise  nature.

They  have,  however,  just  been  supplemented  by  further  discoveries  made
by  Dr.  Scheil  at  Constantinople.     Among  the  tablets  preserved  there,  he  has


EDITOR'S    PREFACE.  vii

fouud  letters  I'roui  Khammurabi  to  his  vassal  Siuidinuara  of  Lar.sa,  from  which
we  leara  that  Sin-idinnam  had  been  dethroned  by  the  Elamites  Kudur-Mabug
and  Eri-lku,  and  had  fled  for  refuge  to  the  court  of  Khammurabi  at  Babylon.
In  the  war  which  subsequently  broke  out  between  Khammurabi  and  Kudur-
Laghghamar,  the  King  of  Elam  (who,  it  would  seem,  exercised  suzerainty  over
Babylonia  for  seven  years),  Sin-idinnam  gave  material  assistance  to  the
Babylonian  monarch,  and  Khammurabi  accordingly  bestowed  presents  upon
him  as  a  "recompense  for  his  valour  on  the  day  of  the  overthrow  of  Ivurhir-
Laghghamar."

I  must  not  conclude  this  Preface  without  referring  to  a  fine  scarab —
found  in  the  rubbish-mounds  of  the  ancient  city  of  Kom  Ombos,  in  Upper
Egypt — which  bears  upon  it  the  name  of  Sutkhu-Apopi.  It  shows  us  that  the
authnr  of  the  story  of  the  Expulsion  of  the  Hylcsos,  in  calling  the  king
Ra-Apopi,  merely,  like  an  orthodox  Egyptian,  substituted  the  name  of  the  god
of  Heliopolis  for  that  of  the  foreign  deity.  Equally  interesting  are  the  scarabs
brought  to  light  by  Professor  Flinders  Petrie,  on  which  a  hitherto  unknown
Ya'aqob-hal  or  Jacob-el  receives  the  titles  of  a  Pharaoh.

A.  H.  SAYCE.


TRANSLATOPv^S    PREFACE.


In  presentiuu-  to  the  public  Professor  J^laspero's  latest  volume,  the  "  Premieres
Meldes  cles  Peuplf  s,"  in  its  English  form,  I  have  little  to  add  to  the  words
I  prefixed  to  the  first  volume  of  the  series.  I  have  in  the  present,  as  in
the  previous  work,  preserved  Professor  Maspero's  spelling  of  the  I]gyptiau
proper  names,  inserting  in  tlie  Index  the  forms  in  general  use  among
English  Egyptologists.  With  regard  to  such  Syrian  personal  and  place
names  as  occur  in  the  Bible,  I  have  followed  the  spelling  of  the  Revised
Version ;  thougli  here,  as  in  the  Assyrian  portion  of  the  work,  the  forms
represented  on  the  monuments,  whether  cuneiform  texts.  Tel  el-Amarna
tablets,  or  Egyptian  hieroglyphs,   are  also    given.

While  this  translation  was  passing  through  the  press,  fresh  discoveries
were  made  which  have  tlirown  further  light  upon  a  few  points  dealt  with
in  tlie  text,  and  in  these  cases  the  Editor  or  Translator  has  ventured  to  add
such  short  notes  as  seemed  needful.  As  an  example  of  these,  I  may  call
attention  to  the  notes  on  p.  29,  in  whicli  Professor  Hommel's  unhesitating
identification  of  Khammurabi  with  the  Amraphel  of  Genesis  xiv.  1  is  given,
and  also  the  true  reading  of  Kirn-Sin  as  determined  by  Mr.  Pinches.

I  iiave  not  referred  in  the  notes  to  Professor  Hommel's  letter  in  the
Academy  of  October  17th  last,  dealing  with  the  word  "  Arpachshad,"  which
he  considers  to  be  an  Egypticised  form  of  the  territorial  name  "  Ur  Kasdim,"
or  "Ur  of  the  Chaldees."  Tliis  important  elucidation  of  an  ethnological
term  occurring  in  Genesis  x.,  in  a  passage  ascribed  by  recent  critics  to
the  time  of  the  Exile,  will  doubtless  receive  the  consideration  it  merits.

M.  L.  McCLUIiM

London,

Novemher  11,   1896.


n:^


^•''■,  A  to  tf   '^    '      '^'^-Jlf^~^"''


■MQ  -100  ^OO


Stoj&brds  Gtoa    E.-'tab^JjOndon^.


Loudou.  Published  hv  llif  SotrictT  fuv  Fnunotiii;^  Cbrishan  Kluiwlcdgr


liiiiHnwMilHMi


%mwm^


i:'ii:dkb  op  the  fcneral  tall  of  queen  ISIMKIlOr.IU.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER   I.

THE    FIRST    CHALD/EAN    EMPIRE    AND    THE    HYKSOS    IN    EGYPT.

PACK

SvnrA :  The  Pat;t  Flayed  by  it   i.v  the  Ancient  "World— Babylon  and  the

First  Cfiald.ean  Empire — The  Dominion  of  the  Hyksos  :  Ahmosis        ...         3

CHAPTER   II.

SYRIA    AT   THE    BEGINNING    OF    THE    EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.

XlNEVEH    ANIl    THE   FiRST    CoSS.IiAN   KlNUS ThE    rEOl'LES    OF    SvRIA,  THEIll   I'OWNS,

THEIR  Civilization,  their  Eeligion — PiiciNiciA  ...  ...  ...     Ill

CHAPTER   III.

THE    EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN    DYNASTY.

ThCtmosis  I.  AND  HIS  Ar.m Y— HlTSHOPsiTu  AND  Thut.mosis  III.:  The  Organisa-
tion OF  THE  Syrian  Provinces — AmenOthes  III. :  The  Koyal  Worshippers
OF  Atonu  ...  ...  ...  •••  ••■  •••  ••■     2i)9


CHAPTER    IV.

THE    REACTION    AGAINST    EGYPT.

The  XIX"'  Dynasty:  IIailmhabI — The  Hittite  Empire  in  Syria  and  in  Asia
Minor — Seti  I.  and   Ra.mses  II. — The   People   of   the  Sea:    Minephtah

AND    the    Isr.AFJ.ME    E.XODUS  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       341


Xll  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER   V.

THE  CLOSE  OF  THE  THEBAN  EMPIRE,

I'AGE

Eamses    III. — The    Theban    City    under    the    Eamessides  —  Manners    and

Customs — Population — The  Predominance  of  Amon  and  his  High  Priests    453

CHAPTER   VI.

THE    RISE   OF   THE   ASSYRIAN    EMPIRE.

Phcenicia  and  the  Northern  Nations  after  the  Death  of  Eajises  III. — The
First  Assyrian  Empire  :  Tiglath-pileser  I. — The  Aram.eans  and  the
Khati  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     569

CHAPTER   VII.

THE    HEBREWS    AND    THE    PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

The  Israelites  in  the  Land  of  Canaan  :  The  Judges — The  Philistines  and
the  Hebrew  Kingdom— Saul,  David,  Solomon,  the  Defection  of  the  Ten
Tribes — The  XXI"  Egyptian  Dynasty — Sheshonq — Damascus  ...     073

Index  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     789


THE    FIRST    CHALD.EAN    EMPIRE
AND    THE    HYKSOS    IN    EGYPT.


SYRIA  ;     THE   PART    PLAYED     BY    IT    IN     THE     HISTOKY     OF    THE    ANCIENT    WORLD — BABYLON
AND   THE   FIRST   CHALD.EAN   EMPIRE THE   DOMINION   OF   THE   HYKSOS  :    AHMOSIS.

Syria,  owimj  tu  its  ijeugraphical  position,  condemned  to  ha  snhjtjct  to  nciglthouring
powers — Lebanon,  Anti-Lebanon,  the  valley  of  the  Orontes  and  of  the  Litany,  and  surrounding
rsgions:  the  northern  table-land,  the  conntrij  about  Damascus,  [the  Mediterranean  coast,
the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea — Civilization  and  primitive  inhabitants,  Semites  and  Aaiaticji :
the  almost  entire  abseiice  of  Egyptian  influence,  the  predominance  of  that  of  Chaldxa.

Babylon,  its  ruins  and  its  environs — It  extends  its  ride  over  Mesopotamia;  its  earliest
dynasty  and  its  struggle  with  Central  Chaldaia — Elam,  its  geographical  position,  its  peoples  :
Kutur-Nakhunta  conquers  Larsam — Rimsin  (Eri-Aku) ;  Klmmmurabi  founds  tlte  first
Babylonian  empire ;  his  victories,  his  buildings,  his  canals — The  Elam,ites  in  Syria  ;  Kiidur-
lagamar — Syria  recoynizes  the  authority  of  H ammnrabi  and  liis  successors.

Tlie  Hyksos  conquer  Egypt  at  the  end  of  the  XIV"'  dynasty;  the  founding  of  Avaris —
Uncertainty  both  of  ancients  and  moderns  tvith  regard  to  (lie  origin  of  the  Hyksos  :  probability
■of  their  being  tlie  Khati — Their  kings  adopt  the  manners  and  civilization  of  the  Egyptians:
the  monuments  of  Khiani  and  of  Apophis  I.  and  IT. — The  XV"'  dynasty.

Semitic  incursioiis  following  the  IlyksCis — The  migration  of  the  Ptimnicians  and  the
Israelites  into  Sgria  :  Terah,  Abraliam  and  his  sojourn  in  the  land  of  Canaan — Isaac,  Jacob,
Joseph  :  the  Israelites  yo  doiun  into  Egxjpt  and.  settle  in  the  land  of  Goshen.


(  ^  )

27ie6es  revolts  against  the  Hyksos :  popular  traditions  tw  to  the  origin  of  tlie  u-ar,  the
romance  of  Apdphis  and  Saqnilnri — The  Theban  princesses  and  the  last  kings  of  the  XVII""
dynastxj:  Ti-Mgni  Kamosii,  Ahmosis  I. — The  lords  of  El-Kah,  and  the  part  they  played
during  the  icar  of  independence — 27ie  taking  of  Avaris  and  the  expulsion  of  the  Uyksus.

The  reorganization  of  Egypt — Ahmosis  I.  and  his  Nubian  irars,  the  reopening  of  the
quarries  of  Tilrah — Ainenothes  I.  and  his  mother  Nofrttari :  the  jetoellery  of  Qneen  Ahhotpii
— 27i€  xoars  of  Ainenothes  I.,  the  apotheosis  of  Nofrttari — The  accession  of  TliAtmosis  I.  ami
the  re-generation  of  Egypt.


%SJ


te^^^JV-*^^''^^'^-.


^'


*


I  J  A  i^  ^


%\\


S'


THE  ENAMELLED  GOLD   NEUKLACE   Ol"   QUEEN   AHHOTPU   IN   THE  GIZEH    MUSEUM.'


CHAPTER    I,


THE    FIRST   CHALD/EAN    EMPIRE   AND   THE   HYKSOS   IN    EGYPT.

Syria :  the  part  played  by  it  in  the  ancient  world— Babylon  and  the  first  Chaldajan  empire — The

dominion  of  the  Hyksus :  Ahmosis.

SOEIE  countries  seem  destined  from  their
origin  to  become  the  battle-fields  of  the
contending  nations  which  environ  them.  Into
such  regions,  and  to  tlieir  cost,  neighbour-
ing peoples  come  from  century  to  century  to
settle  their  quarrels  and  bring  to  an  issue  the
questions  of  supremacy  which  disturb  their
little  corner  of  tlie  world.  The  nations  around
are  eager  for  the  possession  of  a  country  thus
situated ;  it  is  seized  upon  bit  by  bit,  and  in
the  strife  dismembered  and  trodden  underfoot :
at  best  the  only  course  open  to  its  inhabitants
is  to  join  forces  with  one  of  its  invaders,  and
while  helping  the  intruder  to  overcome  the  rest,
to  secure  for  themselves  a  position  of  permanent
servitude.  Should  some  unlooked-for  chance  relieve  them  from  the  presence
of  their  foreign  lord,  they  will  probably  be  quite  incapable  of  profiting  by  the

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey.  The  vignette,  also  by
Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograph  by  Deviiria  taken  in  lSG-1,  represents  the  gilded  mask  of  tlio
coffin  of  Queen  AhhotpCi  I.     Cf.  p.  95,  et  seq.,  of  the  present  volume.


4  TEE  FIRST  on  ALB  JEAN  EMPIRE.

respite  which  fortune  puts  iu  their  way,  or  of  making  any  effectual  attempt  to
organize  themselves  in  view  of  future  attacks.  They  tend  to  become  split  up
into  numerous  rival  communities,  of  which  even  the  pettiest  will  aim  at
autonomy,  keeping  up  a  perpetual  frontier  war  for  the  sake  of  becoming
possessed  of  or  of  retaining  a  glorious  sovereignty  over  a  few  acres  of  corn  in
the  plains,  or  some  wooded  ravines  in  the  mountains.  Year  after  year  there
will  be  scenes  of  bloody  conflict,  in  which  petty  armies  will  fight  petty  battles
on  behalf  of  petty  interests,  but  so  fiercely,  and  with  such  furious  animosity,
that  the  country  will  suffer  from  the  strife  as  much  as,  or  even  more  than,
from  an  invasion.  There  will  be  no  truce  to  their  struggles  until  they  all  fall
under  the  sway  of  a  foreign  master,  and,  except  in  the  interval  between  two
conquests,  they  will  have  no  national  existence,  their  history  being  almost
entirely  merged  in  that  of  other  nations.

From  remote  antiquity  Syria  was  in  the  condition  just  described,  and  thus
destined  to  become  subject  to  foreign  rule.  Chalda3a,  Egypt,  Assyria,  and
Persia  presided  in  turn  over  its  destinies,  while  Macedonia  and  the  empires  of
the  West  were  only  waiting  their  opportunity  to  lay  hold  of  it.  By  its  position
it  formed  a  kind  of  meeting-place  where  most  of  the  military  nations  of  the
ancient  world  were  bound  sooner  or  later  to  come  violently  into  collision.
Confined  between  the  sea  and  the  desert,  Syria  offers  the  only  route  of  easy
access  to  an  army  marching  northwards  from  Africa  into  Asia,  and  all
conquerors,  whether  attracted  to  Mesopotamia  or  to  Egypt  by  the  accumulated
riches  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  or  the  Nile,  were  obliged  to  pass  through
it  in  order  to  reacli  the  object  of  their  cupidity.  It  might,  perhaps,  have
escaped  this  fatal  consequence  of  its  position,  had  the  formation  of  the  country
permitted  its  tribes  to  mass  themselves  together,  and  oppose  a  compact  body
to  the  invading  hosts ;  but  the  range  of  mountains  which  forms  its  backbone
subdivides  it  into  isolated  districts,  and  by  thus  restricting  each  tribe  to  a
narrow  existence  maintained  among  them  a  mutual  antagonism.  The  twin
chains,  the  Lebanon  and  the  Anti-Lebanon,  which  divide  the  country  down  the
centre,  are  composed  of  the  same  kind  of  calcareous  rocks  and  sandstone,  while
the  same  sort  of  reddish  clay  has  been  deposited  on  their  slopes  by  the  glaciers
of  the  same  geological  period.'  Arid  and  bare  on  the  northern  side,  they
send  out  towards  the  south  featureless  monotonous  ridges,  furrowed  here  and

'  Drake  remarked  in  the  Lebanon  several  varieties  of  limestone  (Bluiton-Duake,  Unexplored
Syria,  vol.  i.  pp.  90,  91),  -wliicli  have  been  carefully  catalogued  by  Blanche  and  Lartet  (Duo  de
LuYNES,  Voyage  d'exploration  a  la  mer  Morlc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  40,  41,  49-58).  Above  these  strata,  which
belong  to  the  Jurassic  formation,  come  reddish  sandstone,  then  beds  of  very  hard  yellowish  limestone,
and  finally  marl.  The  name  Lebanon,  in  Assyrian  Libnana,  would  appear  to  signify  "  the  white
mountain;"  the  Amorites  called  the  Anti-Lebanon  Saniru,  Shenir,  according  to  the  Assyrian
•  texts  (Fr.  DELrrzsou,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies'?  p.  104)  and  tlie  Hebrew  books  {DeiU.  iii.  9;  1  Chron.
V.  23).


6  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE,

there  by  short  narrow  valleys,  hollowed  out  iu  places  into  basins  or  funnel-
shaped  ravines,  which  are  widened  year  by  year  by  the  down-rush  of  torrents.
These  ridges,  as  thej^  proceed  southwards,  become  clothed  with  verdure  and  offer
a  more  varied  outline,  tlie  ravines  being  more  thickly  wooded,  and  the  summits
less  uniform  in  contour  and  colouring.  Lebanon  becomes  white  and  ice-crowned
in  winter,  but  none  of  its  peaks  rises  to  the  altitude  of  perpetual  snows :  the
highest  of  them,  Mount  Timarun,  reaches  10,526  feet,  while  only  three  others
exceed  9000.'  Anti-Lebanon  is,  speaking  generally,  1000  or  1300  feet  lower  than
its  neighbour :  it  becomes  higher,  however,  towards  the  south,  where  the  triple
peak  of  Mount  Hermon'-^  rises  to  a  height  of  9184  feet.  Tlie  Orontes  and  the
Litany  drain  the  intermediate  space.  The  Orontes  rising  on  the  west  side  of  the
Anti-Lebanon,  near  the  ruins  of  Baalbek,^  rushes  northwards  in  such  a  violent
manner,  that  the  dwellers  on  its  banks  call  it  the  rebel — Nahr  el-Asi.*  About  a
third  of  the  way  towards  its  mouth  it  enters  a  depression,  which  ancient  dykes
help  to  transform  into  a  lake ;  it  flows  thence,  almost  parallel  to  the  sea-coast,  as
far  as  the  o6th  degree  of  latitude.  There  it  meets  the  last  spurs  of  the  Amanos,
but,  failing  to  cut  its  way  through  them,  it  turns  abruptly  to  the  west,  and  then  to
the  south,  falling  into  the  Mediterranean  after  having  received  an  increase  to  its
volume  from  the  waters  of  the  Afrin.^  The  Litany  rises  a  short  distance  from  the
Orontes  ;  it  flows  at  first  through  a  wide  and  fertile  plain,  which  soon  contracts,
however,  and  forces  it  into  a  channel  between  the  spurs  of  the  Lebanon  and
the  Galilffian  hills."     The  water  thence  makes  its  way  between  two  cliffs  of

'  Bdrtojs-Brake,  Unexplored  Syria,  vol.  i.  p.  88,  attributed  to  it  an  altitude  of  9175  English  feet;
others  estimate  it  at  10,539  feet.  The  mountains  which  exceed  3000  metres  are  Dahr  el-Kozib,  3046
metres  ;  Jebel-Miskiyah,  3uS0  metres  ;  and  Jebel-Makhmal  or  Makmal,  3040  metres  (Elisee  Reclus,
Nouvelle  Geographic  nnicerselle,  vol.  ix.  jip.  693,  094).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  these  heights  are  not  yet
determined  with  the  accuracy  desirable.

■  It  was  sometimes  called  in  the  plural,  Hermonim,  the  Hermons  (Ps.  slii.  6).

'  Flint,  Natural  Eistory,  Bk.  V.  xviii. :  "  Amnis  Orontes,  natus  inter  Libanum  ct  Antilibanum,
juxta  Heliopolin."   On  the  source  of  the  Orontes,  cf.  BuRTOs-DR.iKE,  Unexplored  Syria,  vol.  i.  pp.  58-66.

'  The  Egyptians  knew  it  in  early  times  by  the  name  of  Auarati,  or  Araiinti  (E.  de  Eocge,  Le
Poeme  de  Pen-ta-onr,  1S5G,  p.  8,  whose  opinion  has  since  been  adopted  by  all  Egyptologists) ;  it  is
mentioned  in  Assyrian  inscriptions  under  the  name  of  Arantii  (Fr.  Delitzsoh,  TTo  lag  das
Paradiesi  p.  274).  All  are  agreed  in  acknowledging  that  this  name  is  not  Semitic,  and  an  Aryan
origin  is  attributed  to  it,  but  witliout  convincing  proof;  according  to  Strabo  (xvi.  ii.  §  7,  p.  750),  it
was  originally  called  Typhon,  and  was  only  styled  Orontes  after  a  certain  Orontes  had  built  the  first
bridge  across  it.  The  name  of  Axios  which  it  sometimes  bears  appears  to  have  been  given  to  it  by
Greek  colonists,  in  memory  of  a  river  in  Macedonia  (Sozo.men.  History,  vii.  15).  This  is  probably  the
origin  of  the  modern  name  of  Asi,  and  the  meaniug,  rebellious  ricer,  which  Arab  tradition  attaches  to
the  latter  term,  prob.ably  comes  from  a  popular  etymology  which  likened  Axios  to  Asi :  the  identification
was  all  the  easier  since  it  justifies  the  epithet  by  the  violence  of  its  current  (Pococke,  Travels,
French  trans.  1777,  vol.  iii.  pp.  414,  415).

^  The  Afrin  is  the  Aprie  of  cuneiform  inscriptions,  at  first  confounded  with  one  of  the  two  rivers
of  Damascus,  the  Baradah  (Fixzi,  Ricerche  per  lo  Studio  dell'  Antirhita  Assira,  p.  2S4),  the  exact
position  of  which  was  discovered  by  H.  Rawlinson  (G.  Eawlinson,  The  Five  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  89).

'  The  Litany  was  identified  by  Reland  (Palwstina  ex  moimmentis  veteribu.i  iUustrata,  vol.  i.  pp.
290,  291)  with  the  river  of  the  Lion,  Afovros  irora^ifs  of  Ptolemy  (v.  15),  commonly  called  Leontes  :
Strabo,  who  mentions  the  river,  gives  it  no  name  at  all  (xvi.  ii.  §  24,  p.  758).  Eeland's  hypothesis
has  been  strenuously  opposed  by  Poulain  de  Bossay  {Essais  de  restitution  et  d'interprftation  d'un


aCELE-STRIA   AND    TEE  NORTHERN  TABLE-LAND.  7

perpendicular  rock,  the  ravine    being    in    several  places  so  narrow,  that  the

branches  of  the  trees  ou  the  opposite  sides  interlace,  and  an  active  man  could

readily  leap  across  it.    Near  Yakhmur  some  detached  rocks  appear  to  have  been

arrested  in  their  fall,  and,  leaning  like  flying  buttresses  agaiust  the  mountain

face,  constitute  a  natural  bridge  over  the  torrent.^     The  basins  of  the  two  rivers

lie  in  one  valley,  extending  eighty  leagues  in  length,  divided  by  an  almost

imperceptible  watershed  into  two  beds  of  unequal  slope.     The  central  part  of

the  valley  is  given  up  to  marshes.     It  is  only  towards  the  south  that  we  find

cornfields,  vineyards,  plantations  of  mulberry  and  olive  trees,  spread  out  over

the  plain,  or  disposed  in  terraces  on  the  hillsides.     Towards  the  north,  the

alluvial  deposits  of  the  Orontes  have  gradually  formed  a  black  and  fertile

soil,  upon  which  grow  luxuriant  crops  of  cereals  and  other  produce.      Coele-

Syria,  after  having  generously  nourished  tlie   Oriental   empires   which   had

preyed  upon  her,  became  one  of  the  granaries  of  the  Eoman  world,  under  the

capable  rule  of  the  Csesars.

Syria  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  countries  of  varying  aspect  and  soil.

That  to  the  north,  flanked  by  the  Amanos,  is  a  gloomy  mountainous  region,

with  its  greatest  elevation  on  the  seaboard :  it  slopes  gradually  towards  the

interior,  spreading  out  into  chalky  table-lands,  dotted  over  with  bare  and

rounded   hills,  and   seamed    with   tortuous   valleys   whioli    open    out   to   the

Euphrates,  the  Orontes,  or  the  desert.    Vast,  slightly  undulating  plains  succeed

the  table-lands :    the  soil  is  dry  and  stony,  tlie  streams  are  few  in  number

and  contain  but  little  water.     The  Sajur  flows  into  the  Euphrates,^  the  Afrin

and  the  Karasu  when  united   yield  their  tribute  to  the  Orontes,^  while  the

others  for  the  most  part  pour  their  waters  into  enclosed  basins.     The  Khalus

of  the  Greeks  sluggishly  pursues  its  course  southward,  and  after  reluctantly

leaving  the  gardens  of  Aleppo,  finally  loses  itself  on  the  borders  of  the  desert

in  a  small  salt  lake  full  of  islets  :  ^  about  halfway  between  the  Khalus  and  the

pdssiKje  de  Scylax,  pp.  39,  40),  and  it  ia  now  acknowledged  that  the  Lion  Kiver  and  the  Litany  have
nothing  in  common  (Kiepeut,  Ua/idhuch  der  Alien  Geoijraphie,  p.  159,  u.  2).  The  Samaritan
Chronicles  published  Ijy  Neubauer  call  it  the  Nahar  Litah  {Journal  Asiatique,  1SG9,  vol.  ii.  p.  442).
The  Anastasi  Papyrus,  Xu.  1,  pi.  xx.  1.  8,  pi.  xxi.  1.  8,  mentions  a  watercourse  between  Tyre  and  Sidon,
called  the  Nazana,  which  can  only  be  the  Nahr  Kasimiye'h,  that  is  to  say,  the  lower  stream  of  the
Litany  (MASrEiiO,  Notes  sur  diff^renU  poinls  de  grammaire  et  d'hisloire,  §  13,  in  the  Mdanges
d' Archeblogie  Egyptienne  et  Amyrienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  140,  141).

'  The  gorges  of  the  Litany  are  described  by  Van  den  Velde,  Reiie  durch  Syrien  und  Palaslina,
vol.  i.  p.  113;  and  the  natural  bridge  at  Yakhmur  by  Eobinson,  Later  Biblical  Researches,  pp.
421,  423.

'  The  Sujur  is  the  Sagurra  of  the  cuneiform  texts  (Fit.  Delitzsch,  TI'o  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  183).

°  For  the  Afrin,  cf.  p.  0  of  this  volume.  The  modem  Karasu  was  called  by  the  Assyrians
Saluara,  the  River  of  Eels,  and  it  preserved  this  name  until  the  Arab  period  (Halevy,  Recherckes
hibliqiies,  §  xii.  p.  278 ;  Saohau,  Zur  hislorischen  Geographie  von  Nordsyrien,  in  the  Sitzungsheiichte  of
the  Academy  of  Science  at  Berlin,  vol.  xxi.  pp.  329-33G).

'  The  Assyrian  monuments  have  not  yet  given  us  the  native  name  of  this  river ;  Xenophon
(Anabasis,  vol.  1,  iv.  9)  calls  it  Khalus,  and  says  that  it  was  full  of  largo  edible  fish.


8  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

Euphrates  a  second  salt  lake  receives  tlie  Xahr  ed-Dahab,  the  "golden  river.*"
The  climate  is  mild,  and  the  temperature  tolerably  uniform.  The  sea-breeze
which  rises  every  afternoon  tempers  the  summer  heat :  the  cold  in  winter  is
never  piercing,  except  when  the  south  wind  blows  which  comes  from  the
mountains,  and  the  snow  rarely  lies  on  the  ground  for  more  than  twenty-four
hours.  It  seldom  rains  during  the  autumn  and  winter  months,  but  frequent
showers  fall  in  the  early  days  of  spring.  Vegetation  then  awakes  again,  and
the  soil  lends  itself  to  cultivation  in  the  hollows  of  the  valleys  and  on  the
table-lands  wherever  irrigation  is  possible.  The  ancients  dotted  these  now
all  but  desei-t  spaces  with  wells  and  cisterns ;  they  intersected  them  with
canals,  and  covered  them  with  farms  and  villages,  with  fortresses  and  populous
cities.  Primaeval  forests  clothed  the  slopes  of  the  Amanos,  and  pinewood  from
this  region  was  famous  both  at  Babylon  and  in  the  towns  of  Lower  Chaldsea.-
The  plains  produced  barley  and  wheat  in  enormous  quantities,  the  vine  throve
there,  the  gardens  teemed  with  flowers  and  fruit,  and  pistachio  and  olive  trees
grew  on  every  slope.  The  desert  was  always  threatening  to  invade  the  ph^in,
and  gained  rapidly  upon  it  whenever  a  prolonged  war  disturbed  cultivation,
or  when  the  negligence  of  the  inhabitants  slackened  the  work  of  defence :
beyond  the  lakes  and  salt  marshes  it  had  obtained  a  secure  hold.  At  the  present
time  the  greater  part  of  the  country  between  the  Orontes  and  the  Euphrates
is  nothing  but  a  rocky  table-land,  ridged  with  low  hills  and  dotted  over  with
some  impoverished  oases,  excepting  at  the  foot  of  Anti-Lebanon,  where  two
rivers,  fed  by  innumerable  streams,  have  served  to  create  a  garden  of  marvellous
beauty.  The  Barada,  dashing  from  cascade  to  cascade,  flows  for  some  distance
through  gorges  before  emerging  on  the  plain  :  ^  scarcely  has  it  reached  level
ground  than  it  widens  out,  divides,  and  forms  around  Damascus  a  miniature
delta,  into  which  a  thousand  interlacing  channels  carry  refreshment  and
fertility.  Below  the  town  these  streams  rejoin  the  river,  which,  after  having
flowed  merrily  along  for  a  day's  journey,  is  swallowed  up  in  a  kind  of  elongated
chasm  from  whence  it  never  again  emerges.  At  the  melting  of  the  snows  a
regular  lake  is  formed  here,  whose  blue  waters  are  surrounded  by  wide  grassy
margins  "  like  a  sapphire  set  in  emeralds."  This  lake  dries  up  almost
completely  in  summer,  and  is  converted  into  swampy  meadows,  filled  with
gigantic  rushes,  among  which  the  birds  build  their  nests,  and  multiply  as
unmolested  as  in  the  marshes  of  Chald;ea.     The  Awaj,  unfed  by  any  tributary,

'  The  ancient  native  name  of  the  Nahr  ed-Dahab,  like  that  of  the  Khalus,  is  unknown.

'  On  the  transport  of  timber  from  the  Amanos^  and  on  the  ancient  lue  of  it  in  the  small  states  of
Chaldfea,  ef.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  614.

'  The  Barada  is  the  Abaua  or  Amana,  mentioned  in  the  Hebrew  books  as  one  of  the  rivers  which
watered  the  country  round  Damascus  (2  Kings  v.  12),  the  Bardines  or  Chrysorrhoas  of  the  Greeks.


TEE  COUNTRY  OF  DAMASCUS  AND  THE  MEDITERRANEAN  LITTORAL.      '.>

fills  a  second  deeper  though  smaller  basin,^  while  to  the  south  two  other
lesser  depressions  receive  the  waters  of  the  Anti-Lebanon  and  the  Haurau.
Syria  is  protected  from  the  encroachments  of  the  desert  by  a  continuous
barrier  of  pools  and  beds  of  reeds :  towards  the  east  the  space  reclaimed
resembles  a  verdant  promontory  thrust  boldly  out  into  an  ocean  of  sand.
The  extent  of  the  cultivated  area  is  limited  on  the  west  by  the  narrow
strip  of  rock  and  clay  which  forms  the  littoral.  From  the  mouth  of
the  Litany  to  that  of  the  Orontes,  the  coast  presents  a  rugged,  precipitous,
and  inhospitable  appearance.  There  are  no  ports,  and  merely  a  few  ill-
protected  harbours,  or  narrow  beaclies  lying  under  formidable  headlands.  One
river,  the  Nahr  el-Kebir,"  which  elsewhere  would  not  attract  the  traveller's
attention,  is  here  noticeable  as  being  the  only  stream  whose  waters  flow
constantly  and  with  tolerable  regularity;  the  others,  the  Leon,^  the  Adonis,*
and  the  Nahr  el-Kelb,^  can  scarcely  even  be  called  torrents,  being  precipitated
as  it  were  in  one  leap  from  the  Lebanon  to  the  Mediterranean.  Olives,  vines,
and  corn  cover  the  maritime  plain,  while  in  ancient  times  the  heights  were
clothed  with  impenetrable  forests  of  oak,  pine,  larch,  cypress,  spruce,  and
cedai'.  The  mountain  range  drops  in  altitude  towards  the  centre  of  the  country
and  becomes  merely  a  line  of  low  hills,  connecting  Gebel  Ansarieh  with  the
Lebanon  proper ;  beyond  the  latter  it  continues  without  interruption,  till  at
length,  above  the  narrow  Phoenician  coast  road,  it  rises  in  the  form  of  au
almost  insurmountable  wall.

Near  to  the  termination  of  Coele-Syria,  but  separated  from  it  by  a  range
of  hills,  there  opens  out  on  the  western  slopes  of  Hermon  a  valley  unlike  any
other  in  the  world.  At  this  point  the  surface  of  the  earth  has  been  rent  in  pre-
historic times  by  volcanic  action,  leaving  a  chasm  which  has  never  since  closed
up.      A   river,   unique   in   character — the  Jordan — flows  down  this   gigantic

'  Tbe  modern  Awaj  is  identified  witli  tlje  Pharpar  of  the  Hebrew  text  (2  Kings  v.  I'i).

'  The  Nahr  el-Kebir  is  tho  Eleutheros  of  classical  geographers  (Stkabo,  xvi.  ii.,  §  12,  15,  pp.
754,  755 ;  Pliny,  Natural  Hislory,  iv.  17),  its  Phoenician  name  has  not  yet  been  discovered ;  it  was
perhaps  called  Shabtuna  or  Sbabtun,  from  whence  the  river-name  Sabbaticus  might  be  derived.

•■  The  Leon  of  Ptolemy  (v.  15)  is  perhaps  tho  river  which  the  majority  of  Roman  geographers  call
Tamyras  (Stkabo,  xvi.  ii.,  §  22,  p.  756),  or  Damuras  (Polybius,  v.  68,  69),  the  present  Nahr-
Damur  (Pohlain  de  Bossay,  Emais  de  restitution  H  d' inter prilation  d'un  passage  de  Scylax,  pp.
39,  40).

*  The  Adonis  of  classical  authors  is  now  Nahr-Ibrahim.  We  have  as  yet  no  direct  evidence  as  to
th('  PliOQuician  name  of  this  river  ;  it  was  probably  identical  with  that  of  tho  divinity  worshipped  on
its  banks.  The  fact  of  a  river  bearing  the  name  of  a  god  is  not  surprising:  the  Belos,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Acre,  aiTords  us  a  parallel  case  to  the  Adonis  (Renan,  Mission  da  Th^iiicie,
p.  283).

'  The  present  Nahr  ol-Kelb  is  the  Lykos  of  classical  authors.  Tho  Due  do  Luyuos  ( Voyage
d'erploralion  a  la  mer  Morle,  vol.  i.  p.  '.I,  u.  1)  thought  he  recognized  a  corruption  of  the  Phcoiiician
name  in  that  of  Alcobile,  which  is  mentioned  hereabouts  in  the  Itinerary  of  tho  pilgrim  of  Honieaux.
The  order  of  the  Itinerary  does  not  favour  this  idontificatinn,  and  Alcobile  is  probably  Jebail  (M.  dk
VogOk,  Melawjes  d'Arch.  Orientale,  pp.  16,  17)  :  it  is  none  the  less  probable  that  tho  original  name  of
tho  Nahr  el  Kelb  contained  from  earliest  times  the  Phaiuiciau  equivalent  of  the  Arab  word  li'lh, "  dog.'"


10


THE   FIBST  CHALDJUAN  EMPIRE.


THE    MOST   NOKTHEEN    SOUKCE    OF   THE   .lORDAS,   THE   NAHR    EL-HASBAXY.'

crevasse,  fortiliziug  the  valley  formed  by  it  from  end  to  end.^  Its  principal
source  is  at  Tell  el-Qadi,  where  it  rises  out  of  a  basaltic  mound  whose  summit
is  crowned  by  the  ruins  of  Laish.^  The  water  collects  in  an  oval  rocky  basin
hidden  by  bushes,  and  flows  down  among  the  brushwood  to  join  the  Nahr
el-Hasbany,  which  brings  the  waters  of  the  upper  torrents  to  swell  its  stream ;  ^
a  little  lower  down  it  mingles  with  the  Banias  branch,^  and  winds  for  some
time  amidst  desolate  marshy  meadows  before  disappearing  in  the  thick  beds  of
rushes  bordering  Lake  Huleh."     At  this  point  the  Jordan  reaches  the  level  of

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograpli  by  the  Due  de  Luynes,  Voyage  d'exploration  a  la  mer

Morte,  vol.  iv.  pi.  59.

=  The  Jordan  is  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  texts  under  the  name  of  Yorduua  {Anastasi  Papyrus,
No.  1,  pi.  xxiii.  1.  1) :  the  name  appears  to  mean  the  descender,  the  dou-n-floidng ■

'  This  source  is  mentioned  by  Josephus  (Ant.  Jud.,  \.  iii.  1  ;  YIII.  viii.  4)  as  being  that  of  the
Little  Jordan,  (Kda-coyos  'lopiafov,  tov  /j.mpov  'lopSavov.

■■  The  ancient  geographers  do  not  appear  to  have  considered  the  Nahr  el-Hasbany  as  a  source  of
the  Jordan.  This  is  proved  by  the  passage  where  S.  Jerome  {Comm.  in  Mathmum,  xvi.  3),  after  his  own
fashion,  gives  the  etymology  of  the  name  :  "  Jordanes  oritur  ad  radices  Libanis,  et  habet  duos  fontes,
unum  nomine  Jor  et  alteram  Dan ;  qui  simul  mixti  Jordanis  nomen  efficiunt."  The  two  sources
whioli  he  indicates  being  those  of  Banias  and  Tell  el-Qadi,  the  Nahr  el-Hasbany  is  thus  excluded.

^  For  the  source  of  the  Jordan  at  Banias,  of.  JosErHi'S,  Antiquities  of  the  Jeics,  XV.  x.  3 ;  and
Jewish  War,  I.  xsi.  3 ;  III.  xv.  7  ;  for  the  difference  between  the  ancient  and  present  condition  of  the
place,  see  Griinis,  Galilee,  vol.  ii.  pp.  312-314.

«  Lake  Huleh  is  called  the  JTatcrs  of  Merom,  JK-Merom,  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  xi.  5,  7;  and
Lake  Sammochonitis  in  Josephus,  Antiquities  of  the  Jvics,  V.  v.  1 ;  cf.  Jeicish  War,  IIL  x.  7 ;  IV.  i.  1.
The  name  of  Ulatha,  wliich  was  given  to  the  surrounding  country  (Josephcs,  Jewish  War,  XV.  x.  3),
shows  that  the  modern  word  Huleh  is  derived  from  an  ancient  form,  of  which  unfortunately  the
original  has  not  come  down  to  us  (Neubauer,  La  Ge'ographie  du  Talmud,  p.  17).


9PK


i*Ml


J3


o    o


12


THE    FIRST  CHALTIJRAN  EMPIRE.


^fj^^P^^^X^^S-s^-*^-**"-  ^


ONE  OF  THE  UEACHES  OF  THE

JORDAN,  IN  THE  NEIGHBOURHOOD

OF  JERICHO.'


the  MediteiTanean,  but  instead  of  maintaiuing  it,  the  river  makes  a  sudden
drop  on  leaving  the  lake,  cutting  for  itself  a  deeply  grooved  channel.  It  has
a  fall  of  some  300  feet  before  reaching  the  Lake  of  Genesareth,-  where  it  is
only  momentarily  arrested,  as  if  to  gather  fresh  strength  for  its  headlong
career  southwards.  Here  and  there  it  makes  furious  assaults  on  its  right  and
left  banks,  as  if  to  escape  from  its  bed,  but  the  rocky  escarpments  which
hem  it  in  present  an  insurmountable  barrier  to  it ;  from  rapid  to  rapid  it
descends  with  such  capricious  windings  that  it  covers  a  course  of  more
than  62  miles  before  reaching  the  Dead  Sea,  nearly  1300  feet  below  the
level  of  the  Mediterranean.^  Nothing  could  offer  more  striking  contrasts  than
the  country  on  either  bank.  On  the  east,  the  ground  rises  abruptly  to  a
height  of  about  3000  feet,  resembling  a  natural  rampart  flanked  with  towers
and  bastions  :  behind  this  extends  an  immense  table-land,  slightly  undulating
and  intersected  in  all  directions  by  the  affluents  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  several  photographs  brought  back  by  Lortet.

-  Its  most  ancient  name  is  the  Sea  of  Kinuereth,  Yam-Kinnereth  {Narnh.  xxsiv.  11 ;  Josh.  slii.  27),
or  Yam-Kineroth  {Jodi.  sii.  3) ;  from  the  time  of  the  Greek  period  it  was  called  tlie  Lake  of  Gennesar
or  Guinussar  (1  Mace.  si.  67 ;  Josephcs,  Jewish  War,  III.  s.  7,  8 ;  cf.  Nec^acer,  Geographie  dii
Talmud,  p.  255).

"  The  exact  figures  are  :  the  Lake  of  Hflleh  7  feet  above  the  Mediterranean ;  the  Lake  of
Genesareth  682'5  feet,  and  the  Dead  Sea  1292'1  feet  below  the  sea-level ;  to  the  south  of  the  Dead
Sea,  towards  the  water-parting  of  the  Akabah,  the  ground  is  over  720  feet  higher  than  the  level  of
the  Bed  Sea  (Elisee  Eeclus,  Geographie  universelle,  vol.  ix.  pp.  730-735).


THE  JORDAN  AND    THE  DEAD   SEA.


13


.lii.    1.»,A1J    jiKA    AXD    THE   MOUNTAINS    ul     .:..\L.,    cKEN    I'KOM    THE    HEIGHTS   OF    EXGEUI.'

Sea — the  Yarmuk,"  the  Jabbok,^  aud  the  Arnon.*  The  whole  of  this  district
forms  a  little  world  in  itself,  whose  inhabitants,  half  shepherds,  half  bandits,
live  a  life  of  isolation,  with  no  ambition  to  take  part  in  general  history.  West
of  the  Jordan,  a  confused  mass  of  hills  rises  into  sight,  their  sparsely  covered
slopes  affording  an  impoverished  soil  for  the  cultivation  of  corn,  vines,  and
olives.  One  ridge — Mount  Carmel — detached  from  the  principal  chain  near  the
southern  end  of  the  Lake  of  Genesareth,  runs  obliquely  to  the  north-west,  and
finally  projects  into  the  sea.  North  of  this  range  extends  Galilee,  abounding
in  refreshing  streams  and  fertile  fields ;  while  to  the  south,  the  country  falls
naturally  into  three  parallel  zones — the  littoral,  composed  alternately  of  dunes
and  marshes — an  expanse  of  plain,  a  "  Shephelah,"  *  dotted  about  with  woods
and  watered  by  intermittent  rivers, — aud  finally  the  mountains.  The  region
of  dunes  is  not  necessarily  barren,  and  the  towns  situated  in  it — Gaza,  Jaffa,


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photognipli  by  the  Duo  de  Luvnes,  Voyage  cC exploration  a  la  mer
Morte,  vol.  iii.  pi.  26.

-  The  Yurmuk  does  not  occur  in  the  Bible,  but  we  meet  with  its  name  in  the  Talmud  (Neubaueu,
La  Gfographie  du  Talmud,  p.  31),  and  the  Greeks  adopted  it  under  the  form  Hieromax.

'  Gen.  xxxii.  22 ;  Numb.  xxi.  24.  The  name  has  been  Greoized  under  the  forms  lobacchos,
labacchos  (.JosEruus,  Ant.  Jud.,  I.  xx.  2 ;  IV.  v.  2),  lambykes.     It  is  the  present  Nalir  Zerqa.

*  Numh.  xxi.  13-26 ;  DeiU.  ii.   24  ;  tlie  present  Wady  Mnjib.

*  [Shephelali  =  "  low  country,"  i)lain  QJogh.  xi.  16).  With  the  article  it  means  tlio  plain  along
the  Mediterranean  from  Joppa  to  Gaza.     Gk.  rj  26'i|)j|\a  (1  Mace.  xii.  VJ). — Tr.]


^^  THE  FIRST   CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

Ashdod,  aud  Ascaloii— are  surrounded  by  flourishinj?  orchards  and  gardens.
The  plain  yields  plentiful  harvests  every  year,  the  ground  needing  no  manure  and
very  little  labour.  The  higher  ground  and  the  hill-tops  are  sometimes  covered
with  verdure,  but  as  they  advance  southwards,  they  become  denuded  and
burnt  by  the  sun.  The  valleys,  too,  are  watered  only  by  springs,  which  are
dried  up  for  the  most  part  during  the  summer,  and  the  soil,  parched  by  the
continuous  heat,  can  scarcely  be  distinguished  from  the  desert.  In  fact,  till
the  Sinaitic  Peninsula  and  the  frontiers  of  Egypt  are  reached,  the  eye  merely
encounters  desolate  and  almost  uninhabited  solitudes,  devastated  by  winter
torrents,  and  overshadowed  by  the  volcanic  summits  of  Mount  Seir.  The
spring  rains,  however,  cause  an  early  crop  of  vegetation  to  spring  up,  which
for  a  few  weeks  furnishes  the  flocks  of  the  nomad  tribes  with  food.

We  may  summarise  the  physical  characteristics  of  Syria  by  saying  that
Nature  has  divided  the  country  into  five  or  six  regions  of  unequal  area,  isolated
by  rivers  and  mountains,  each  one  of  which,  however,  is  admirably  suited  to
become  the  seat  of  a  separate  independent  state.  In  the  north,  we  have  the
country  of  the  two  rivers— the  Naharaim— extending  from  the  Orontes  to  the
Euphrates  and  the  Balikh,  or  even  as  far  as  the  Khabur ;  i  in  the  centre,  between
the  two  ranges  of  the  Lebanon,  lie  Coele-Syria  and  its  two  unequal  neio-h-
bours,  Aram  of  Damascus  and  Phrenicia ;  while  to  the  south  is  the  varied
collection  of  provinces  bordering  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.  It  is  impossible
at  the  present  day  to  assert,  with  any  approach  to  accuracy,  what  peoples
inhabited  these  different  regions  towards  the  fourth  millennium  before
our  era.  Wherever  excavations  are  made,  relics  are  brought  to  lio-ht  of
a  very  ancient  semi-civilization,  in  which  we  find  stone  weapons  and  imple-
ments, besides  pottery,  often  elegant  in  contour,  but  for  the  most  part  coarse
in  texture  and  execution.  These  remains,  however,  are  not  accompanied  by
any  monument  of  definite  characteristics,  and  they  yield  no  information  with
regard  to  the  origin  or  affinities  of  the  tribes  who  fashioned  them.^     The  study

'  The  Naharaim  of  the  Egyptians  (nf.  for  the  prommciation,  BIaspero,  A  travers  la  vocalisation
^gijptienne,  in  the  Recueil  des  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  pp.  1S9-192)  was  first  identified  with  Mesopotamia
(BRroscH,  Geogmpldsche  Inschri/ten,  vol.  ii.  p.  30)  ;  it  was  located  between  the  Orontes  and  the
Balikh  or  the  Euphrates  by  Maspero  (De  Carchemis  oppiili  situ  et  Ilidorid  anliquissima,  map  No.
2).  This  opinion  is  now  adopted  by  the  majority  of  Egyptologists,  with  slight  differences  in  detail
(W.  Max  MOller,  Asien  timl  Europa  nach  altagyptischcn  Denkmiilern,  p.  249,  et  seq.).  Ed.  Meyer
(Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  227)  has  accurately  compared  the  Egyptian  Naharaim  with  the  Parapotamia
of  the  administration  of  the  Seleucidas  (Polyb.,  v.  69  :  Sirabo,  xvi.  ii.,  §  11,  p.  753).

=  Kesearclies  with  regard  to  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  Syria  and  their  remains  have  not  as  yet
been  prosecuted  to  any  extent.  The  caves  noticed  by  Hedenborg  at  Ant-Elias,  near  Tripoli,  and  by
Botta  at  Nahr  el-Kelb  {Observations  sur  le  Liban  el  I'AnliUban  in  the  Mdmoires  de  la  Soci^tTgeoloqique
de  France,  1st  series,  vol.  1.  p.  135),  and  at  Adluu  by  the  Due  de  Luynes,  have  been  successively
explored  by  Lartet  (Due  de  Luynes,  Voyage  d'exploration  a  la  mer  Morte,  vol.  i.  p.  23 ;  vol.  iii.  pp
213-240),  Tristram,  Lortet,  and  Dawson  {Notes  on  prehistoric  Man  in  Egypt  and  the  Lebanon,  m'  the"
Transactions  of  the  Victoria  Institute,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  2S7-301).     The  grottoes  of  Palestine  proper,  at


THE  FlilMITIVE  RACES    OF  SYRIA.  15

of  the  geographical  nomenclature  in  use  about  the  VI'"  century  u.c.  reveals
the  existence,  at  all  events  at  that  period,  of  several  peoples  and  several
languages.  The  mountains,  rivers,  towns,  and  fortresses  in  Palestine  and  Ccjele-
Syria  are  designated  by  words  of  Semitic  origin  :  it  is  easy  to  detect,  even
in  the  hieroglyphic  disguise  which  they  bear  on  the  Egyptian  geographical
lists,  names  familiar  to  us  in  Hebrew  or  Assyrian.^  But  once  across  the
Oroutes,  other  forms  present  themselves  which  reveal  no  affiuities  to
these  languages,  but  are  apimrently  connected  witli  one  or  other  of  the
dialects  of  Asia  Minor.^  The  tenacity  with  which  the  place-names,  once  given,
cling  to  the  soil,  leads  us  to  believe  that  a  certain  number  at  least  of  those
we  know  in  Syria  were  in  use  there  long  before  they  were  noted  down  by  the
Egyptians,  and  that  they  must  have  been  heirlooms  from  very  early  peoples.
As  they  take  a  Semitic  or  non-Semitic  form  according  to  their  geographical
position,  we  may  conclude  that  the  centre  and  south  were  colonized  by  Semites,
and  the  north  by  the  immigrant  tribes  from  beyond  the  Taurus.  Facts  are  not
wanting  to  support  this  conclusion,  and  they  prove  that  it  is  not  so  entirely
arbitrary  as  we  might  be  inclined  to  believe.  The  Asiatic  visitors  who,  under
a  king  of  the  XII"^  dynasty,  came  to  offer  gifts  to  Khuumhotpu,  the  Lord  of
Beni-Hasan,-'  are  completely  Semitic  in  type,  and  closely  resemble  the  Bedouins
of  the  present  day.  Their  chief — Abisha — bears  a  Semitic  name,*  as  too  does
the  Sheikh  Ammianshi,  with  whom  Sinuhit  took  refuge.^     Ammianshi  himself

Bethzur,  at  Gilgal  near  Jericho,  and  at  Tibneh,  have  been  the  subject  of  keen  controversy  ever  since
their  discovery  (Lahtet,  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  Society  de  Giblugie,  2nd  series,  vol.  xsii.  p.  527  ;  in  the
Matiriaux  pour  servir  a  I'histoire  de  Vhomme,  Ist  series,  1SG9,  vol.  v.  p.  2.37 ;  cf.  Due  de  Lutnes,
Voyage  d'exploration,  vol.  iii.  pp.  224-22ti ;  Arcelin,  I'Industrie  primitive  en  Syrie,  Gisements  de
Beth-Saour,  and  I'Agi'  de  la  pierre  2)olie  ii  Beth-Saour,  in  the  Matgriaux,  1st  series,  1S69,  vol.  v.  p.  237,
et  seq. ;  2nJ  series,  1874,  vol.  v.  p.  19).  The  Abbe  llicliard  desired  to  identify  the  flints  of  Gilgal
and  Tibneh  with  the  stone  knives  used  by  Joshua  for  the  circumcision  of  the  Israelites  after  the
passage  of  the  Jordan  {Josh.  v.  2-9),  some  of  which  might  have  been  buried  in  tliat  hero's  tomb
(RiCHAKD,  Dgcoui-ertes  d'iusfrumeiits  de  pierre  en  Egijpte,  au  Sinai  et  dans  le  Tombeau  de  Josui',  in  the
Comptes  rendus  de  I'Acadd'mie  des  Sciettces,  1871,  vol.  Ixxii.  p.  540).

'  Ou  the  question  of  the  transcription  of  Syrian  geographical  names  into  the  hieroglyphs,
see  Brugsch,  Geogr.  Ins.,  vol.  i.  pp.  5-15;  E.  de  Rouge,  Mgjnoire  sur  I'origim;  (gyptienne  de
Valphabet  pMnicien ;  and  lastly,  Vi'.  Max  Muller,  Asien  und  Europa  nach  allagyptischen  Denlcmdlern,
pp.  58-109.

^  The  non-Semitio  origin  of  the  names  of  a  number  of  towns  in  Northern  Syria  preserved
in  the  Egyptian  lists,  is  admitted  by  the  majority  of  scholars  who  have  stmlied  the  question
(Lenormant,  Lcs  Origines  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  319,  et  seq.  ;  Max  Miller,  Asieit und  Europa  nach
ultSgyptisrhen  Denhmiilern,  pp.  28t)-292  ;  cf.  for  the  question  of  Semitic  origin,  Halevy,  Recherchea
hibligues,  §  12,  pp.  270-2S8).

'  See  tho  representation  of  the  whole  scene  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  408,  409.

'  His  name  has  been  shown  to  be  cognate  with  tho  Hebrew  Abishai  (I  Sam.  xxvi.  0-9 ;  2  Sam.
ii.  18,  24;  xxi.  17)  and  with  the  Clialdaio-Assyrian  Abcshukh  (cf.  tlie  list  of  Babylonian  kings  on
p.  27  of  the  present  volume).

'  The  name  Ammianshi  at  onco  recalls  those  of  Ammisataua,  Ammizadugga,  and  perhajjs
Aiumurabi,  or  Khammurabi,  of  one  of  the  Babylonian  dynasties ;  it  contains,  witli  tho  element  Ammi,
a  final  anshi  (Masi'ero,  Notes  sur  quelqnee  points  de  grammain;  el  d'histoire,  §  T,  in  the  Ueeueil  de
Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  70 ;  cf.  Sayoe,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  03,  04,  200).  Chabas  connects  it  with
two  Hebrew  words  Am-7iesh,  which  he  does  not  translate  {Etudes  sur  I'antiquiti historique,  2nd  edit.,
pp.  105,  100).


16


THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


ASIATIC    WOMEN    FliOM    THE   TOMB   OP    KHNUMHOTPb'.'


reigned  over  the  province  of  Kadima,  a  word  which  in  Semitic  denotes  the
East.'  Finally,  the  only  one  of  their  gods  known  to  us,  Hadad,  was  a  Semite
deity,  who  presided  over  the  atmosphere,  and  whom  we  find  later  on  ruling
over  the  destinies  of  Damascus.'^  Peoples  of  Semitic  speech  and  religion  must,
indeed,  have  already  occupied  the  greater  part  of  that  region  on  the  shores  of

the  Mediterranean  which  we
find  still  in  tlieir  possession
many  centuries  later,  at
the  time  of  the  Egyptian
conquest.^

For  a  time  Egypt  pre-
ferred not  to  meddle  in  their
affairs.  When,  however,
the  "  lords  of  the  sands "
grew  too  insolent,  the  Pha-
raoh sent  a  column  of  light
troops  against  them,  and  in-
flicted on  them  such  a  severe
punishment,  that  the  remembrance  of  it  kept  them  within  bounds  for  years.
Offenders  banished  from  Egypt  sought  refuge  with  the  turbulent  kinglets,
who  were  in  a  perpetual  state  of  unrest  between  Sinai  and  the  Dead  Sea.
Egyptian  sailors  used  to  set  out  to  trafiSc  along  the  seaboard,  taking  to
piracy  when  hard  pressed  ;  Egyptian  merchants  were  accustomed  to  penetrate
by  easy  stages  into  the  interior.'  The  accounts  they  gave  of  their  journeys
were  not  reassuring.  The  traveller  had  first  to  face  the  solitudes  which
■confronted  him  before  reaching  the  Isthmus,  and  then  to  avoid  as  best
he  might  tlie  attacks  of  the  pillaging  tribes  who  inhabited  it.  Should  he
escape  these  initial  perils,  the  Amu — an  agricultural  and  settled  people
inhabiting  the  fertile  region — would  give  the  stranger  but  a  sorry  recep-
tion: he  would  have  to  submit  to  their  demands,  and  the  most  exorbitant

'  Cf.  the  story  relating  to  Prince  Ammianslii  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  472,  473.

^  A  seal  affixed  to  contracts  of  the  time  of  KJiammurabi  belonged  to  a  "servant  of  the  god  of
Martu,"  who  is  none  other  than  the  god  usually  known  as  Eamman  (cf.  Dwwn  of  Civilization,  pp.
658-663).  This  fact  was  elucidated  by  Hommel  {Geschiehte  Babyloniem  und  Assijriens,  pp.  349,
412).  Schrader  {Die  Namen  Hadad,  Hadadezer,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Keilforschung,  vol.  li.  pp.  366-
384)  and  Oppert  {Adad,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  viii.  pp.  310-314)  have  proved  that
the  god  Raininan  was  also  called  Hadad.

'  Chabas  (Ulude  sur  Vanliquite'  historique,  d'apres  les  sotirces  (gyptiennes  et  lee  monuments  reputes
pr^historiques,  2nd  edit.,  p.  99,  et  se(i.)  had  already  arrived  at  the  same  conclusions,  which  are  also
those  of  W.  JIax  Mullek  (Asien  und  Europa,  p.  32,  et  seq.).

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Oudin,  from  a  pbotograpli  by  lusinger ;  cf.  the  whole  scene  from  which  these
two  and  the  following  figures  are  taken,  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  469.

'  Persons  banished  from  Egypt  are  mentioned  in  the  Memoirs  of  Sinuhit,  11.  31-34  (cf.  Maspero,
Les  Contes 2>opulaires,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  99,  100),  and  Sinuhit  himself  is  au  exile;  for  the  navigation  of
the  Syrian  coast  from  the  time  of  the  ancient  empire,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  390-394.


TEE  ABSENCE   OF  EGYPTIAN  INFLUENCE  IN  SYRIA.


17


TWO   ASIATICS   FKOII    THE   TOMB    OF    KHNUMHOTPU.


levies  of  toll  did  not  always  preserve  caravans  from  their  attacks.^  The
country  seems  to  have  been  but  thinly  populated ;  tracts  now  denuded  were
then  covered  by  large  forests  in  which  herds  of  elephants  still  roamed,"  and
wild  beasts,  including  lions  and  leopards,  rendered  the  route  through  them
dangerous.^  The  notion  that  Syria  was  a  sort  of  preserve  for  both  big  and
small  game  was  so  strongly
implanted  in  the  minds  of
the  Egyptians,  that  their
popular  literature  was  full
of  it :  *  the  hero  of  their
romances  betook  himself
there  for  the  chase,  as  a
prelude  to  meeting  with
the  princess  whom  he  was
destined  to  marry,'  or,  as  in
the  case  of  Kazarati,  chief
of  Assur,  that  he  might
encounter  there  a  monstrous
hyena  with  which  to  en-
gage   in    combat.'      These

merchants'  adventures  and  explorations,  as  they  were  not  followed  by  any  mili-
tary expedition,  left  absolutely  no  mark  on  the  industries  or  manners  of  the
primitive  natives :  those  of  them  only  who  were  close  to  the  frontiers  of
Egypt  came  under  her  subtle  charm  and  felt  the  power  of  her  attraction,  but
this  slight  influence  never  penetrated  beyond  the  provinces  lying  nearest  to  the
Dead  Sea.  The  remaining  populations  looked  rather  to  Chaldaea,  and  received,
though  at  a  distance,  the  continuous  impress  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  Euphrates.
The  tradition  which  attributes  to  Sargon  of  Agade,  and  to  his  son  Naramsin,  the
subjection  of  the  people  of  the  Amanos  and  the  Orontes,  probably  contains  but

'  The  merchant  who  sets  out  for  foreign  lands  "  leaves  his  posaeBsions  to  his  cliildren — for  fear  of
lions  and  Asiatics  "  {Sallier  Papyrus,  No.  2,  pi.  yii.  11.  G,  7 ;  cf.  Vawn  oj  Civilization,  p.  470).

'  Thutmosis  III.  went  elephant-hunting  near  the  Syrian  town  of  Nii  {Inscriptiun  of  Amenemhahi,
11.  22,  2H ;  cf.  CuABAS,  Melanges  £gijptolo(iiques,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2SG,  287,  290-301).

'  As  to  the  extent  of  the  forest  which  separated  Jaffa  from  Carmel,  cf.  Maspero,  Enlre  Jopp^et
Magcddo,  in  tho  Htudes  historiquca,  linguistiques  el  arcMuhgiques  dMi^ns  a  M.  le  D''  C.  Leemans,
pp.  3-G:  what  was  true  under  the  XIX"'  dynasty  would  he  still  more  likely  to  be  tho  case  in  earlier
times.

*  W.  Max  MOlleb,  Asien  und  Europa  nach  allmgyplischcn  DenhnSlern,  p.  4G.

'  Ae,  for  instance,  tho  hero  in  the  Slonj  of  the  Fredeatined  Priiiee,  exiled  from  Egypt  with  his
dog,  pursues  his  way  hunting  till  he  reaches  the  confines  of  Naharaim,  wliero  ho  is  to  marry  the
prince's  daughter;  cf.  Masi'ERO,  Les  Contes populaires  de  VEgypte  oncieimo, 2nd  edit.,  p.  231.  Peikiii,
Egyptian  Tales,  2nd  series,  p.  15.  et  seq.

'  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger.     Cf.  p.  IG  of  this  work,  note  4.

'  Aiiastasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xxiii.  11.  G,  7 ;  cf.  Chabas,  Le  Voyage  d'un  Egyptieu,  pp.  223-226.

C


18  THE  FIRST   CUALD2EAN   EMPIRE.

a  slight  element  of  truth  ; '  but  if,  while  awaiting  further  information,  we  hesitate
to  believe  that  the  armies  of  these  princes  ever  crossed  the  Lebanon  or  landed
in  Cyprus,  we  must  yet  admit  the  very  early  advent  of  their  civilization  in
those  western  countries  which  are  regarded  as  having  been  under  their  rule.
More  than  three  thousand  years  before  our  era,  the  Asiatics  who  figure  on  the
tomb  of  Khniimhotpu  clothed  themselves  according  to  the  fashions  of  Urn
and  Lagash,  and  affected  long  robes  of  striped  and  spotted  stuffs."     We  may
well  ask  if  they  had  also  borrowed  the  cuneiform  syllabary  for  tlie  purposes  of
their  oiEcial  correspondence,^  and  if  the  professional  scribe  with  his  stylus  and
clay  tablet  was  to  be  found  in  their  cities.     The  Babylonian  courtiers  were,  no
doubt,  more  familiar  visitors  among  them  than  theMemphite  nobles,  while  the
Babylonian  kings  sent  regularly  to  Syria  for  statuary  stone,  precious  metals,
and  the  timber  required  in  the  building  of  their  monuments :  *   Urbau  and
Gudea,  as  well  as  their  successors  and  contemporaries,  received  large  convoys
of  materials  from  the  Amanos,  and  if  the  forests  of  Lebanon  were  more  rarely
utilised,  it  was  not  because  their  existence  was  unknown,  but  because  distance
rendered   their   approach   more   difficult   and   transport    more   costly.      The
Mediterranean  marches  were,  in  their  language,  classed  as  a  whole  under  one
denomination — Martu,  Amurru,^  the  West — but  there  were  distinctive  names
for  each  of  the  provinces  into  which  they  were  divided.   Probably  even  at  that
date  they  called  the  north  Kbati,''  and  Ccele-Syria,  Amurru,  the  land  of  the

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  the  subject  of  these  conquests  in  Maspebo,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.
598-600.

=  Cf.  Maspero,  Daicn  of  Civilization,  for  the  Asiatics  received  by  the  Prince  of  Beni-Hasau,
pp.  468,  469 ;  for  the  resemblance  of  tlieir  costume  to  that  of  the  Chaldieans,  cf.  ibid.,  p.  719,  note  4.

'  The  most  ancient  cuneiform  tablets  of  Syrian  origin  are  not  older  than  the  XIV""  century  before
our  era  ;  they  contain  the  official  correspondence  of  the  pative  princes  with  the  Pharaohs  Amenothes
III.  ai.d  IV.  of  the  XVIII'"  dynasty,  as  will  be  seen  later  on  in  this  volume  ;  they  were  discovered
in  the  ruins  of  one  of  the  palaces  at  Tel  el-Amarna  in  Egypt.

*  This  communication  with  Syria  has  been  pointed  out  by  Maspero  in  the  Daion  of  Civilization,
pp.  610,  614.  It  has  been  carefully  described  by  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babylonieus  und  Assyriens,  pp.
325-330.

'  Formerly  read  Akharru.  For  a  general  notice  of  these  names,  see  Fk.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das
Parodies  ?  pp.  271-273 ;  and  Schradek,  Vie  Keilinscliriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  90-92.
Martu  would  be  the  Sumerian  and  Akharru  the  Semitic  form,  Akharru  meaning  that  which  is  behind.
The  discovery  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  threw  doubt  on  the  reading  of  the  name  Akharru :  some
thought  that  it  ought  to  be  kept  in  any  case  (Halevt,  Notes  ggbgraphiques,  §  34,  in  the  Revue  S€mi-
tique,  vol.  i.  p.  185);  others,  with  more  or  less  certainty,  think  that  it  should  be  replaced  by  Amuru,
Amurru,  the  country  of  the  Amorites  (Delattre,  Azirou,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Biblical  Archxol.
Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  siii.  pp.  233,  234  ;  cf  Morris  Jastrow,  On  Palestine  and  Assyria  in  the  Days  of
Joshua,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  p.  2,  note  1;  Bezold-Budge,  The  Tell  el-Amarna
Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  p.  xviii.,  note  2).  But  the  question  has  now  been  settled  by  Babylonian
contract  and  law  tablets  of  the  period  of  Khammurabi,  in  which  tbe  name  is  written  A-mu-ur-ri  {-hi).
Hommel  originated  the  idea  that  Martu  might  be  an  abbreviation  of  Amartu,  that  is,  Amar  with  the
feminine  termination  of  nouns  in  the  Cauaanitish  dialect :  Martu  would  thus  actually  signify  the
country  of  the  Amorites  {Geschichte  Bahyloniem  und  Assyriens,  p.  270;  cf.  Assijriological  Notes,  §  5,  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1893-94,  vol.  svi.  p.  212).

«  The  name  of  the  Khali,  Khatti,  is  found  in  the  Book  of  Omens  (Hommel,  Die  Semitischen  Viilher
und  Sprache,  p.  176,  ct  seq.),  which  is  supposed  to  contain  an  extract  from  the  annals  of  Sargon  and


THE   CITY   OF  BABYLON.  19

Amorites.  The  scattered  references  in  their  writings  seem  to  indicate  frequent
intercourse  with  these  countries,  and  that,  too,  as  a  matter  of  course  \vhich  excited
no  surprise  among  their  contemporaries :  a  journey  from  Lagash  to  the  moun-
tains of  Tidanum  and  to  Gubiu,  or  to  the  Lebanon  and  beyond  it  to  Byblos,^
meant  to  them  no  voyage  of  discovery.  Armies  undoubtedly  followed  the
routes  already  frequented  by  caravans  and  flotillas  of  trading  boats,  and
the  time  came  when  kings  desired  to  rule  as  sovereigns  over  nations  with
whom  their  subjects  had  peaceably  traded.  It  does  not  appear,  however,
that  the  ancient  rulers  of  Lagash  ever  extended  their  dominion  so  far.
The  governors  of  the  northern  cities,  on  the  other  hand,  showed  themselves
more  energetic,  and  inaugurated  that  march  westwards  which  sooner  or  later
brought  the  peoples  of  the  Euphrates  into  collision  with  the  dwellers  on  the
Nile:  for  the  first  Babylonian  empire  without  doubt  comprised  part  if  not
the  whole  of  Syria.^

Among  the  most  celebrated  names  in  ancient  history,  that  of  Babylon
is  perhaps  the  only  one  which  still  suggests  to  our  minds  a  sense  of  vague
magnificence  and  undefined  dominion.  Cities  in  other  parts  of  the  world,
it  is  true,  have  rivalled  Babylon  in  magnificence  and  power :  Egypt  could
boast  of  more  than  one  such  city,  and  their  ruins  to  this  day  present  to  our
gaze  more  monuments  worthy  of  admiration  than  Babylon  ever  contained  in
the  days  of  her  greatest  prosperity.  The  pyramids  of  Memphis  and  the
colossal  statues  of  Thebes  still  stand  erect,  while  the  ziggurats  and  the
palaces  of  Chaldtea  are  but  mounds  of  clay  crumbling  into  the  plain:  but
the  Egyptian  monuments  are  visible  and  tangible  objects;  we  can  calculate  to
within  a  few  inches  the  area  they  cover  and  the  elevation  of  their  summits,
and  the  very  precision  with  which  we  can  gauge  their  enormous  size  tends
to  limit  and  lessen  their  eflect  upon  us.     How  is  it  possible  to  give  free  rein

Naramsin  (cf.  Maspebo,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  599) ;  as,  however,  the  text  which  we  possess  of  it
is  merely  a  copy  of  the  time  of  Assiirbanipal,  it  is  possible  that  the  word  Khati  is  merely  the
translation  of  a  more  ancient  term,  perhaps  Martu  (Fit.  Lenormant,  Les  Oriyines  de  I'hietoire,  vol.  iii.
pp.  330,  337;  Hommel,  Gescliichte  Babyloniene  und  Jssi/nens,  p.  271,  note  6).  Winckler  (JJior/en-
■talische  Forschmigen,  p.  142,  note  1)  thinks  it  to  be  included  in  Lesser  Armenia  and  the  Melitene
of  classical  authors.

'  Gubin  is  probably  the  Kiipuna,  Kupnu,  of  the  Egyptians,  the  Byblos  of  Phcenicia  (Hommel,
GescliiMe  Bahijloniene  und  Assyriens,  p.  229).  Amiand  {Sirpourla,  pp.  H-13)  had  proposed  a  most
unlikely  identiiication  with  Koptos  in  Egypt.  In  the  time  of  Ine-Sin,  King  of  Ur,  mention  is  found
•of  Simurru,  Zimyra  (Hommel,  Aus  der  Bubylonischen  Alterlumsliunde,  in  Die  Aula,  1895,  vol.  i.  p.  550).

'  It  is  only  since  the  discovery  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  that  the  fact  of  the  dominant
influence  of  Chaldjca  over  Syria  and  of  its  conquest  has  been  definitely  realized.  It  ia  now  clear
that  tlio  state  of  things  of  which  the  tablets  discovered  in  Egypt  give  us  a  picture,  could  only  be
explained  by  the  hypothesis  of  a  Babylonish  supremacy  of  long  duration  over  the  peoples  situated
•between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Mediterranean  (HI.  Jastkow,  Oh  Palestine  and  Assyria  in  the  Days  <>/
Joshua,  in  the  Zcittchri/t  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  1-7 ;  Winckleh,  Babyloniene  Herrsehaft  in
Mesopotamien  und  seine  Erobenmyen  in  rulditina  im  zweiten  Jahrtauscnd,  in  the  Altorientalische
Forschungen,  pp.  140-158,  224-220;  and  Gescliichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  120-132;  Saxoe,  Patriarchal
Palestine,  \>.  55,  et  seq.).


20


THE  FIRST  CEALDJSAN  EMPIRE.


THE  BOINS  OF  BABYLON  SEEN  FROM  THE  SODTH.'

to  the  imagination  when  the  subject  of  it  is  strictly  limited  by  exact  and
determined  measurements  ?  At  Babylon,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  nothing
remaining  to  check  the  flight  of  fancy  :  a  single  hillock,  scoured  by  the
rains  of  centuries,  marks  the  spot  where  the  temple  of  Bel  stood  erect  in  its
splendour ;  another  represents  the  hanging  gardens,  while  the  ridges  running  to
the  right  and  left  were  once  the  ramparts.  The  vestiges  of  a  few  buildings
remain  above  the  mounds  of  rubble,  and  as  soon  as  the  pickaxe  is  applied
to  any  spot,  irregular  layers  of  bricks,  enamelled  tiles,  and  inscribed  tablets-
are  brought  to  light — in  fine,  all  those  numberless  objects  which  bear  witness
to  the  presence  of  man  and  to  his  long  sojourn  on  the  spot.  But  these  vestiges-
are  so  mutilated  and  disfigured  that  the  principal  outlines  of  the  buildings
cannot  be  determined  with  any  certainty,  and  afford  us  no  data  for  guessing
their  dimensions.  He  who  would  attempt  to  restore  the  ancient  appearance
of  the  place  would  find  at  his  disposal  nothing  but  vague  indications,  from
which  he  might  draw  almost  any  conclusion  he  pleased.  Palaces  and  temples
would  take  a  shape  in  his  imagination  on  a  plan  which  never  entered  the
architect's  mind ;  the  sacred  towers  as  they  rose  would  be  disposed  in  more
numerous  stages  than  they  actually  possessed ;  the  enclosing  walls  would
reach  such  an  elevation  that  they  must  have  quickly  fallen  under  their
own  weight  if  they  had  ever  been  carried  so  high :  ^  the  whole  restoration,.


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  drawing  reproduced  in  Hcefek,  L'Assyrie  et  la  ChakJi'e,  pi.  10.  It
shows  the  state  of  the  ruins  in  the  first  half  of  our  century,  before  the  excavations  carried  out  at
European  instigation.

'  A  very  just  criticism  of  the  various  proposed  reconstructions  of  the  walls  of  Babylon  will  be  found
in  DiECLAFOT,  L'Acropoh  de  Suse,  pp.  191,  192;  and  also  an  explanation  of  the  figures  given  by
Herodotus,  which  jjermits  of  their  altitude  being  brought  within  possible  limits.


THE   RUINS    OF  BABYLON.


21


V    BB    'u'iS,.    ,;     ,        rj  >


-•  >^  rampart /..Xv'^l      -      ."    > -V   "-.?.    -_•


^^^,-*reirmTjts  of  "   ~   -  .-  -?-

iH=fe=:^'-  -*     •'•  Vi' .'-


X  ■_  *


■  «


^V


accomplished  without  any  certain  data,  embodies  the  concept  of  somethin.
vast  and  superhuman,
well  befitting  the  city  of
blood  and  tears,  cursed
by  the  Hebrew  prophets.
Babylon  was,  however,
at  the  outset,  but  a  poor
town,  situated  on  both
banks  of  the  Euphrates,
in  a  low-lying,  flat  dis-
trict, intersected  by
canals  and  liable  at
times  to  become  marshy.
The  river  at  this  point
runs  almost  directly
north  and  south,  between
two  banks  of  black  mud,
the  base  of  which  it  is
perpetually  undermining.
As  long  as  the  city  exis-
ted, the  vertical  thrust
of  the  public  buildings
and  houses  kept  the  river
within  bounds,  and  even
since  it  was  finally  aban-
doned, the  masses  of
debris  have  almost  every-
where had  the  effect  of
resisting  its  encroach-
ment ;  towards  the  north,

however,  the  line  of  its  ancient  quays  has  given  way  aud  sunk  beneath  the
waters,  while  the  stream,  turning  its  course  westwards,  has  transferred  to  the
eastern  bank  the  gardens  and  mounds  originally  on  the  opposite  side.^  E-sagilla,
the  temple  of  the  lofty  summit,  the  sanctuary  of  Merodach,  probably  occupied

'   Prepared  by  Thuillier,  from  a  plan  reproduced  in  G.  Rawlinson,  Herodotus,  vol.  ii.  p.  473.

'  The  first  detailed  description  that  we  possess  of  tho  ruins  of  Babylon  is  that  of  J.  C.  Rlou,
Voyage  aux  ruines  ile  Babi/lone,  Iraduit  et  enrichi  d' observations,  avec  dcs  notes  expUcatives,  pur  J.
Eaimoni),  aneien  consul  de  Bassora,  Paris,  1818.  They  liavo  been  very  carefully  studied  by  Oitkut,
Jixpffditioii  en  Mgsoijotamie,  vol.  i.  pp.  135-254,  who  proposed  identifications  for  the  various  divisions
of  the  ruins,  all  of  which  are  not  accepted  at  tlie  present  day.  A  very  clear  exposition  of  all  tho
facts  relating  to  the  subject  is  found  in  G.  Rawlinson,  On  the  Topography  of  Babylon  (Uerodotus,  li.
472-489).     The  dilBculties  raised  could  only  be  solved  by  systematic  excavation,  of  which  there  is


PLAN  OF  THE  RUINS  OF  BABYLON.


22


THE  FIBST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


the  vacant  space  in  the  depression  between  the  Babil  and  the  hill  of  the  Kasr.*
In  early  times  it  must  have  presented  much  the  same  appearance  as  the
sanctuaries  of  Central  Chaldfea  :  a  mound  of  crude  brick  formed  the  sub-
structure of  tlie  dwellings  of  the  priests  and  the  household  of  the  god,  of  the
shops  for  the  ofierings  and  for  provisions,  of  the  treasury,  and  of  the  apartments
for  purification  or  for  sacrifice,  while  the  whole  was  surmounted  by  a  ziggurat.
On  other  neighbouring  platforms  rose  the  royal  palace  and  the  temples  of
lesser  divinities,^  elevated  above  the  crowd  of  private  habitations.     The  houses


THE    KASK   SEEN    FKOM    THE    SUl  111.-


of  the  people  were  closely  built  around  these  stately  piles,  on  either  side  of
narrow  lanes.  A  massive  wall  surrounded  the  whole,  shutting  out  the  view  on
all  sides ;  it  even  ran  along  the  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  for  fear  of  a  surprise
from  that  quarter,  and  excluded  the  inhabitants  from  the  sight  of  their  own-
river.*  On  the  right  bank  rose  a  suburb,  which  was  promptly  fortified  and
enlarged,  so  as  to  become  a  second  Babylon,  almost  equalling  the  first  in  extent
and  population.  Beyond  this,  on  the  outskirts,  extended  gardens  and  fields,,
iinding  at  length  their  limit  at  the  territorial  boundaries  of  two  other  towns,


no  talk  for  the  present :  the  little  that  has  been  undertaken  in  this  direction  has  been  accomplished
by  HoRMCZD  Kassam,  Recent  Discoveries  of  Ancient  Bahijlonian  Cities,  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Biblical  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  viii.  p.  184,  et  seq.

'  The  temple  of  Merodach,  called  by  tlie  Greeks  the  temple  of  Belos,  has  been  placed  on  the  site
called  Babil  by  the  two  Eawlinsons  (On  the  Topography  of  Babylon,  in  G.  Eawlix.son,  Herodotus,  ii.
477-479 ;  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  533-538) ;  and  by  Oppert  {Expedition  en
Mfsopotamie,  vol.  i.  pp.  200-216) ;  Hormuzd  Bassam  and  Fr.  Delitzsch  locate  it  between  the  hill  of
Junjuma  and  the  Kasr,  and  consider  Babil  to  be  a  palace  of  Nebuchadrezzar.

■  '  As,  for  instance,  the  temple  E-temenanki  on  the  actual  hill  of  Amran-ibn-Ali  (Fe.  Delitzsch,
Wo  lag  das  Paradiesl  p.  210),  the  temple  of  Shamash  (PoGSOX,  Les  Inscriptions  de  VOuady  Brissa,
pp.  15,  16),  and  others,  -n-hich  there  will  be  occasion  to  mention  later  on  in  dealing  with  the  second
Chaldean  empire.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  by  Thomas  in  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art,  vol.
ii.  pi.  1.

*  The  description  of  the  walls  of  Babylon  will  be  found  hereafter  when  treating  of  the  great
works  undertaken  by  Nebuchadrezzar  in  the  VI""  century  B.C.


THE  ENVIRONS   OF  BABYLON.


23


Ivutlui  and  Borsippa,  whose  black  outlines  are  visible  to  tlie  east  and  south-west
respectively,  standing  isolated  above  the  plain.  Sippara  on  the  north,  Nippur
on  the  south,  and  the  mysterious  Agade,  completed  the  circle  of  sovereign
states  which  so  closely  hemmed  in  the  city  of  Bel.^  We  may  surmise  with  all
probability  that  the  history  of  Babylon  in  early  times  resembled  in  the  main
that  of  the  Egyptian  Thebes.'-     It  was  a  small  seigneury  in  the  hands  of  petty


*..  -^-


THE    TEI.L   Ot"    BOKSirPA,   THE    PEESENT    BIBS-NIMBCD.


princes  ceaselessly  at  war  with  petty  neighbours  :  bloody  struggles,  witli  alter-
nating successes  and  reverses,  were  carried  on  for  centuries  with  no  decisive
results,  until  the  day  came  when  some  more  energetic  or  fortunate  dynasty  at
length  crushed  its  rivals,  and  united  under  one  rule  iirst  all  the  kingdoms
of  Northern  and  finally  those  of  Southern  Chaldsea.

The  lords  of  Babylon  had,  ordinarily,  a  twofold  function,  religious
and  military,  the  priest  at  first  taking  precedence  of  the  soldier,  but  gra-
dually yielding  to  the  latter  as  the  town  increased  in  power.*  They  were
merely  the  priestly  representatives  or  administrators  of  Babel — shalMnuahii


'  For  these  neighbouring  towns  of  Babylon,  cf,  Maspeko,  Damn  of  Civilization,  pp.  562,  OOM.

'  The  history  of  Thebes  is  given,  as  far  as  is  possible  at  present,  in  M.ispero,  Dawn  of
Civilization,  p.  4.03.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  after  the  plate  published  iu  Chesney,  The  Expedition  for  the  Surcey
of  the  Itivers  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  vol.  ii.  p.  25  ;  Euphrates  Expedilinn.

'  The  title  of  the  kings  of  Babylon  has  been  studied  by  Tiele,  JJaliylonisch-Assyrische  Gefcliichte,
pp.  491,  492,  and  by  Winckler,  Die  KeilschriftU:xte  Sargons,  p.  xxxvi.,  note.  Winckler  believed
that  the  title  of  sharrtt  was  only  given,  every  year,  to  the  sovereign  of  Babylon  after  "  the  taking
of  the  hands  of  Bel"  {Geschichte  Bubyloniens  und  Aesyricns,  pp.  35,  30,  90,  127,  128):  this  belief
is  correct  only  up  to  a  certain  point,  as  has  been  aliown  by  Tiele  {Zeitschrifl  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  viii.
p.  370).


24  TEE  FIRST   GHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

Babili—a,m\  their  authority  was  not  considered  legitimate  until  officially
confirmed  by  the  god.  Each  ruler  was  obliged  to  go  in  state  to  the  temple
of  Bel  Merodach  within  a  year  of  his  accession  :  there  he  had  to  take  the
hands  of  the  divine  statue,  just  as  a  vassal  would  do  homage  to  his  liege,
and  those  only  of  the  native  sovereigns  or  the  foreign  conquerors  could
legally  call  themselves  Kings  of  Babylon — sharru  Bahili — who  had  not  only
performed  this  rite,  but  renewed  it  annually.^  Sargon  the  Elder  had  lived
in  Babylon,  and  had  built  himself  a  palace  there ;  hence  the  tradition  of  later
times  attributed  to  this  city  the  glory  of  having  been  the  capital  of  the  great
empire  founded  by  the  Akkadian  dynasties.^  The  actual  sway  of  Babylon,
though  arrested  to  the  south  by  the  petty  states  of  Lower  Chaldsea,  had  not
encountered  to  the  north  or  north-west  any  enemy  to  menace  seriously  its
progress  in  that  semi-fabulous  period  of  its  history.  The  vast  plain  extending
between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  is  as  it  were  a  continuation  of  the
Arabian  desert,  and  is  composed  of  a  grey,  or  in  parts  a  whitish,  soil  impreg-
nated with  selenite  and  common  salt,  and  irregularly  superimposed  upon  a
bed  of  gypsum,  from  which  asphalt  oozes  up  here  and  there,  forming  slimy  pits.
Frost  is  of  rare  occurrence  in  winter,  and  rain  is  infrequent  at  any  season ;  the
sun  soon  burns  up  the  scanty  herbage  which  the  spring  showers  have  en-
couraged, but  fleshy  plants  successfully  resist  its  heat,  such  as  the  common
salsola,  the  salsola  soda,  the  pallasia,  a  small  mimosa,  and  a  species  of  very
fragrant  wormwood,  forming  together  a  vari  -  coloured  vegetation  which
gives  shelter  to  the  ostrich  and  the  wild  ass,  and  affords  the  flocks  of  the
nomads  a  grateful  pasturage  when  the  autumn  has  set  in.^  The  Euphrates
bounds  these  solitudes,  but  without  watering  them.  The  river  flows,  as  far  as
the  eye  can  see,  between  two  ranges  of  rock  or  bare  hills,  at  the  foot  of  which
a  narrow  strip  of  alluvial  soil  supports  rows  of  date-palms  intermingled  here
and  there  with  poplars,  sumachs,  and  willows.     Wherever  there  is  a  break

'  The  meaning  of  the  ceremony  in  which  the  kings  of  Babylon  "  took  the  hands  of  Bel "  has
been  given  by  Winckler  (De  inscriptione  Sargonis  regis  Assyria  qum  vacatur  Annalium,  thesis  iv.,  and
Siudien  und  Beitrdge  zur  Babylotiisch-Assyrischen  Gescliichte,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyridlogie,  vol.
ii.  p.  302,  et  seq.,  and  Die  KeilschrifUexle  Sargons,  p.  sxxvi. ;  cf.  Lehmann,  Schamaschschumukin,
KSnig  von  Bahylonien,  pp.  44-53);  Tiele  (^Bahylonisch-As^yrisalie  Geschichte,  pp.  276,  SIB)  compares
it  very  aptly  with  the  rite  performed  by  the  Egyptian  kings — at  Heliopolis,  for  example,  when  they
entered  alone  the  sanctuary  of  Ra,  and  tliere  contemplated  the  god  face  to  face.  The  rite  was
probably  repeated  annually  (Lehmann,  Scliamaschschumuhin,  pp.  51,  53;  Wincklek,  Studien  und
Beiirdge,  in  the  Zeitschrift  filr  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  303,  304,  and  Untersuchungen  zur  Allorienta-
Uscher  Geschichte,  p.  85),  at  the  time  of  the  Zakmuku,  that  is,  tlie  New  Year  festival.

-  Cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  597.  According  to  Nabonidos  and  his  contemporaries,
Sargon  and  Narainsin  were  kings  of  Babylon  (Eawlinson,  Oun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  G9,  col.  ii.
pp.  29,  30).

"  This  region,  which  comprises  the  second  and  third  zones  into  which  the  country  lying  between
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  may  be  divided,  has  been  admirably  depicted  by  Oliviek,  Voyage  dans
I' Empire  Othoman,  VEgypte,  la  Perse,  vol.  ii.  pp.  419-422  ;  we  are  indebted  to  modern  travellers  for
precise  details,  but  not  any  of  them  has  studied  the  country  with  the  method  and  power  of
generalisation  displayed  by  Olivier.


THE   EnPHllATES   AND   MESOPOTAMIA.


25


TUE  I;ANK.S  or  the  EUI'UKATES  at  zuleileii.'


in  the  two  cliffs,  or  where  they  recede  from  the  river,  a  series  of  shadufs
takes  possession  of  the  bank,  and  every  inch  of  the  soil  is  brought  under
cultivation.^  The  aspect  of  the  country  remains  unchanged  as  far  as  the
embouchure  of  the  Khabur;  but  there  a  black  alluvial  soil  replaces  the
saliferous  clay,  and  if  only  the  water  were  to  remain  on  the  land  in  suffi-
cient quantity,  the  country  would  be  unrivalled  in  the  world  for  the  abundance
and  variety  of  its  crops.  The  fields,  which  are  regularly  sown  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  small  towns,  yield  magnificent  harvests  of  wheat  and  barley  :
while  in  the  prairie-land  beyond  the  cultivated  ground  the  grass  grows  so  high
that  it  comes  up  to  the  horses'  girths.  In  some  places  the  meadows  are  so
covered  with  varieties  of  flowers,  growing  in  dense  masses,  that  the  effect
produced  is  that  of  a  variegated  carpet ;  dogs  sent  in  among  them  in  search
of  game,  emerge  covered  with  red,  blue,  and  yellow  pollen.'*  This  fragrant
prairie-land  is  the  delight  of  bees,  which  produce  excellent  and  abundant
honey,  while  the  vine  and  olive  find  there  a  congenial  soil.  The  population
was   unequally  distributed    in    this   region.      Some    half-savage    tribes   were

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  tlie  plate  in  Chesney,  The  Expedition  for  the  Survey  of  the  Rivers
Euphrates  and  Tigris,  vol.  i.  p.  49.

'  The  description  of  the  country  bordering  the  Euphrates  is  given  in  detail  by  Olivieu,  Voyage
dans  I'Empire  Othvman,  vol.  iii.  p.  477,  et  seq.  Palm  trees  are  numerous  as  far  as  Anah  (Chesney,
The  Expedition  for  the  Surrey  of  the  Rivers  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  vol.  i.  p.  53) ;  beyond  that  spot
they  are  only  found  in  isolated  groups  as  far  as  Deir,  where  they  cease  altogether  (AiNswoiiTU,
Researches  in  Assyria,  p.  72).

'  Tliis  fact  was  noticed  in  Assyria  by  Layakd,  Nintveh  and  its  Remains,  vol.  i.  p.  7S  :  more  recent
travellers  have  assured  nie  that  it  was  equally  true  of  the  country  bordering  the  Khabur.


26  TEE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIEE.

accustomed  to  wander  over  the  plain,  dwelling  in  tents,  and  supporting  life  by
the  chase  and  by  the  rearing  of  cattle ;  but  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  were
concentrated  around  the  affluents  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  or  at  the  foot
of  the  northern  mountains  wherever  springs  could  be  found,  as  in  Assur,
Singar,  Nisibis,  Tilli,i  Kharranu,  and  in  all  the  small  fortified  towns  and
nameless  townlets  whose  ruins  are  scattered  over  the  tract  of  country
between  the  Khabur  and  the  Balikh.  Kharranu,  or  Harran,  stood,  like  an
advance  guard  of  Chaldaean  civilization,  near  the  frontiers  of  Syria  and  Asia
Minor.^  To  the  north  it  commanded  the  passes  which  opened  on  to
the  basins  of  the  Upper  Euphrates  and  Tigris ;  it  protected  the  roads
leading  to  the  east  and  south-east  in  the  direction  of  the  table-land  of  Iran
and  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  it  was  the  key  to  the  route  by  which  the  commerce
of  Babylon  reached  the  countries  lying  around  the  Mediterranean.  We  have
no  means  of  knowing  what  affinities  as  regards  origin  or  race  connected  it
with  Uru,  but  the  same  moon-god  presided  over  the  destinies  of  both  towns,
and  the  Sin  of  Harran  enjoyed  in  very  early  times  a  renown  nearly  equal  to
that  of  his  namesake.  He  was  worshipped  under  the  symbol  of  a  conical
stone,  probably  an  aerolite,  surmounted  by  a  gilded  crescent,^  and  the  ground-
plan  of  the  town  roughly  described  a  crescent-shaped  curve  in  honour  of
its  patron.*  His  cult,  even  down  to  late  times,  was  connected  with  cruel
practices ;  generations  after  the  advent  to  power  of  the  Abbasside  caliphs,
bis  faithful  worshippers  continued  to  sacrifice  to  him  human  victims,  whose
heads,  prepared  according  to  the  ancient  rite,  were  accustomed  to  give  oracular
responses.^  The  government  of  the  surrounding  country  was  in  the  hands  of
princes   who   were   merely    vicegerents :  '^    Chaldaean   civilization   before   the

'  Tilli,  tlie  only  one  of  these  towns  mentioned  with  any  certainty  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  first
Chaldaean  empire  (cf.  JIasfkro,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  614,  note  3),  is  tlie  Tela  of  classical  authors,
and  probably  the  present  Weranshaher,  near  the  sources  of  the  Balikli.

'  Kharranu  was  identified  by  the  earlier  Assyriologists  with  the  Harran  of  the  Hebrews
(Gen.  V.  12),  the  Carrhte  of  classical  authors  (Strabo,  xvi.  1,  §  23,  p.  747 ;  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  v.  24),
and  this  identification  is  still  generally  accepted  (FiNzi,  Ricerche  per  lo  studio  delV  Antiehita.  Assira,
pp.  2t)S-270;  Fk.  Schkader,  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  134,  140);
cf ,  however,  what  is  said  on  p.  Go  of  this  worlr.

'  Winckler  (Altorientalische  Forscliunrjen,  pp.  S3,  84)  believes  that  the  Sin  of  Harran  is  probably
a  moon-god  of  the  Semites,  in  contradistinction  to  Nannar  of  Uru,  who  would  be  more  specially  the
moon-god  of  the  Sumerians.  For  the  two  Sins,  cf  Sayce,  The  Beligiun  of  the  Ancient  Babylonians,
pp.  160-1G5,  who  gives  his  opinion  with  greater  reserve.

*  Sachau,  Seise  in  Syrien  und  Mesopotamien,  p.  223;  and  Baal-Earran  in  einer  AltaramaiscJien
Inschrift  auf  einem  Belief  des  Kiiniijlichen  Museums  zu  Berlin,  p.  3.

'  For  the  cultus  of  Sin  at  Harran,  cf.  Maspero,  Daicn  of  Cinlization,  pp.  658,  659.  Without
seeking  to  specify  exactly  wliich  were  the  doctrines  introduced  into  Hiirranian  religion  subsecjuently
to  the  Christian  era,  we  may  yet  affirm  that  the  base  of  this  system  of  faith  was  merely  a  verv
distorted  form  of  the  ancient  Chaldaean  worship  practised  in  the  town.  The  information  collected
with  regard  to  their  history  by  Chwolson,  Die  Ssahier,  vol.  i.,  has  been  completed  by  the  text  pub-
lished by  DozY-GoEJE,  Nouveaux  Documents  pour  I'^tude  de  la  religion  des  Uarraniens,  in  the  Acles
d«  6°  Congres  des  Orienlalistes,  tenu  en  ISSS,  a  Leijde,  2nd  part,  sect.  1,  pj).  281-366.

°  Only  one  vicegerent  of  Mesopotamia  is  known  at  present,  and  he  belongs  to  the  Assyrian  epoch.
His  seal  is  preserved  in  tlie  British  JIuseum  (Pinches,  Guide  to  the  Koyundjih  Gallery,  p.  128).


THE  Fin  ST  BAllTLOXIAy  DYNASTY.  TT

beginnings  of  history  had  more  or  less  laid  Iiohl  of  them,  and  made  them/
willing  subjects  to  the  kings  of  Babylon.^

These  sovereigns  were  probably  at  the  outset  somewhat  obscure  personages,
without  much  prestige,  being  sometimes  independent  and  sometimes  subject  to-
the  rulers  of  neighbouring  states,  among  others  to  those  of  Agade.  In  later-
times,  when  Babylon  had  attained  to  universal  power,  and  it  was  desired  to
furnish  her  kings  with  a  continuous  history,  the  names  of  these  earlier  rulers  were
sought  out,  and  added  to  those  of  such  foreign  princes  as  had  from  time  to  time
enjoyed  the  sovereignty  over  them — tlius  forming  an  interminable  list  which
for  materials  and  authenticity  would  well  compare  with  that  of  the  Thinite
Pharaohs.^  This  list  has  come  down  to  us  incomplete,  and  its  remains  do  not
permit  of  our  determining  the  exact  order  of  reigns,  or  the  status  of  the
individuals  who  composed  it.  We  find  in  it,  in  the  period  immediately  subse-
quent to  the  Deluge,  mention  of  mythical  heroes,  followed  by  names  which  are
still  semi-legendary,  such  as  Sargon  the  Elder ;  the  princes  of  the  series  were,
however,  for  the  most  j^art  real  beings,  whose  memories  had  been  preserved
by  tradition,  or  whose  monuments  were  still  existing  in  certain  localities.*"
Towards  the  end  of  the  XXV*  century  before  our  era,  however,  a  dynasty  rose
into  power  of  which  all  the  members  come  within  the  range  of  history.*  The
first  of  them,  Sumuabim,  has  left  us  some  contracts  bearing  the  dates  of  one

'  The  importance  of  Harran  in  the  development  of  the  history  of  the  first  Chaldajan  empire  was
pointed  out  by  WiNCKLEii,  Gesehichte  Babyloniens  unci  Assijriens,  pp.  31,  n.  2,  148-150,  and  AUorien-
talischer  Fonchungen,  pp.  74-97,  140,  230,  231 ;  but  the  theory  according  to  which  this  town  was  tlie
capital  of  the  kingdom,  called  by  the  (Jhaldajan  and  Assyrian  scribes  '•  the  kingdom  of  tlie  world  "
(cf.  Dawn  of  Cioilization,  p.  596,  note  2),  is  justly  combated  by  Tielo  in  the  Zeilschri/t  fur
Aeiyriolofjie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  368-370.

-  For  the  composition  of  these  dynasties,  cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilizatiun,  pp.  236-242.

'  The  kings  subsequent  to  the  Deluge  are  mentioned  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  592.

'  This  dynasty,  which  is  known  to  us  in  its  entirety  by  the  two  lists  of  G.  Smith  (On  Fragments
of  an  Liscription  giving  -part  of  the  Chronology  from  which  the  Canon  of  Berosus  was  copied,  iu  the
Transactiom  of  the  Biblical  Archaeological  Society,  vol.  iii.  pp.  365,  366,  372,  373)  and  by  Pinches
(_Tlie  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  the  Proceedings,  1883-84,  p.  195),  was  legitimately
composed  of  only  eleven  kings,  and  was  known  as  the  Babylonian  dynasty,  although  Sayce  suspects
it  to  be  of  Arabian  origin  (^Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  vii.,  viii.,  62-04).     It  is  composed  as  follows : —

I.  SnMUABiM       ...    15

II.  Sn.MULAiLU       ...     35

III.  Zabum 14

IV.  Abilsix 18

V.    SiNMCBALLIT    ...      30

The  dates  of  this  dynasty  are  not  fixed  with  entire  certainty.  Hommel  (Geschichte  Babyloniens  u/td
Assyriens.  pp.  109,  173,  174,  351-353;  cf.  A  Supplementary  Note  to  Gibil-Gamish,  in  the  Proceedings
of  the  Biblical  Archaiol.  Soc,  vol.  xvi.,  1893-94,  p.  14)  believes  that  tlie  order  of  the  dynasties  has
been  reversed,  and  that  the  first  upon  the  lists  we  possess  was  historically  the  second;  he  thus  places
the  Babylonian  dynasty  between  2035  and  1731  B.C.  His  opinion  has  not  been  generally  adopted,
but  every  Assyriologist  dealing  with  this  period  proposes  a  different  date  for  the  reigns  in  this
dynasty  ;  to  take  only  ono  characteristic  example,  Khammurabi  is  placed  by  Oppert  {The  Ileal
Chronology  and  tlie  TrueUislory  of  the  Babylonian  Dynasties,  in  tlie  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Itecord,
vol.  ii.  p.  108)  in  tho  year  2394-2339,  by  Delitzsch-MUrdter  (Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,
2nd  edit.,  p.  85  and  vol.  i.)    in  2287-2232,  by   Winokler  (Untersuchungen   zur   Altorientalischen


2416-2401

VI.

Khammurabi    .

.     55

2304-2249

2401-2366

VII.

Sam.sdIll'Na  .     .

.     35

2249-2214

2366-2352

VIII.

Abesuuku    .     .

.     25

2214-2189

IX.

Ammisatana

.     25

2189-2164

2352-2334

X.

Ammizadugga  .

.     21

2104-2143

2334-2304

XI.

Samsusatana

.     31

2143-2112

"28  THE  FIRST   CEALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

or  other  of  the  fifteeu  years  of  his  reign,^  and  documents  of  public  or  private
interest  abound  in  proportion  as  we  follow  down  the  line  of  his  successors.
Sumulailu,  who  reigned  after  him,  was  only  distantly  related  to  his  predecessor  ;
■but  from  Sumulailu  to  Samshusatana  the  kingly  power  was  transmitted  from
father  to  son  without  a  break  for  nine  generations,  if  we  may  credit  the  testi-
mony of  the  ofScial  lists.^  Contemporary  records,  however,  prove  that  the  course
of  affairs  did  not  always  run  so  smoothly.  They  betray  the  existence  of  at  least
•one  usurper — Immeru — who,  even  if  he  did  not  assume  the  royal  titles,  enjoyed
the  supreme  power  for  several  years  between  the  reigns  of  Zabu  and  Abilsin.^
The  lives  of  these  rulers  closely  resembled  those  of  their  contemporaries  of
Southern  Chaldfea.*  They  dredged  the  ancient  canals,  or  constructed  new
ones ;  ^  they  restored  the  walls  of  their  fortresses,  or  built  fresh  strongholds  on
the  frontier  ; "  they  religiously  kept  the  festivals  of  the  divinities  belonging  to
their  terrestrial  domain,  to  whom  they  annually  rendered  solemn  homage.''
They  repaired  the  temples  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  enriched  them  according
to  their  means ;  we  even  know  that  Zabu,  the  third  in  order  of  the  line  of
sovereigns,  occupied  himself  in  building  the  sanctuary  Eulbar  of  Anunit,  in
Sippara.^  There  is  evidence  that  they  possessed  the  small  neighbouring
kingdoms  of  Kishu,  Sippara,  and  Kuta,  and  that  they  had  consolidated  them
into  a  single  state,  of  which  Babylon  was  the  capital.     To  the  south  their

■GescMchte,  p.  35,  and  Geschiclite  Baliyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  60)  in  2264-2210,  and  by  Peiser  (Zar
Babylonischen  Chronologic,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  p.  267)  in  2139-20S4,  and  by
Carl  Niebuhr  (Die  ChronoJogie  der  Geschichie  Israels,  p.  74)  in  20S1-2026.

'  See  the  notice  of  some  contracts  of  Sumuabim  in  Bruno  Mkissheb,  Beitrage  zum  altbabyloniachen
Privatrechf,  p.  4.

"  Sumulailu,  also  written  Samu-la-ilu,  whom  Mr.  Pinches  has  found  in  a  contract  tablet  associated
with  Punguuila  as  king,  was  not  the  sou  of  Sumuabim,  since  the  lists  do  not  mention  him  as  such ;
he  must,  liowever,  have  been  connected  by  some  sort  of  relationship,  or  by  marriage,  with  his  pre-
decessor, since  both  are  placed  in  the  same  dynasty.  A  few  contracts  of  Sumulailu  are  given  by
Meissner,  Beitrage  zum  altbahylonischen  Privatrecld,  p.  4.  Samsuiluua  calls  him  "  my  forefather
{a-gula-mu),  the  fifth  king  before  me ''  {Cyl.  Sams.  ii.  C2  -64).

*  Bruno  Meissner,  op.  cii.,  p.  4.

■•  See  the  description  given  of  these  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  617-619.

'  Contract  dated  in  "  the  year  in  which  Immeru  dug  the  canal  Ashukhun"  (Meissner,  op.  cit„
p.  22,  n.  10)  ;  contract  dated  "  the  year  of  the  canal  Tutu-kbegal "  (Id.,  Hid.,  pp.  24,  25,  83,  84).  The
exact  site  of  Tutu-khegal  is  still  unknown.

'  Sumulailu  had  built  six  such  large  strongholds  of  biick,  which  were  repaired  by  Samsuiluna
five  generations  later  (Winckler,  Untersuchmigen  zur  altorientalischen  Geschichte,  pp.  7,  142,  and
Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothel:,  yo\.  iii.  pp.  132,133;  Ho'iiMiih,  Geschicltle  Sabyloniens  und  Assyriens,
p.  353).  A  fortress  on  the  Elamite  frontier,  Kar-Dur-Abilsin,  mentioned  in  a  mutilated  inscription
(Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  p.  38,  No.  2,  verso,  1.  64),  had  probably  been  built  by  Abilsin,
whose  name  it  perpetuated  (Fr.  Delitzsoh,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossseer,  pp.  67,  6S ;  Hommel,  Gtschichte
Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  355).  A  contract  of  Sinmuballit  is  dated  the  year  in  which  he  built
the  great  wall  of  a  strong  place,  the  name  of  which  is  unfortunately  illegible  on  the  fragment  which
we  possess  (Meissner,  Beitrage,  etc.,  pp.  81,  82).

'  Contract  of  Sinmuballit,  dated  "  the  year  of  the  throne  of  Sin  "  (Meissner,  Beitrage,  etc.,  p.  70)  ;
also  "  the  year  of  Shamash  and  of  Ramm&n  "  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  72).

*  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  69,  col.  iii.  11.  28-31;  cf  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of
Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Biblical  Archaeological  Society,  vol.  i.  p.  34.  Hommel,  Ge-
schichte Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  354,  believes  that  the  passage  merely  indicates  the  ruin  of  the
•temple  subsequent  to  the  time  of  Zabu,  and  not  by  any  means  its  restoration  by  that  prince.


KINGS  ANTERIOR    TO    K HAMMURABI  2S>

possessions  touched  upon  those  of  the  kings  of  Uru,  but  the  frontier  was  con-
stantly shifting,  so  that  at  one  time  an  important  city  such  as  Nippur  belonged
to  them,  while  at  another  it  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  southern  provinces.
Perpetual  war  was  waged  in  the  narrow  borderland  which  separated  the  two
rival  states,  resulting  apparently  in  the  balance  of  power  being  kept  tolerably
equal  between  them  under  the  immediate  successors  of  Sumuabim  ^ — th&
obscure  Sumulailu,  Zabum,  the  usurper  Immeru,  Abilsin  and  Sinmuballit —
until  the  reign  of  Khammurabi  (the  son  of  Sinmuballit),  who  finally  made  it
incline  to  his  side.'-^  The  struggle  in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  which,  after
many  vicissitudes,  he  brought  to  a  successful  issue,  was  the  more  decisive,
since  he  had  to  contend  against  a  skilful  and  energetic  adversary  who  had
considerable  forces  at  his  disposal.  Kimsin  ^  was,  in  reality,  of  Elamite  race,
and  as  he  held  the  province  of  Yamutbal  in  appanage,  he  was  enabled  to
muster,  in  addition  to  his  Cbaldfean  battalions,  the  army  of  foreigners  who  had
conquered  the  maritime  regions  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates.
It  was  not  the  first  time  that   Elam  had  audaciously  interfered  in   the

'  None  of  these  facts  are  as  yet  historically  proved ;  we  may,  however,  conjecture  with  some
probability  what  was  the  general  state  of  things,  when  we  remember  that  the  first  kings  of  Babylon
were  contemporaries  of  the  last  independent  sovereigns  of  Southern  Clialdffia.

'  The  name  of  this  prince  has  been  read  in  several  ways — Hammurabi,  Khammurabi,  by  the
earlier  Assyriologists,  subsequently  Hammuragash,  Khammuragash,  as  being  of  Elamite  or  Cosstean
extraction :  the  reading  Khammurabi  is  at  present  the  prevailing  one.  The  bilingual  list  published
by  Pinches  (_Notes  on  a  New  List  of  Early  Babi/lonian  Kings,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Biblical  Archseo-
logical  Society,  1880-Sl,  p.  38)  makes  Khammurabi  an  equivalent  of  the  Semitic  names  Kimta-rapash-
timi.  Hence  Halevy  concluded  that  Khammurabi  was  a  series  of  ideograms,  and  that  Kimtaraijashtum
was  the  true  reading  of  tlie  name  {Melanges  de  Critique  et  d' Histuire,  p.  39G ;  Becherches  hibliques,
pp.  254-258,  307-310 ;  cf.  Gtjyakd,  La  Question  Smn^ro-Jccadi^niie,  in  the  Revue  des  Religions,  vol.  v.
p.  274);  his  proposal,  partially  admitted  by  Hommel  (^Gishgidlahi,  Babylon,  in  the  Proceedings,
1892-93,  vol,  XV.  p.  110;  Assyriological  Notes,  in  the  Proceedings,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  p.  212),  furnishes
us  with  a  mixed  reading  of  Khammurapaltu,  Amraphel.  [Hommel  is  now  convinced  of  the  identity
of  the  Amraphel  of  Gen.  xiv.  1  with  Khammurabi. — Tk.]  Sayce,  moreover,  adopts  the  reading
Khammurabi,  and  assigns  to  him  an  Arabian  origin  (^Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  vii.,  viii.,  62-64).  The
part  played  by  this  prince  was  pointed  out  at  an  early  date  by  Mtnant  (Inscriiitions  de  Hammurabi,,
roi  de  Babylone,  XVI'  siecle  avant  J.-C,  1863).  Keceut  discoveries  have  shown  the  important  share
which  he  had  in  developing  the  Chalda;au  empire,  and  have  increased  liis  reputation  with
Assyriologists  (Tiele,  Bahylonisch-Assyrische,  pp.124,  127;  ilomiEh,  GescliiclUe  Babyluuiens  und
Assyriens,  p.  407,  et  seq. ;  DELiTZSCH-MiJiiDTEB,  Gesrhichle  Bab.  und  Ass ,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  85-87 ;
WiNCKLEE,  Geschichte  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  60-C5).

'  The  name  of  this  king  has  been  the  theme  of  lieated  discussions :  it  was  at  first  pronounced
Aradsin,  Ardusiu,  or  Zikarsin  (Oitert,  Expedition  en  M^sopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  261);  it  is  now  read  in
several  dift'erent  ways — Rimsiu  (Delitzscu-Mlrdter,  Geschichte  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  83, 84 ;
WlNCKLER,  Geschichte  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  48),  or  Eriaku,  Kiaku,  Eimagu  (Hommel,  Gescli.  Bab.  u.  Ass.,.
pp.  362,  3C3 ;  Die  Semilischen  Viilher  und  Sprache,  p.  345 ;  Halevy,  Notes  Sum^riennes,  §  5,  in  the
Revue  Sgmitique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270-276;  Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  p.  65,  et  seq.).  Otiiers  have
made  a  dLstinction  between  the  two  forms,  and  have  made  out  of  them  the  names  of  two  diflercnt
kings  (G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  tlie  Biblieal  Arcli.  Soc,  vol.  i.
pp.  42,  43,  and  53-55,  where  tlie  author  preserves,  side  by  side  with  Eimsin,  Oppert's  reading  of
Ardusin,  Aradsin;  Fa.  Delitz.soii,  Die  Sprachc  der  Kosssecr,  pp.  68,  69;  Tiele,  Bab.  Asstjrische  Ge-
schichte, pp.  122-124).  They  are  all  variants  of  the  same  name.  I  have  adopted  the  form  Uimsin,
which  is  preferred  by  a  few  Assyriologists.  [The  tablets  recently  discovered  by  Mr.  Pinches,  refer-
ring to  Kudur-lagamar  and  Tudkhula,  which  he  lias  publislied  in  a  Paper  read  before  the  Victoria
Institute,  .Ian.  20,  1896,  have  shown  tliat  the  true  reading  is  Eri-Aku.  Tlie  Elamite  name  lOri-Aku,
"  servant  of  tlie  moon-god,"  was  changed  by  some  of  his  subjects  into  the  Babylonian  Kim-Sin,.
"  Have  mercy,  0  Moon-god  !  "  just  as  Ahesukh,  the  Hebrew  Abishu'a  ("  the  father  of  welfare  ")  was
transformed  into  the  Baljylonian  Kbisum  ("the  actor"). — Ed.]


■iO  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

affairs  of  her  neighbours.  In  fabulous  times,  one  of  her  mythical  kings —
Khumbaba  the  Ferocious — had  oppressed  Uruk,  and  Gilgames  with  all  his
valour  was  barely  able  to  deliver  the  town.'^  Sargon  the  Elder  is  credited
with  having  subdued  Elam ;  the  kings  and  vicegerents'of  Lagash  had  measured
forces  with  Anshau  as  well  as  with  Uru  and  Larsam,  but  with  uncertain  issue.
From  time  to  time  they  obtained  an  advantage,  and  we  find  recorded  in  the
annals  victories  gained  by  Gudea,  Ine-sin,  or  Bursin,^  but  to  be  followed
only  by  fresh  reverses ;  at  the  close  of  such  campaigns,  and  in  order  to  seal
the  ensuing  peace,  a  princess  of  Susa  would  be  sent  as  a  bride  to  one  of  the
Chaldsean  cities,  or  a  Chaldtean  lady  of  royal  birth  would  enter  the  harem  of  a
king  of  Anshan.^  Elam  was  protected  along  the  course  of  the  Tigris  and  on
the  shores  of  the  Nar-Marratum  by  a  wide  marshy  region,  impassable  except
at  a  few  fixed  and  easily  defended  places.*  The  alluvial  plain  extending
behind  the  marshes  was  as  rich  and  fertile  as  tliat  of  Chaldaea.  Wheat  and
barley  ordinarily  yielded  an  hundred  and  at  times  two  hundredfold ;  ^  the
-towns  were  surrounded  by  a  shadeless  belt  of  palms ;  '^  the  almond,  fig,  acacia,
poplar,  and  willow  extended  in  narrow  belts  along  the  rivers'  edge.'  The
climate  closely  resembles  that  of  Chaldtea  :  if  the  midday  heat  in  summer  is
more  pitiless,  it  is  at  least  tempered  by  more  frequent  east  winds.**  The  groimd,
however,  soon  begins  to  rise,  ascending  gradually  towards  the  north-east.  The
distant  and  uniform  line  of  mountain-peaks  grows  loftier  on  the  approach  of  the
traveller,  and  the  hills  begin  to  appear  one  behind  another,  clothed  halfway
up  with  thick  forests,  but  bare  on  their  suurmits,  or  scantily  covered  with
meagre   vegetation.     They   comprise,  in  fact,  six   or   seven   parallel   ranges,

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  tliis  subject  in  M.\srERO,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  579,  5S0.  A  much
mutilated  test,  published  by  A.  Strong  (Three  Cuneiform  Texts,  in  the  Bahylonian  and  Oriental
Record,  vol.  vi.  pp.  4-9),  appears  to  refer  in  the  same  way  to  some  fabulous  struggle  between  a  very
ancient  king  of  Chaldasa  and  a  certain  Khumbasitir,  King  of  Elam.

^  Contract  dated  '-the  year  in  which  tbe  King  Ine-Sin  ravaged  Anshan"  (Scheil,  Notes  d'Hpig.
et  d' Archeblogie  Assyriennes,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  37;  cf.  Constantinople,  N.  394).

'  Contract  dated  "the  year  in  which  the  king's  daughter  went  to  Anshan"  (Scheil,  Notes  d'^pi-
graphie  et  d'Arcti^vlogie  Assyriennes,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  38) ;  an  unpublished
contract  of  Constantinople  is  dated  '"  the  year  in  which  the  daughter  of  the  King  Ine-Sin  became  vice-
gerent in  Anshau  and  in  Murkhasi,"  probably  by  marriage  with  the  vicegerent  of  these  countries.
The  title  of  "vicegerent"  used  in  this  passage  appears  to  denote  that  Anshan  was  subject  to  the
King  Inc-Sin.

'  The  geography  of  Elam  has  been  made  the  subject  of  minute  study  in  the  monograph  by
BiLLERBEOK,  Susa,  einc  Sludie  zur  Aiteu  Geschichte  Wtstasiens,  pp.  1-23.

'  Stbabo,  XV.  3,  §  11,  p.  731,  who  appears,  however,  to  have  taken  his  information  in  this  case
from  the  stories  of  Aristobulus,  which  should  always  be  received  with  caution.

"  Stkaeo,  XV.  3,  §  10,  p.  731 ;  xvi.  1,  §  5,  p.  739.  Assyrian  sculptures  show  us  that  these  grew
around  the  towns  in  the  time  of  Assurbauipal  as  commonly  as  at  the  present  day  (Layard,  Monu-
ments of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  49).

'  LoFTUS,  Travels  and  Researches  in  Ghaldsea  and  Susiana,  pp.  270,  816.

*  Strabo,  XV.  3,  §  10,  p.  731,  again  following  Aristobulus,  relates  that  in  summer  the  heat  at
midday  is  so  excessive  that  snakes  cannot  cross  the  streets  without  running  the  risk  of  being  Uterally
baked  by  the  sun.  Modern  travellers  have  shown  themselves  less  susceptible  to  a  high  temperature,
and  have  rarely  left  record  of  a  day  when  the  heat  was  unbearable  (LOFTns,  Travels  and  Researches
in  Chaldfea  and  Susiana,  pp.  290,  307).


TEE   CLIMATE  AND   HI  VERS    OF  EL  AM.


31


resembling  natural  ramparts  piled  up  between  the  country  of  the  Tigris  and  the
table-land  of  Iran.  The  intervening  valleys  were  formerly  lakes,  having  had
for  the  most  part  no  communication  with  each  other  and  no  outlet  into  the
sea.     In  the  course  of  centuries  they  had  dried  up,  leaving  a  thick  deposit  of


CHALD^tA,  ELAM,
ASSYRIA.


t  nu,//;iir,tft/r


MA1>   OF    CUALDJiA    AND    ELA3I.

mud  in  the  hollows  of  their  ancient  beds,  from  which  sprang  luxurious  and
abundant  harvests.^  The  rivers— the  Uknu,^  the  Ididi,^  and  the  Ulai* —
which  water  this  region  are,  on  reaching  more  level  ground,  connected  by

'  Eliske  Eecltjs,  G^ographie  universelU,  vol.  ix.  p.  168.

'  The  Uknu  is  the  Kerkhah  of  the  present  day,  the  Choaspea  of  the  Greeks  (Fb.  Delitzsoh,  Wo  lag
das  Paradient  pp.  193-19G>

^  The  IJidi  was  at  first  identified  with  the  aucieut  Pasitigris  (FiNZi,  Eieerche  intorno  all'  Anli-
chita  Assira,  p.  2l5l),  which  echclars  then  desired  to  distinguish  from  tlie  Eulasos  :  it  is  now  known
to  be  the  arm  of  the  Karuu  which  runs  to  Dizful  (Fit.  Delitzscu,  Wo  lag  das  Faradics  1  p.  329),  the
Koprates  of  clasaical  times  (Strabo,  xv.  3,  §  Ij,  p.  729J,  which  has  eometijues  been  confouLded  with
the  Eulasos.

'  The  Ulai,  mentioned  in  the  Hebrew  texts  (,Dan.  viii.  2,  10),  tlie  Eulteos  of  classical  writers


32


THE   FIRST   CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


y


canals,  and  are  constantly  shifting  their  beds  in  the  light  soil  of  the  Susian
plain  :  thej'  soon  attain  a  width  equal  to  that  of  the  Euphrates,  but  after  a  short
time  lose  half  their  volume  in  swamps,  and  empty  themselves  at  the  present
day  into  the  Shatt-el-Arab.     They  flowed  formerly  into  that  part  of  the  Persian

Gulf  whicli  extended  as  far  as
Kornah,  and  the  sea  thus  formed
the  southern  frontier  of  the
kingdom.^

From  earliest  times  this
country  was  inhabited  by  three
distinct  peoples,  whose  descen-
dants may  still  be  distinguished
at  the  present  day,  and  although
they  have  dwindled  in  numbers
and  become  mixed  with  elements
of  more  recent  origin,  the  resem-
blance to  their  forefathers  is  still
very  remarkable.  There  were,  in
the  first  place,  the  short  and  robust
people  of  well-knit  figure,  with
brown  skins,  black  hair  and  eyes,
who  belonged  to  that  negritic
race  which  inhabited  a  consider-
able part  of  Asia  in  prehistoric
times.^  These  prevailed  in  the
lowlands  and  the  valleys,  where  the
warm,  damp  climate  favoured  their
development ;  but  they  also  spread  into  the  mountain  region,  and  had  pushed
their  outposts  as  far  as  the  first  slopes  of  the  Iranian  table-land.  They  there
came  into  contact  with  a  white-skinned  people  of  medium  height,  who  were
probably  allied  to  the  nations  of  Northern  and  Central  Asia — to  the  Scythians,

(Areian,  Anabasis.,  vii.  7  ;  DiODOra'S  Siuulus,  xix.  19),  also  called  Pasltigris  (Abkian,  Hht.  Ind.,  xlii. ;
Straeo,  XV.  3,  §  46,  pp.  71S-729  ;  Pliny,  Eist.  Nat.,  vi.  31).  It  is  the  Karun  of  the  present  day  (Fr.
Delitzsoh,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  1  p.  320),  until  ils  confluence  with  the  Shaur,  and  subsequently  the
Shaur  itself,  which  waters  the  foot  of  the  Susian  hills.

'  For  tlie  ancient  limits  of  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  alluvial  deposits  which  have  gradually  filled
it  from  early  times,  cf.  Maspero,  Daton  of  Civilization,  pp.  548,  549.

^  The  connection  of  the  negroid  type  of  Susiaus  witli  the  negritic  races  of  India  and  Oceania,
suspected  by  Quatrepages-Hamy,  Crania  Ethnica,  pp.  152,  166,  has  been  proved,  in  the  course  of
M.  Dieulafoy's  expedition  to  the  Susian  plains  and  the  ancient  provinces  of  Elam,  by  the  researches
of  Fr.  Houssay,  Les  Races  humaines  de  la  Perse,  pp.  28-45,  48 ;  cf.  Diedlafoy,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,
pp.  7,  8,  10,  11,  27-33,  30,  37.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  of  Sargon  II.  in  the  Louvre.


v-^i-.w


dh


AN   ANCIENT   SUSIAN  OP  NEGEITIU   UAiV..'


THE   PEOPLES   AND    THE   CITIES    OF  EL  AM.


33


for  instance,  if  it  is  permissible  to  use  a  vague  term

employed  by  the  Ancients.^     Semites   of  the  same

stock  as  those  of  Chaldcea  pushed  forward  as  far

as  the  east  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and  settling  mainly

among    the  marshes  led  a  precarious   life

by  fishing  and    pillaging.^     The  country  '  ij

of  the  plain  was  called  Anziin,  or  Anshan,^  -

and   the    mountain    region    Numma,   or

Ilamma,  "  the  high   lands  :  "    these  two

names  were  subsequently  used  to  denote

the  whole  country,  and   Ilamma  has   sur-        •  ,,

vived  in  the  Hebrew  word  Elam.^     Susa,  the


NATIVE  OP  MIXED  XEfiKITIC  RACE  FliOJI  SUSIANA.'


most  important  and  flourishing  town  in  the
kingdom,  was  situated  between  the  Ulai  and
the  Ididi,  some  twenty-five  or  thirty  miles  from  the  nearest  of  the  mountain

1  This  last-mentioneil  people  is,  by  some  authors,  for  reasons  which,  so  far,  Ciin  Iiardly  be  con-
sidered conclusive,  connected  with  the  so-called  Sumerian  race,  which  we  find  settled  in  ChaldiSii
(cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  550,  551).  They  are  said  to  have  been  the  first  to  employ
horses  and  chariots  in  warfare  (Billerbeck,  Susa,  p.  24).

=  From  the  earliest  times  we  meet  beyond  the  Tigris  with  names  like  that  of  Durilu  (cf  Maspero,
Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  598),  a  fact  which  proves  the  existence  of  races  speaking  a  Semitic  dialect  in
the  countries  under  the  suzerainty  of  the  King  of  Elam :  in  the  last  days  of  the  Chaldajan  empire  they  had
assumed  such  importance  that  the  Hebrews  made  out  Elam  to  be  one  of  the  sous  of  Shem  {Gen.  x.  22).

'  Anzan,  Anslian,  and,  by  assimilation  of  the  nasal  with  the  sibilant,  Ashshan.  This  name  has
already  been  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  kings  and  vicegerents  of  Lagash  (cf.  Maspero,  Dawn
of  Civilization,  pp.  (J03,  CIO)  and  in  the  Book  of  Prophecies  of  the  ancient  Chaldajau  astronomers  ;  it
also  occurs  in  the  myal  preamble  of  Cyrus  and  his  ancestors  (Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.
35,11.  12,  21),  who  like  him  were  styled  "kings  of  Anshan."  It  had  been  applied  to  the  whole
country  of  Elam  (Halevy,  Mdanges  de  Critique  et  d'Histoire,  pp.  (J,  7,  117-110,  120,  130),  and  after-
wards to  Persia  (Amiaud,  Cyrus,  roi  de  Perse,  in  the  Mdanges  Renier,  pp.  243-2G0 ;  Oppert,  in  the
Giittingische  gelehrte  Anzeigen,  18S1,  No.  40,  1254-5(j,  where  the  author  questions  the  identity  of
.\ii8han  with  Anzan,  regarding  the  latter  wnrd  as  the  name  of  Elam,  and  the  former  as  that  of  a
Persian  town,  Pasargadse  or  Marrhasion);  others  are  of  opinion  that  it  was  the  name  of  a  part  of
Elam,  viz.  that  inhabited  by  the  Turanian  Medes  who  spoke  the  second  language  of  the  Achoeme-
nian  inscriptions  (Delattre,  Le  Peuple  el  la  Langue  des  Perses,  pp.  44,  et  seq.),  the  eastern  half
(H.  Rawlinsox,  Notes  on  a  Clny  Cylinder  of  Cyrus  the  Great,  in  the  J.  R.  Ai.  S.,  new  series,  vol.  xii.
pp.  70-07,  wliere  tlie  author  connects  the  name  with  a  town  called  Assan,  mentioned  as  being  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Shuster;  Tiele,  Bahylonisch-Assyrische  Geschichte,  p.  4(;9),  bounded  by  the  Tigris
aud  the  Persian  Gulf,.cousistingof  a  flat  and  swampy  land  (8ayce,  Tlie  Languages  of  the  Cun.  Insar.
of  Elam,  in  tlie  Trans.  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  p.  475,  and  The  Inscriptions  of  Mai-Amir,  pp.  4,  5).
These  dift'ereuces  of  opinion  gave  rise  to  a  heated  eoulroversy;  it  is  now,  however,  pretty  generally
admitted  that  Anzan-Anshiln  was  really  the  plain  of  Elam,  from  the  mountains  to  the  sea,  and  one
set  of  authorities  affirms  that  the  word  Anzan  may  have  meant  "  plain "  in  the  language  of  the
country  (Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  en  lanijue  susienne,  in  the  jWm.  du  Congres  internal,  des  Orientalistes
de  Paris,  vol.  ii.  p.  194  ;  ef.  Fr.  DEi-rrzscH,  Ho  lug  das  Paradiesi  p.  32G),  while  others  hesitate  as
yet  to  pronounce  definitely  on  this  point  (Weissbacu,  Anzanische  Insehriftcn,  in  the  Abhandlungen  of
the  Sax.  Academy  of  Sciences,  vol.  xii.  p.  137;  vol.  xiv.  p.  730).

«  The  meaning  of  "  Numma,"  "  Ilamma,"  "  Ilamtu,"  in  the  group  of  words  used  to  indicate  Elam,
had  been  recognised  even  by  the  earliest  Assy riologists;  the  name  originally  referred  to  the  hilly
country  on  the  north  and  east  of  Susa  (Fr.  Delitzscii,  TKo  lag  das  Parodies. '  p.  320).  To  the
Hebrews,  Elam  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Shem  (Gen.  x.  22).  The  Greek  form  of  the  name  is  Elymais,
and  some  of  the  classical  geographers  were  well  enough  acquainted  with  the  meaning  of  the  word  to
bo  able  to  distinguish  the  region  to  which  it  referreil  from  ."^usiana  proper:  'E\wyuai  (vur. 'E\i/uofs),
;^wf)a  'Affav/iuiv  Trphs  rrj  UfptTiKrj  rij^  ^ouffiSos  iyyv^  (StepIIEX  oe  ByZANTIl".M,  8.  V.  I.).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  furnished  by  Marcel  Dieulafoy.

1)


34


TEE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


ranges.  Its  fortress  and  palace  were  raised  upon  the  slopes  of  a  mound  which
overlooked  the  surrounding  country  :  ^  at  its  base,  to  the  eastward,  stretched
the  town,  with  its  houses  of  sun-dried  bricks.^     Further  up  the  course  of


THE   TUMCLUS   OP   SUSA,    AS   IT    APPEARED    TOWARDS   THE    MIDDLE    OF    THIS   CENTCRY,'


the  Uknu,  lay  the  following  cities :  Madaktu,  the  Badaca  of  classical  authors,*
rivalling  Susa  in  strength  and  importance ;  Naditu,^  Til-Khumba,"  Dur-
Undash,''  Khaidalu,^ — all  large  walled  towns,  most  of  which  assumed  the  title
of  royal  cities."     Elam  in  reality  constituted  a  kind  of  feudal  empire,  composed

'  Susa,  in  the  language  of  the  country,  was  called  Shushun  (Oppert,  Leg  Inscriptions  en  langtie
susienne,  Etsai  d'interpr^tation,  in  the  Me'moires  du  Covgres  international  des  Orientalistes  de  Paris,
vol.  ii.  p.  179);  this  name  was  transliterated  into  Chaldseo-Assyrian,  by  Shushan,  Shushi  (Fr.
Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  pp.  326,  327).

"  On  the  site  of  the  citadel,  cf.  M.  Dieulafoy,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  117,  et  seq.  Strabo  (xv.
3,  §  2,  p.  728)  tells  us,  on  tlie  authority  of  Polycletus,  that  the  town  had  no  walls  in  the  time  of
Alexander,  and  extended  over  a  space  two  hundred  stadia  in  length  ;  in  the  VII"'  century  B.C.  it
was  enclosed  by  walls  with  bastions,  which  are  showu  on  a  bas-relief  of  Assurbanipal,  but  it  was
surrounded  by  unfortified  suburbs  (Layard,  Monuments  of  Kineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  49).

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  after  a  plate  in  Chesney's  Expedition  for  the  Survey  of  the  Riven
Tigris  and  Euphrates,  vol.  ii.  p.  356.  It  represents  the  tumulus  of  Susa  as  it  appeared  prior  to  the
excavations  of  Loftus  and  the  Dieulafoys.

'  Madaktu,  Mataktu,  the  Badaka  of  Diodorus  (xix.  19),  situated  on  the  Eulaeos,  between  Susa
and  Ecbatana,  has  been  placed  by  Rawlinson  {The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  173,  No.  3)  near
the  bifurcation  of  the  Kerkhah,  either  at  Paipul  or  near  Aiwan-i-Kherkah,  where  there  are  some
rather  important  and  ancient  ruins;  Billerbeck  (^Susa,  pp.  71,  72)  prefers  to  put  it  at  the  mouth  of
the  valley  of  Zal-fer,  on  the  site  at  present  occupied  by  the  citadel  of  Kala-i-Riza.

'  Naditu  is  identified  by  Finzi  {Riccrche  intomo  alio  Studio  dell'  Antichitii  Assira,  p.  298)  with
the  village  of  Natanzah,  near  Ispahan ;  it  ought  rather  to  be  looked  for  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sarua.

"  Til-Khumba,  the  Mound  of  Kliumba,  so  named  after  one  of  the  principal  Elamite  gods,  was,  per-
haps, situated  among  the  ruins  of  Budbar,  towards  the  confluence  of  the  Ab-i-Kirind  and  Kerkhah,
or  possibly  higher  up  in  the  mountain,  in  the  vicinity  of  Asmanabad  (Billerbeck,  Susa,  p.  72).

'  Dur-Undasli,  Dur-Uudasi,  has  been  identified,  without  absolutely  conclusive  reason,  with  the
fortress  of  Kala-i-Dis  on  the  Disful-Kud  (Billerbeck,  Susa,  p.  72).

'  Khaidalu,  Khidalu,  is  perhaps  the  present  fortress  of  Dis-Malkan  (Billerbeck,  Susa,  p.  72).

'  E.g.  Madaktu  (Rawlinsom,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  5, 11. 13,  72,  81),  Xaditu  (Id.,  ibid.,  1.  77),
Dur-Undasi  (Id.,  ibid.,  1.  94),  KhiJalu  (Id.,  pi.  3,  1.  49).


TEE  LANGUAGE  AND    THE    GODS    OF  EL  AM.  35

of  several  tribes — tlie  Habardip,  the  Kliushshi/  the  Umliyash,  the  people  of
Yamutbal  and  of  Yatbur  '^— all  independent  of  each  other,  but  often  united  under
the  authority  of  one  sovereign,  who  as  a  rule  chose  Susa  as  the  seat  of  govern-
ment. The  language  is  not  represented  by  any  idioms  now  spoken,  and  its
affinities  with  the  Sumeriaa  which  some  writers  have  attempted  to  establish,
are  too  uncertain  to  make  it  safe  to  base  any  theory  upon  them.''  The  little
that  we  know  of  Elamite  religion  reveals  to  us  a  mysterious  world,  full  of  strange
names  and  vague  forms.^  Over  their  hierarchy  there  presided  a  deity  who  was
called  Shushinak  (the  Susian),  Dimesh  or  Samesh,  Dagbag,  Assiga,  Adaene,  and
possibly  Khumba  and  Umman,  whom  the  Chaldaeans  identified  with  their  god
Ninip ;  ^  his  statue  was  concealed  in  a  sanctuary  inaccessible  to  the  profane,  but
it  was  dragged  from  thence  by  Assurbanipal  of  Nineveh  in  the  VII"'  century  B.c.^

'  Stkabo,  xi.  13,  §  3,  0,  pp.  523,  524,  on  the  authority  of  Nearclius,  an  admiral  under  Alexander,
divides  the  peoples  of  Susiana  into  four  races  of  brigands — the  Mardi,  Uxiane,  Elymajans,  and
Cossseans.  The  Mardi  or  Amardians  are  the  Habardip  of  the  Assyro-Chaldasau  inscriptions,  the
Kliapirti-Apirti  of  the  Susian  and  Achremeniau  texts,  who  inhabited  the  region  to  the  north-east  of
Susa,  where  are  the  monuments  of  Mai-Amir  (Nomas,  Scylhia  Version  of  the  Behislun  Inscription  in
tlie  Journ.  S.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xv.  pp.  4,  164;  Sayce,  The  Languages  of  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of
Elam  and  Media,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archajology,  vol.  iii.  p.  46S,  and  Tlie
Inscriptions  of  Mai-Amir,  pp.  C-9);  the  Uxians  are  the  Khushshi  (Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  en  langue
fusienne,  Essai  d' interpretation,  in  the  Memoires  du  Congres  international  des  Orientalistes  de  Paris,
vol.  ii.  p.  183),  and  the  Elyma;ans  are  the  Elamites  (cf.  p.  33,  note  3,  of  the  present  work).  The
identity  of  the  Cossseans  will  be  discussed  at  greater  length  on  pp.  113-120  of  this  volume.

'  The  countries  of  Yatbur  and  Yamutbal  extended  into  tlie  plain  between  the  marshes  of  the
Tigris  and  the  mountain;  the  town  of  Durilu  was  near  the  Y.amutbal  region,  if  not  in  that  country
itself  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies'  p.  230;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,
pp.  342,  354,  who  derives  this  name  from  that  of  Mutabil,  governor  of  Durilu).  Umliyash  lay
between  the  Uknu  and  the  Tigris  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  pp.  230,  231).

'  A  great  part  of  the  Susian  inscriptions  have  been  collected  by  Fr.  Lenormaut,  Choix  de  Textes
■cungiformes  inifdils,  pp.  115-141.  They  have  been  studied  successively  by  Oi'Fert,  Les  InscTiptions
en  langue  susienne,  Essai  d' interpretation  (in  the  Memoires  du  Congrcs  international  des  Orientalistes
dn  Paris,  1873,  vol,  ii.  pp.  79-21G) ;  by  Sayce,  Tlie  Languages  of  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Elam  (in
the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archeology,  vol.  iii.  pp.  465-485),  aud  The  Inscriptions  of
Mai-Amir  and  the  Language  of  the  Second  Column  of  the  Achxmenian  Inscriptions  (ia  the  Acles  du
sizieme  Congres  di;s  Orientalistes,  tenu  en  1SS3  u  Leyde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  637-75(j) ;  subsequently  by  Weiss-
bach,  Anzanische  Inschriften  (iu  the  Ahhandlungen  der  Kgl.  Sdchsischen  Gesellschafl  der  Wissenschaften,
vol.  xii.  pp.  119-150),  and  Neue  Beitriige  zur  Kunde  der  Susischen  Inschriften  (vol.  xiv.  pp.  731-777  of
the  same);  by  Quentin,  Textes  Susiens  (in  tho  Journal  Asialique,  1891,  vol.  xvii.  p.  150,  et  seq.);
aud  lastly  by  Winckler,  Zu  den  altsmischen  Inschriften  (in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.
lip.  317-32G).  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  identify  the  language  in  which  they  are  written  with
tho  Sumero-accadian  (Lenormant,  La  Magie  chez  les  Chaldeens,  pp.  322-328,  and  La  Langue  primitive
de  la  Chaldee,  pp.  313-31G),  and  authorities  now  generally  agree  in  considering  the  Achoemenian
inscriptions  of  the  second  type  as  representative  of  its  modern  form,  cf.  Weissbacu,  Anzanische  In-
erhriften,  pp.  149,  150.  Hommel  {Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  46,  47,  274,  ot  seq.,  and
Die  Sumero-Alikadische  Sprache,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Kcilschriftforschung,  vol.  i.  pp.  330-340)
connects  it  with  Georgian,  and  includes  it  in  a  great  linguistic  family,  which  comjirises,  besides
these  two  idioms,  the  Hittite,  tho  Cappadocian,  tho  Armenian  of  the  Van  inscriptions,  and  the
Cossajan.  Opport  claims  to  have  discovered  on  a  tablet  iu  the  British  Museum  a  list  of  words
belonging  to  one  of  tlie  idioms  (probably  Semitic)  of  Susiana,  which  differs  alike  from  the  Suso-Medio
and  the  Assyrian  (La  Langue  des  Elamites,  in  tho  Eevue  d' Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  \>\k  45-49).

•  There  are  only  about  twenty  lines  or  bo  on  the  religion  of  the  Elamites  in  Fr.  Lenokmamt's  La
Magie  chezles  Chaldeens,i>. 321,  note  I,audapagein  Fr.  Vklitzhcu's  Die  Sprache  der  Kossaer,  pp.i2,i3.

'  II.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Lis.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  57, 11.  46-50 ;  Fh.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der
Kosfaer,  p.  42,  after  the  text  published  by  Rawlinson.

'  Shushinak  is  an  adjective  derived  from  tho  name  of  the  town  of  Susa.  Tho  real  name  of  the
god  was  probably  kept  secret  aud  rarely  uttered.    The  names  which  appear  by  the  side  of  Shushinak


36


TEE  FIRST   CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.


This  deity  was  associated  with  six  others  of  the  first  rank,  who  were  divided  into
two  triads — Shumndii,  Lagamaru,    Partikira ;    Ammankasibar,  Uduran,  and

Sapak :  of  these  names,  the  least  repellent,
Ammankasibar,  may  possibly  be  the  Memnon  of
the  Greeks.^  The  dwelling  of  these  divinities
was  near  Susa,  in  the  depths  of  a  sacred  forest  to
which  the  priests  and  kings  alone  had  access  ;
their  images  were  brought  out  on  certain  days
to  receive  solemn  homage,  and  were  afterwards
carried  back  to  their  shrine  accompanied  by  a
devout  and  reverent  multitude.  These  deities
received  a  tenth  of  the  spoil


after  any  successful  campaign —
the  offerings  comprising  statues
of  the  enemies'  gods,  valuable
vases,  ingots  of  gold  and  silver,
furniture,  and  stuffs.^  The
Elamite  armies  were  well  or-
ganized, and  under  a  skilful
general  became  irresistible.  In
other  respects  the  Elamites
closely  resembled  the  Chal-
dseans,  pursuing  the  same  indus-
tries and  having  the  same  agri-
cultural and  commercial  instincts.  In  the  absence  of  any  bas-reliefs  and
inscriptions  peculiar  to  this  people,  we  may  glean  from  the  monuments  of
Lagash  and  Babylon  a  fair  idea  of  the  extent  of  their  civilization  in  its
earliest  stages.

The  cities  of  the  Euphrates,  therefore,  could  have  been  sensible  of  but  little
change,  when  the  chances  of  war  transferred  them  from  the  rule  of  their  native
princes  to  that  of  an  Elamite.     The  struggle  once  over,  and  the  resulting  evils


AN    LLAMITE   tiUDDESS,  AXSWKIUM.  TU  THE    LHAEII.EA.S     1>HTAH.


in  tbe  text  published  by  H.  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  ]V.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  57,  11.  46-50,  as  equivalents  of
the  Babylonian  Ninip,  perhaps  represent  different  deities ;  we  may  well  ask  whether  the  deity  may
not  be  the  Khumba.  Umma,  TJmman,  who  recurs  so  frequently  in  the  names  of  men  and  places,  and
who  has  hitherto  never  been  met  with  alone  in  any  formula  or  dedicatory  tablet.  As  to  the  sanctuary
in  which  he  resided,  cf.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  6,  11.  30,  31.

'  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  6,  11.  33-36 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,
p.  228,  and  Jensen,  Inschri/ten  AschurhanijiaVs,  in  the  Keilinschnftliehe  Bihlioiheh,  vol.  ii.  p.  205.
Fr.  Lenormaut  was  inclined  to  think  that  Ammankasibar  represented  a  sular  god  and  Uduran  a
lunar  god  {La  Magie  cliez  les  Chald^ens,  p.  319,  n.  1).

"  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  6, 11.  G5-69,  describing  the  sack  of  Susa  by  Assurbanipal.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  in  Layaud's  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.
pi.  65.


KODUB-NAKHUNTA    CONQUERS    VEUK  AND   LAltSAM.  37

repaired  as  far  as  practicable,  the  people  of  these  towns  resumed  their  usual
ways,  hardly  conscious  of  the  presence  of  their  foreign  ruler.     Tiie  victors,  for
tlieir  part,  became  assimilated  so  rapidly  with  the  vanquished,  that  at  the
<;lose   of  a   generation   or   so    the    conquering    dynasty    was   regarded   as   a
legitimate  and  national  one,  loyally  attached  to  the  traditions  and    religion
of  its   adopted   country.      In  the  year  2285  B.C.,  towards  tlie  close  of  the
reign  of  Nurramman,  or  in  the  earlier  part  of  that  of  Siniddinam,^  a  King
of  Elam,  by  name  Kudur-uakhuuta,-^  triumphantly  marched  througli  Chaldrea
from   end   to   end,    devastating  the   country   and   sparing   neither   town   nor
temple:    Uruk  lost  its  statue   of  Nana,  which  was  carried   off  as   a  trophy
and  placed   in   the  sanctuary  of  Susa.      The  inhabitants  long  mourned  the
■detention  of  their  goddess,  and  a  hymn  of  lamentation,  probably  composed
for  the  occasion  by  one  of  their  priests,  kept  the  remembrance  of  the  disaster
fresh  in  their  memories.     "  Until  when,  oh  lady,    shall   the   impious  enemy
ravage  the   country  ! — In  thy   queen-city,   Uruk,   the   destruction  is  accom-
plished,— in  Eulbar,  the  temple  of  thy  oracle,  blood  has  flowed  like  water, —
upon  the  whole  of  thy  lands  has  he  poured  out  flame,  and  it  is  spread  abroad
like  smoke. — Oh,  lady,  verily  it  is  hard  for  me  to  bend  under  the  yoke  of
misfortune  ! — Oh,  lady,  thou  hast  wrapped  me  about,  thou  hast  plunged  me,
in  sorrow ! — The  impious  mighty  one  has  broken  me  in  pieces  like  a  reed, —
and  I  know  not  what  to  resolve,  I  trust  not  in  myself, — like  a  bed  of  reeds
I  sigh  day  and  night! — I,  thy  servant,  I  bow   myself  before  thee!"^      It
would   appear   that   the    wliole   of    Chalda;a,   including   Babylon   itself,  was
forced  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  the  invader ;  *  a  Susiau  empire  thus

'  Cf.  Maspeko,  I)aa-n  of  Cifilizalwn,  j).  610,  for  a  summary  of  the  little  we  know  in  regard  to
the  reigns  of  Nurrammau  and  Siniddinam.

^  G.  Smith,  Hintorij  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  240-251,  where  Assurbanipal  tells  how  he  recovered,  at
Susa,  the  statue  of  Nana,  which  King  Kuduruankhundi  had  carried  off  1635  years  (other  copies  of
the  same  text  give  153.T  years)  before  his  time.  This  document,  discovered  by  G.  Smitu  {Egyptian
Campuigna  uf  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-lani-pal  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  JEgypHsclie  Sprache,  ISfiS,  pp.
115,  116),  has  enabled  historians  to  establish  approximately  the  chronology  of  the  first  Babylonian
empire.  As  we  do  not  know  the  date  of  the  capture  of  Suea  by  Assurbanipal,  the  possible  error  in
regard  to  the  date  of  this  Kudurnankhundi  is  about  twenty  years,  more  or  less;  the  invasion  of
Chald.-ea  falls,  therefore,  between  2275  and  2205  B.C.  if  we  accept  the  figures  1G35,  or  between  2175
and  2105  if  wc  take  1535  to  be  correct.  Kudurnankhundi  is  a  corruption  of  the  name  Kuduruakhuuta,
which  occurs  in  the  Susian  inscriptions.  As  Kudur,  or  rather  Kutur,  means  srrvanl  (Sayce,  The
Languages  of  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Elam,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical
Archajology,  vol.  iii.  p.  470),  Kuduruakhuuta  signifies  -'servant  of  the  goddess  Makhunla."

'  IIawlinso.v,  Cnn.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  10,  No.  3;  cf.  Fa.  Lenoumaxt,  Eludes  Accadiennes,
vol.  ii.  pp.  101-106,  and  vol.  iii.  pp.  36,  37;  Hommel,  Die  Semitischen  Viilhtr,  p.  225,  and  Geschichte
llahijltiniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  345.  Another  relic  of  this  conquest  has  been  discovered  by  IIiLritECUT,
The  Babylonian  Expedition,  vol.  i.  p.  31  ;  it  is  an  agate  tablet  dedicated  to  N  ina,  for  tho  life  of  Dungi,
King  of  Urn,  by  an  unknown  vicegerent,  carried  off  into  Elam,  and  recovered  some  time  in  the  XV'"
century  by  Kurigalzu.

•■  The  submission  of  Babylon  is  evident  from  the  title  Adda  Martu,  "  sovereign  of  tho  West,"
assumed  by  several  of  the  Elamite  princes  (cf.  p.  47  of  the  present  work) :  in  order  to  extend  his
authority  beyond  the  Euphrates,  it  was  necessary  for  the  King  of  Elam  to  bo  first  of  all  master  of


38  THE  FIRST  CEALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

absorbed  Chaldaea,  reducing  its  states  to  feudal  provinces,  and  its  princes  to
humble  vassals.  Kudui-nakhunta  having  departed,  the  people  of  Larsa
exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  repair  the  harm  that  he  had  done,  and
they  succeeded  but  too  well,  since  their  very  prosperity  was  the  cause  only
a  short  time  after  of  the  outburst  of  another  storm.  Siniddinam,  perhaps,
desired  to  shake  off  the  Elamite  yoke.  Simtishilkhak,  one  of  the  successors  of
Kudur-nakhunta,  had  conceded  the  principality  of  Yamutbal  as  a  fief  to  Kudur-
mabug,  one  of  his  sons.  Kudur-mabug  appears  to  have  been  a  conqueror  of
no  mean  ability,  for  he  claims,  in  his  inscriptions,  the  possession  of  the  whole
of  Syria.^  He  obtained  a  victory  over  Siniddinam,  and  having  dethroned  him,
placed  the  administration  of  the  kingdom  in  the  hands  of  liis  own  son  Rimsin.^
This  prince,  who  was  at  first  a  feudatory,  afterwards  associated  in  the  govern-
ment with  his  father,  and  finally  sole  monarch  after  the  latter's  death,  married
a  princess  of  Chaldsean  blood,^  and  by  this  means  legitimatized  his  usurpation  in.
the  eyes  of  his  subjects.  His  domain,  which  lay  on  both  sides  of  the  Tigris
and  of  the  Euphrates,  comprised,  besides  the  principality  of  Yamutbal,  all  the
towns  dependent  on  Sumer  and  Accad — Uru,  Larsa,'  Uruk,  and  Nippur.  He
acquitted  himself  as  a  good  sovereign  in  the  sight  of  gods  and  men  :  he
repaired  the  brickwork  in  the  temple  of  Nannar  at  Uru ;  *  he  embellished
the  temple  of  Shamash  at  Larsa,  and  caused  two  statues  of  copper  to  be  cast
in  honour  of  the  god ;  he  also  rebuilt  Lagash  and  Girsu.^  The  city  of  Uruk
had  been  left  a  heap  of  ruins  after  the  withdrawal  of  Kudur-nakhunta :  he
set  about  the  work  of  restoration,  constructed  a  sanctuary  to  Papsukal,  raised
the  ziggurat  of  Nana,  and  consecrated  to  the  goddess  an  entire  set  of  temple

Babylon.  In  the  early  days  of  Assyriology  it  was  supposed  that  this  period  of  Elamite  supremacy
coincided  with  the  Median  dynasty  of  Berosus  (G.  Rawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  i.
p.  159,  et  seq. ;  Oppekt,  Histoire  des  Empires  de  Chaldfe  et  d'Assyrie,  pp.  10-13).

'  His  preamble  contains  the  titles  adda  Martu  (Eawlinson,  Cun.  Itn.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  2,  No.  3,
1.  4),  "  prince  of  Syria ;  "  adda  laynutbal  (Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  5,  No.  16,  1.  9),  "  prince  of  Yamutbal."  The-
word  adda  seems  properly  to  mean  "  father,"  and  the  literal  translation  of  the  full  title  would  pro-
bably be  "father  of  Syria,"  "father  of  Yamutbal,"  whence  the  secondary  meanings  "  master,  lord,
prince"  (G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical
Archaeology,  vol.  i.  p.  42),  which  have  been  provisionally  accepted  by  most  Assyriologists.  Tiele
(^Babylonisch-Assyrische  Geschichte,  ii-p.  123,  124),  and  Winckler  after  him  {Untersuchunqen  zur  altori-
entalischen  Geschichte,  p.  37,  n.  2),  have  suggested  that  Martu  is  here  equivalent  to  Y'amutbal,  and
that  it  was  merely  used  to  indicate  the  western  part  of  Elam ;  Winckler  afterwards  rejected  this
hypothesis,  and  has  come  round  to  the  general  opinion  (Altorientalische  Forschungen,  p.  143,  et  seq.,
and  Geschichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  130,  131).

-  In  regard  to  the  reading  of  the  word  Rimsin,  cf  p.  29,  u.  3,  of  the  present  work.  His  preamble
contains  the  titles  "  Benefactor  of  Uru,  King  of  Larsa,  King  of  Shumir  and  of  Acc.id  "  (Bawlixson,
Cun.  Ins.  TT.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  5,  No.  16,  U.  5-7),  "mighty  shepherd  of  Nippur"  (Fr.  Lenorman't,  C/iojar
de  Textes  Cun€iformes  in€dits.  No.  70,  p.  164,  1.  11).

^  WixcKLER,  Sumer  und  Accad,  in  the  Mittheilungen  des  Ah.  Orient.  Vereins  :u  Berlin,  vol.  i.  p.  17.
Her  name,  which  has  been  mutilated,  was  compounded  with  that  of  the  goddess  Niuni  (1.  13).

*  Bricks  bearing  his  name,  brought  from  Mugheir,  now  in  the  British  Museum  (Kawllnson,  Cun.
Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  2,  No.  3 ;  pi.  5,  No.  16) ;  stone  plaque  from  the  same  source  (Id.,  ibid.,  pi  3,
No.  10).

'  Rawlinsox,  Ctm.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  26,  Nos.  13,  14 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Baby-
lonia, in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archajology,  vol.  i.  p.  55.


lilMSIN  AND    KHAMMURABI.  39

furniture  to  replace  that  carried  off  by  the  Elamites.^  He  won  the  adhesion  of
the  priests  by  piously  augmenting  their  revenues,  and  throughout  his  reign  dis-
played remarkable  energy.^  Documents  exist  which  attribute  to  him  the  reduction
of  Duriln,  on  the  borders  of  Elam  and  the  Chalda^an  states ;  ^  others  contain  dis-
creet allusions  to  a  perverse  enemy  who  disturbed  his  peace  in  the  north,  and
whom  he  successfully  repulsed.^  He  drove  Sinmuballit  out  of  Ishin,^  and  this
victory  so  forcibly  impressed  his  contemporaries,  that  they  made  it  the  starting-
point  of  a  new  semi-official  era ;  twenty-eight  years  after  the  event,  private  con-
tracts still  continued  to  be  dated  by  reference  to  the  taking  of  Ishin.  Sinmu-
ballit's  son,  Khammurabi,  was  more  fortunate.  Rimsin  vainly  appealed  for  help
against  him  to  his  relative  and  suzerain  Kudur-lagamar,  who  had  succeeded
Simtishilkhak  at  Susa.  Eirasin  was  defeated,  and  disappeared  from  the  scene  of
action,  leaving  no  trace  behind  him,  though  we  may  infer  that  he  took  refuge  in
his  fief  of  Yamutbal.^  The  conquest  by  Khammurabi  was  by  no  means  achieved
at  one  blow,  the  enemy  offering  an  obstinate  resistance.  He  was  forced  to
destroy  several  fortresses,  the  inhabitants  of  which  had  either  risen  against  him
or  had  refused  to  do  him  homage,  among  them  being  those  of  Meir '  and  Malgu.*

'  Rawlinsok,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  35,  No.  6,  11.  16,  17 ;  of.  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahy-
loniens  unci  Assyrieng,  p.  359  ;  Winokler,  Inschriften  vo7>  Konigen  von  Sumer  unci  Accad,  in  the
Keilinschri/lliche  Bihllothek,  vol.  iii.  pp.  96-99,  No.  6.

'  Kawlinson,  Cun.  Jns.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  3,  No.  10 ;  of.  Sjiith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the
Transactions,  vol.  i.  p.  53;  Fb.  Lenormant,  iStucles  Accadiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  351-353;  Winckler,
Imchriften  ron  Koniijeii  vo7i  Sumer  und  Accad,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothel;,  vol.  iii.  pp.  94,  95.

'  Rawunson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  No.  18 ;  cf.  G.  S.«ith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,
in  the  Proceedings,  vol.  i.  p.  55;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  2tjl.

'  Contract  dated  "the  year  in  which  King  Rimsin  [vanquished]  the  perveise,  the  enemies"
(Metssxer,  Beilriige  zum  altbahylonischen  Privalreeht,  pp.  17,  95,  9G);  the  scribe  left  the  phrase  in-
complete, the  remainder  of  the  formula  being  sufficiently  familiar  at  the  time  for  the  reader
to  supply  it  for  himself.  A  variant,  indicating  that  it  was  a  time  of  peace,  is  found  on  another
contract  of  the  same  year  (Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As,,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  No.  2;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early
History,  in  the  Transactions  Bib.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  1.  p.  55;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens,  etc.,
p.  361).  Many  Assyriologists  regard  this  as  indicating  a  defeat  suffered  by  Khammurabi  (G.  Smith,
Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions,  vol.  i.  pp.  55-57).  The  contract  published  by  BIeis.sner,
Beilriige  zum  altbabyl.  Frivatrecht,  pp.  32,  33,  proves  that  the  event  took  place  under  Sinmiiballit.
This  prince  is  there  stated  to  have  been  then  alive,  an  oath  in  the  body  of  the  document  being  sworn
by  him  and  by  the  town  of  Sippar,  but  the  date  is  that  of  "  the  year  of  the  taking  of  Ishin."

'  Contracts  dated  "  the  taking  of  Ishin  "  (Meissner,  Beitrage  zum  altbabyl.  PriiiatrecM,  pp.  32,  33),
the  year  V.  (G.  Sihth,  Early  History,  p.  54),  the  year  VI.  (Meissner,  Beitrage,  pp.  40, 41),  the  years  VII.,
VIII.,  XIII.,  XVIII.,  XXVIII.  (G.Smith,  Early  History, \i.  54,  where  the  name  is  transcribed  Karrak).

'  This  is  a  contract  dated  the  year  in  which  Khammurabi  defeated  Rimsin,  thanks  to  the  help  of  Anu
and  Bel  (RAWLrxsON,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  30,  No.  21 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archieology,  vol.  i.  p.  57 ;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens
und  Assyriens,  pj).  361,  362)  ;  Jensen  {Inschriften  aus  der  Zeit  Hammurabi's,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche
Bibliotheh,  vol.  iii.  p.  127,  note)  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  alone  in  believing  that  wo  cannot  with  any
certainty  deduce  from  this  passage  that  Kimsin  was  really  defeated  by  Khammurabi.  A  notice  of  tho
wars  of  Rimsin  and  Kudur-lagamar  has  been  discovered  by  Pinches  (Hommel,  Aus  der  Bahyhmischen
Alterthmnshunde,  in  Die  Aula,  1705,  vol.  i.  pp.  551,  552  ;  Savce,  Becent  Discoveries  in  Babylonian  and
Egyptian  History,  in  the  Academy,  Sept.  7,  1895,  p.  189,  and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  v.,  vi.,  61-70).

'  Mairu,  Bleir,  has  been  identified  with  Shurippak  (Fii.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradiesl  p.  224;
Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  4 14) ;  but  it  is,  rather,  the  town  of  Mar,  now  Tell-Id.
X  and  Lagamal,  the  Elamite  Lagamar,  were  worshipped  there.  It  was  the  seat  of  a  liiun  manu-
facture, and  possessed  large  shipping  (Meissner,  Beitrage  zum  allbubyhmischen  Privafrecht,  p.  18).

"  Contract  dated  "  the  year  in  which  King  Khammurabi,  by  order  of  Anu  and  Bel,  destroyed  the


40  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIUE.

When  the  last  revolt  had  been  put  down,  all  the  countries  speakiug  the
language  of  Chaldfca  and  sharing  its  civilization  were  finally  united  into
a  single  kingdom,  of  which  Khammurabi  proclaimed  himself  the  head.
Other  princes  who  had  preceded  him  liad  enjoyed  the  same  opportunities,  but
their  efforts  had  never  been  successful  in  establishing  an  empire  of  any  dura-
tion ;  the  various  elements  had  been  bound  together  for  a  moment,  merely  to
be  dispersed  again  after  a  short  interval.  The  work  of  Khammurabi,  on  the
contrary,  was  placed  on  a  solid  foundation,  and  remained  unimpaired  under  his
successors.  Not  only  did  he  hold  sway  without  a  rival  in  the  soutli  as  in  the
north,  but  the  titles  indicating  the  rights  he  had  acquired  over  Sumer  and
Accad  were  inserted  in  his  Protocol  after  those  denoting  his  hereditary  pos-
sessions,— the  city  of  Eel  and  the  four  houses  of  the  world.  Khammurabi's
victory  marks  the  close  of  those  long  centuries  of  gradual  evolution  during  which
the  peoples  of  the  Lower  Euphrates  passed  from  division  to  unity.  Before  his
reign  there  had  been  as  many  states  as  cities,  and  as  many  dynasties  as  there
were  states ;  after  him  there  was  but  one  kingdom  under  one  line  of  kings.^

Khammurabi's  long  reign  of  fifty-five  years  has  hitherto  yielded  us  but  a
small  number  of  monuments — seals,  heads  of  sceptres,  alabaster  vases,  and
pompous  inscriptions,  scarcely  any  of  them  being  of  historical  interest.  He  was
famous  for  the  number  of  his  campaigns,  no  details  of  which,  however,  have
come  to  light,  but  the  dedication  of  one  of  his  statues  celebrates  his  good
fortune  on  the  battle-field.  "  Bel  has  lent  thee  sovereign  majesty  :  thou,  what
awaitest  thou  ? — Sin  has  lent  thee  royalty :  thou,  what  awaitest  thou  ? — Ninip
has  lent  thee  his  supreme  weapon :  thou,  what  awaitest  thou  ? — The  goddess  of
light,  Ishtar,  has  lent  thee  the  shock  of  arms  and  the  fray :  thou,  what  awaitest
thou  ? — Shamash  and  Eamman  are  thy  varlets  :  thou,  what  awaitest  thou  ? —
It  is  Khammurabi,  the  king,  the  powerful  chieftain — who  cuts  the  enemies  in
pieces, — the  whirlwind  of  battle — who  overthrows  the  country  of  the  rebels —
who  stays  combats,  who  crushes  rebellions, — who  destroys  the  stubborn  like
images  of  clay, — who  overcomes  the  obstacles  of  inaccessible  mountains."  ^  The
majority  of  these  expeditions  were,  no  doubt,  consequent  on  the  victory  which

walls  of  Miiii-u  and  the  walls  of  Mnlka. "  (Rawlixsos,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  Xo.  43 ;  cf.
G.  S.MiTH,  Early  Illstorij  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archieology,
vol.  J.  p.  59,  where  Malka,  Mulgai,  is  called  Malalnak;  Jessex,  Inschri/ten  atts  der  Hegierungszeit
Hammurabi's,  in  the  Keilinschri/tUche  BibUothtk,  vol.  iii.  pp.  128,  129;  BIeissxer,  Seitriige  zum
altlabylonischen  Frivatrecht,  pp.  29,  30,  118,  where  the  name  is  written  E-alkaa,  Bit-alka) ;  contracts
dated  simply  from  the  taking  of  Mairu  (Meissxek,  Beitriige  zum  altbabijlonischen  Privatrtcht,  pp. 51, So).

'  Delitzsch-Murdter,  GeschicMe  Babijloniens  und  Assyriens,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  85-87;  Iiele,  Baby-
lonisch-Assyrische  GescMchte,  pp.  124-127 ;  Homjiel,  Gi:schichte  Bahylonieiis  nnd  Assyriens,  pp.  406-
415 ;  WixcKLER,  GeschicMe  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  00-65.

'  Ajiiavd,  Vne  Inscription  bilingue  de  Hammourabi,  roi  de  Babylone,  du  XV'  au  XX'  siecJe  avant
J.-C,  in  the  Becueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  i.  pp.  180-100,  and  L'Inscription  bilingue  de  Hammourabi,  in  the
Bevue  d' Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  p.  10;  cf.  Jessex,  Inschri/ten  aus  der  Begierungszeit  Hammurabi's,  in  the
Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothel;  vol.  iii.  pp.  110-117.


.A


TEE    CONSTRUCTIONS    OF  KIlAMMUltABI.  41

destroyed  the  power  of  Eimsin.      It  would  not  have  sufficed  merely  to  drive
back  the  Elamites  Leyond  the  Tigris ;  it  was  necessary  to  strike  a  blow  within
their  own  territory  to  avoid  a  recurrence   of  hostilities,  which    might   liave
endangered    the    still     recent   work   of    conquest.
Here,  again,  Khammurabi   seems   to   have  met
witli  his  habitual  success.  Ashnunak  was  a  border

district,  and  shared  the  fate  of  all  the  provinces    ^^H^:%   "^Y     /\  '*'

on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Tigris,  being  held     ||^^^^'  \  ^i     ^  A    -^       V  VJt
sometimes  by  Elam  and  sometimes  by  Chaldaea ;

properly  speaking,  it  was  a  country  of  Semitic     ''HB|^a&~.i;^.^y^*' " "'  .  /

speech,   and  was   governed   by  viceroys  owning
allegiance,  now  to  Babylon,  now  to  Susa.^     Kham-
murabi   seized     this     province,'-^    and    permanently
secured  its  frontier  by  building  along  the  river  a  line  ^^^^  ^f  a  sceitke  ix  cuiteh,  eeae-
of  fortresses  surrounded  by  earthworks.'^     Following

the  example  of  his  predecessors,  he  set  himself  to  restore  and  enrich  the  temples.
The  house  of  Zamama  and  Ninni,  at  Kish,  was  out  of  repair,  and  the  ziggurat
threatened  to  fall ;  he  pulled  it  down  and  rebuilt  it,  carrying  it  to  such  a
height  that  its  summit "  reached  the  heavens." "  Merodach  had  delegated  to  him
the  government  of  the  faithful,  and  had  raised  him  to  the  rank  of  supreme  ruler
over  the  whole  of  Chaldsea.  At  Babylon,  close  to  the  great  lake  which  served
as  a  reservoir  for  the  overflow  of  the  Euphrates,  the  king  restored  the  sanctuary
of  Esagilla,  the  dimensions  of  which  did  not  appear  to  him  to  be  proportionate
to  the  growing  importance  of  the  city.  "  He  completed  this  divine  dwelling
with  great  joy  and  delight,  he  raised  tlie  summit  to  the  firmament,"  and  then

'  PoGNOS,  Quelques  Ilois  du  pays  d'Achnounnak  (in  the  Mus^oji,  1S02,  pp.  249-253),  discovered
inscriptions  of  four  of  the  vicegerents  of  Ashnunak,  whicli  he  assigns,  with  some  hesitation,  to  the
time  of  Khammurabi,  rather  than  to  that  of  the  kings  of  Telloh.  Three  of  these  names  .are  Semitic,
the  fourth  Sumerian  ;  the  language  of  the  inscriptions  bears  a  resemblauce  to  the  Semitic  dialect  of
Chaldiea  (cf.  Pinches,  Discoveries  in  Ashnunnah,  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.
pp.  66-68).

^  Proof  of  his  conquest  of  the.se  two  countries  is  afforded  by  inscriptions  on  contracts  dated  "  tlie
year  in  which  Ashnuuak  was  inundated,  under  King  Khammurabi"  (Kawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,
vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  Nos.  38,  39 ;  cf  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Society  of  Biblical  ArcLa;ology,  vol.  i.  pp.  58,  59 ;  Meissnek,  Beitrage  zum  altbabylonischen  Privutrechl,
pp.  30-47,  48,  69;  Soheil,  Notes  d'Epigraphie  et  d' Arclitfologie  Assyriennes,  in  the  Recueilde  Travaux,
vol.  xvii.  p.  35).  Ashnunak,  or  Ishnunak,  is,  according  to  some  documents,  the  same  country  as
Umliyash  (Fn.  Deutzscu,  Il'o  lag  daa  Paradiesl  pp.  230,  231);  the  probability  is,  however,  that  it
was  originally  an  independent  province,  subsequently  incorporated  witli  Umliyash.

"  Coutract  dated  "  the  year  of  tlie  great  wall  of  Kar-Shamash  "  (G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Baby-
lonia, in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  liiblical  Avchreology,  vol.  i.  p.  59;  JiIeissxek,  Bcilriigc
zum  altbabylonischen  Pricatrecfd,  pp.  34,  35,  51,  50).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  rapid  sketch  made  at  the  British  Museum.

*  Kawllnson,  Cun.  Lis.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  30,  No.  34;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archiuulogy,  vol.  i.  j).  58;  Meissneh,  Bcitrdge  zum
allbabylonischen  Primtmht,  pp.  44-40;  Hommel,  Geschickte  Babyloniena  und  Assyriens,  p.  111.  The
temple  was  called  Kmitiursagga,  "  the  house  of  the  image  of  the  god  Ninip ;  "  Zamama  of  Kith,  being
identified  with  Xiiiip  (Fii.  Delitzsch,  TI'o  lag  das  Paradics  ?).    Ninni,  like  Nana,  is  a  form  of  Ishtar.


42  THE  FIRST   CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

enthroued  Merodach  and  his  spouse,  Zarpanit,  within  it,  amid  great  festivities.^
He  provided  for  the  ever-reeurring  requirements  of  the  national  religion
by  frequent  gifts ;  the  tradition  has  come  down  to  us  of  the  granary  for  wheat
which  he  built  at  Babylon,  the  sight  of  which  alone  rejoiced  the  heart  of  the
god.^  While  surrounding  Sippar  with  a  great  wall  and  a  fosse,  to  protect  its
earthly  inhabitants,"  he  did  not  forget  Shamash  and  Malkatu,  the  celestial
patrons  of  the  town.  He  enlarged  in  their  honour  the  mysterious  Ebarra,  the
sacred  seat  of  their  worship,  and  "  that  which  no  king  from  the  earliest  times
had  known  how  to  build  for  his  divine  master,  that  did  he  generously  for
Shamash  his  master."  *  He  restored  Ezida,  the  eternal  dwelling  of  Merodach,
at  Borsippa  ;  ^  Eturkalamma,  the  temple  of  Anu,  Ninni,  and  Nana,  the  suzerains
of  Kish ;  ®  and  also  Ezikalamma,  the  house  of  the  goddess  Ninna,  in  the  village
of  Zarilab.'  In  the  southern  provinces,  but  recently  added  to  the  crown, — at
Larsa,^  Uriik,  and  Uru, — he  displayed  similar  activity.  He  had,  doubtless,  a
political  as  well  as  a  religious  motive  in  all  he  did  ;  for  if  he  succeeded  in
winning  the  allegiance  of  the  priests  by  the  prodigality  of  his  pious  gifts,

•  Mutilated  copy  of  an  inscription  of  Khammurabi  from  tlie  library  of  Assurbanipal  (Rawlinson,
Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  18,  No.  1,  in  tbe  Transadioyis,  vol.  i.  pp.  56-59;  see  Hommel,  Geschiahte
Bahyloniens  uiid  Assyriens,  pp.  410,  411).

^  Jensen,  Inschriften  aus  der  Begieruncjszeit  Hammurabi's,  in  tbe  Keilinsf.hri/tliche  Sihliothek,
vol.  iii.  pp.  120-123  ;  it  is  a  copy  of  an  ancient  text  made  by  a  scribe  of  tbe  later  Assyrian  epocb.

'  Cylinder  of  Khammurabi,  col.  i.  11.  10-19.  Contract  dated  "tbe  year  in  wbich  the  foundations
of  tbe  wall  of  Sippara  were  laid"  (Meissner,  Beitrdge  turn  allbabylonischen  Privatrecht,  pp.  31,  32).

*  Menant,  Une  Nouvelle  Inscription  de  Hammourabi,  in  tbe  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  73-
85 ;  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kostder,  pp.  73,  74 ;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und
Assyriens,  p.  410  ;  Jensen,  Inschriften  aus  der  Begierungszeit  Hammurabi's,  in  the  KeilinsehriftUche
Biblioihek,  vol.  iii.  pp.  124-127.

'  Cylinders  in  the  British  Museum  published  and  translated  by  Stkassmaier-Winckler,  Einige
neuverSffentlichte  Texte  Hammurabis,  Nabopolassars  und  Ntbuhadnezars,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir  Assijrio-
logie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  118-123,  174-176;  cf.  Jensen,  Inschriften  aus  der  Begierungszeit  Hammurabi's,  in
tbe  KeilinsehriftUche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  iii.  pp.  116-121.  Mention  is  made  of  this  restoration  by
Nabonidus,  who  boasts  tliat  be  found  some  of  Khammurabi's  cylinders  among  tbe  foundations
(Bezold,  Two  Inscriptions  of  Nabonidus,  in  the  Proceedings  of  tlie  Society  of  Biblical  Arcbteology,
1888-89,  vol.  xi.  pp.  94, 95, 99, 1 00 ;  cf.  Peiser,  Inschriften  Nabonid's,  in  tbe  KeilinsehriftUche  Biblioihek,
vol.  iii.  pp.  90,  91).

°  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  Nos.  35-37 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Baby-
lonia, in  the  Transactions  of  tbe  Society  of  Biblical  Arcbosology,  vol.  i.  p.  58;  Hommel,  Geschichte
Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  411 ;  Meissner,  Beitrdge  zum  altbabylonischen  Privatrecht,  pp.  88,  89.

'  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,  No.  15,  1 ;  cf.  Menant,  Inscriptions  de  Hammourabi,
roi  de  Babylone,  pp.  72-79,  and  Babylone  et  la  Chaldee,  p.  109 ;  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archicolcgy,  vol.  i.  p.  60 ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  Etudes
Accadiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  356-360 ;  Amiadd,  Une  Inscription  non-sCmitique  de  Hammourabi,  in  the
Journal  Asiatique,  1883,  vol.  xx.  pp.  231-244  :  Jensen,  Inschriften  atts  der  Begierungszeit  Hammu-
rabi's, in  tbe  Keiiinschriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  iii.  pp.  106-109.  The  ordinary  reading  of  tbe  name
of  the  town  in  wbich  Khammurabi  built  this  temple  is  Zarilab  or  Zerlab  (cf.  Maspero.  Dawn  of
Civilization,  p.  562) ;  a  text  mentioned  by  Zimmern  {Einige  Bemerkungen  zu  den  Babylonischen
KOnigsinschriften,  in  tbe  Zeiischrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  p.  97)  seems,  however,  to  indicate  Hallabi
as  being  the  proper  reading,  and  this  has  been  adopted  by  Jensen.  The  town  ought  in  that  case  to
be  sought  for  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sippara.

'  Brick  from  Senkereh  in  the  British  Museum,  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Itis.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,  No.
XV.  2 ;  cf.  Oppert,  Expedition  en  M^fopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  257 ;  Menant,  Inscriptions  de  Hammourabi,
pp.  68-71;  Fr.  Lenormant,  Etudes  Accadiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  355,  356;  Jensen,  Inschriften  aus  der
Begierungszeit  Hammurabi's,  in  tbe  Keilintchriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  iii.  pp.  110,  111.


KEAMMVRABI  REGULATES   TEE  SYSTEM   OF  CANALIZATION.        43

he  could  count  on  their  gratitude  in  securing  for  him  the  people's  obedience,
and   thus   prevent   the  outbreak    of  a  revolt.     He   had,  indeed,  before  him
a  difficult   task    iu    attempting   to   allay  the    ills  which   had   been    growing
during   centuries    of    civil   discord    and   foreign    conquest.      The    irrigation
of  the    country  demanded   constant  attention,  and  from
earliest    times   its    sovereigns  had  directed  the  work
with  real  solicitude ;   but   owing   to   the    breaking
up  of  the  country  into  small  states,   their  respec-
tive   resources    could    not    be    combined    iu    such
general    operations   as   were    needed    for    controlling
the  inundations  and   effectually  remedying   the   excess
or   the   scarcity  of  water.       Kliammurabi  witnessed  the
damage    done    to    the    whole    province    of  Umliyash    by
one  of  those  terrible  floods  which  still   sometimes  ravage
the  regions  of  the  Lower  Tigris,^  and  possibly  it  may  have
been  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such  a  disaster  that  he  under-
took the  work  of  canalization.     He  was  the  first  that  we  know  of
who  attempted  to  organize  and  reduce  to  a  single  system  the  com-
plicated network  of  ditches  and  channels  which  intersected  the
territory  belonging  to  the  great  cities  between  Babylon  and  the      fkagment  of  a
sea.^  Already,  more  than  half  a  century  previously,  Siuiddinam  had       khImmuuabi^
enlarged  the  canal  on  which  Larsa  was  situated,^  while  Kimsin  had
provided  an  outlet  for  the  "  Kiver  of  the  Gods"  into  the  Persian  Gulf:  ^  by  the
junction  of  the  two  a  navigable  channel  was  formed  between  the  Euphrates  and
the  marshes,  and  an  outlet  was  thus  made  for  tlie  surplus  waters  of  the  inun-
dation.    Kliammurabi  informs  us  how  Anu  and  Bel,  having  confided  to  him  the
government  of  Sumer  and  Accad,  and  having  placed  in  his  hands  the  reins  of
power,  he  dug  the  Nar-Khammurabi,  the  source  of  wealth  to  the  people,  which
brings  abundance  of  water  to  the  country  of  Sumir  and  Accad.    "  I  turned  both

•  Contracts  dated  the  year  of  an  inundation  which  laid  waste  Umliyasli  (Meissnku,  Btiitriige
zum  althabylonischen  Pricatrecht,  p.  30)  ;  cf.  in  our  own  lime,  the  inundation  of  April  10, 1831,  wliich
in  a  single  night  destroyed  half  the  city  of  Bagdad,  and  iu  which  fifteen  thousand  persons  lost  their
lives  either  by  drowning  or  by  the  collapse  of  their  houses.

'  P.  Delattre,  iu  Travaux  hydmuliques  en  Bahylonie,  pp.  33-37,  was  the  first  to  estimate  the
canal  works  of  Khanimurabi  at  their  true  value.

'  Eawlin-son,  Cuh.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  5,  No.  xx.,  II.  1-19  ;  of.  G.  Smith,  h'arly  History  of  Bahy-
lonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archajology,  vol.  i.  pp.  -14,  45 ;  Delatthe,  Lfs
Travaux  Itydrauliques  en  Bahylonie,  pp.  32,  33.  Another  passage  referring  to  this  canal  is  found  on
a  cylinder  published  and  translated  by  Fit.  Delitzsch,  Kn  Tlionhegul  Sinidilinam's,  in  the  Beilrdije
zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  301,  302.

*  Drawn  by  l'"aucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  published  by  Hili'IIeoht,  The  Bahylonian]  Expe-
dition of  the  University  of  J'ennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pi.  i.x.,  No.  20.

'  Contract  dated  "  the  year  the  Tigris,  river  of  the  gods,  was  canalized  down  to  the  sea  "  (Meissjiek,
Beitraije  zum  althabylonischen  Pricutrecht,  p.  44 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  iu  the
Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Arehmology,  vol.  i.  p.  55) ;  i.e.  as  far  as  the  point  to  which
the  sea  then  penetrated  iu  the  environs  of  Komah.


•44  THE  FIL'ST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

its  banks  into  cultivated  ground,  I  heaped  up  mounds  of  grain  and  I  furnished
perpetual  water  for  the  people  of  Sumir  and  Accad.  The  coiiutry  of  Sumer
and  Accad,  I  gathered  together  its  nations  who  were  scattered,  I  gave  them
pastiire  and  drink,  I  ruled  over  them  in  riches  and  abundance,  I  caused  them
to  inhabit  a  peaceful  dwelling-place.  Then  it  was  that  Kliammurabi,  the
powerful  king,  the  favourite  of  the  great  gods,  I  myself,  according  to  the
prodigious  strength  with  which  Merodach  had  endued  me,  I  constructed  a  high
fortress,  upon  mounds  of  earth  ;  its  summit  rises  to  the  height  of  the  mountains,
at  the  head  of  the  Nar-Khanimurabi,  the  source  of  wealth  to  the  people.  This
fortress  I  called  Dur-Siumuballit-abim-ualidiya,  the  Fortress  of  Sinmuballit,
the  father  who  begat  me,  so  that  the  name  of  Sinmuballit,  the  father  who  begat
me,  may  endure  in  the  habitations  of  the  world."  ^  This  caual  of  Khammurabi
ran  from  a  little  south  of  Babylon,  joining  those  of  Siuiddinamand  Eimsin,  and
probably  cutting  the  alluvial  plain  in  its  entire  length.^  It  drained  the  stag-
nant marshes  on  either  side  along  its  course,  and  by  its  fertilising  effects,  the
dwellers  on  its  banks  were  enabled  to  reap  full  harvests  from  the  lands  which  pre-
viously had  been  useless  for  purposes  of  cultivation.  A  ditch  of  minor  importance
pierced  the  isthmus  which  separates  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Sippar.^  Khammurabi  did  not  rest  contented  with  these ;  a  system
of  secondary  canals  doubtless  completed  the  whole  scheme  of  irrigation  which  he
had  planned  after  the  achievement  of  his  conquest,  and  his  successors  had  merely
to  keep  up  his  work  in  order  to  ensure  an  unrivalled  prosperity  to  the  empire.
Their  efforts  in  this  direction  were  not  unsuccessful.  Samsuiluua,  the  son
of  Khammurabi,  added  to  the  existing  system  two  or  three  fresh  canals,  one  at
least  of  which  still  bore  his  name  nearly  fifteen  centuries  later ; ''  it  is  men-
tioned  in    the   documents   of  the   second   Assyrian  empire   in   the  time   of

•  Menant,  Inscriptions  de  Eammouraht,  roi  de  Bahylone,  pp.  13-66,  and  Manuel  de  la  langue
Assyrienne,  2ud  edit,,  pp.  306-313 ;  Jensen,  Iiischrifteu  aus  der  Eegierimgsziit  Hammurabi's,  in  the
KeiUnschriftliche  Bihliothel:,  vol.  iii.  pp.  122-125.  The  inscription  is  now  preserved  iu  the  Louvre.
Jl.any  contracts  are  dated  from  the  year  in  which  this  caual  was  finished  (Meissnek,  Beilrdcje  zum
oUhahijlonisfhcn  rriiatreclif,  pp.  23,  48,  86).

2  Delattre,  Les  Traraux  lii/drauliques  en  Bahi/hnie,  pp.  35,  36,  is  of  opinion  that  the  canal  dug
by  Khammurabi  is  the  Arakhtu  of  later  epochs  (Fk.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  >  pp.  74-76),
•which  began  at  Babylon  and  extended  as  far  as  the  Larsa  canal.  It  must  therefore  be  approxi-
mately identified  with  the  Shatt-en-Nil  of  the  present  day,  which  joins  Shatt-el-Kaher,  the  caual  of
Siniddinam.

'  Cylindre  de  Hammourahi,  col.  i.  11.  20-23,  in  Wincklee-Steassmaiek,  Einige  neuverSffentliche
Texte  Hammurahis,  Nahopolatsars,  ttiid  Nchucadnezars,  in  the  Zeilsclirift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.
pp.  118-123,  where  it  is  evidently  not  the  Euphrates  which  is  meant,  as  Winekler  seems  to  think  (cf.
Ein  Text  Xahopolassars,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  p.  74).  The  canal  which  Kham-
murabi caused  to  be  dug  or  dredged  may  be  the  Nar-Malka,  or  "royal  canal"  (Winoklek,  Ein  Text
NahojKlassars,  p.  70 ;  Delattre,  Les  Travaux  hydrauliqites  en  Bahylonie,  p.  30),  which  ran  from  (he
Tigris  to  the  Euphrates,  passing  Sippar  on  the  way.  The  digging  of  this  canal  is  mentioned  in  a
contract  (Meissner,  Beitriige  ziun  altbahylonisehen  Privatrecht,  pp.  89,  90).

■"  Contracts  dated  "  the  year  of  the  Nar-Samsuiluna-nagab-nukhshi."  i.e.  "  Canal  of  Samsuiluna,
source  of  riclies"  (G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  iu  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical
Archa;ology,  vol.  i.  pp.  62,  63;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Asiyriens,  p.  416;  Meissner,
Beitriige  zum  altbabyloniselien  Privatrecht,  pp.  53,  54 ;  of.  Delattke,  Les  Travaux  hydrauliqties  en


THE  LAST  KINGS    OF   THE  BABYLONIAN  DYNASTY.  45

Assurbaniiial,  aud  it  is  possible  that  traces  of  it  may  still  be  found  at  the
present  day.  Abiesliukh/  Ammisataua,"  Ammizadugga,^  and  Samsusatana,*  all
either  continued  to  elaborate  the  network  planned  by  their  ancestors,  or  applied
themselves  to  the  better  distribution  of  the  overflow  in  those  districts  where
cultivation  was  still  open  to  improvement.  We  should  know  nothing  of  these
kings  bad  not  the  scribes  of  those  times  been  in  the  habit  of  dating  the  con-
tracts of  private  individuals  by  reference  to  important  national  events.  They
appear  to  have  chosen  by  preference  incidents  in  the  religious  life  of  the
country  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  restoration  of  a  temple,  the  annual  enthronisation
of  one  of  the  great  divinities,  such  as  Shamash,  Merodach,  Ishtar,  or  Nana,  as
the  eponymous  god  of  the  current  year/  the  celebration  of  a  solemn  festival,^  or
the  consecration  of  a  statue  ; ''  while  a  few  scattered  allusions  to  works  of  forti-
fication show  that  meanwhile  the  defence  of  the  country  was  jealously  watched
over.^  These  sovereigns  appear  to  have  enjoyed  long  reigns,  the  shortest
extending  over  a  period  of  five  and  twenty  years;  and  when  at  length  the  death

Bahylonie,  p.  37).  The  annalistio  tablet  S'.  16  iu  the  museum  of  Constantinople  gives,  after  the  year
in  which  the  king  dug  the  canal,  that  iu  which  "  the  canal  gave  abundance."  The  canal  iu  question
is  mentioned  in  a  list  of  canals  and  rivers  from  the  library  of  Assurbanipal  (K.\wlinson,  Curt.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  51,  No.  2,  recto,  1.  51 ;  cf.  Delitzsch,  Wo  liirj  das  Paradus?  p.  190;  Delattrb,
Leg  Traraiij-  InjdrauViques  en  Bahylonie,  pp.37,  48).  .

'  Abishukh  (the  Hebrew  Abishua)  is  the  form  of  the  name  which  we  find  in  contemporary
contracts  (Wixckler,  Altorientalische  Forschuntjen,  p.  28-1 ;  Meissnek,  Beitrdije  zum  alihabylomschen
Privatrecltt,  pp.  i,  17,  IS).     The  official  lists  contain  the  variant  Ebishu,  Ebishum.

'  The  name  has  been  transcril^eil  Ammiditaua  (Delitzsch-Mledtek,  GescJi.  Bah.  iind  AssyrienSy
2nd  edit.,  p.  SS;  Hommel,  Gesrliiehte  Bahyloniens  uitd  Assyriens,  pp.  416,  417);  otliers  prefer
Ammisataua  (Pixches,  Text  of  Ammisutana,  King  of  Bahylon,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,
vol.  V.  pp.  102-105;  Winckler,  Gesrhichte  Bahyloniens  und  Atsyriens,  p.  (J6).  The  Nar-Ammisataua
is  mentioned  in  a  Sippar  contract  (Meissner,  Beitriiije.  etc.,  p.  28).  Another  contract  is  dated  "the
year  in  which  Ammisatana,  tlie  king,  repaired  the  canal  of  Samsuiluna"  (Id.,  ihid.,  p.  59).

'  This  was,  at  first,  read  Ammididugga  (Fb.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossder,  p.  70,  n.  G).
Ammizadugga  is  mentioned  in  the  date  of  a  contract  as  having  executed  certain  works — of  what
nature  it  is  not  easy  to  say— on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  (Meissner,  Beitriiije  zum  althahylonischeu
Priiatrecht,  pp.  61,  62);  another  contract  is  dated  "the  year  in  whicli  Ammizadugga,  tlie  king,  by
siipremc  command  of  Shamash,  his  master,  [dug]  the  Niir-Ainmizadngga-nukhiis-nishi  (canal  of  Am-
mizadugga), prosperity  of  men"  (Id.,  t7j«(.,  pp.  86,  87).  In  the  Sliusean  inscriptions  of  Southern
Arabia  the  name  is  found  under  the  form  of  Animi-Zaducj.

'  Sometimes  erroneously  read  Samdiusatana  (but  see  Winckler,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und
Assyriens,  p.  60);  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  have  contracts  of  that  time,  in  wliich  a  royul  name
is  plainly  written  as  Samsusatana  (Meissner,  Beitriirje,  etc.,  p.  45).

=  Contracts  of  the  time  of  Ammizadugga,  dated  from  the  enthronement  of  Shamash  anil  Merodach
(Meissner,  Beitrdge,  etc.,  pp.  18,  19),  or  from  "  the  year  in  which  ho  proclaimed,  in  tlio  temple  at
Enamtila,  a  god"  whose  name  is  uncertain  (Id.,  ihid.,  pp.  41,  42).

"  Contract  dated  "  the  year  iu  which  Samsuiluna,  the  king,  made  the  true  liglit "  (Meissner,
Beitrage,  etc.,  pp.  80, 81).     At  present  we  have  no  e.Kact  knowledge  of  what  this  ceremony  was.

'  Contracts  dated  the  year  in  whicli  Samsuiluna  placed  the  statues  plated  with  gold  before
Merodach,  in  Esagilla  at  Babylon  (Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  Nos.  ii(S,  67),  or
in  libabbara  at  Larsa,  before  Shamash  (Id.,  ihid.,  pi.  36,  No.  58) ;  cf.  G.  SiiiTii,  Early  History  of
Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  liiblical  Archajology,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  64).

'  Samsuiluna  repaired  the  five  l'ortre.s.ses  which  his  ancestor  Sumulailu  had  built  CWinckleb
Samsuiluna,  iu  the  Keilinschriftliehe  Bihliothek,  vol.  iii.  pp.  130-133;  cf.  p.  28,  u.  6,  of  the  present
work).     Contract  dated  "  the  year  in  which  Ammisutana,  the  king,  built  Dur- Ammisatana,  near  the


46  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

of  any  king  occurred,  he  was  immediately  replaced  by  his  son,^  the  notaries'
acts  and  the  judicial  documents  which  have  come  down  to  us  betraying  no
confusion  or  abnormal  delay  iu  the  course  of  affairs.  We  may,  therefore,
conclude  that  the  last  century  and  a  half  of  the  dynasty  was  a  period  of  peace
and  of  material  prosperity.  Chalda3a  was  thus  enabled  to  fully  reap  the  advan-
tage of  being  united  under  the  rule  of  one  individual.  It  is  quite  possible
that  those  cities — Uru,  Larsa,  Ishiu,  Uruk,  and  Nippur — which  had  played
so  important  a  part  in  the  preceding  centuries,  suffered  from  the  loss  of  their
prestige,  and  from  the  blow  dealt  to  their  traditional  pretensions.  Up  to  this
time  they  had  claimed  the  privilege  of  controlling  the  history  of  their  country,
and  they  had  bravely  striven  among  themselves  for  the  supremacy  over  the
southern  states;  but  the  revolutions  which  had  raised  each  in  turn  to  the
zenith  of  power,  had  never  exalted  any  one  of  them  to  such  an  eminence  as  to
deprive  its  rivals  of  all  hope  of  supplanting  it  and  of  enjoying  the  highest
place.  The  rise  of  Babylon  destroyed  the  last  chance  which  any  of  them  had
of  ever  becoming  the  capital ;  the  new  city  was  so  favourably  situated,  and
possessed  so  much  wealth  and  so  many  soldiers,  while  its  kings  displayed
such  tenacious  energy,  that  its  neighbours  were  forced  to  bow  before  it  and
resign  themselves  to  the  subordinate  position  of  leading  provincial  towns.
They  gave  a  loyal  obedience  to  the  officers  sent  them  from  the  north,  anfd
sank  gradually  into  obscurity,  the  loss  of  their  political  supremacy  being  some-
what compensated  for  by  the  religious  respect  in  which  they  were  always
held.  Their  ancient  divinities — Nana,  Sin,  Anu,  and  Ea — were  adopted,  if  we
may  use  the  term,  by  the  Babylonians,  who  claimed  the  protection  of  these
gods  as  fully  as  they  did  that  of  Merodach  or  of  Nebo,  and  prided  them-
selves on  amply  supplying  all  their  needs.  As  the  inhabitants  of  Babylon  had
considerable  resources  at  their  disposal,  their  appeal  to  these  deities  might  be
regarded  as  productive  of  more  substantial  results  than  the  appeal  of  a  merely
local  kinglet.  The  increase  of  the  national  wealth  and  the  concentration,
under  one  head,  of  armies  hitherto  owning  several  chiefs,  enabled  the  rulers,
not  of  Babylon  or  Larsa  alone,  but  of  the  whole  of  Chaldspa,  to  offer  an
invincible  resistance  to  foreign  enemies,  and  to  establish  their  dominion
in  countries  where  their  ancestors  had  enjoyed  merely  a  precarious  sove-
reignty.    Hostilities  never  completely  ceased  between  Elam  and  Babylon ;  if

■Sin  river"  (Meissner,  Beitrdye  zum  althahylonisclien  Privatrecht,  pp.  26,  27),  and  "  the  year  in  whicli
Ammisafana,  tlio  king,  gave  its  name  to  Dur-Iskunsiu,  near  the  canal  of  AminiBfttana  "  (Id.,  ibid.,
p.  28).  Contract  dated  "tlie  year  iu  which  the  King  Ammisatana  repaired  Dur-Iskuiisin"  (lT>.,ibid.,
p.  63).  Contract  dated  the  year  iu  wliioh  Samsuiluna  caused  "the  wall  of  Uru  and  Uruk"  to  be
built  {Cunsiantiitople,  unpublished,  but  communicated  by  Father  Scheil).

'  See  p.  27,  n.  4,  of  the  present  work  for  a  table  of  the  dynasty  as  preserved  in  the  official  lists  ;
the  reign  of  the  usurper  Immeru  has  been  interpolated  between  Zabum  and  Abilsiu,  this  being  the
place  aesigued  to  him  by  the  contracts.


THE  ELAMITES  IN  SYRIA,   KUDUR-LAGAMAR.  47

arrested  for  a  time,  they  broke  out  again  in  some  frontier  disturbance,  at  times
speedily  suppressed,  but  at  others  entailing  violent  consequences  and  ending
in  a  regular  war.  No  document  furnishes  us  with  any  detailed  account  of
these  outbreaks,  but  it  would  appear  that  the  balance  of  power  was  maintained  on
the  whole  with  tolerable  regularity,  both  kingdoms  at  the  close  of  each  genera-
tion finding  themselves  in  much  the  same  position  as  they  had  occupied  at  its
commencement.  The  two  empires  were  separated  from  south  to  north  by  the
sea  and  the  Tigris,  the  frontier  leaving  the  river  near  the  present  village  of
Amara  and  running  in  the  direction  of  the  mountains.  Durilu  probably  fell
ordinarily  under  Cbalilfeau  jurisdiction.  Umliyash  was  included  in  the  original
domain  of  Khammurabi,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  evacuated
by  his  descendants.^  There  is  every  probability  that  they  possessed  the  plain
east  of  the  Tigris,  comprising  Nineveh  and  Arbela,  and  that  the  majority  of
the  civilized  peoples  scattered  over  tlie  lower  slopes  of  the  Kurdish  mountains
rendered  them  homage.  They  kept  the  Mesopotamian  table-land  under  their
suzerainty,  and  we  may  aCBrm,  without  exaggeration,  that  their  power  extended
northwards  as  far  as  Mount  Masios,  and  westwards  to  the  middle  course  of  the
Euphrates.

At  what  period  the  Chaldaeans  first  crossed  that  river  is  as  yet  unknown.
Many  of  their  rulers  in  their  inscriptions  claim  the  title  of  suzerains  over  Syria,
and  we  have  no  evidence  for  denying  their  pretensions.  Kudur-mabug  pro-
claims himself  "  adda  "  of  Martu,  Lord  of  the  countries  of  the  West,^  and  we
are  in  the  possession  of  several  facts  which  suggest  the  idea  of  a  great  Elamite
empire,  with  a  dominion  extending  for  some  period  over  Western  Asia,  the
existence  of  whicli  was  vaguely  hinted  at  by  the  Greeks,  who  attributed  its  glory
to  the  fabulous  Memnou.''  Contemporary  records  are  still  wanting  which  might
show  whether  Kudur-mabug  inherited  these  distant  possessions  from  one  of  his
predecessors — such  as  Kudur-nakhunta,  for  instance  * — or  whether  he  won  them
himself  at  the  point  of  the  sword  ;  but  a  fragment  of  an  old  chronicle,  inserted
in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  speaks  distinctly  of  another  Elamite,  who  made  war
in  person  almost  up  to  the  Egyptian  frontier.^     This  is  the  Kudur-lagamar

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  Umliyasli  on  p.  43  of  tlie  present  work.

-  See  remarks  on  this  title  and  its  probable  meaning  on  p.  37  of  the  present  work.

'  We  know  that  to  Herodotus  (v.  55)  Susii  was  the  city  of  Memnon,  and  that  Strabo  (xv.  3,  §  2,
p.  728)  attributes  its  foundation  to  Tithouus,  father  of  Memnon.  According  to  Oppert  (ies  Inscriptions
en  lanrjue  ausienne,  Essai  dHnterpT^talion,  in  the  M^moires  du  Cungris  international  des  Orientalistes
a  I'arin,  vol.  ii.  p.  179)  tlie  word  Memnon  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Susian  Uuiman-auin,  "  the  house
of  the  king:"  Weissbach  (Anzaniaclie  Ingchriften,  p.  13li)  declares  that  "auin"  does  not  mean  king,
and  contradicts  Oppert's  view,  though  he  does  not  venture  to  suggest  a  new  explanation  of  the  name.

*  In  regard  to  Kudur-nakhunta,  see  what  has  been  said  above  on  pp.  SU,  37  of  the  present  work.

'-  Gen.  xiv.  From  the  outset  Assyriologists  have  never  doubted  the  historical  accuracy  of  this
chapter,  and  they  have  connected  the  facts  which  it  contains  with  those  wliich  teem  to  bo  revealed
by  the  Assyrian  monuments.  Tlie  two  Rawlinsons  (77ie  Five  Great  Monarchies  of  the  Ancient  Eudein
World,  vol.  i.  p.  01,  et  seq.)  intercalate  Kudur-lagamar  between  Kudur-nakhunta  and  Kudur-mabug,


48  THE  FIRST  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

(Chedorlaomer)  who  helped  Kimsin  against  Khammuiabi,  but  was  unable  to
prevent  his  overthrow.  In  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign  over  the  East,  the
cities  of  the  Dead  Sea — Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Adamah,  Zeboim,  and  Bela — revolted
against  him  :  he  immediately  convoked  his  great  vassals,  Amraphel  of  Chalda^a,
Arioch  of  Ellasar.^  Tida'lo  the  Guti,  and  marched  with  them  to  the  confines  of
his  dominions.  Tradition  has  invested  many  of  the  tribes  then  inhabiting
Southern  Syria  with  semi-mythical  names  and  attributes.  They  are  represented
as  being  giants — Eephaim  ;  men  of  prodigious  strength — Zuzim ;  as  having
a  buzzing  and  indistinct  manner  of  speech — Zamzummim ;  as  formidable
monsters  * — Emim  or  Anakim,  before  whom  other  nations  appeared  as  grass-
hoppers;^ as  the  Horim  who  were  encamped  on  the  confines  of  the  Siuaitic  desert,
and  as  the  Amalekites  who  ranged  over  the  mountains  to  the  west  of  the  Dead
Sea.  Kudur-lagamar  defeated  them  one  after  another — the  Kephaim  near  to
Ashtaroth-Karnaim,  the  Zuzim  near  Ham,*  the  Emim  at  Shaveh-Kiriathaim,
and  the  Horim  on  the  spurs  of  Mount  Seir  as  far  as  El-Paran ;  then  retracing
his  footsteps,  he  entered  the  country  of  the  Amalekites  by  way  of  En-misli-

!ind  Oppert  places  him  about  tlie  same  period  (Hlstoire  des  empires  ile  Chuld^e  et  d'Assi/iie  d'apres
les  monuments,  pp.  10,  11).  Fr.  Lenormant  regards  him  as  one  of  the  successors  of  Kudur-mabug,
possibly  his  immediate  successor  (La  Langue  primitive  de  Ja  Chalde'e  et  les  idiomes  touraniens,
pp.  375,  376).  G.  Smith  does  not  hesitate  to  declare  positively  that  the  Kudur-mabug  and  Kudur-
nakhunta  of  the  inscriptions  are  one  and  the  same  with  the  Kudur-lagamar  (Chedor-laomer)  of  the
Bible  (Eijijptian  Campaign  of  Esarhaddon,  in  the  Zeitscliri/t  fiir  JEgypiisclie  Sprache,  1S6S,  vol.  i.
p.  110).  Finally,  Schrader,  while  he  repudiates  Smith's  view,  agrees  in  the  main  fact  with  the  other
Assyriologists  (Die  Keilinsclriften  und  das  alte  Testament,  2Qd  edit.,  pp.  IStS,  137).  We  find  the
same  view,  with  but  slight  modification,  in  Delitzsch-Miirdter  (Geschichte  Bahyloniens  v.nd  Assi/riens,
p.  S3,  note),  in  Ed.  Meyer  (Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  Itij,  lUU),  and  in  Hommel  (Geschichte
Dahijloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  363,  et  seq.).  On  the  other  hand,  the  majority  of  modern  Biblical
critics  have  absolutely  refused  to  credit  the  story  in  Genesis,  e.g.  Keuss  (L'Hisloire  Sai)d  et  la  Lot,
vol.  i.  pp.  3io-350), 'Kiilieke  (Untersuchunge n  zur  Kriiik  des  Alte  TfsJamenf,  p.  156,  et  seq.),  Tiele
(Bahylonisdi-Assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  123,  121),  Winckler  (Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,
p.  48,  where  Kudur-lagamar  is  not  noticed  at  all).  Sayce  (The  Higher  Criticism,  etc.,  3rd  edit.,
pp.  160-169)  thinks  that  the  Bible  story  rests  on  an  historic  basis,  and  his  view  is  strongly  confirmed
by  Pinches'  discovery  of  a  Chaklsean  document  which  mentions  Kudur-lagamar  and  two  of  his  allies
(HoMJiEL,  Aus  der  Bahylonische  Altertumshunde,  in  Die  Aula,  1895,  vol.  i.  p.  552;  Sayce,  Recent  Dis-
coveries in  Babylonian  and  Egyptian  History,  in  the  Academy,  Sept.  7,  1895,  p.  189,  and  Patriarchal
Palesti7ie,  pp.  v.,  vi.,  61-76).  The  Hebrew  historiographer  reproduced  an  authentic  fact  from  the
chronicles  of  Babylon,  and  connected  it  with  one  of  the  events  in  the  life  of  Abraham.  The  very
late  date  generally  assigned  to  Gen.  xiv.  in  no  way  diminishes  the  intrinsic  probability  of  the  facts
narrated  by  the  Chaldfean  document  which  is  preserved  to  us  in  the  pages  of  the  Hebrew  book.

'  EUasar  has  been  identified  with  Larsa  since  the  researches  of  Eawlinson  and  Norris  (Fii.
Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  p.  224;  Schisader,  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament.
2nd  edit.,  pp.  135,  136);  the  Goim,  over  whom  Tidal  was  king,  with  the  Guti  (Schr.\dek,  Die
Keilinschriften,  p.  137).

*  Sayce,  The  Higher  Criticism  and  the  Verdict  of  the  Monuments,  3rd  edit.,  pp.  160,  161.  considers
Zuzim  and  Zamzummim  to  be  two  readings  of  tlie  same  word  Zamzum,  written  in  cuneiform  characters
on  the  original  document.  The  sounds  represented,  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  by  the  letters  m  and  w,
are  expressed  in  the  Chaldsean  syllabary  by  the  same  character,  and  a  Hebrew  or  Babylonian  scribe,
who  had  no  other  means  of  telling  the  true  pronunciation  of  a  race-name  mentioned  in  the  story  of
this  campaign,  would  have  been  quite  as  much  at  a  loss  as  any  modern  scliolar  to  say  whether  he  ought
to  transcribe  the  word  as  Z-m-z-m  or  as  Z-ic-z-ia;  some  scribes  read  it  Z«;«m, others  preferredZamrummim.

'  Numh.  xiii.  33.

*  In  Deut.  ii.  20  it  is  stated  that  the  Zamzummim  lived  in  the  country  of  Ammon.  Sayce  points  out
that  we  often  find  the  variant  Am  for  the  character  usually  read  Ham  ovKham — the  name  Khammurabi,


KHAMMURABI  ANT)   HIS   SUCCESSORS  IN  SYRIA.  49

pat,  and  pillaged  the  Amorites  of  Hazazou-Tamar.  In  the  mean  time,  the
kings  of  the  five  towns  had  concentrated  their  troops  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,
and  were  there  resolutely  awaiting  Kudur-lagamar.  They  were,  however,
completely  routed,  some  of  the  fugitives  being  swallowed  up  in  the  pits  of
bitumen  with  which  the  soil  abounded,  while  others  with  difficulty  reached
the  mountains.  Kudur-lagamar  .sacked  Sodom  and  Gomorrali,  re-established
Ills  dominion  on  all  sides,  and  returned  laden  with  booty,  Hebrew  tradition  adding
that  he  was  overtaken  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  by  the  patriarch  Abraham.^
After  his  victory  over  Kudur-lagamar,  Khamraurabi  assumed  the  title  of
King  of  Martu,-  which  we  find  still  borne  by  Ammisatana  sixty  years  later.^
We  see  repeated  here  almost  exactly  what  took  place  in  Ethiopia  at  the  time
of  its  conquest  by  Egypt :  merchants  had  prepared  the  way  for  military  occu-
pation, and  the  civilization  of  Babylon  had  taken  hold  on  the  people  long  before
its  kings  had  become  sufficiently  powerful  to  claim  them  as  vassals.  The
empire  may  be  said  to  have  been  virtually  established  from  the  day  when  the
states  of  the  Middle  and  Lower  Euphrates  formed  but  one  kingdom  in
the  hands  of  a  single  ruler.  We  must  not,  however,  imagine  it  to  have  been
a  compact  territory,  divided  into  provinces  under  military  occupation,  ruled  by
a  uniform  code  of  laws  and  statutes,  and  administered  throughout  by  functionaries
of  various  grades,  who  received  their  orders  from  Babylon  or  Susa,  according
as  the  chances  of  war  favoured  the  ascendancy  of  Chalda;a  or  Elam.     It  was  in

for  instance,  is  often  found  written  Ammurabi  (cf.  p.  15,  n.  5,  of  the  present  work);  tbe  Ham  in  the
uarrativcof  Genesis  would,  therefore,  be  identical  with  the  land  of  Amnion  in  Deuteronomy,  and  the
difl'erence  between  the  spelling  of  the  two  would  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  document  reproduced  in
the  XIV"'  chapter  of  Genesis  had  been  originally  copied  from  a  cuneiform  tablet  in  which  the  name
of  the  place  was  expressed  by  the  sign  Ham-Am  (Sayce,  The  Higher  Criticism,  3rd  edit.,  pp.  IGO,  lljl).

'  An  attempt  lias  been  made  to  identify  the  three  va.ssals  of  Kudur-lagamar  with  kings  mentioned
on  the  Chaldaian  monuments.  Tidcal,  or,  if  we  adopt  the  Septuagint  variant,  Thorgal,  has  been
considered  by  some  as  the  bearer  of  a  Sunierian  name,  Tur-gal  =  "  great  chief,"  "  great  son  "  (Oi'PKitT,
Histoire  des  Empires  de  ChaUlee,  p.  1 1),  while  otliers  put  liim  on  one  side  as  not  having  been  a  Baby-
Ionian  (Halevy,  Recherches  liilliques,  p.  2.i4,  and  Notes  Sume'rienncs,  in  the  Revue  Simitique,  vol.  ii.
pp.  278-2S0);  Pinches,  Sayce,  and  Hommel  identify  him  with  Tudkhula,  an  ally  of  Kudur-lagamar
against  Khammurabi  (Hommel,  Aus  der  Babylonischen  Alterlumshunde,  in  Die  Aula,  1S95,  vol.  i.
p.  552;  Sayce,  Recent  Discoveries,  in  the  Academy,  Sept.  7, 1895,  p.  189,  and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  p.  70).
Arioch  is  Kimaku,  Eri-Aku  (cf.  p.  29,  n.  2,  of  the  present  work,  and  Fr.  Lenohmant,  La  Lanrjue  primi-
tive de  la  Chald^e,  pp.  878,370;  Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  135,  13G ;  Hommei.,
Die  Semitische  Vlillcer,  p.  48;  Hai.evy,  Recherches  Bibliqjies,  pp.  253,  254,  and  Notes  Siunirieunes,  in
the  Revue  S^mitique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  272-270).  Schrader  was  tlic  first  to  suggest  that  Amrapliel  was
really  Khammurabi  (Die  Keilinschriftliche  Bahylonische  Kijnigsliste,  pp.  22-27),  and  emended  the
Amraphel  of  the  biblical  text  into  .Vmraphi  or  Amrabi,  in  order  to  support  this  identilication.
Ilale'vy,  while  on  the  whole  accepting  this  tlieory,  derives  the  name  from  the  pronunciation  Kim-
tarapaalitum  or  Kimtarapallum,  whicli  he  attributes  to  the  name  generally  read  Khammurabi
{Recherches  Rihliques,  pp.  254-258,  303-315),  and  in  this  he  is  partly  6U|)ported  by  Hommel,  who
reads  "  Khamniurapaltu  "  (Assyriulogicul  Notes,  in  the  Proceedings  of  Sue.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  212).

'  It  is,  indeed,  the  sole  title  which  ho  attributes  to  himself  on  a  stone  tablet  now  in  the  liritish
Museum;  cf.  \Vincki,i:r,  AlloTieidalische  Forschungin,  pp.  145,  140.

'  In  an  inscription  by  this  prince,  copied  probably  about  tho  time  of  Nabonidus  by  the  scribe
Belusballim,  he  is  called  "  king  of  the  vast  land  of  Martu  "  (Pinches,  Text  of  Ammisatana,  King  of
Baii/Um,  from  about  .111.5  to  HOOO  B.C.,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  v.  pp.  102-105).

E


50  TEE  FIRST  CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.

reality  a  motley  assemblage  of  tribes  and  principalities,  whose  sole  bond  of  union
Avas  subjection  to  a  common  yoke.  They  were  under  obligation  to  pay  tribute,
and  furnish  military  contingents  and  show  other  external  marks  of  obedience,  but
their  particular  constitution,  customs,  and  religion  were  alike  respected  :  they
had  to  purchase,  at  the  cost  of  a  periodical  ransom,  the  right  to  live  in  their
own  country  after  their  own  fashion,  and  the  iiead  of  the  empire  forbore  all
interference  in  their  affairs,  except  in  cases  where  their  internecine  quarrels
and  dissensions  threatened  the  security  of  his  suzerainty.  Tlieir  subordination
lasted  as  best  it  could,  sometimes  for  a  year  or  for  ten  years,  at  the  end  of  which
period  they  would  neglect  the  obligations  of  their  vassalage,  or  openly  refuse
to  fulfil  them :  a  revolt  would  then  break  out  at  one  point  or  another,  and  it
was  necessary  to  suppress  it  without  delay  to  prevent  the  bad  example  from
spreading  far  and  wide.^  The  empire  was  maintained  by  perjietual  re-conquests,
and  its  extent  varied  with  the  energy  shown  by  its  chiefs,  or  with  the  resources
which  were  for  the  moment  available.

Separated  from  tlie  confines  of  the  empire  by  only  a  narrow  isthmus,  Egypt
loomed  on  the  horizon,  and  appeared  to  beckon  to  her  rival.  Her  natural
fertility,  the  industry  of  her  inhabitants,  the  stores  of  gold  and  perfumes  which
she  received  from  the  heart  of  Etliiopia,  were  well  known  by  the  passage  to
and  fro  of  her  caravans,  and  the  recollection  of  her  treasures  must  have  fre-
quently provoked  the  envy  of  Asiatic  courts.^  Egypt  had,  however,  strangely
declined  from  her  former  greatness,  and  the  line  of  princes  who  governed  her  had
little  in  common  with  the  Pharaohs  who  had  rendered  her  name  so  formidable
under  the  XII"'  dynasty.  She  was  now  under  the  rule  of  the  Xoites,  whose
influence  was  probably  confined  to  the  Delta,  and  extended  merely  in  name
over  the  Said  and  Nubia.^     The  feudal  lords,  ever  ready  to  reassert  their

'  Cf.  the  account  of  the  revolt  of  the  kinga  of  the  valley  of  Sidiiim  against  Kudur-lagamar
(pp.  48,  49  of  the  present  work),  which,  if  not  absolutely  accurate  in  every  detail,  gives  nevertheless
a  very  clear  idea  of  what  the  Elamite  or  Chaldjean  rule  meant  in  these  early  epochs ;  we  shall  come
upon  the  same  state  of  things  later  on  at  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  conquest.

*  As  we  proceed,  we  sliall  continually  meet  indications,  in  letters  written  by  Asiatic  princes,  of
the  existenoe  of  this  idea  that  Egypt  was  a  kind  of  El  Dorado  where  gold  was  as  plentiful  as  dust
upon  the  high-road  (DELATTRE,J/aria(/esprjHCierse»  Egypte,  in  the  Rev.  des  Quest.  Aist.,  vol.  1.  p.  231).

'  See  what  is  said  concerning  the  Xoites  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilhatioii,  pp.  533,  53 1.  I  may
recall  the  fact  that  Lepsius  placed  the  Hyksos  invasion  first  at  the  end  of  the  XII"'  dynasty  and
then  at  the  beginning  of  the  XIII""  {Konigshuch  der  AUen  JEgypter,  p.  21,  et  seq.),  and  that  his
theory,  at  first  adopted  by  Bunsen  (^JEgyptens  Stelle  in  der  Weltgeschk'hte,  vol.  iii.  p.  9,  et  seq.),  by
Lieblein  {Mgypt.  Chron.,  pp.  02-76,  and  Recherches  sur  la  Chron.  £gypt.,  pp.  84-135),  was  vigorously
contested  by  E.  de  Rouge'  {Examen  de  VOurrage  de  M.  de  Bunsen,  ii.  pp.  35-59).  It  has  gradually
been  abandoned  by  most  Egyptologists,  and  finally  by  Naville  (Buhastis,  pp.  15,  10).  The  history
of  the  Hyksos  has  been  dealt  with  by  Cliabas  (ies  Pasteurs  en  Egypte,  180S)  in  a  special  monograph,
then  by  Padre  Cesare  di  Cara  (Gli  Hyksos  di  Egitto,  1889),  who  collected  with  much  care  and  discussed
at  great  length  all  the  references  to  them  contained  in  the  texts  of  ancient  writers  and  in  all  the
Egyptian  documents;  finally,  Xaville devotes  a  chapter  in  his  Buhastis,  pp.  16-29,  to  the  history  of
the  shepherd  kings.  Here,  as  in  the  preceding  pages,  the  materials  are  so  scanty  that  we  are  obliged
to  fall  back  on  conjecture  in  endeavouring  to  interpret  them  and  to  work  out  the  elements  of  a
connected  narrative ;  from  the  various  hypotheses  I  have  chosen  those  which  appeared  to  be  the
simplest  and  best  adapted  to  the  scope  of  my  work.


TEE  EYKSOS  INVASION.  51

independence  as  soon  as  the  central  power  waned,  shared  between  them  the
possession  of  the  Nile  valley  below  Memphis :  the  princes  of  Thebes,  who  were
probably  descendants  of  Usirtasen,  owned  the  largest  fiefdom,  and  though  some
sliglit  scnqde  may  have  prevented  them  from  donning  the  pschont  or  placing
their  names  witliin  a  cartouche,  they  assumed  notwithstanding  the  plenitude
of  royal  power.  A  favourable  opportunity  was  therefore  offered  to  an  invader,
and  the  Chaldaaans  might  have  attacked  with  impunity  a  people  thus  divided
among  themselves.^  They  stopped  short,  however,  at  the  southern  frontier
of  Syria,  or  if  they  pushed  further  forward,  it  was  without  any  important
result :  distance  from  head-quarters,  or  possibly  reiterated  attacks  of  the
Elamites,  prevented  them  from  placing  in  the  field  an  adequate  force  for  such
a  momentous  undertaking.  What  they  had  not  dared  to  venture,  others  more
audacious  were  to  accomplish.  At  this  juncture,  so  runs  the  Egyptian  record,
"  tliere  came  to  us  a  king  named  Timaios.^  Under  this  king,  then,  I  know  not
wherefore,  the  god  caused  to  blow  upon  us  a  baleful  wind,  and  in  the  face  of
all  probability  bands  from  the  East,  people  of  ignoble  race,  came  upon  us
unawares,  attacked  the  country,  and  subdued  it  easily  and  without  tighting."  ^
It  is  possible  that  they  owed  this  rapid  victory  to  the  presence  in  their  armies
of  a  factor  hitherto  unknown  to  the  African — the  war-chariot  —and  before  the
horse  and  his  driver  the  Egyptians  gave  way  in  a  body.'     Tiie  invaders  appeared

'  The  theory  that  the  divisions  of  Ejrypt,  under  the  XIV"'  dynasty,  and  tlie  discords  between  it3
feudatory  princes,  were  one  of  the  main  causes  of  the  success  of  the  Sliepherds  (Maspero,  Jfistoire
Ancienne  des  Peuples  de  I'Orienl,  4th  edit.,  p.  102),  is  now  admitted  to  be  correct,  amongst  otliers,  by
Ed.  Meykr,  Geschichte  ^rjyptens,  p.  201,  et  seq.,  and  by  Naville,  Buhastis,  pp.  19,  20.

-  Fruiu  emended  ^juIj/  TiVaios  in  tlie  text  of  Manetlio  into  'Afieye/xaios  or  'A/jerfjuf/s  {Manethonis
Sehennyix  Meliq.,  pp.  .53-5.J),  and  Lepsius  first  identified  this  new  Amenemes  witli  the  1,'ist  Pharaoh
of  the  XII"'  dynasty,  Anienenihait  IV.,  then  with  the  third  liing  of  the  XIII'",  Ka-Ameuemhait
(^Kuitiijghuch,  p.  24).  Bunsen  (JEgypteiiH  Stelle,  vol.  iii.  p.  42,  note  5)  suggests  the  emendation
'AfiovvTl/xaioi ;  as  the  sole  object  of  this  is  to  identify  the  name  of  the  kingdefcaled  by  the  shepherds
with  that  oVA/jLouBapTatos,  mentioned  by  Eratosthenes,  I  do  not  think  it  worth  accepting.  We  know
too  little  of  Manetho's  style  to  be  able  to  decide  a  priori  whether  the  plirase  'Eyivero  /SacriAeus  ^fiii/
T.Vaios  woua  is  or  is  not  in  harmony  with  his  manner  of  narrating  historical  facts;  the  phrase  is
correct,  and  that  should  be  enough  to  deter  us  from  altering  it,  at  any  rate  in  our  present  stage  of
knowledge.

'  SIanetho,  in  JIlller-Didot,  Fragmenla  Ilistorioorum  Grsscorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  50(5.  The  apparent
contradiction  between  the  terms  in  which  Manetho  explains  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  fxiiiu^  ifiaxv'i
rairrfv  Kara  Kparos  iiKov,  has  been  noticed  and  explained  by  FuuiN,  Maiutlioim  Sthenmjl:v  IlcUqmii:,
p.  .59 :  Padre  di  Caiia  (Oii  Uijhfus  o  Re  Paslori  di  I'gitto,  p.  2!)^,  et  seq.)  sees  in  it  a  proof  that  the
Hyksus  had  not  been  guilty  of  the  atrocities  of  wliieh  the  Egyptians  accused  them.

'  The  horse  was  unknown,  or  at  any  rate  had  not  been  employed  in  Egypt  prior  to  the  invasion
(ef.  Ma.spero,  Dav;n  of  CivHization,  p.  32,  note  2);  we  find  it,  however,  in  general  use  immediately
after  the  expulsion  of  the  Shepherds,  see  the  tomb  of  Pihiri  (CiiAJiroLi.ioN,  MoimmenU  de  I'Jigijpte  et
de  la  Nuttie,  pi.  cxlv.  1,  and  vol.  i.  p.  208;  Kosellini,  Momimcnti  Civili,  pi.  cxvi.  .'),  vol.  iii.  pp.  238-
240;  Lepsius,  Dcnkmiller,  iii.  10  a"").  Moreover,  all  historians  agree  in  admitting  that  it  was
introduced  into  the  country  under  the  rule  of  the  Shepherds  (Prisse  d'Avknnes,  IJes  Chavaux  chez
h$  Ancienn  /ifji/ptient,  in  Perron,  Le  Ncn(fri,  vol.  i.  pp.  128-13.');  Fr.  Lenor.mant,  its  Premiiret
Civilitationn,  vol.  i.  pp.  299-305  ;  Pietrement,  Lcs  Chuvaux  dimf  lis  temps  aiM/iistoriquee  et  hisloriqites,
p.  459,  c:t  seq.;  Ed.  Meyer,  GencUichte  Aigyplent,  jip.  210,  211).  The  use  of  the  war-chariot  in
(^'haldica  at  an  epoch  prior  to  the  llyktos  invasion,  is  proved  by  a  fragment  of  the  Vulture  Stele  (cf.
Masi'ERO,  Caien  nf  Civilization,  i)p.  00(i,  007,  722);  it  is,  therefore,  natural  to  suppose  that  the  Hyksos
used  the  chariot  in  war,  and  that  the  rajiiility  of  their  conquest  was  due  to  it.


52  THE  HTESbs  IN  EGYPT.

us  a  cloud  of  locusts  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  Towns  and  temples  were  alike
pillaged,  burnt,  and  ruined  •  they  massacred  all  they  could  of  the  male  popula-
tion, reduced  to  slavery  those  of  the  women  and  children  whose  lives  they  spared,
and  then  proclaimed  as  king  Salatis,  one  of  tlieir  chiefs.^  He  established  a
semblance  of  regular  government,  chose  Memphis  as  his  capital,  and  imposed
a  tax  upon  the  vanquished.^  Two  perils,  however,  immediately  threatened  the
security  of  his  triumph :  in  the  south  tlie  Theban  lords,  taking  matters  into
their  own  hands  after  the  downfall  of  the  Xoites,  refused  the  oath  of  allegiance
to  Salatis,  and  organised  an  obstinate  resistance  ;  ^  in  the  north  he  had  to  take
measures  to  protect  himself  against  an  attack  of  the  Chaldseans  or  of  the
Elamites  who  were  oppressing  Clialdtea.^  From  the  natives  of  the  Delta,  who
were  temporarily  paralysed  by  their  reverses,  he  had,  for  the  moment,  little  to
fear  :  restricting  himself,  therefore,  to  establishing  forts  at  the  strategic  points  in
the  Nile  valley  in  order  to  keep  the  Thebans  in  check,  he  led  the  main  body
of  his  troops  to  the  frontier  on  the  isthmus.  Pacific  immigrations  had  already
introduced  Asiatic  settlers  into  the  Delta,  and  thus  prepared  the  way  for
securing  the  supremacy  of  the  new  rulers  :  in  the  midst  of  these  strangers,  and
on  the  ruins  of  tlie  ancient  town  of  Hawarit-Avaris,''  in  the  Sethroite  nome —

>  The  name  Salatis  (var.  Saites)  seems  to  be  deriveJ  from  a  Semitic  word,  SHALiT  =  "tlie
chief,"  "the  governor;"  this  was  the  title  which  Joseph  received  when  Pharaoh  gave  him  authority
over  the  whole  of  Egypt  {Gen.  xli.  43).  Salatis  may  not,  therefore,  have  been  the  real  name  of  the
first  Hyksos  king,  but  his  title,  which  the  Egyptians  misunderstood,  and  from  which  they  evolved  a
proper  name  :  Uhlemann  hns,  indeed,  deduced  from  this  that  Manetho,  being  familiar  with  the
passage  referring  to  Joseph,  had  forged  the  name  of  Salatis  (_Israeliten  und  HtjksSs  in  JEgijpten,  p.  7G).
Ebera  imagined  that  he  could  decipher  Ihe  Egyptian  form  of  this  prince's  name  on  the  Colossus  of
Tell-Mokdam  {JSgypten  tmd  die  Biicher  Moses,  p.  202;  cf.  Ed.  Meyer,  Set-Ti/phon,  p.  56;  Lauth,  Jits
JEgyptens  Vorzeit,  p.  229),  where  Naville  has  since  read  with  certainty  the  name  of  a  Pliaraoh  of  the
XIII"'  and  XIV"'  dynasties,  Nahsiri  (Le  Roi  Nehasi,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  pp.  07-101).

'  Manetho,  iu  Mv'ller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Eistoricorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  560,  567.

'  The  text  of  Manetho  speaks  of  taxes  which  he  imposed  on  the  high  and  low  lauds,  Tiji/  te  Avw
Koi  Karui  xupav,  which  would  seem  to  include  the  Thebaid  in  the  kingdom ;  it  is,  however,  stated  in
the  next  few  pages  that  the  successors  of  Salatis  waged  an  incessant  war  against  the  Egyptians,
which  can  only  refer  to  hostilities  against  the  Thebans.  We  are  forced,  therefore,  to  admit,  either
that  Manetho  took  the  title  of  lord  of  the  high  and  low  lands  which  belonged  to  Salatis,  literally,  or
that  the  Thebans,  after  submitting  at  first,  subsequently  refused  to  pay  tribute,  thus  provoking  a  war.

•  Mauetho  here  speaks  of  Assyrians;  this  is  an  error  which  is  to  be  explained  by  the  imperfect
state  of  historical  knowledge  in  Greece  at  the  time  of  the  Macedonian  supremacy.  We  need  not
for  this  reason  be  led  to  cast  doubt  upon  the  historic  value  of  the  narrative  (Wiedemann,  JEgyplische
Geschichte,  p.  21)8) :  we  must  remember  the  suzerainty  which  Ihe  kings  of  Babylon  exercised  over
Syria  (cf.  p.  47,  et  seq.,  of  the  present  work),  and  read  Chahlvans  where  Manetho  has  written  Assyrians.
In  Herodotus  "Assyria"  is  the  regular  term  for  "Babylonia,"  and  Babylonia  is  called  "the  land  of
the  Assyrians"  (ii.  193).

'  The  manuscripts  of  Josephus  placed  this  town  in  the  Saite  nome  ;  this  error  of  a  copyist  is  easily
corrected  from  the  royal  lists,  where  the  Sethroite  nome  is  indicated  (Manetho,  in  Muller-Didot,
Frag.  Eist.  Grmc,  vol.  ii.  p.  567).  The  first  commentators  on  JIanetho  placed  Avaris  on  the  site  of
Pelusium  (Marsham,  Can.  Chron.,  Lipsiae,  1676,  pp.  107,  lOS;  Zoega,  De  Origins  Obelise.,  pp.  577,
578),  relying  on  the  fact  that  Chaeremon  (Fragm.  1,  in  Mlli.er-Didot,  Frag.,  vol.  iii.  p.  495)  names
Pelusium  as  the  town  which  Manetho  and  Ptolemy  of  Mendes  (Fragm.  1,  in  MIxlek-Didot,  Frag.,
vol.  iv.  p.  485)  call  Avaris.  Larcher  identified  it  with  Heroopolis,  and  ChampoUion  (L'L'gypte  sous
les  Pharaons,  vol.  ii.  pp.  87-92)  endeavoured  to  support  this  view  by  evidence  derived  from  Egyptian
mythology;  finally  Lepsius  connected  Avaris  with  the  name  of  the  Hebrews,  and  tried  to  make  out
tliat  it  had  been  occupied  by  that  people  during  their  sojourn  in  Egypt  (Chron.  der  JEgypter,  p.  341).


TEE  ENTRENCHED    CAMP  AT  AVAlilS.  53

a  place  connected  by  tradition  witli  the  myth  of  Osiris  and  Typhou — Salatis
constructed  an  immense  entrenched  camp,  capable  of  sheltering  two  hundred
and  forty  thousand  men.  He  visited  it  yearly  to  witness  the  military  man-
ceuvres,  to  pay  his  soldiers,  and  to  preside  over  the  distribution  of  rations.  This
permanent  garrison  protected  him  from  a  Chalda3an  invasion,  a  not  unlikely
event  as  long  as  Syria  remained  under  the  supremacy  of  the  Babylonian  kings  ;
it  furnished  his  successors  also  with  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  trained  soldiers,
thus  enabling  them  to  complete  the  conquest  of  Lower  Egypt.  Years  elapsed
before  the  princes  of  the  south  would  declare  themselves  vanquished,  and  five
kings — Bnon,  Apaclmas,  Apnphis  I.,  lannas,  and  Asses — passed  their  lifetime
"  in  a  perpetual  warfare,  desirous  of  tearing  up  Egypt  to  the  very  root."  ^  These
Theban  kings,  who  were  continually  under  arms  against  the  barbarians,  were  sub-
sequently classed  in  a  dynasty  by  themselves,  the  XV"'  of  Manetho,  but  they  at
last  succumbed  to  the  invader,  and  Asses  became  master  of  the  entire  country.
His  successors  in  their  turn  formed  a  dynasty,  the  XVI'",  the  few  remaining
monuments  of  which  are  found  scattered  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
valley  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  rocks  of  the  first  cataract.^
Tlie  Egyptians  who  witnessed  the  advent  of  this  Asiatic  people  called

The  hieroglyphic  name  for  the  town  of  Tauis  was  added  by  Champollion  (^Dict.  Hi€r.,  p.  116);  then
E.  de  Eouge'  read  it  as"Zan,"  which  seemed  to  confirm  the  assimilation  theory;  then  the  same
scholar  discovered  the  true  reading,  Hawarit,  and  at  once  proposed  to  recognise  in  this  name  the
original  of  Avaris,  while  still  continuing  to  identify  the  site  with  that  of  Tanis  (Summary  of  a
lecture  :  see  the  Atli^nieum  Fran^ais,  1854,  p.  532).  This  conjecture  found  general  acceptance,  but
doubts  were  expressed  in  regard  to  the  identity  of  the  two  cities,  and  it  was  rightly  pointed  out  that
in  the  text  of  Manetho  Avaris  is  described  as  an  entrenched  camp.  Lcpsius,  returning  to  the  old
theory,  proposed  to  look  for  the  site  in  the  environs  of  Pelusium  (Konigebuch,  p.  45,  note  1),  and  was
not  lung  in  locating  it  among  the  ruins  of  Tell-Her,  the  name  of  which  city  would  probably  be
derived  from  that  of  Hiwaiet  (linldevlamg  eiues  hilingues  Dekretes,  in  the  Zeitsi-hrift,  1S60,  pp.  31,  32).
Kbers  {IJurch  Guscn,  etc.,  pp.  73, 74)  recognised  evenPelusium,  and  consequently  Avaris,  in  Tell-Hor.
This  hypothesis,  approved  by  Cliabas  (Les  Pasteurs  en  Egtjpte,  p.  42),  does  not  seem  to  be  in  favour
at  present;  the  only  person  who  appears  to  support  it  is  Tadro  di  Cara  (G?i  Hi/lfve,  [>.  332,  et  seq.).
Hawarit  is  placed  either  at  Tanis  (Bkugsoh,  lleitragc  iiher  Tanis,  in  the  Zeitscliri/I,  1S72,  pp.  10,  20,
JJirl.  giTijg.,  pp.  143,  144),  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Daphnio  (Ed.  Meyeh,  Gesclt.  Jiiji/ptetis,  p.  207),
or  at  Migdol  Tell-es-Semiit  (Brugsch,  Die  JEgyjitiilugie,  p.  3G).

'  None  of  these  five  kings  have  left  monuments  which  can  be  identified  with  certainty,  unless,
indeed,  we  agree  witli  Naville  in  supposing  that  Khiani  (cf  p|).  59,  (iO  of  the  present  work)  represents
Annas  or  launas  QBuIiastis,  pp.  23-2(5).  Di'veria  {Lettre  it  M.Auguste  MarielU,  etc.,  in  the  Revue  Arch^ot,
IStjl,  vol.  iv.  pp.  253-256)  thought  he  could  recognise  three  of  them — BnCin,  Apakhnas,  and  Apophis —
in  the  three  halt'-cfi'accd  names  on  fragment  No.  112  of  the  royal  canon  at  Turin  (Lepsius,  Auaioa)d,c\,<i.,
pi.  viii.) ;  he  connected  fragment  No.  150,  on  whicli  ho  made  out  tlie  name  of  the  god  Sit,  with  the  same
teries.  His  liypothesis  was  accepted  by  Pleyte  (La  Religion  dee  Fr(f-Uraelites,  p.  35),  and  Lautli,  who
had  made  the  same  suggestion  almost  simultaneously  with  Di'Veria,  added  to  the  two  fragments  112-
1511  fragment  144, on  which  he  thought  he  could  deciplier  traces  of  the  name  Salati.s  {Manetho  und  der
Turiner  Konigspapyinii,  \i.  247)  ;  the  theory  is  now  only  accepted  with  large  reserves.  Lauth  liad  also
found  tlie  name  of  I3non  on  the  tiallier  Papi/rus,  No.  1,  pi.  ii.  1.  7,  but  Krman  proved  that  in  this  passage
the  correct  reading  was  Alt  =  "suvereigii,"  and  not  a  proper  name  at  all  {Varia,  in  the  Zcitschri/t,
1877,  p.  37).  Finally,  Erman,  in  the  same  article  in  which  he  pointed  out  Lauth's  mistake,  proposed
to  recognise  Apakhnas  in  the  Sit-apaliiti  Nubiti  of  the  stele  of  the  year  400  {Ibid.,  p.  37)  ;  it  appears
to  mc,  however,  that  this  refers  not  to  a  mortal  king,  but  to  the  god  Sit,  described  by  his  etlinical
title  Nubiti,  the  man  of  (Jiubos,  and  considered  as  king  of  the  divine  dynasties.

'  Monuments  of  Susirniri  Khiani  and  of  Ausirri  Apopi  II.  at  Gebelein,  in  Dabessy,  Notes  et
llemarquet,  §§  xxx.,  Ixxxviii.,  in  the  lierueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiv.  p.  2i; ;  xvi.  ]>.  42.


54  THE  lIYKSnS   IN  EOYPT.

them  by  the  general  term  Amiui,  Asiatics,^  or  Monatiu,  the  men  of  the  desert.^
They  had  already  given  the  Bedouin  the  opprobrious  epithet  of  Shausu —
pillagers  or  robbers— which  aptly  described  them;^  and  they  subsequently
applied  the  same  name  to  the  intruders — Hiq  Shausu — from  which  the  Greeks
derived  their  word  Hyksos,  or  Hykoussos,  for  this  people.^  But  we  are  without
any  clue  as  to  their  real  name,  language,  or  origin.  The  writers  of  classical
times  were  unable  to  come  to  an  agreement  on  these  questions :  some  con-
founded the  Hyksos  with  the  Phceuicians,  others  regarded  them  as  Arabs.^

•  GOLENISCHEPF,  Notice  sur  un  texte  de  Stahl-Antar,  iu  the  Eecuetl,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2,  3,  and  vol.  \ii.
pi.  i.  1.  37.  Ed.  Meyer  thiuks  that  these  priuces  extended  their  rule  over  a  part  of  Syria ;  he  points  out
in  this  connection,  though  he  admits  the  hypothesis  to  be  a  bold  one,  the  identity  of  date  established  by
the  Jewish  chronicler  (^Numb.  xiii.  22)  for  the  foundations  of  Tanis  and  Hebron  {Gescli.  JEgypt.,  p.  210).

=  The  meaning  of  the  term  j\IonUi  was  discovered  by  E.  de  Eouge,  who  translated  it  Shepherd,
and  applied  it  to  the  Hyksos  (Examen  de  I'Owvrage  de  M.  de  Bunsen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41,  42;  Me'm.  sur
I'liiscrip.  d'Ahmes,  p.  171) ;  from  thence  it  passed  into  the  works  of  all  the  Egyptologists  who  con-
cerned themselves  with  this  question  (Brcgsoh,  JEgypt.  Stud.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19,  20,  and  Geseh.  ..Egypt.,
pp.  217,  21S;  Chabas,  Milanges  Egyptohg.,  1st  series,  pp.  33-35,  and  Les  Pasteurs  en  f'gypie,  pp.  24,
25),  but  Shepherd  has  not  been  universally  accepted  as  the  meaning  of  the  word.  It  is  generally  agreed
that  it  was  a  generic  term,  indicating  the  races  with  which  their  conquerors  were  supposed  to  be  con-
nected, and  not  the  particular  term  of  which  Manetho's  word  rioiVsi-es  would  be  the  literal  translation.

'  The  nime  seems,  iu  fact,  to  be  derived  from  a  word  which  meaut  "  to  rob,"  "  to  pillage."  The
name  Shausu,  Shosu,  was  not  used  by  the  Egyptians  to  indicate  a  particular  race.  It  was  used  of
all  Bedouins,  and  iu  general  of  all  the  marauding  tribes  who  infested  the  desert  or  the  mountains.
The  Shausu  most  frequently  referred  to  on  the  monuments  are  those  from  the  desert  between  Egypt
and  Syria,  but  there  is  a  reference,  in  the  time  of  Kamses  II.,  to  those  from  the  Lebanon  and  the
valley  of  Orontes.  Krall  finds  an  allusion  to  them  in  a  word  (Shosim)  in  Judges  ii.  14,  which  is
generally  translated  by  a  generic  expression,  "the  spoilers"  (Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  AUen
JEgyplens  II.,  aus  demotischen  Vrkunden,  p.  69).

«  Manetho  (Muller-Didot.  Frag.  Bist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  567)  declares  that  the  people  were
called  Hyksos,  from  Byh,  which  means  "  king "  in  the  sacred  language,  and  sos,  which  means
"  shepherd  "  in  the  popular  language.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  word  Hyhti  means  "  prince  "  in  the
classical  language  of  Egypt,  or,  as  Manetho  styles  it,  the  sacred  language,  i.e.  in  the  idiom  of  the
old  religious,  historical,  and  literary  texts,  which  in  later  ages  the  populace  no  longer  understood.
Shus,  on  the  contrary,  belongs  to  the  spoken  language  of  the  later  time,  and  does  not  occur  in  the
ancient  inscriptions,  so  that  Manetho's  explanation  is  valueless ;  there  is  but  one  material  fact  to  be
retained  from  his  evidence,  and  that  is  the  name  Hyk-Shus  or  Hyhu-Shus  given  by  its  inventors  to
the  alien  kings.  Champolliou  {Lettres  !i  M.  de  Blacas,  nlatices  au  Mus^e  Boyal  de  Turin,  I'"  Lettre,
p.  57)  and  Rosellini  (Monumcnti  Storici,yo].  i.  pp.  175-17S)  were  the  first  to  identify  these  ShOs  with
the  Shausfi  whom  they  found  represented  on  the  monuments,  and  their  opinion,  adopted  by  some
(Brugsch,  iJss(o«re  d'Eijypte,p.  77,  and  Geschichte  Ji:gyptens,p.  216;  WiEDEMAsy,  J!:gyptische  Ge-
schichte, pp.  2SS,  2S9;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  .Sgyptcns,  p.  205),  contested  by  others  (Chabas,
Melanges  Egyptologiques,  1st  series,  p.  33,  aud  Voyage  d'u7i  Egyptitn,  p.  116),  seems  to  me  an  ex-
tremely plausible  one:  the  Egyptians,  at  a  given  moment,  bestowed  the  generic  name  of  Shaiisu  on
these  strangers,  just  as  they  had  given  those  of  Amiiu  and  Monatiii.  The  texts  or  writers  from  whom
Manetho  drew  his  information  evidently  mentioned  certain  kings  /(j(g«-Shaus>l ;  other  passages,  or
the  same  passages  wrongly  interpreted,  were  applied  to  the  race,  and  were  rendered  AyAit-Shausii  =
"  the  prisoners  taken  from  the  Shaftsii,"  a  substantive  derived  from  the  root  haha  =  "  to  take  "  being
substituted  for  the  noun  /lygu  =  "  prince."  Josephus  {Contra  Apionem,  i.  14)  declares,  on  the
authority  of  Manetho,  that  some  manuscripts  actually  suggested  this  derivation — a  fact  which  is  easily
explained  by  the  custom  of  the  Egyptian  record  oifices  (Krall,  Stud,  zur  Gesch.  der  AUen  JUgyptens
II.,  aus  demot.  Uric.,  p.  69).  I  may  mention,  in  passing,  that  JIariette  {Extrait  d'un  Mimoire  iniituU:
Questions  relatives  aux  nourelles  fouilles  a  f aire  en  Egypte,  p.  41)  recognised  in  the  element  -'Sos"
au  Egyptian  word  shus  =  "soldiers,"  and  in  the  name  of  King  Mirmashau,  which  he  read  Mirsbosii,
an  equivalent  of  the  title  Hyq-Shosu  (ef.  Maspebo,  Damn  of  Civilization,  pp.  531-533,  in  regard
to  Mirmashaii).

»  Manetho  (Muller-Didot,  Frag.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  ii.  p.  567)  takes  them  to  be  Phcenicians,


THEIR    UNCERTAIN   ORIGIN.  55

Modern  scholars  have  put  forward  at  least  a  dozen  contradictory  hypotheses
on  the  matter.  The  Hyksos  have  been  asserted  to  liave  been  Cauaanites/
Elamites,^  Hittites,^  Accadiaus,  Scythians.^  The  last  opinion  found  great
favour  with  the  learned,  as  long  as  they  could  believe  that  the  sphinxes  dis-
covered by  Marietto  represented  Apophis  or  one  of  his  predecessors.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  tliese  monuments  present  all  the  characteristics  of  the  Mongoloid
type  of  countenance — the  small  and  slightly  oblique  eyes,  the  arched  but  some-
what flattened  nose,  the  pronounced  cheek-bones  and  well-covered  jaw,  the
salient  chin  and  full  lips  slightly  depressed  at  the  corners.''  These  peculiarities
are  also  observed  in  the  three  heads  found  at  Damanhur,"  in  the  colossal
torso  dug  up  at  Mit-Fares  in  the  Fayum,'  in  the  twin  figures  of  the  Nile
removed  to  the  Bulaq  Museum  from  Tauis,*  and  upon  the  remains  of  a
statue  in  the  collection  at  the  Villa  Ludovisi  in  Kome.'-'     The  same  foreign

but  ho  adds  that  certain  writers  thought  them  to  be  Arabs ;  nvis  5e  \eyo\)inv  aiirohs  "Apneas  thai.
Brugsch  favours  this  latter  view  (Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp.  214-217),  but  tbe  Arab  legend  of  a
conquest  of  Egypt  by  Sheddud  and  tlie  Aditea  is  of  recent  origin,  and  was  inspired  by  traditions  in
regard  to  the  Hyksus  current  during  the  Byzantine  epoch ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  allow  it  to  inlluenee
us  (Wiedemann,  JEijyptische  Geschichte,  p.  288).  We  must  wait  before  expressing  a  definite  opinion
in  regard  to  the  facts  wliich  Glaser  believes  he  lias  obtained  from  the  Miua;an  inscriptions  whicli
date  from  tlie  time  of  the  Hyksus.

•  The  theory  of  the  Cananzeo-Kushite  origin  has  been  defended  by  Lepsius  (_Nuh.  Gram.  Einhitung,
pp.  cxiii.-c.w.)  and  by  Maspero  (^Hist.  Anc.  des  Peuplcs  de  VOrienl,  4th  edit.,  pp.  IGl,  102),  who
base  their  argument  on  the  tradition  that  tlie  Pliceniciaus  came  from  the  shores  of  tlie  Erythraian
Sea  (cf.  infra,  pp.  62-64),  and  on  the  Phcenician  origin  attributed  to  the  Shepherd  kings  by  one  of
Manetho's  authorities;  cf.  Ed.  Meyeu,  Gesch.  JEgypL,  p.  20G,  and  G.  Steindokff,  Zur  Geschichte  dor
Hylisos,  pp.  3-7.

'  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Alterlh.,  vol.  i.  pp.  166, 167  ;  he  has  since  rejected  this  view  (Gesch.  JEgypt.,
p.  206,  note  1),  which  lias  been  taken  up  again  by  Winckler,  Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  180,  131.

'  Mariette,  Ajkt^u  de  I'llistoire  d'Egypte,  1824,  p.  50,  et  seq  ,  and  Padre  Cesare  di  Cara,  GU
HyJcsos  di  Egiito,  pp.  175-177,  and  GU  Ilethei-Pelasgi,  vol.  i.  pp.  5,  6,  who  take  them  to  have  been
Semites,  while  I.  Taylor,  Conder,  and  others,  regarding  the  Hittites  as  Mongolians  or  Scythians,
incline  to  the  theory  of  a  Mongolo-Hittite  origin.

■•  Kosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  i.  pp.  173-180,  and  in  our  own  time  Fk.  Lenormant,  Frammentn
di  Slatua  di  uno  de'  Re  Paslori  di  Egitto,  p.  15,  with,  however,  considerable  reserve,  and  fully
admitting  a  large  admixture  of  Phoenician  and  Canaauitish  elements;  cf.  Beugscu,  I>«e  Altiegypt.
Viilherlafel,  in  the  Ahhandlungen  des  5''"  Internal.  Orienl.-Congr.  zii  Berlin,  Afric.  Seld.  pp.  78,  79.

'  Mariette,  who  was  the  first  to  describe  these  curious  monumeut.s,  recognised  in  tliem  all  the
incontestable  characteristics  of  a  Semitic  type  {Leltre  a  M.  le  Vicomle  de  Rougif  sur  les  fouilles  de
Tunis,  pp.  9,  10),  and  the  correctness  of  his  view  was,  at  first,  universally  admittoil  (Fr,  Lenormant,
Manuel  de  Vlligtoire  Ancienne  des  I'euples  de  I'Orient,  3rd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  365).  Later  on  Haniy
imagined  that  lie  could  distinguish  traces  of  Mongolian  inlluences,and  Fr.  Lenormant  (Les  rremiCres
Cimlinalions,  vol.  i.  p.  207;  Frammenio  di  stalna  di  uno  de'  Re  Pastori  di  Egiito,  pp.  13,  14;  and
Histoire  Ancienne,  9th  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  145),  and  then  Mariette  himself  (Pietrement,  Les  Chevaux
dans  les  temps  preliistoriques  et  historiques,  pp.  474,  475)  came  round  to  this  view;  it  has  recently
been  supported  in  England  by  Flower,  and  in  Germany  by  Viichow.

'  VlREV,  Notice  des  Principuux  Monuments  exposi^s  an,  Musi'e  de  Gizeh,  p.  45,  No.  138.

'  Mariette,  Notice  des  Principaux  Monuments,  18()4,  p.  64,  No.  9,  and  Monuments  divers,  pi.  39fi,
Texle,  p.  11 ;  Maspero,  Guide  du  Visiteur  an  Musc'e  de  Boulaq,  No.  lOlJ,  pp.  65,  ^ij.

'  Mariette,  Deuxiime  LMre  h  M.  le  Vicomle  de  Uouge  sur  les  fouilles  de  Tunis,  pp.  5-7,  pis.  v.,  vi.,
and  Notice  sur  les  Principaux  Monuments,  1864,  No.  14,  pp.  204,  205.  The  group  really  belongs  to
the  XXP'  dynasty  (Maspero,  ArchCologie  Egyptienne,  p.  217),  and  in  many  respects  reminds  us  of
a  number  of  specimens  of  Cypriot  art.

•  Fu.  Lenormant,  Frummento  di  Statua  di  uno  de'  Re  Pastoridi  Egiito  (e\tiacl  from  the  liollettino
Archeologieo  Comunale  di  Roma,  1877,  vol.  v.,  2ud  series).


56  THE  TITKSOS   IN  EGYPT.

type  of  face  is  also  fouud  to  exist  among  the  present  inhabitants  of  the
villages  scattered  over  the  eastern  part  of  the  Delta,  particularly  on  the
shores  of  Lake  Menzaleh,  and  the  conclusion  was  drawn  that  these  people
were  the  direct  descendants  of  the  Ilyksos.^  This  theory  was  abandoned,
however,  when  it  was  ascertained  that  the  sphinxes  of  San  had  been
carved,  many  centuries  before  the  invasion,  for  Ameuemhait  III.,'^  a  king  of
the  XII'"  dynasty.  In  spite  of  the  facts  we  possess,  the  problem  therefore
still  remains  unsolved,  and  the  origin  of  the  Hyksos  is  as  mysterious  as  ever.
We  gather,  however,  that  the  third  millennium  before  our  era  was  repeatedly
disturbed  by  considerable  migratory  movements.  The  expeditions  far  afield  of
Elamite  and  Chaldaean  princes  could  not  have  taken  place  without  seriously
perturbing  the  regions  over  which  they  passed.  They  must  have  encountered
by  the  way  many  nomadic  or  unsettled  tribes  whom  a  slight  shock  would  easily
displace.  An  impulse  once  given,  it  needed  but  little  to  accelerate  or  increase
the  movement :  a  collision  with  one  horde  reacted  on  its  neighbours,  who  either
displaced  or  carried  others  with  them,  and  the  whole  multitude,  gathering
momentum  as  they  went,  were  precipitated  in  the  direction  first  given.^  A
tradition,  picked  up  by  Herodotus  on  his  travels,  relates  that  the  Phoenicians
had  originally  peopled  the  eastern  and  southern  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf ;  ^  it
was  also  said  that  Indathyrses,  a  Scythian  king,  had  victoriously  scoured  the
whole  of  Asia,  and  had  penetrated  as  far  as  Egypt.^  Either  of  these  invasions
may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  Syrian  migration.  In  comparison  with  the
meagre  information  which  has  come  down  to  us  under  the  form  of  legends,  it
is  provoking  to  think  how  much  actual  fact  has  been  lost,  a  tithe  of  which
would  explain  the  cause  of  the  movement  and  the  mode  of  its  execution.
The  least  improbable  hypothesis  is  that  which  attributes  the  appearance  of
the  Shepherds  about  the  XXIII''''  century  B.C.,  to  the  arrival  in  Naharaim
of  those  Khati  who  subsequently  fought  so  obstinately  against  the  armies
both  of  the  Pharaohs  and  the  Ninevite  kings.      They  descended  from   the

'  Makiette,  Leitre  a  M.  le  Vicomte  de  Rougd  gur  les  fouilles  dc  Tanis,  pp.  10,  11,  and  Note  sur  lee
Biahmiles  et  les  Baschmourites,  iu  the  Melanges  d' Arcliifologie  Egypticnne  el  Amyrienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  91-93.

^  Goi.ENiscHEFF,  Amenemhd  III  et  les  Sphinx  de  San,  in  the  Recueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  xv.  pp.  131-
136  ;  cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  502,  503.

'  The  Hyksos  invasion  luis  been  regarded  as  a  natural  result  of  the  Elamite  conquest,  by  Maspero,
Eistoire  Ancienne  des  Peuples  de  VOrient,  1st  edit.,  p.  173;  later  by  Fr.  Lenormant,  Frammento  di
un  Statua  di  uno  de'  Re  Pastori  di  Egilto,  p.  14,  and  Eistoire  Ancienne  des  Peuples  de  VOrient,  9th
edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  144;  by  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschiclde  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  166,  167;  by  Hommel,
Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyrieus,  pp.  370,  371 ;  and  by  Naville,  Buhaslis,  pp.  18,  19,  28,  29.

*  Herodotus,  I.  i.,  VII.  Ixxxix.  It  was  to  the  exodus  of  this  race,  in  the  last  analysis,  that  I
liave  attributed  tlie  invasion  of  the  shepherds  (Eistoire  ancienne,  4th  edit ,  pp.  161, 162).

=  Megasthenes,  fragm.  2,  in  Mui.ler-Didot,  Frag.  Eist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  416;  cf.  Strabo,
XV.  1,  §  6,  p.  687,  and  Arrianu.s,  Indiea,  v.  §  6;  JuSTiNus,  i.  1.  A  certain  number  of  commen-
tators are  of  opinion  that  the  wars  attributed  to  Indathyrses  have  been  confounded  with  what
Herodotus  tells  of  the  exploits  of  Madyes  (IV.  ciii.,  et  seq.),  and  are  nothing  more  than  a  distorted
remembrance  of  the  great  Scythian  invasion  which  took  place  iu  the  latter  half  of  the  VII"'  century  B.C.


PROBABLE  IDENTIFICATION    WITH   THE   KHATI.


57


mouutaiu  region  in  which  the  Halys  and  the  Euphrates  take  their  rise,
and  if  the  bulk  of  them  proceeded  no  further  than  tlie  valleys
of  the  Taurus  and  tlie  Amanos,  some  at  least  must  have  pushed
forward  as  far  as  the  provinces  on  the  western  shores  of  the  Dead
Sea.  The  most  adventurous  among  tliem,  reinforced  by  the  Canaanites
and  other  tribes  who  had  joiued  them  on  their  southward  course,
crossed  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  and  finding  a  people  weakened  by
discord,  experienced  no  difficulty  in  replacing  the  native  dynasties
by  their  own  barbarian  chiefs.^  Both  their  name  and  origin  were
doubtless  well  known  to  the  Egyptians,  but  the  latter  nevertheless
disdained  to  apply  to  them  any  term  but  that  of  "  shemau,"^  strangers,
and  in  referring  to  them  used  the  same  vague  appellations  which
they  applied  to  the  Bedouin  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula, — Monatiu,  the
shepherds,  or  Satiii,  tlie  archers.  They  succeeded  in  hiding  the
original  name  of  their  conquerors  so  thoroughly,  that  in  the  end  they
themselves  forgot  it,  and  kept  the  secret  of  it  from  posterity.

The  remembrance  of  the  cruelties  with  which  the  invaders  sullied
their  conquest  lived  long  after  them ;  it  still  stirred  the  anger  of
Manetho  after  a  lapse  of  twenty  centuries.^  The  victors  were  known  as
the  "  Plagues  "  or  "  Pests,"*  and  every  possible  crime  and  impiety  was
attributed  to  them.  But  the  brutalities  attending  the  invasion  once
past,  the  invaders  soon  lost  their  barbarity  and  became  rapidly  civi-
lized. Those  of  them  stationed  in  the  encampment  at  Avaris  retained
the  military  qualities  and  characteristic  energy  of  their  race ;
the  remainder  became  assimilated  to  their   new  compatriots,  and  were   soon

'  Mariette,  Aper^u  de  I'Hktoire  de  VEqijple,  1874,  pp.  49-54, 172-175,  deliberately  coiumitteil  him-
self to  this  view,  and  Padre  Cesaue  di  Caka,  Gli  Uijksus  di  Egitto,  has  written  in  support  of  it.  At
the  present  time,  those  scholars  who  admit  the  Turanian  origin  of  the  Hyksog  are  of  opinion  that  only
the  nucleus  of  the  race,  the  royal  tribe,  was  composed  of  Mongols,  while  the  main  body  consisted  of
elements  of  all  kinds — Canaanitish,  or,  more  generally,  Semitic  (Navii.le,  Bahastis,  pp.  18, 28).

^  The  term  sJiamamu,  variant  of  shemati,  is  applied  to  them  by  Queen  Ilatshopsitu  (Golknisghefi',
Notice  eur  un  texte  de  Stabl-Antar,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.  iii.  p.  3)  :  the  same  term  is  employed  shortly
afterwards  by  Thutmoais  HI.,  to  indicate  the  enemies  whom  he  had  defeated  at  Megiddo  (BKroscu,
Uecueil  de  Men.,  vol.  i.  pi.  xliii.  1.  1,  where  the  text  is  defective).

'  He  speaks  of  them  in  contemptuous  terms  as  men  of  ignoble  race,  afOpunrot  to  yfi/os  aari/xu:
(JIOlleh-Didot,  Frug.  Hist.  Grmc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  5(i6).

'  The  epithet  Aiti,  laiti,  laditi,  was  applied  to  the  Nubians  by  the  writer  of  the  inscription  of
Ahmosi-si-Abina  (1.  21),  and  to  the  Shepherds  of  the  Delta  by  the  author  u(  Iho  Saltier  Papyrus,
No.  1,  pi.  1, 1.  1.  Brugsch  explained  it  as  "the  reliels,"  or  "disturbers"  (^JKgypt.  Stud.,  §  ii.  p.  10),
and  Goodwin  translated  it  "invaders"  (IJier.  Pap.,  in  the  Camlj.  Essays,  18.58,  p.  24.'!);  Chabas
rendered  it  by  "  jilague-stricken,"  an  interpretation  which  was  in  closer  conformity  with  its  etymo-
logical/neaning  (.1/H.  Egyptoliuj.,  1st  series,  pp.  :i5-H),  and  GroiT  pointed  out  that  the  malady  called
Alt,  or  Adit  in  Egyptian,  is  the  malignant  fover  still  frequently  to  be  met  with  at  the  present  day
in  the  marshy  cantons  of  the  Delta,  and  furnished  the  proper  rendering,  which  is  "The  Fevor-
etricken"  {ihiides  ArchMog.:  la  Malaria).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  J[.  do  Mortens.  It  is  the  palette  of  a  scribe,
now  in  the  Berlin  Museum,  and  given  by  King  Apopi  II.  Ausirri  to  a  scribe  named  Atu  (Eisenloiir,
An  Jlitlorical  Monument,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archseology,  1881,  pp.  97,  98).


I'ALF.TTE  OF

A    HYKSIJB

SCItlDE.'


58


THE  HYKSOS  IN  EGYPT.


A    HVKSOS    I'RISUNER   GCIDIKG    THE    I'LOUGH,    AT    EL-KAB."


recoguisable  merely  by  their  long  hair,  thick  beard,  and  marked  features.
Their  sovereigns  seem  to  have  realised  from  the  first  that  it  was  more  to
their  interest  to  exploit  the  country  than  to  pillage  it;  as,  however,  none  of
them  was   competent   to   understand    the    intricacies   of  the   treasury,  they

were  forced  to  retain  the
services  of  the  majority
of  the  scribes,  who  had
managed  the  public  ac-
counts under  the  native
kings.^  Once  schooled
to  the  new  state  of  affairs,
they  readily  adopted  the
refinements  of  civilized
life.  The  court  of  the
Pharaohs,  with  its  pomp
and  its  usual  assemblage
of  ofScials,  both  great
and  small,  was  revived  around  the  person  of  the  new  sovereign ;  ^  the  titles  of
the  Amenemhaits  and  the  Usirtasens,  adapted  to  these  "princes  of  foreign
lauds,"  *  legitimatised  them  as  descendants  of  Horus  and  sons  of  the  Sun.^
They  respected  the  local  religions,  and  went  so  far  as  to  favour  those  of  the  gods
whose  attributes  appeared  to  connect  them  with  some  of  their  own  barbarous
divinities.    The  chief  deity  of  their  worship  was  Baal,  the  lord  of  all,''  a  cruel  and

'  Tlic  same  tbing  took  place  on  every  occasion  when  Egypt  was  conquered  by  an  alien  race  :  the
Persian  Acbamenians  and  Greeks  made  use  of  the  native  employe's,  as  did  the  Komaus  after  them;
and  lastly,  the  Mussulmans,  Arabs,  and  Turks  (cf.  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  .^gypfens,  pp.  20G,  207).

■  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger.  The  Hyksus,  whom  I  think  I  can
identify  here,  is  represented  among  the  slaves  of  Pihiri  at  El-Kab  (Maspero,  Notes  stir  quelques
points  de  Gram.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S79,  p.  53;  cf.  Ed.  Meter,  Geichichte  JSgyptens,  p.  219,  note  2);
liis  is  the  second  figure  on  the  right,  holding  the  hilts  of  the  plough.

'  The  narrative  of  the /SaZ/ier  Papi/rus,  No.  1,  shows  us  thecivil  and  military  chiefs  collected  round
the  8hepherd-king  Apopi,  and  escorting  him  in  the  solemn  processions  in  honour  of  the  gods  (pi.  i.  1.  4).
They  are  followed  by  the  scribes  and  magicians,  who  give  him  advice  on  important  occasions  (pi.  ii.  1.  2).

*  Hiqu  Situ  :  this  is  the  title  of  Abisha  at  Beni-Hassan  (cf.  Maspero,  D.  of  Cirilh.,  p.  -lliS),  which
is  also  assumed  by  Khiaiit  on  several  small  monuments  (cf.  Petrie,  Hist.  Scarabs,  pi.  25,  No.  729);
Steindorft"  (Zur  Gescli.  der  Uylcsos,  pp.  4,  5)  has  attempled  to  connect  it  with  the  name  of  the  HyksOs.

'  The  preamble  of  the  two  or  three  Shepherd-kings  of  whom  we  know  anything,  contains
the  two  cartouches,  the  special  titles,  and  the  names  of  Horus.  which  formed  part  of  the  title  of
the  kings  of  pure  Egyptian  race ;  thus  Apophis  II.  is  proclaimed  to  be  the  living  Horus,  tcho  joins  the
two  earths  in  peace,  the  good  god,  Aqnunri,  son  of  the  Su7i,  Apopi,  who  lives  for  ever,  on  the  statues  of
Mirmashau,  which  he  had  appropriated  (E.  and  J.  de  Kouge,  Inscrip.  hi^rogl.  en  Egypte,  pi.  Ixxvi.,
where  the  proper  name  has  been  misread),  and  on  the  pink  granite  table  of  offerings  in  the  Gizeh
Museum  (Mauiette,  Notice  des  Princip.  Mon.,  1S76,  p.  299,  No.  1001,  and  Mon.  divers, , pi.  38,
pp.  10,  11).

"  The  name  of  Baal,  transcribed  Baalu,  is  found  on  that  of  a  certain  Petebadlfl,  "  the  Gift  of
Baal,"  who  must  have  flourished  in  the  time  of  the  last  shepherd-kings,  or  rather  under  the  Theban
kings  of  the  XVII"'  dynasty,  who  were  their  contemporaries  (Lieblein,  liecherches  sur  la  Chronologic
£gyptienne,  pp.  129-132,  whose  conclusions  have  been  adopted  by  Brugsoh,  Geach.  Mgypt.,  pp.  238, 239).


THEIR   ASSIMILATION   TO    THE  EGYPTIANS.


59


savage  warrior ;  his  resemblance  to  Sit,  the  brother  and  enemy  of  Osiris,  was
so  marked,  that  he  was  identified  with  the  Egyptian  deity,  with  the  emphatic

additional    title    of    Siitkhii,    the

Great  Sit.^  He  was  usually  repre-
sented as  a  fully  armed  warrior,
wearing  a  helmet  of  circular  form,
ornamented  with  two  plumes ;  but
he  also  borrowed  the  emblematic
animal  of  Sit,  the  fennec,  and  the
winged  grifSn  which  haunted  the
deserts  of  the  Thebaid.^  His
temples  were  erected  in  the  cities
of  the  Delta,  side  by  side  with
the  sanctuaries  of  the  feudal  gods,

both  at  Bubastis^  and  at  Tanis.''  Tanis,  now  made  the  capital,  reopened
its  palaces,  and  acquired  a  fresh  impetus  from  the  royal  presence  within
its  walls.  Apophis  Aqnunri,''  one  of  its  kings,  dedicated  several  tables  of
offerings  in  that  city,  and  engraved  his  cartouches  upon  the  sphinxes  and
standing  colossi  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XIP"  and  XIIl"'  dynasties.  He  was,
however,  honest  enough  to  leave  the  inscriptions  of  his  predecessors  intact,
and  not  to  appropriate  to  himself  the  credit  of  works  belonging  to  the
Amenemhaits   or   to   Mirmasliau.''     Khiani,   who   is   possibly    the    lannas   of


TABLE  OK  OFFEKINGS  BEARING  THE  NAME  OF  APulT
AQNUNBi.'


'  Sutikba,  Sutkliu,  are  lengthened  forms  of  Sfltu,  or  Situ ;  and  Cliabas,  who  had  at  first  denied
the  existence  of  the  final  Itliu  {Mglangeg  Kgijpt.,  2nd  series,  pp.  187-91,  and  Voyage  d'un  Egypticn,  p.  293),
afterwards  himself  supjilied  the  philological  arguments  which  proved  the  correctness  of  the  reading
{Les  PaeteuTS,  p.  35):  he  rightly  refused,  however,  to  rccoguiso  in  Sutikhu  or  Sutkha — the  name
of  the  conquerors'  god — a  transliteration  of  the  Phconician  Sydyk,  and  would  only  see  in  it  that  of  the
nearest  Egyptian  deity.  This  view  is  now  accepted  as  the  right  one,  and  Sutkhft  is  regarded  as  the
indigenous  equivalent  of  the  great  Asiatic  god,  elsewhere  called  Baal,  or  supremo  lord.  [Professor
Potrie  found  a  scarab  bearing  the  cartouche  of  •'  Sutekh  "  Ajiepi  I.  at  Koptos. — Ti!.]

'  For  the  aspect  of  the  god  Sit,  cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  GioUizalioii,  pp.  102,  103,  132-135.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  E.  Brugsch ;  cf.  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,
pi.  38.

'  Fragment  of  an  inscription  which  states  that  Apophis  raised  columns  and  had  a  metal  door
made  for  his  god  (Naville,  Buhnstis,  pis.  22,  23,  pis.  xxii.  A,  xxxv.  B,  C),  i.e.  for  Sutikhfl.

'  As  to  the  restoration  or  IniildiTig  of  temples  at  Tanis,  cf.  Mariette,  Lcllre  a  M.  h  Vicomte  de
Rouge  sur  lesfoiiilleg  de  Tunis,  p.  8,  etseq.  ;  and  Flinders  Petrie,  Tanis,  i.  pp.  7,  8,  9,  and  ii.  pp.  10, 33.

°  The  cartouche  name  of  this  king,  wrongly  deciphered  at  first  by  Mariette  (Deuxiime  Leiln  ii
M.  h  Vicomte  de  Uougif,  p.  l)  ami  by  E.  de  Rouge  (E.  and  J.  he  Eougio,  Inscrip.  Hi(frogl.  recueillies
en  Egypte,  pi.  Ixxvi. ;  Koiiinu,  herons  de  M.  de  Rnugg,  in  the  Melanges  d'Areli.  Kgypt.  et  Assyrienne,  vol.
ii.  p.  283),  was  afterwards  restored  to  its  true  form  by  Mariette  himself  (Mil. ler-Mariette,  iStude
sur  une  Inscription  grecque,  in  the  Melanges  d' Archc'ologie,  vol.  i.  p.  50),  and  liis  reading  -Vqnunri,
adopted  by  Brugscli  (Ueschirhte  JEgyptens,  p.  824),  has  since  been  accepted  by  all  subsequent  writers.
Tiie  old  reading  still  reappears  in  the  work  of  Padre  tjesare  di  Cara  ((7/(  Ihjhsos  di  Egitto,  p.  312)  side
by  Bide  witli  tlie  true  reading.

'  Table  of  offerings  discovered  at  Cairo,  and  brought  tliitlior  from  Heliopolis  or  Mcnii)liia,  or
pf-rhaps  from  Tanis  (Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  38) ;  statues  and  ejihinx  usurped  at  Tanis
itsell  (Bluton,  Excerpta  hieroghjphica,  pi.  40  ;  Mariette,  Notice  dea  rrincip.  Mo7i.,  1876,  p.  202,  No.  0,
264,  Nob.  H-13);  sphinx  usurped  at  Toll  el-Maskhfltah  (Maspero,  Sur  deux  monuments  nouveaux


60


THE  HYKSOS   IN  EOTPT.


THE  BAGDAD   LION,   IN  THE  BRITISH  MUSEDM."


Manetho,  was  not,  however,  so  easily  satisfied.^  The
statue  bearing  his  inscription,  of  which  the  lower  part
was  discovered  by  Naville  at  Bubastis,  appears  to
have  been  really  carved  for  himself  or  for  one  of
his  contemporaries.  It  is  a  work  possessing
no  originality,  though  of  very  commend-
^1  able  execution,  such  as  would  render  it
acceptable  to  any  museum  ;  the  artist
who  conceived  it  took  his  inspiration
with  considerable  cleverness  from  the
best  examples  turned  out  by  the  schools  of  the  Delta  under  the  Sovkhotpus  and
the  Nofirhotpiis.  But  a  small  grey  granite  lion,  also  of  the  reign  of  Khiani,
which  by  a  strange  fate  had  found  its  way  to  Bagdad,  does  not  raise  our  estima-
tion of  the  modelling  of  animals  in  the  Hyksos  period.  It  is  heavy  in  form,
and  the  muzzle  in  no  way  recalls  the  fine  profile  of  the  lions  executed  by  the
sculptors  of  earlier  times.  The  pursuit  of  science  and  the  culture  of  learning
appear  to  have  been  more  successfully  perpetuated  than  the  fine  arts  ;  a  treatise
on  mathematics,  of  which  a  copy  has  come  down  to  us,  would  seem  to  have  been
recopied,  if  not  remodelled,  in  the  twenty-second  year  of  Apopliis  II.  Ausirri.^

du  regne  de  Bamses  II.,  pp.  1,  2,  where  the  sphinx  is  given,  though  attention  is  not  called  to  the  fact
that  it  had  heen  usurped) ;  usurped  sphinx  in  the  Louvre  (DiiVERiA,  Lettre  a  M.  A.  Marielte  sur
queJques  mon.  relati/s  aiix  Hijq-Sds,  in  the  lievue  Arch.,  2nd  series,  vol.  iv.,  1861,  pp.  260,  261).

'  Nayille,  Bubastis,  pi. -xii.,  xxxv.  A,  and  pp.  23-26,  who  reads  the  name  Eayan  or  Yanra,  and
tliinlis  that  tliis  jjrince  must  he  the  Annas  or  lannas  mentioned  by  Manelho  (MI'ller-Didot,  Frag.
Eist.  Graic,  vol.  ii.  p.  567)  as  being  one  of  the  six  shcphcrd-kings  of  tlie  XV"'  dynasty.  Mr.  Petrio
proposed  to  read  Khian,  Khiani,  and  tlie  fragment  discovered  at  Gebeleiu  confirms  this  reading
(Dakes-st,  Notes  et  Remurqiies,  in  the  Becueil,  vol.  xvi.  p.  42,  §  Ixxxviii.),  as  well  as  a  certain  number  of
cylinders  and  scarabs  (Fl.  Petrie,  Hist.  Scarabs,  pi.  25).  Mr.  Petrio  prefers  to  place  this  Pharaoh  in
the  VlII"'  dynasty  (Hist,  of  Eiji/pt,  vol.  i.  pp.  117-121).  and  makes  him  one  of  the  leaders  in  the
foreign  occupation  towliich  lie  supposes  Egypt  to  have  submitted  at  tliat  time  (as  to  this  point,  of.
BIaspero,  I>((!nt  o/ C«'i7(;nYtoH,  pp.  110,  441) ;  but  it  is  abnost  certain  that  he  ought  to  lie  placed
among  the  Hyksos  of  tlie  XVI"'  dynasty  (Steindorff,  Zur  Gescli.  der  Jlijlisos,  pp.  4,  5).  The  name
Khiani,  more  correctly  Khiyani  or  Klieyani,  is  connected  by  Tomkins  (/rZ.  Anthropological  Institute,
1889,  p.  185),  and  Hilprecht  {Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  p.  130,  note  2)  with  tliat  of  a  certain  Khayanii  or
Khayan,  sou  of  Galjbar,  who  reigned  in  Amanos  in  the  time  of  Salmanasar  II.,  King  of  Assyria.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  made  in  the  British  Museum.  This  miniature  lion  was
first  brought  into  notice  by  De'vc'ria  {Lettre  n  31.  Augusle  Mariette  sur  quelques  monuments  rrlati/s
anx  Hyq-Sos,  in  the  Berue  Archiologiqtw,  new  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  256.  257),  who  read  the  cartouche
Ea-sit-uflb;  it  was  reproduced  by  Plcyto  {La  Religion  des  Pr^-Israelites,  pi.  i.  fig.  9),  from  Dc'vc'ria's
sketch,  and  was  bought  for  tlie  British  Museum  by  G.  Smith,  who  believed  he  could  detect  on  it  the
name  of  Salatis  {Assyrian  Discoveries,  p.  420).  Mr.  Tomkins  made  a  new  drawing  of  it,  and  published
it  in  his  Studies  on  the  Times  of  Abraham,  pi.  xi.  pp.  110-112.  The  discovery  of  the  true  reading  of
the  cartouche,  Siisiruiri,  and  its  identification  with  tlie  cartouche-prenomeu  of  Khiani,  are  due  to
Griffith  (Naville,  Bubastis,  pp.  21,  25).  Ed.  Meyer  {Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  13G)  con-
siders this  lion  not  to  be  Egyptian  work  at  all,  but  pseudo-Egyptian,  and  that  it  was  executed  in
Asia ;  the  head,  which  had  been  mutilated,  has  been  restored  at  a  much  later  date,  and  has  thus
lost  its  ancient  character,  but  the  body  shows  it  to  have  been  of  pure  Egyptian  origin.

'  The  cartouche-name  Ausirri,  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  papyrus,  was  pointed  out  by
Birch  (Geometric  Papyrus,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  186S,  p.  109),  who  did  not  classify  it;  Eisenlohr  recog-
nised the  fact  that  it  must  date  from  the  time  of  the  XVII"'  dynasty  {Ueber  altHgyptische  Maasse,
iu  the  Zeitschrift,  1875.  p.  -U,  and  Ein  Mathematisches  Handbuch  der  Allen  .^gypter,  pp.  7,  8),  and


TEE  MONUMENTS   OF  KHIANI.


61


If  we  only  possessed  more  monuments  or  documents  treating  of  this  period,
we  should  doubtless  perceive  that  their  sojourn  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile
was  instrumental  in  causing  a  speedy  change  in  the  appearance  and  character
of  the  Hyksos.  The
strangers  retained  to  a
certain  extent  their
coarse  countenances  and
rude  manners  :  they
showed  no  aptitude  for
tillintr  the  soil  or  sowing'
grain,  but  delighted  in
the  marshy  expanses  of
the  Delta,  where  they
gave  themselves  up  to
a  semi-savage  life  of
hunting  and  of  tending
cattle.  The     nobles

among  them,  clothed  and
schooled  after  the  Egyp-
tian fashion,  and  holding
fiefs,  or  positions  at  court,
difiered  but  little  from
the  native  feudal  chiefs.
We  see  here  a  case  of
what  generally  happens
when  a  horde  of  bar-
barians settles  down  in  a
highly  organised  country
which  by  a  stroke  of  fortune  they  may  have  conquered :  as  soon  as  the  Hyksos
had  taken  complete  possession  of  Egypt,  Egypt  in  her  turn  took  possession
of  them,  and  those  who  survived  the  enervating  effect  of  her  civilization
were  all  but  transformed  into  Egyptians.

If,  in  the  time  of  the  native  Pharaohs,  Asiatic  tribes  had  been  drawn
towards   Egypt,  where   they  were   treated   as   subjects   or  almost  as  slaves,''

fimilly  showed,  on  the  evidence  of  Stern,  that  it  belonged  to  one  of  the  Apuphis  (/(»  Uidorical Monu-
ment, in  the  Froreedingso!  the  Soc.  of  liibl.  Arch.,  1881,  pp.  97,  98).  It  is  tlius  placed  in  tliu  XVI"'
dynasty  (WiEDisMANX,  Jl'Jijijptischc  Geschiehle,  jip.  293, 294),  and  the  liypothesis  is  coiilirmed  by  a  nionn-
ment  of  Apophia  II.  in  the  aoulli  of  Egypt,  at  Geheleiu  (Dahkssy,  Notes  el  liemarques,  §  xxx.,  in  the
Iieew:il  de  Traoaux,  vol.  xii.  |).  26).  Tlie  treatise  had  been  composed  nnder  Anienenihait  III.  ((iRir-
FiTii,  The  lihind  Malliematical  Papyrus;  in  the  Pruceedimjs  of  the  8oc.  of  l!ihl.  Aich.,  vol.  xiv.,  1891,
pp.  3G,  37).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograph  by  Nftville;  of.  N.wili.k,  Buhaatis,  pi.  xii.

'  Cr  in  regard  to  these  Asiatic  emigrants,  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Cioilizatinn,  pp.  •168-471.


TUE    BROKEM    STATUE    OF    KHIANI,   IN    THE    GIZEII    MUSEUM.'


02  rilE  HTKSoS  IN  EGYPT.

the  attraction  which  she  possessed  for  them  must  have  increased  in  inten-
sity under  the  shepherds.  They  would  now  find  the  country  in  the  hands  of
men  of  the  same  races  as  themselves — Egyptiauised,  it  is  true,  but  not  to  such
an  extent  as  to  have  completely  lost  their  own  language  and  the  knowledge  of
their  own  extraction.  Such  immigrants  were  the  more  readily  welcomed,
since  there  lurked  a  feeling  among  the  Hyksos  that  it  was  necessary  to
strengthen  themselves  against  the  slumbering  hostility  of  the  indigenous
population.  The  royal  palace  must  have  more  than  once  opened  its  gates  to
Asiatic  counsellors  and  favourites.  Canaanites  and  Bedouin  must  often  have
been  enlisted  for  the  camp  at  Avaris.  Invasions,  famines,  civil  wars,  all  seem
to  have  conspired  to  drive  into  Egypt  not  only  isolated  individuals,  but  whole
families  and  tribes.  That  of  the  Beni-Israel,  or  Israelites,  who  entered  the
country  about  this  time,  has  since  acquired  a  unique  position  in  the  world's
history.  They  belonged  to  that  family  of  Semitic  extraction  which  we  know
by  the  monuments  and  tradition  to  have  been  scattered  in  ancient  times  along
the  western  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf  and  on  tlie  banks  of  the  Euphrates.
Those  situated  nearest  to  Chaldaja  and  to  the  sea  probably  led  a  settled  exist-
ence ;  they  cultivated  the  soil,  they  employed  themselves  in  commerce  and
industries,  their  vessels — from  Dilmun,  from  Magan,  and  from  Milukhkha —
coasted  from  one  place  to  another,  and  made  their  way  to  the  cities  of
Sumer  and  Acead.  They  had  been  civilized  from  very  early  times,  and  some
of  their  towns  were  situated  on  islands,  so  as  to  be  protected  from  sudden
incursions.^  Other  tribes  of  the  same  family  occupied  the  interior  of  the  con-
tinent ;  they  lived  in  tents,  and  delighted  in  the  unsettled  life  of  nomads.
There  appeared  to  be  in  this  distant  corner  of  Arabia  an  inexhaustible  reserve
of  population,  which  periodically  overflowed  its  borders  and  spread  over  the
world.  It  was  from  this  very  region  that  we  see  theKashdim,  the  true  Ciialdaeans,
issuing  ready  armed  for  combat, —  a  people  whose  name  was  subsequently  used
to  denote  several  tribes  settled  between  the  lower  waters  of  the  Tigris  and  the
Euphrates.^  It  was  there,  among  the  marshes  on  either  side  of  these  rivers,
that  the  Aramfeans  established  their  first  settlements  after  quitting  the  desert.^
There  also  the  oldest  legends  of  the  race  placed  the  cradle  of  the  Phosnicians  ;  *
it  was  even  believed,  about  the  time  of  Alexander,  that  the  earliest  ruins
attributable  to  this  people  had  been  discovered  on  the  Bahrein  Islands,  the

'  E.g.  the  ancient  town  of  Dilmun  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  229).

'  As  to  tlie  position  occupied  by  tlie  Chald.-Eans  in  the  niarslies,  at  the  mouths  of  the  Euphrates
(ind  Tigris,  on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  of.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Faradies  ?  p.  134,  et  seq.

'  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  show  tliat  there  wore  Aramiieans  in  this  region  also  (Fu.  Dei.itzsch,
TFo  lag  das  Paradies'?  pp.  257,  258).  The  tendency  to  trace  all  the  Aramteans  who  settled  in  Syria
to  the  marshy  regions  which  border  on  the  lower  Euphrates  has  become  very  pronounced  of  late:
cf.,  amongst  others,  IIalevy,  Mdanges,  pp.  29-31;  Becherches  Bib.,  pp.  57,  5S,  165,  287,  288;  and
Kenan,  Hist,  du  Peiqilc  d'lsracl,  vol.  i.  p.  10.

*  Cf.  p.  55  of  the  present  work  for  a  passing  allusion  to  this  legend.


THE  Pn(ENICIAN  IMMIGRATION  INTO   SYIilA.  63

largest  of  whicb,  Tylos  and  Arados,  bore  names  resembling  the  two  great  ports
of  Tyre  and  Arvad.'  We  are  indebted  to  tradition  for  the  cause  of  their  emigra-
tion and  the  route  by  which  they  reached  the  Blediterranean.  The  occurrence
of  violent  earthquakes  forced  them  to  leave  their  home ;  they  travelled  as
far  as  the  Lake  of  Syria,  where  they  halted  for  some  time;  then  resuming  their
march,  did  not  rest  till  they  had  reached  the  sea,  where  they  founded  Sidon.^
The  question  arises  as  to  the  position  of  tlie  Lake  of  Syria  on  whose  shores
they  rested,  some  believing  it  to  be  the  Bahr-i-Nedjif  and  the  environs  of
Babylon;''  others,  the  Lake  of  Bambykes  near  the  Euplirates,*  the  emigrants
doubtless  liaving  followed  up  the  course  of  that  river,  and  having  approached
the  country  of  their  destination  on  its  north-eastern  frontier.  Another
theory  would  seek  to  identify  the  lake  with  the  waters  of  Merom,  the  Lake
of  Galilee,  or  the  Dead  Sea ;  in  this  case  the  horde  must  have  crossed  the
neck  of  the  Arabian  peninsula,  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Jordan,  through
one  of  those  long  valleys,  sprinkled  with  oases,  which  afforded  an  occasional
route  for  caravans.^  Several  writers  assure  us  that  the  Phoenician  tradition  of
this  exodus  was  misunderstood  by  Herodotus,  and  that  the  sea  which  they
remembered  on  reaching  Tyre  was  not  the  Persian  Gulf,  but  tlie  Dead  Sea.  If
this  liad  been  the  case,  they  need  not  have  hesitated  to  assign  their  departure
to  causes  mentioned  in  other  documents.  The  Bible  tells  us  that,  soon
after  the  invasion  of  Kudur-lagamar,  the  auger  of  God  being  kindled  by  the
wickedness  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  He  resolved  to  destroy  the  five  cities
situated  in  the  valley  of  Siddim.  A  cloud  of  burning  brimstone  broke  over
them  and  consumed  them  ;  when  the  fumes  and  smoke,  as  "  of  a  furnace,"  had
passed  away,  the  very  site  of  the  towns  had  disapjieared.''  Previous  to  their
destruction,  the  lake  into  which  the  Jordan  empties  itself  had  had  but  a  re-
stricted area :  the  subsidence  of  the  southern  plain,  which  had  been  occupied
by  the  impious  cities,  doubled  the  size  of  the  lake,  and  enlarged  it  to  its  present

'  Straeo,  xvi.  3,  §  4,  p.  7G6,  according  to  the  missing  narrative  of  Androsthenes,  one  of
Alexander's  admirals.  A  place  on  tbe  Persian  (rulf  named  Dora  (Stiiabo,  8.  v.)  is  also  mentioned  :
it  was  known  to  Ptolemy  (yi.  7)  by  the  name  of  Tliaro,  Sapti.

'  Jf.-TiNus,  xviii.,  iii.  2-4  :  "  Tyriorum  gens  condita  a  PhojnicibuB  fuit,  qui  terra  motn  vexati  relicto
patria;  solo  ad  Syrium  stagnum  primo,  mox  mari  proximum  litus  iucoluerunt,  condita  ibi  urbe,  qtiam
a  piscium  ubertute  Sidona  appellaverunt ;  nam  pisces  Pbcciiices  siilun  vocunt."  The  ancient  editions
read  "  Assijrium  stagnum  primo,  mox  mari  proximum  litus  incolueruut."

'  6.  Eawlinson,  UeroiL,  vol.  iv.  p.  201,  and  Jlifl.  of  I'Uoeiiicia,  pp.  53,  54,  from  the  reading
"Assyrium."

*  A.  VON  GuTSCHMii),  Beitriirjc  zur  Geschlchtc  dee  Allen  OrienU,  p.  3G,  !iote.  Gutsohmid  afterwards
abandoned  tbis  view  {PJt<i;n'ii-ia,  in  the  Kncyclopaidia  Britannicn,  9th  edit.,  vol.  xviii.  j).  803  B;  cf.
Kleiiie  SchrijttjH,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41,  4'i,  80,  87).

'  They  would  thus  have  arrived  at  the  shores  of  Lake  Merom  (Hitzig,  Urgesch.  dcr  I'liilistieer,
pp.  181-184),  or  at  the  shores  titlier  of  the  Dead  Sea  or  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth  (Kkn'hick,
I'litaiiicia,  II.  47);  the  Arab  traditions  speak  of  an  itinerary  wliicb  would  Lave  led  the  emigrants
across  the  desert  (0.  he  Pkuckvai,,  UMoire  dt-s  Arahes,  vol.  i.  p.  38,  et  seq.),  but  they  possess  no
historic  value  in  so  far  as  these  early  epochs  are  concerned  (Noe.dekk,  Uehcr  die  AmaUkiler,  p.  34).

"  Gt7i.  xix.  24-29 ;  the  whole  of  this  episode  belongs  to  the  Jehovistic  narrative.


64  THE  HTKSOS  IN  EGYPT.

dimensions.'  The  earthquake  which  caused  the  Phcenicians  to  leave  their
ancestral  home  may  have  been  the  result  of  this  cataclysm,  and  the  sea  on
whose  shores  they  sojourned  would  thus  be  our  Dead  Sea.  One  fact,  however,
appears  to  be  certain  in  the  midst  of  many  hypotheses,  and  that  is  that  the
Phcenicians  had  their  origin  in  the  regions  bordering  on  the  Persian  Gulf.^
It  is  useless  to  attempt,  with  the  inadequate  materials  as  yet  in  our  possession,
to  determine  by  what  route  they  reached  the  Syrian  coast,  though  we  may
perhaps  conjecture  the  period  of  their  arrival.  Herodotus  asserts  that  the
'J'yriaus  placed  the  date  of  the  foundation  of  their  principal  temple  two  thou-
sand three  hundred  years  before  the  time  of  his  visit,^  and  the  erection  of  a
sanctuary  for  their  national  deity  would  probably  take  place  very  soon  after
their  settlement  at  Tyre  :  this  would  bring  their  arrival  there  to  about  the
XXVIIP''  century  before  our  era.  The  Elamite  and  Babylonian  conquests
would  therefore  have  found  the  Phcenicians  already  established  in  the  country,
and  would  have  had  appreciable  effect  upon  them.

The  question  now  arises  whether  the  Beni-Israel  belonged  to  the  group  of
tribes  which  included  the  Phoenicians,  or  whether  they  were  of  Chaldasan  race.
Their  national  traditions  leave  no  doubt  upon  that  point.  They  are  regarded
as  belonging  to  an  important  race,  which  we  find  dispersed  over  the  country  of
Padan-Aram,  in  Northern  Mesopotamia,  near  the  base  of  Mount  Masios,  and
extending  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphrates.'*  Their  earliest  chiefs  bore  the  names
of  towns  or  of  peoples, — Nakhor,  Peleg,  and  Serug  :  ^  all  were  descendants  of
Arphaxad,*^  and  it  was  related  that  Terakh,  the  direct  ancestor  of  the  Israelites,
had  dwelt  in  Ur-Kashdim,  the  Ur  or  Uru  of  the  Chaldseans.''     He  is  said  to  have

'  The  tlieory  which  endeavours  to  prove  that  the  southern  part  of  the  Dead  Sea  was  originally  a
plain  covered  with  cities,  has  been  vigorously  opposed  by  Laitet  (.Due  de  Lcynes,  Voyage  d'Explora-
Uon  a  la  mer  Morte,  vol.  iii.  p.  241,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Sayce,  I'atriarchal  Falestiiie,  pp.  177-179).

■-■  This  opinion  was,  I  believe,  first  put  forward  by  Bunsen  (^Y  S(e;/e,  vol.iv.  pp.  291,  292);  at  first
rejected  by  Outschmid  {Oesch.  des  Alteii  Orients,  pp.  26,  27),  was  afterwards  accepted  by  him  (Kleine
t>eliri/t.,\o\.  ii.  pp.  11,42,86,87),  and  from  him  passed  into  Pietschm.\nn,  Ges.  derPltSnizier,  pp.  114-116.

"  Heuodotus,  II.  xliv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann's  commentary  on  Herodols  zweites  Buch,  pp.  207-211.

♦  The  country  of  Padan-Aram  is  situated  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  upper  reaches  of  the
Khabur,  on  both  sides  of  the  Balikh,  and  is  usually  explained  as  the  "  plain  "  or  "  table-land  "  of  Aram,
though  the  etj  mology  is  not  certain  ;  the  word  seems  to  be  preserved  in  that  of  Tell-Faddan,  near  Harran.

^  Nakhor  has  been  associated  with  the  ancient  village  of  Khaura,  or  with  the  ancient  village  of
Haditlia-en-Naura,  to  the  south  of  Anah  ;  Peleg  probably  corresponds  with  Phalga  or  Phaliga,  which
was  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khabur  ;  Serug  with  the  present  Sarudj  in  the  neighbourlicod  of
Edcssa,  aud  the  other  names  in  the  genealogy  were  probably  borrowed  from  as  many  diflereut  localities.

«  The  site  of  Arphaxad  is  doubtful,  as  is  also  its  meaning :  its  second  element  is  undoubtedly  the
name  of  the  Chaldteans,  but  the  first  is  interpreted  in  several  ways—"  frontier  of  the  Cbaldjcans,"
"domain  of  the  Chaldaians."  The  similarity  of  sound  was  the  cause  of  its  being  for  a  long  time
associated  « ith  the  Arrapakhitis  of  classical  times ;  the  tendency  is  now  to  recognise  in  it  the
country  nearest  to  the  ancient  domain  of  the  Chaldajans,  t.e.  Babylonia  proper  (Fk.  Delitzsch,  TIo
lag  das  Paradiesi  pp.  264,  265;  Schradek,  Die  Keitinsclirifteii,  1888,  pp.  112,  113;  Budde,  Die  Bib.
Urgesch.,  p.  444,  note).

■  Ur-Kashdim  has  long  been  sought  for  in  the  north,  either  at  Orfa,  in  accordance  with  the
tradition  of  the  Syrian  Churches  still  existing  in  the  East,  or  in  a  certain  Ur  of  Mesopotamia,  placed
by  Ammiauus  Marcellinus  (xxxv.  8,  7)  between  Nisibis  and  the  Tigris  (cf.  for  a  very  clear  summary
of  these  early  opinions,  ViGOCROUX,  La  Bible  et  les  Difcouverles  modernes,  1884,  vol.  i.  pp.  ."3.")-394);


THE  MIGRATION  OF  TEE  ISRAELITES  FROM  CHALDJEA  INTO  SYRIA.   65

had  three  sons — Abraham,  Nakhor,  and  Haran.  Haran  begat  Lot,  but  died
before  bis  father  in  Ur-Kashdim,  his  own  country  ;  Abraham  and  ISTakhor  both
took  wives,  but  Abraham's  wife  remained  a  long  time  barren.  Then  Terakh,
with  Ills  son  Abraham,  his  grandson  Lot,  tlie  son  of  Haran,  and  his  daughter-
in-hiw  Sarah,'  went  forth  from  Ur-Kashdim  (Ur  of  the  Chaklees)  to  go  into
the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  they  came  unto  Kharan,  and  dwelt  there,  and
Terakh  died  in  Kharan.^  It  is  a  question  whether  Kharan  is  to  be  identified
with  Harran  in  Mesopotamia,  the  city  of  the  god  Siu ;  or,  which  is  more  pro-
bable, with  the  Syrian  town  of  Hauran,^  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Damascus.*
The  tribes  who  crossed  the  Euphrates  became  subsequently  a  somewhat  im-
portant people.  They  called  themselves,  or  were  known  by  others,  as  the  'Ibrim,
or  Hebrews,  the  people  from  beyond  the  river ;''  and  this  appellation,  which  we
are  accustomed  to  apply  to  the  children  of  Israel  only,  embraced  also,  at  the
time  when  the  term  was  most  extended,  the  Ammonites,  Moabites,  Edomites,
Ishiuaelites,  Midianites,  and  many  other  tribes  settled  on  the  borders  of  the
desert  to  the  east  and  south  of  the  Dead  Sea."  These  peoples  all  traced  their
descent  from  Abraham,  the  son  of  Terakh,  but  the  children  of  Israel  claimed  the
privilege  of  being  the  only  legitimate  issue  of  his  marriage  with  Sarah,  giving
naive  or  derogatorv  accounts  of  the  relations  which  connected  the  others  with

iit  the  present  day  Halevy  still  looks  for  it  on  the  Syrian  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  to  the  south-east  of
Thapsacus  (Mdanges  d'Epigraphie  et  d'Arche'ologie  Se'initiques,  p.  84,  and  Mechcrches  Bibliques,  p.  715,
uote  1).  Rawlinson's  proposal  to  identify  it  with  the  town  of  Uru  has  been  successively  accepted  by
nearly  all  Assyriologists  ;  Ijy  Oppert  (Les  Inscriptions  de  Dur-Sarkayau,  in  Place's  Niuive  et  I'Assyrie,
vol.  ii.  p.  289,  note  1),  by  Schrader  (Die  Keilinschri/ten  und  das  alte  Testament,  1872,  pp.  283,  284,  and
latterly  in  the  article,  Ur-Kasdim,  in  the  Handworterhucli  des  Bihlischen  Altertums,  1894,  pp.  1729,
1730).  Sayce  remarks  that  the  worship  of  Sin,  which  was  common  to  both  towns,  established  a
natural  link  between  them,  and  that  an  inhabitant  of  Uru  would  have  felt  more  at  home  in  Harran
than  in  any  other  town  {Tlce  Higher  Criticism  and  the  Verdict  of  the  Monuments,  3rd  edit.,  p.  159,
and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  16tJ,  167).

'  The  names  of  Sarah  and  Abraham,  or  rather  the  earlier  form,  Abram,  have  been  found,  the
latter  under  the  form  Abiramu,  iu  the  contracts  of  the  first  Chaldsean  empire  (Halevy,  liecherches
Bibliques,  p.  270 ;  Sayce,  The  Higher  Criticism,  etc.,  p.  159).  For  the  explanation  of  Sara  in  Chaldsean
use,  cf  Meissner,  Beitriige  zum  althabylonischen  Privatrecht,  p.  213.

'  Gen.  xi.  27-32.  In  the  opiuion  of  most  critics,  verses  27,  31,  32  form  part  of  the  document
which  was  the  basis  of  the  various  narratives  still  traceable  in  the  Bible  ;  it  is  thought  that  the
remaining  verses  bear  the  marks  of  a  later  redaction,  or  that  they  may  be  additions  of  a  later  date.
The  most  important  part  of  the  text,  that  relating  the  migration  from  Ur-Kashdim  to  Kharan,
belongs,  therefore,  to  tlie  very  oldest  part  of  the  national  tradition,  and  may  be  regarded  as  expressing
the  knowledge  which  the  Hebrews  of  later  times  possessed  concerning  the  origin  of  their  race.

'  Kenan,  Histoire  du  Peuple  d'lsruel,  vol.  i.  pp.  91,  92,  where  the  name  of  Terakh  is  compared
with  that  of  Trachonitis,  and  the  Biblical  Kharan  identified  with  the  modern  Haurau.

*  Halevy,  Mdanges  d'Epigraphie  et  d' Archgologie  S^mitiques,  pp.  82-81,  where  Kharan  is  con-
nected with  Spelunca,  a  Roman  station  iu  Central  Syria;  cf.  liecherches  Bibliques,  715,  uote  1.

'  The  most  ancient  interpretation  identified  this  numeless  river  with  the  Euphrates ;  an  identifi-
cation still  admitted  by  most  critics  (Buijde,  Die  Biblische  Urgeschichte,  p.  505,  note  1  ;  Kenan,
Histoire  du  Peuple  d'Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  91);  others  i)refer  to  recognise  it  as  being  the  Jordan  (Ed.
Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Allerthums,  vol.  i.  p.  215;  Stade,  Geechichte  dvs  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  110,
113).  Halevy  (Melanges  d'Jipigraphie,  etc.,  p.  81)  prefers  to  identify  it  with  one  Of  the  rivers  of
Damascus,  probably  the  .\bana  (cf.  p.  8  of  the  present  volume).

"  For  the  way  iu  which  Hebrew  hiatorians  have  taken  cognisance  of  the  relationship  which  con-
nected them  with  neighbouring  peoples,  cf.  Wellhausen,  Prolegomena  zur  Geeeh.  Israels,  p.  336,  sen.

F


(56  THE  HYKSOS   IN  EGYPT.

their  common  ancestor ;  Ammon  and  Bloab  were,  for  instance,  the  issue  of  the
incestuous  union  of  Lot  and  his  daughters.^  Midian  and  his  sous  were  descended
from  Keturah,  who  was  merely  a  second  wife,'-^  Ishmael  was  the  son  of  an  Egyptian
slave/  while  the  "  hairy"  Esau  had  sold  his  birthright  and  the  primacy  of  the
Edomites  to  his  brother  Jacob,  and  consequently  to  the  Israelites,  for  a  dish  of
lentils.*  Abraham  left  Kharan  at  the  command  of  Jahveh,  his  God,  receiving
from  Him  a  promise  that  his  posterity  should  be  blessed  above  all  others.
Abraham  pursued  his  way  into  the  heart  of  Canaan  till  he  reached  Shechem,  and
there,  under  the  oaks  of  Moreh,  Jahveh,  appearing  to  him  a  second  time,
announced  to  him  that  He  would  give  the  whole  land  to  his  posterity  as  an
inheritance.  Abraham  virtually  took  possession  of  it,  and  wandered  over  it
with  his  flocks,  building  altars  at  Shechem,  Bethel,  and  Mamre,'  the  places  where
God  had  revealed  Himself  to  him,  treating  as  his  equals  the  native  chiefs,
Abimelech  of  Gerar  and  Melchizedek  of  Jerusalem,^  and  granting  the  valley
of  the  Jordan  as  a  place  of  pasturage  to  his  nephew  Lot,  whose  flocks  had
increased  immensely^  His  nomadic  instinct  having  led  him  into  Egypt,  he
was  here  robbed  of  his  wife  by  Pharaoh."  On  his  return  he  purchased  the
field  of  Ephron,  near  Kirjath-Arba,  and  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  of  which  he  made
a  burying-place  for  his  family.^   Kirjath-Arba,  the  Hebron  of  subsequent  times,

'  Gen.  xix.  30-38.  For  the  origin  of  this  account,  cf.  Eeuss,  L'Eist.  Sainte  el  la  Lot,  vol.  i.  p.  363,
n.  3  :  it  appears  from  the  passage  in  Deut.  ii.  9, 19,  whicli  speaks  of  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  that
the  writer  did  not  then  know  of  this  tradition,  or  did  not  choose  to  take  it  into  consideration,  and  con-
fined himself  to  stating  the  descent  of  the  two  peoples  without  connecting  it  with  any  incestuous  origin .

^  Gen.  sxv.  1-6.  Other  Hebrew  documents  prefer  to  classify  the  Midianites  among  the  descendants
of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxxvii.  25,  27,  28;  Judges  viii.24).

'  Gen.  xvi.,  xxi.  9-21,  xxv.  12-18,  where  we  have  two  different  forms  of  the  narrative,  the  first
Jehovistic  (ch.  xvi.),  the  second  Elohistic  (xxi.  9-21);  cf.  Keuss,  L'Sistoire  Sainte  et  la  Lot,  vol.  i.
p.  127,  note  78,  for  the  comparison  of  the  two  versions.

*  Gen.  xxvii.  For  Wellhausen's  theory  of  the  probable  date  of  this  episode,  cf.  his  Prolegomena
zur  Gesehichte  Israels,  p.  328,  et  seq.

*  Gen.  xii.  1-4,  6-8.  The  mention  of  these  three  places  would  indicate,  as  far  as  the  redaction  is
concerned,  that  it  was  made  at  a  period  anterior  to  that  when  all  other  localities  for  worship  except
the  temple  at  Jerusalem  were  proscribed  by  the  law.

"  Cf.  the  meeting  with  Melchizedek  after  the  victory  over  the  Elamites  (Gen.  xiv.  18-20)  and  the
agreement  with  Abimelech  about  the  well  (^Gen.  xxi.  22-34).  The  mention  of  the  covenant  of
Abraham  with  Abimelech  belongs  to  the  oldest  part  of  the  national  tradition,  and  is  given  to  us  in  the
Jehovistic  narrative  (Keuss,  L'Histoire  Sainte  et  la  Loi,  vol.  i.  pp.  368,  369).  Many  critics  have
questioned  the  historical  existence  of  Melchizedek,  and  believed  that  the  passage  in  which  he  is
mentioned  is  merely  a  kind  of  parable  intended  to  show  the  head  of  the  race  paying  tithe  of  the  spoil  to
the  priest  of  the  supreme  God  residing  at  Jerusalem  (Reuss,  L'Histoire  Sainte  et  la  Loi,  vol.  i.  p.  349) ;
the  information,  however,  furnished  by  the  Tel-el-Amarua  tablets  about  the  ancient  city  of  Jerusalem
(ZniMEKN,  Die  Kcilschriflhriefe  aus  Jerusalem,  in  the  Zeitschri/t/iir  Assijriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  245-263)  and
the  character  of  its  early  kings  have  determined  Say  ce  to  pronounce  Melcliizedek  to  be  an  historical  per-
sonage (TAe  Higher  Criticism  and  the  Monuments,  pp.  174-178,  and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  p.  71,  et  seq.).

'  Geif.  xiii.  1-13.  Lot  has  been  sometimes  connected  of  late  with  the  people  called  on  the  Egyptian
monuments  Rotanu,  or  Lotanu,  whom  we  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  frequently  further  on  :  he
is  supposed  to  have  been  their  eponymous  hero  (Ren.\n,  Histoire  du  Peuple  Hebreu,  vol.  i.  pp.  12, 115).
Lotan,  which  is  the  name  of  an  Edomite  clan  (^Gen.  xxxvi.  20,  29),  is  a  racial  adjective,  derived  from
Lot  (Stade,  Gesehichte  des  Volkes  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  118,  119).

*  Gen.  xii.  9-20,  xiii.  1.  Abraham's  visit  to  Egypt  reproduces  the  principal  events  of  that  of
Jacob  (Reuss,  L'Histoire  Sainte  et  la  Loi,  vol.  i.  p.  342,  note  5).

'  Gen.  xiii.  18,  xxiii.  (Elohistic  narrative).     The  tombs  of  the  patriarchs  are  believed  by  the


ABRAHAM   TX    THE  LAXD    OF   CANAAN.


(i7


THE   TRADITIONAL    OAK   OF    ABRAHAM    AT    HEBKON


became  from  henceforward  his  favourite  dwelliug-place,  and  he  was  residing
there  when  the  Elamites  invaded  the  valley  of  Siddim,-  and  carried
off  Lot  among  their  prisoners.  Abraham  set  out  in  pursuit  of  them,  and
succeeded  in  delivering  his  nephew/'  God  (Jahveh)  not  only  favoured  him  on
every  occasion,  but  expressed  His  will  to  extend  over  Abraham's  descendants
His  sheltering  protection.  He  made  a  covenant  with  him,  enjoining  the  use
on  the  occasion  of  the  mysterious  rites  employed  among  the  nations  when  effect-
ing a  treaty  of  peace.  Abraham  offered  up  as  victims  a  heifer,  a  goat,  and  a
three-year-old  ram,  together  with  a  turtle-dove  and  a  young  pigeon  ;  he  cut
the  animals  into  pieces,  and  piling  them  in  two  heaps,  waited  till  the  evening.
"  And  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  Abraham  ;  and  lo,  an
horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him,"  and  a  voice  from  on  high  said  to  him  :
"  Know  of  a  surety  tliat  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  theirs,
and  shall  serve  them ;  and  they  sliiill  afflict  them  four  hundred  years  ;  aud  also
that  nation,  whom  they  shall  serve,  will  I  judge  :  and  afterward  shall  they  come
out  with  great  substance.  ...  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  the  sun  went
down,  and  it  was  dark,  behold  a  smoking  furnace,  and  a  burning  lamp  tliat  passed
between  those  pieces."  Jahveh  sealed  the  covenant  by  consuming  the  offering.^
Two  less  important  figures  fill  the  interval  between  the  Divine  prediction  of

Moliammedans  to  exiat  to  the  present  day  iu  the  cave  which  is  situated  witliiu  tlio  enclosure  ol'  tlie
mosque  at  Hebron,  and  the  tradition  on  wliieh  tliis  belief  is  based  goes  back  to  early  Christian  times;
ef.  ViGOUKOUx,  La  Bible  ei  h:s  D&ouverles  vwdernes,  1884,  vol.  i.  pp.  ."irZ-SlS,  where  we  find  summed
up  the  results  of  the  most  recent  reseaielios  ou  tlio  subject.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograph  brought  homo  by  Lortet.

'  On  the  subject  of  tliis  invasion,  cf.  pp.  47,  48  of  the  present  worl%.

'  Gen.  xiv.  12-24.

'  Gen.  XV.,  Jehovibtio  narrative.


68  THE  BYKS08   IN  EGYPT.

servitude  and  its  accomplishment.    The  birth  of  one  of  them,  Isaac,  was  ascribed
to  the  Divine  intervention  at  a  period  when  Sarah  had  given  up  all  hope  of  be-
coming a  mother.   Abraham  was  sitting  at  his  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day,
when  three  men  presented  themselves  before  him,  whom  he  invited  to  repose
under  the  oak  while  he  prepared  to  offer  them  hospitality.     After  their  meal,
he  who  seemed  to  be  the  chief  of  the  three  promised  to  return  within  a  year,
when  Sarah  should  be  blessed  with  the  possession  of  a  son.     The  announce-
ment came  from  Jahveh,  but  Sarah  was  ignorant  of  the  fact,  and  laughed  to
herself  within  the  tent  on  hearing  this  amazing  prediction ;  for  she  said, "  After
I  am  waxed  old  shall  I  have  pleasure,  my  lord  being  old  also  ?  "     The  child
was  born,  however,  and  was  called  Isaac,  "  the  laugher,"  in  remembrance  of
Sarah's  mocking  laugh.^     There  is  a  remarkable  resemblance  between  his  life
and  that  of  his  father.'^     Like  Abraham  he  dwelt  near  Hebron,"  and  departing
thence  wandered  with  his  household  round  the  wells  of  Beersheba.    Like  him  he
was  threatened  with  the  loss  of  his  wife ;  like  him,  also,  he  renewed  relations
with  Abimelech  of  Gerar.*   He  married  his  relative  Kebecca,  the  granddaughter
of  Nakhor  and  tlie  sister  of  Laban.^     After  twenty  years  of  barrenness,  his
wife  gave  birth  to  twins,  Esau  and  Jacob,  who  contended  with  each  other  from
their  mother's  womb,  and  whose  descendants  kept  up  a  perpetual  feud."     We
know  how  Esau,  under   the   influence  of  his   appetite,  deprived   himself  of
the  privileges  of  his  birthright,  and  subsequently  went  forth  to  become  the
founder  of  the  Edomites.''     Jacob  spent  a  portion  of  his  youth  in  Padan-Aram  ;
here  he  served  Laban  for  the  hands  of  his  cousins  Kachel  and  Leah ;  then,
owing  to  the  bad  faith  of  his  uncle,  he  left  him  secretly,  after  twenty  years'
service    takiu"  with   him   his  wives   and   innumerable  flocks.^     At   first   he
wandered  aimlessly  along  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan,  where  Jahveh  re-
vealed Himself  to  him  in  his  troubles.     Laban  pursued  and  overtook  him,  and,
acknowledging  his  own  injustice,  pardoned  him  for  having  taken  flight.    Jacob

'  Gen.  xviii.  1-16,  according  to  the  Jeliovistic  narrative.  Gen.  xvii.  15-22  gives  another  account,
in  -which  the  Elohistic  writer  predicts  tlie  birth  of  Isaac  in  a  difl'erent  way.  The  name  of  Isaac,  "  the
laugher,"  possibly  abridged  from  Isaak-cl,  "  he  on  wlioui  God  smiles  "  (Renan,  Uistoire  du  I'euple
Israiil  vol.  i.  p.  107),  is  explained  in  three  different  ways:  first,  by  the  laugh  of  Abraham  (ch.  xvii.
17);  secondly,  by  that  of  Sarah  (xviii.  12)  when  her  son's  birth  was  foretold  to  her ;  and  lastly,  by
the  laughter  of  those  who  made  sport  of  the  delayed  maternity  of  Sarah  (xxi.  G).

=  Many  critics  see  in  the  life  of  Isaac  a  colourless  copy  of  that  of  Abraham,  while  others,  on  the
contrary,  consider  that  the  primitive  episodes  belonged  to  the  former,  and  that  the  parallel  portions  of
the  two  lives  were  borrowed  from  tlie  biography  of  the  sou  to  augment  that  of  his  father  (Well-
HAtiSEN,  Prolegomena  zur  Geschichte  Israels,  p.  338).

5  Gen.  XXXV.  27.,  Elohistic  narrative.

*  Gen.  xxvi.  1-31,  Jeliovistic  narrative.  In  Geu.  xxv.  11  an  Elohistic  interpolation  makes  Isaac
also  dwell  in  the  south,  near  to  the  "  Well  of  the  Living  One  Who  eeeth  me."

'  Gen.  xxiv.,  where  two  narratives  appear  to  have  been  amalgamated ;  in  the  second  of  these,
Abraham  seems  to  have  played  no  part,  and  Eliezer  apparently  conducted  Rebecca  direct  to  her
husband  Isaac  (vers.  61-67).

«  Gen.  xxv.  20-26.

'  Gen.  xxv.  29-31 ;  cf.  what  is  said  of  this  descent  on  pp.  65,  66  of  the  present  volume.

«  Gen.  xxvii.  41-46,  xxviii.,  xxxi ,  xxxii.  1.


ISAAC,   JACOB,    AND   JOSEPH.  69

raised  a  heap  of  stones  on  the  site  of  their  encounter,  known  at  i\Iizpah  to
after-ages  as  the  "  Stone  of  Witness  " — Gal-Ed  (Galeed).'  This  having  been
accomplished,  his  difficulties  began  with  his  brother  Esau,  who  bore  him  no
good  will.  One  night,  at  the  ford  of  the  Jabbok,  when  he  had  fallen  behind
his  companions,  "there  wrestled  a  man  with  him  until  the  breaking  of  the  day,"
without  prevailing  against  him.  Tiie  stranger  endeavoured  to  escape  before  day-
break, but  only  succeeded  in  doing  so  at  the  cost  of  giving  Jacob  his  blessing.
"  What  is  thy  name  ?  And  he  said,  Jacob.  And  he  said,  Thy  name  shall  be
called  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel :  for  thou  hast  striven  with  God  and  with  men,
and  hast  prevailed."  Jacob  called  the  place  Peniel,  "for,"  said  he,  "I  have
seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  preserved."  The  hollow  of  his  thigh  was
"  strained  as  he  wrestled  with  him,"  and  he  became  permanently  lame.'-  Im-
mediately after  the  struggle  he  met  Esau,  and  endeavoured  to  appease
him  by  his  humility,  building  a  house  for  him,  and  providing  booths  for  his
cattle,  so  as  to  secure  for  his  descendants  the  possession  of  the  land.  From
this  circumstance  the  place  received  the  name  of  Succoth — the  "  Booths  " — by
which  appellation  it  was  henceforth  known.^  Another  locality  where  Jahveh
had  met  Jacob  while  he  was  pitching  his  tents,  derived  from  this  fact  the
designation  of  the  "Two  Hosts" — Mahanaim.*  On  the  other  side  of  the  river,
at  Shechera,^  at  Bethel,^  and  at  Hebron,  near  to  the  burial-place  of  his  family,'^
traces  of  him  are  everywhere  to  be  found  blent  with  those  of  Abraham.  By
his  two  wives  and  their  maids  he  had  twelve  sons.  Leah  was  the  mother  of
Eeuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  and  Zabulon ;  Gad  and  Asher  were
the  children  of  his  slave  Zilpah ;  while  Joseph  and  Benjamin  were  the  only
sons  of  Eachel — Dan  and  Naphtali^  being  the  offspring  of  her  servant  Bilhah.
The  preference  which  his  father  showed  to  him  caused  Joseph  to  be  hated
by  his  brothers;  they  sold  him  to  a  caravan  of  Midiauites  on  their  way  to
Egypt,  and  persuaded  Jacob  tliat  a  wild  beast  had  devoured  him.  Jahveh
was,  however,  with  Joseph,  and  "  made  all  that  he  did  to  prosper  in  his  hand."

'  Gen.  xxxi.  45-54,  where  the  writer  evidently  traces  the  origin  of  the  word  Gilead  to  Gal-Ed.
We  gather  from  the  context  that  the  narrative  was  conuecled  with  the  cairu  at  Mizpah  which
separated  the  Hebrew  from  tlie  Aramueaa  speaking  jiuoples.

'  Geii.  xxxii.  2'2-32.  This  is  tlie  account  of  the  Jehovistic  writer.  The  Eloliist  gives  a  difFereut
version  of  the  circumstances  which  led  to  tlic  change  of  name  from  Jacob  to  Israel ;  he  places  the
scene  at  Bethel,  and  suggests  no  precise  etymology  for  the  name  Israel  (Gen.  xxxv.  9-15).

'  Gen.  xxxiii.  1-17.  [The  Hebrew  states  that  .lacob  built  the  house,  etc.,  for  liimself  and  not  for
Ksau. — Ed.]

*  Gen.  xxxii.  2,  3,  where  the  theophauy  is  indicated  rather  than  directly  stated.

'  Gen.  xxxiii.  18-20.  Here  should  be  placed  the  episode  of  Dinah  seduced  by  an  Amorito  prince,
and  the  consequent  massacre  of  the  inhabitants  by  Simeon  and  Levi  (Gen.  xxxiv.).  The  almost  com-
plete dispersion  of  the  two  tribes  of  Simeon  and  Levi  is  attributed  to  this  massacre  ;  ef.  Gen.  xli.^.  5-7-

'  Gen.  xxxv.  l-l.o,  where  is  found  the  Elohiatic  version  (9-15)  of  the  circumstuuces  which  led
to  the  change  of  name  from  Jacob  lo  Israel.

■   Gen.  xxxv.  27-29.

'  The  enumeration  of  all  the  sons  is  given  in  Gen.  xxxv.  2:j-26;  the  details  of  the  births  of  the
children  of  Leah  are  found  in  Gen.  xxix.  ;{l-35,  xxx.  14-21  ;  those  of  the  children  of  Uachel  in  Gen.
XXX.  22-24,  xxxv.  lG-19  ;  and  those  of  the  cliildreu  of  Bilhah  and  Zilpah  in  Gen.  xxx.  1-13.


70  THE  EYKSdS   IN  EGYPT.

He  was  bought  by  Potiphar,  a  great  Egyptian  lord  and  captain  of  Pharaoli's
guard,  wlio  made  him  liis  overseer ;  his  master's  wife,  however,  "  cast  her  eyes
upon  Joseph,"  but  finding  that  he  rejected  her  shameless  advances,  she  accused
him  of  having  offered  violence  to  her  person.'  Being  cast  into  prison,  he
astonished  his  companions  in  misfortune  by  his  skill  in  reading  dreams,  and
was  summoned  to  Court  to  interpret  to  the  king  his  dream  of  the  seven  lean
kine  who  had  devoured  the  seven  fat  kine,  which  he  did  by  representing  the
latter  as  seven  years  of  abundance,  of  which  the  crops  should  be  swallowed  up
by  seven  years  of  famine.  Joseph  was  thereupon  raised  by  Pharaoh  to  the  rank
of  prime  minister.  He  stored  up  the  surplus  of  the  abundant  harvests,  and
as  soon  as  the  famine  broke  out,  distributed  the  corn  to  the  hunger-stricken
people  in  exchange  for  their  silver  and  gold,  and  for  their  flocks  and  fields.
Hence  it  was  that  the  whole  of  the  Nile  valley,  with  the  exception  of  the
lands  belonging  to  the  priests,  gradually  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  royal
treasury.  Meanwhile  his  brethren,  who  also  suffered  from  the  famine,  came
down  into  Egypt  to  buy  corn.  Joseph  revealed  himself  to  them,  pardoned  the
wrong  tliey  had  done  him,  and  presented  them  to  the  Pharaoh.  "  And  Pharaoh
said  unto  Joseph,  Say  unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye ;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,
get  you  unto  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  take  your  father  and  your  household,
and  come  unto  me :  and  I  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  ye
shall  eat  the  fat  of  the  land."  Jacob  thereupon  raised  his  camp  and  came  to
Beersheba,  where  he  offered  sacrifices  to  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac ;  and
Jahveh  commanded  him  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  saying,  "  I  will  there  make
of  thee  a  great  nation :  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  Egypt :  and  I  will  also
surely  bring  thee  up  again :  and  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes."
The  whole  family  were  installed  by  Pharaoh  in  the  province  of  Goshen,  as  far
as  possible  from  the  centres  of  the  native  population,  "  for  every  shejiherd  is
an  abomination  unto  the  Egyptians."  ^

In  the  midst  of  these  stern  yet  touching  narratives  in  which  the  Hebrews  of
later  times  delighted  to  trace  the  history  of  their  remote  ancestors,  one  im-
portant fact  arrests  our  attention :  the  Beni-Israel  quitted  Southern  Syria  and
settled  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  They  had  remained  for  a  considerable  time
in  what  was  known  later  as  the  mountains  of  Judah.  Hebron  had  served  as
their  rallying-point;  the  broad  but  scantily  watered  wadys  separating  the  cul-
tivated lands  from  the  desert,  were  to  them  a  patrimony,  which  they  siiared

'  For  the  resemblance  which  has  been  remarked  between  this  episode  and  a  passage  in  the  "  Tale
of  the  Two  Brothers,"  where  the  wife  of  Anupu  endeavours  to  corrupt  her  young  brother-in-law
Biliii,  but  iinds  that  he  repulses  her  advances,  cf.  Ebeks,  JEgypten  und  die  Biicher  Moses,  pp.  314,
315;  and  Maspero,  Les  contes  j'opulaires  de  V£gijpte  Ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  xii.-xiv.

-  The  history  of  Joseph  is  contained  in  Gen.  xxxvii.,  xxxix.-xlvi.  The  commentary  of  Vigourocx,
La  Bihle  et  les  D^couvertes  modernes,\ol.  ii.  pp.  1-227,  and  that  of  Brl'gsch,  Sd/nsc/in/t  «"d  Bibelwort,
pp.  77-103,  give  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  orthodox  commentators  and  Egyptologists  can  defend
the  authenticity  of  the  narrative  by  references  to  tlie  ancient  monuments.


THE  BENI-ISRAEL   AND    THE  LAND    OF  GOSHEN.  71

uitli  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  towns.  Every  year,  in  the  spring,
they  led  their  flocks  to  browse  on  the  thin  herbage  growing  in  the  bottoms  of
the  valleys,  removing  them  to  another  district  only  when  the  supply  of  fodder
was  exhausted.  The  women  span,  wove,  fashioned  garments,  baked  bread,
cooked  the  viands,  and  devoted  themselves  to  the  care  of  the  younger  cliildren,
whom  they  suckled  beyond  the  usual  period.  The  men  lived  like  the  Bedouin  —
periods  of  activity  alternating  regularly  with  times  of  idleness,  and  the  daily
routine,  with  its  simple  duties  and  casual  work,  often  gave  place  to  quarrels
for  the  possession  of  some  rich  pasturage  or  some  never-failing  well.^

A  comparatively  ancient  tradition  relates  that  the  Hebrews  arrived  in
Egypt  during  the  reign  of  Aphobis,  a  Hyksos  king,  doubtless  one  of  the  Apopi,
and  possibly  the  monarch  who  restored  the  monuments  of  the  Theban  Pharaohs,
and  engraved  his  name  on  the  sphinxes  of  Amenemhait  III.  and  on  the  colossi
of  Mirmashaii.'^  The  land  which  the  Hebrews  obtained  is  that  which,  down  to
tlie  present  day,  is  most  frequently  visited  by  uomads,  who  find  there  an  uncertain
hospitality.  The  tribes  of  the  isthmus  of  Suez  are  now,  in  fact,  constantly
shifting  from  one  continent  to  another,  and  their  encampments  in  any
place  are  merely  temporary.  The  lord  of  the  soil  must,  if  he  desire  to  keep
them  within  his  borders,  treat  them  with  the  greatest  prudence  and  tact.
Should  the  government  displease  them  in  any  way,  or  appear  to  curtail  their
liberty,  they  pack  up  their  tents  and  take  flight  into  the  desert.  The  district
occupied  by  them  one  day  is  on  the  next  vacated  and  left  to  desolation.^
Probably  the  same  state  of  things  existed  in  ancient  times,  and  the  border
uomes  on  the  east  of  the  Delta  were  in  turn  inhabited  or  deserted  by  the
Bedouin  of  the  period.  The  towns  were  few  in  number,  but  a  series  of  forts
protected  the  frontier.  These  were  mere  village-strongholds  jjerched  on  the
summit  of  some  eminence,  and  surrounded  by  a  strij)  of  cornland.  Beyond  the
frontier  extended  a  region  of  bare  rock,  or  a  wide  plain  saturated  with  the  ill-
regulated  surplus  water  of  the  iniuidation.     The  land  of  Goshen  was  bounded  by

'  Compare  tlie  picture  of  the  Semitic  nomads  traced  by  Renan,  llieluire  du  Peuple  d' Israel,  vol.  i.
pp.  13-25,  with  that  of  tlie  Bedouin  furnished  by  the  Memoirs  of  Sinuhit  {c{.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civiliza-
iion,  pp.  471-473)  ;  the  narrative  of  Genesis  bears  witness  to  a  state  of  things  analogous  to  that
revealed  by  the  Egyptian  text  as  existing  in  the  age  of  the  XII"'  and  XIII"*  ilyuasties.

'  The  year  XVII.  of  Apophis  has  been  pointed  out  as  the  date  of  their  arrival  (QeorgiusSyncellus,
Chronoyraphy,  Dindorf's  edit.,  p.  201),  and  this  combination,  probably  proposed  by  some  learned  Jew
of  Alexandria,  was  adopted  l)y  Christian  chroniclers.  It  is  unsupported  by  any  fact  of  Egyptian
history,  but  it  rests  on  a  series  of  calculations  founded  on  the  information  contained  in  the  Bible.
.Starting  from  the  assumption  that  the  Exodus  must  have  taken  place  under  Ahmosis,  and  that  the
children  of  Israel  had  been  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  it  was  found  that
the  beginning  of  their  sojourn  fell  under  the  reign  of  the  Apophis  mentioned  by  Josephus,  and,  to
be  still  more  correct,  in  the  XVII"'  year  of  that  prince  (Ermax,  Zur  Clironolorjie  der  Uyhsof,  iu  the
ZeitscUrift,  1880,  pp.  125-127).

'  In  the  last  century,  and  even  in  our  own  times,  we  have  examples  of  several  migrations  of  tribes
established  on  the  istlimus  in  the  eastern  districts  of  tlie  Delta,  who  passed  from  Egypt  into  Syria  or
from  Syria  into  Egypt,  to  escape  the  exactions  of  Egyptian  or  Turkish  governors.


72  THE    HTKSdS   IS'  EGYPT.

the  cities  of  Heliopolis  ou  the  soutli,  Bubastis  on  the  west,  aud  Tanis  and  Mendes
on  the  north:  the  garrison  at  Avaris  could  easily  keep  watch  over  it  and  maintain
order  within  it,  while  they  could  at  the  same  time  defend  it  from  the  incursions
of  the  Monatiu  and  the  Hiru-Shaitu.^  The  Beni-Israel  throve  in  these  sur-
roundings so  well  adapted  to  their  traditional  tastes.  Even  if  their  subsequent
importance  as  a  nation  has  been  over-estimated,  they  did  not  at  least  share
the  fate  of  many  foreign  tribes,  who,  when  transplanted  into  Egypt,  waned
and  died  out,  or,  at  the  end  of  two  or  three  generations,  became  merged  in
the  native  population.^  In  pursuing  their  calling  as  shepherds,  almost  within
sight  of  the  rich  cities  of  the  Nile  valley,  they  never  forsook  the  God  of
their  fathers  to  bow  down  before  the  Enneads  or  Triads  of  Egypt ;  whether
He  was  already  known  to  them  as  Jahveh,  or  was  worshipped  under  the
collective  name  of  Elohim,  they  served  Him  with  almost  unbroken  fidelity
even  in  the  presence  of  Ea  and  Osiris,  of  Phtah  and  Siitkhii.^

The  Hyksos  conquest  had  not  in  any  way  modified  the  feudal  system  of
the  country.*  The  Shepherd-kings  must  have  inherited  the  royal  domain  just
as  they  found  it  at  the  close  of  the  XIY'"  dynasty,  but  doubtless  the  whole
Delta,  from  Avaris  to  Sais,  and  from  Memphis  to  Bute,  was  their  personal
appanage.^  Their  direct  authority  probably  extended  no  further  south  than
the  pyramids,  and  their  supremacy  over   the   fiefs  of  the  Said  was  at  best

'  The  limits  of  the  laud  of  Goshen  are  not  clearly  defined :  I  have  adopted  those  indicated  by
Ebeks,  Durch  Gosen  zum  Siitai,  pp.  73,  74,  488-513,  and  Naville,  Goshen  and  the  Shrine  of  Soft  el
Henneh,  pp.  14-20;  also  Brugsch,  Steininsclirift  and  Bibelwort.  pp.  116,  117.  Goshen  comprised  the
provinces  situated  on  the  borders  of  the  cultivable  coruland,  and  watered  by  the  infiltration  of  the
NUe,  which  caused  the  growth  of  a  vegetation  suflncient  to  support  the  flocks  during  a  few  weeks  ;  and
it  may  also  have  included  the  imperfectly  irrigated  provinces  which  were  covered  with  pools  and  reedy
swamps  after  each  inundation ;  cf.  the  description  of  the  districts  frequented  by  the  Bedouin  in  Josiabd,
Observations  sur  Us  Arabes  de  I'Egypte  Moyenne,  iu  the  Description  de  VEgypte,  vol.  xii.  pp.  310,  311.

'  We  are  told  that  when  the  Hebrews  left  Kamses,  they  were  "  about  six  hundred  thousand  ou
foot  that  were  men,  beside  children.  And  a  mixed  multitude  went  up  also  with  them ;  aud  flocks
and  herds,  even  very  much  cattle"  (Exod.  xii.  37,  38).

"  Kenan,  Histoire  du  Peuple  d'Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  142-153,  where  exception  must  be  taken  to  what
the  author  says  with  regard  to  the  pernicious  influence  of  Egypt.  If  any  Egyptian  influence  took
effect,  it  is  impossible  to  say  at  the  present  time  whether  it  were  good  or  bad ;  every  definite  trace
of  it  has  disappeared  from  the  Biblical  narrative.

'  This  is  evident  from  the  very  passage  iu  which  Manetho  describes  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos  :
Mera  raira  Se  tCiv  ix  tT]s  07)floiSos  koL  tt)s  SAAtjs  AiyinrTov  jSairiAe'uJV  yiyfuBai  (priirlv  e'lrl  ravs  noi/iii/as
iTTavitnaaw  (MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragmeitta  Historicorutn  Grxcorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  567).  Hence  the  docu-
ment of  which  Manetho  made  use  inferred  that  not  only  the  Theban  princes  but  those  of  the  whole
of  Egypt  were  subject  to  the  Shepherds,  since  it  describes  them  as  rebelling  against  their  masters.

'  The  monuments  found  at  Tanis  and  Bubastis  (cf.  pp.  58,  59  of  the  present  work)  sufliciently
prove  that  the  eastern  part  of  the  Delta  was  under  the  immediate  authority  of  the  Shepherd-kings.
As  for  the  remainder  of  the  country,  there  is  adequate  proof  aflbrded  by  a  passage  of  the  inscription
in  the  Stahl-Antar,  iu  which  Queen  Hatshopsitu  relates  that  she  "raised  up  the  monuments
destroyed  in  the  times  when  the  Amilii  reigned  over  the  country  of  the  north  "  (Golenischeff,  Notice
sur  un  Texte  hi^roghjphique  du  Stabl-Antar,  iu  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2,  3).  The  fra^'-
meut  of  the  text  in  which  Minephtah  speaks  "  of  the  kings  of  Lower  Egypt  who  possessed  the  whole
land"  (DiiMiCHEN,  Historische  Inschri/teu,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,  11.  39,  40;  Mamette,  Karnak,  pi.  53,  II.  39,
40)  refers  to  the  same  period,  but  it  recalls  the  fact  of  their  suzerainty  over  the  entire  valley  (E.  de
ROOGE,  M^nioire  sur  les  Attaques  dirige'es  contre  VEgypte  par  les  peuples  Je  la  Mer,  p.  7).


THEBES   BEVOLTS   AGAINST   THE   IIYKSOS.  73

precarious.     The  turbulent  lords  wlio  shared  among  them  the  possession  of  the
valley  had  never  lost  their  proud  or  rebellious  spirit,  and  under  the  foreign  as
under  the  native  Pharaohs  regulated  their  obedience  to  their  ruler  by  the  energy
he  displayed,  or  by  their  regard  for  the  resoux-ces  at  his  disposal.     Thebes  had
never  completely  lost  the  ascendency  which  it  obtained  over  them  at  the  fall  of
the  Memphite  dynasty.     The  accession  of  the  Xoite  dynasty,  and  the  arrival  of
the  Shepherd-kings,  in  relegating  Thebes  unceremoniously  to  a  second  rank,  had
not  discouraged  it,  or  lowered  its  royal  prestige  in  its  own  eyes  or  in  those  of
others :  the  lords  of  the  south  instinctively  rallied  around  it,  as  around  their
natural  citadel,  and  their  resources,  combined  with  its  own,  rendered  it  as
formidable  a  power  as  that  of  the  masters  of  the  Delta.     If  we  had  fuller
information  as  to  the  history  of  this  period,  we  should  doubtless  see  that  the
various  Theban  princes  took  occasion,  as  in  the  Heracleopolitan  epoch,  to  pick
a  quarrel  with  their  sovereign  lord,  and  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  dis-
couraged by  any  check.^     The  centuries  of  rule  attributed  by  the  chronicles
to  the  Hyksos  of  the  XVI"'  dynasty  were  not  probably,  as  far  as  they  were
concerned,   years   of    perfect  tranquillity,   or   of  undisputed   authority.      In
inscribing  their   sole  names  on  the  lists,   the  compilers  denoted  merely  the
shorter  or  longer  period  during  which  their  Theban  vassals  ^  failed  in  their
rebellious  efforts,  and  did  not  dare  to  assume  openly  the  title  or  ensigns  of
royalty.     A  certain  Apophis,  probably  the  same  who  took  the  praenomen  of
Aqniinri,  was  reigning   at  Tanis   when   the   decisive   revolt   broke   out,   and
Saqnunri  Tiuaa  I.,  who  was  the  leader  on  the  occasion,  had  no  other  title  of
authority   over   the   provinces  of  the   south  ^  than   that   of  liiqu,  or   regent.

'  The  length  of  time  during  which  Egypt  was  subject  to  Asiatic  rule  is  not  fully  known.
Historians  are  agreeil  iu  recognising  the  three  epochs  referred  to  iu  the  narrative  of  Mauetho
(Ml'llek-Didot,  Frag.  Higtoricorun  Gnecorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5G6-568)  as  corresponding  with  (1)  the
conquest  and  the  six  lirst  Hyksos  kings,  including  the  XV"'  The  ban  dynasty ;  (2)  the  complete  sub-
miBsioD  of  Egypt  to  the  XVI"'  foreign  dynasty ;  (3)  the  war  of  independence  during  the  XVII"'
dynasty,  wliich  consisted  of  two  parallel  series  of  kings,  the  one  Shepherds  (Pharaohs),  the  other
Thebans  (Maspeuo,  Une  Enquitejudiciuire  ii  Tliehes,  pp.  79,  SO,  and  Revue  Critique,  1870,  vol.  ii.  pp.
118,119).  There  has  been  considerable  discussion  as  to  the  duration  of  tlie  oppression.  The  best
solution  is  still  that  given  by  Ennau  (Z«r  C/iroi/ofoyjeder  i/(//iso8,in  the  Zei7sc/iri/(,  1879,  pp.  125-127),
according  to  whom  the  XV"*  dynasty  lasted  284,  the  XVI"'  234,  and  the  XVII"'  143  years,  or,  in  all,
661  years.  The  invasion  must,  therefore,  have  taken  place  about  2340  B.C.,  or  about  the  time  when
the  Elamite  power  was  at  its  highest.  Ths  advent  of  the  XVI"'  dynasty  would  fall  about  2002  B.C.,.
and  the  commencement  of  the  war  of  independence  between  1730  and  1720  B.C.

^  The  supremacy  of  Thebes  over  the  other  principalities  is  proved  by  tlie  title  of  "  Theban  "
dynasty,  which  Manetho  attributed  to  the  indigenous  Pharaohs  who  contended  with  the  last  of  the
Shepherds  (Mi;i.LER-DiDOT,  Fraij.  Rial.  Gnecoruiu,  vol.  ii.  pp.  507,  568),  as  well  as  by  the  account
given  iu  the  Sallier  Papyrun,  No.  1,  which  makes  the  "  Regent  of  Thebes  "  the  rival  of  the  Sovereign
of  Avaris  (pi.  i.  11.  1,  2).

"  Sallier  I'ajjyrm,  No.  1,  pi.  i.  1.  1  ;  cf.  ]M.\si"Euo,  Kladea  J.'(ji/piienncs,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199.  The
early  Egyptologists  who  studied  this  period  thought  that  tho  fouuder  of  the  XVII"'  Theban  dynasty
was  the  king  mentioned  at  El-Kab,  Saquiinri  Tiiiaqni  (E.  de  Rouge,  Exameii,  de  VOuirmje
du  M.  le  Chev.  de  Bunsen,  ii.  p.  31,  and  Athdiucum  Fraiirais,  1852,  p.  432 ;  liuiT.scii,  jL'ijyptische  Sludien,.
§  ii.  p.  12).  Oliabas  says  that  this  must  bo  the  tirst  of  the  two  Saiinunris  mentioned  in  the  Abbott
Papyrus  (pi.  iii.  11.  8-11),  who  Ijoro  the  name  of  Tiiiaa  (Les  Vasteurs  en  Eijypte,  pp.  37-40).  The  proof
that  the  Apophis  of  the  Pallier  Papyrus  is  probably  Apopi  Aqniiuri  is  furnished  by  the  form  of  the


74  THE   HYKSOS   IN  EGYPT.

We  are  unacquainted  with  tlie  cause  of  the  outbreak  or  with  its  sequel,  and
the  Egyptians  themselves  seem  to  have  been  not  much  better  informed
<jn  the  subject  than  ourselves.  They  gave  free  flight  to  their  fancy,  and
accommodated  the  details  to  their  taste,  not  shrinking  from  the  introduction
<jf  daring  fictions  into  the  account.  A  romance,  which  was  very  popular  with
the  literati  four  or  five  hundred  years  later,  asserted  that  the  real  cause  of
the  war  was  a  kind  of  religious  quarrel.'  "  It  happened  that  the  land  of
Egypt  belonged  to  the  Fever-stricken,  and,  as  there  was  no  supreme  king  at
that  time,  it  happened  then  that  King  Saqnunri  was  regent  of  the  city  of  the
south,  and  that  the  Fever-stricken  of  the  city  of  Ea  were  under  the  rule  of
Ea-Ap6pi  in  Avaris.^  The  Whole  Land  tribute  to  the  latter  in  manu-
factured products,  and  the  north  did  the  same  in  all  the  good  things  of  the
Delta.  Now,  the  King  Ea-Ap6pi  took  to  himself  Sutkhu  for  lord,  and  he  did
not  serve  any  other  god  in  the  Whole  Land  except  Sutkhu,  and  he  built  a
temple  of  excellent  and  everlasting  work  at  the  gate  of  the  King  Ea-Ap6pi,
and  he  arose  every  morning  to  sacrifice  the  daily  victims,  and  the  chief  vassals
were  there  with  garlands  of  flowers,  as  it  was  accustomed  to  be  done  for  the
temple  of  Phrti-Harmakhis."  ^  Having  finished  the  temple,  he  thought  of
imposing  upon  the  Thebans  the  cult  of  his  god,  but  as  he  shrank  from  employ-
ing force  in  such  a  delicate  matter,  he  had  recourse  to  stratagem.  He  took
counsel  with  his  princes  and  generals,  but  they  were  unable  to  propose  any  plan.

cartouche  prsenomeu,  as  Brugsch  saw  as  soon  as  Marictte  had  given  the  true  reading  of  the  name
(Geschklde  JEfjyptens,  p.  S24,  where  the  prainomeu  of  one  of  the  two  Tiii&as  is  mistakenly  read
Aqnunri,  like  that  of  the  Shepherd-king):  the  two  epithets,  Saqnunri,  Aqnunri,  are  formed  on  the
same  model,  and  as  Apupi  reigned  before  his  rival,  it  was  evidently  Tiu^a  who  derived  his  praenomen
Saqnunri  from  that  of  Aqnunri.

'  The  Sallier  Papyrus,  No.  1,  was  written  in  the  year  X.,  probably  in  the  reign  of  Minephtah  ;
ill  any  case,  under  the  rule  of  a  Pharaoh  who  is  to  be  placed  in  the  second  half  of  the  XIX"'  dynasty.
The  value  of  the  document  forming  its  first  pages  was  recognised  by  E.  de  Eouge  {Athgnssum
Franfais,  1854,  p.  532),  and  the  interpretation  of  a  few  lines  attempted  shortly  after  by  Brugsch
<iJEgyptisclie  Studien,  vol.  i.  pp.  8-21).  It  has  since  been  translated  by  Goodwin  {Hieratic  Papyri,
in  the  Cambridge  Essays,  1858,  pp.  243-245),  by  Chabas  (ies  Pasterns  en  Egypte,  pp.  16-19),  by
Brugsch  {Eisloire  d'Egypte,  p.  78 ;  Geschichte  ^gyptens,  pp.  222-226),  by  Ebers  {Mjypten  und  die
Pitcher  Moses,  p.  204,  et  seq. ),  by  Lushington  (Frag,  of  the  1st  Sallier  Pap.,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,
1st  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  1-4);  by  Maspero  {Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  198-214).  The  results
were  at  first  received  as  historical,  except  by  Goodwin  (cf.  Bunskn,  Egypt's  Place,  vol.  iv.  p.  671).  The
true  nature  of  the  document  was  indicated  at  length  by  Maspero  {Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  195-
216,  and  Lcs  Contes  populaires  de  VEgypte  Ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  xxviii.-xxxi.),  and  the  majority
of  Egyptologists  have  since  fallen  in  with  this  opinion  (Wiedemann,  Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  71,  and
Jigyptische  Geschichte,  pp.  299,  300  ;  Erman,  Neu^gyptische  Grammatik,  p.  2,  and  ^gypten  und
JEgyptisches  Lehen,  p.  502;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  135,  256,  and  Geschichte
^gyptens,  p.  212),  without,  however,  accepting  my  view  that  the  Egyptian  story  belongs  to  the  class
of  wager  and  riddle  narratives.

=  The  text  is  here  uncertain,  and  Piehl,  Varia,  §  xiv.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1885,  p.  60,  as  well  as
Lefebure,  Z7n  des  Noms  de  la  Royaut€  septentrionale,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1893,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  116,  has
propounded  readings  of  it  diti'erent  from  mine.  Lefebure  renders  it,  "  The  scourge  of  the  towns,
Apepi-Hfi,  was  chief  of  the  north  in  Avaris,  while  Sekenen-Ra  was  chief  of  the  south  at  Thebes,"
but  "  there  was  no  king  in  that  day."

'  Sallier  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  i.  11.  1-4;  cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  198-203,
and  Contes  populaires  de  VEgypte  Ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  278,  279.


THE   IlOMANCt:   OF  APOPI  AND    OF  SAQNUNP7.


75


^,


The  college  of  diviners  aud  scribes  was  more  complaisant :  "  J^et  a  messenger
go  to  the  regent  of  the  city  of  the  South  to  tell  him :  The  King  Ea-Apopi
commands  thee  :  '  That  the  hippopotami  which  are  in  the  pool  of  the  town  are
to  be  exterminated  in  the  pool,  in  order  that  slumber  may  come  to  me  by  day
and  by  night.'  He  will  not  be  able  to  reply  good  or  bad,  and  then
shalt  send  him  another  messenger  :  The  King  Ea-Ap6pi  commands
thee  :  '  If  the  chief  of  the  South  does  not  reply  to  my  message,  let
him  serve  no  longer  any  god  but  Sutkhu.  But  if  he  replies  to  it,  and
will  do  that  which  I  tell  him  to  do,  then  I  will  impose  nothing
further  upon  him,  and  I  will  not  in  future  bow  before  any  other  god
of  the  Whole  Land  than  Amonra,  king  of  the  gods ! ' "  Another
Pharaoh  of  popular  romance,  Nectanebo,  possessed,  at  a  much  later
date,  mares  which  conceived  at  the  neighing  of  the  stallions  of
Babylon,  and  his  friend  Lycerus  had  a  cat  which  went  forth  every
night  to  wring  the  necks  of  the  cocks  of  Memphis :  ^  the  hippopo-
tami of  the  Theban  lake,  which  troubled  the  rest  of  the  King  of  Tanis,
were  evidently  of  close  kin  to  these  extraordinary  animals.  The
sequel  is  unfortunately  lost.  We  may  assume,  however,  without
much  risk  of  error,  that  Saqnunri  came  forth  safe  and  sound  from  the
ordeal ;  that  Apopi  was  taken  in  his  own  trap,  and  saw  himself  driven
to  the  dire  extremity  of  giving  up  Sutkhu  for  Amonra  or  of  de-
claring war.  He  was  likely  to  adopt  the  latter  alternative,  and  tlie
end  of  the  manuscript  would  probably  have  related  his  defeat.

Hostilities  continued  for  a  century  and  a  half  from  the  time  when
Saqnunri  Tiuaa  declared  himself  son  of  the  Sun  and  kmg  of  the  two  Egypts.
From  tlie  moment  in  wliicli  he  surrounded  his  name  with  a  cartouche,  the  princes
of  the  Said  tlirew  in  their  lot  with  him,  and  the  XVII'"  dynasty  had  its  begin-
ning on  the  day  of  his  proclamation.^  The  strife  at  first  was  undecisive  and
without  marked  advantage  to  either  side  :*  at  length  the  Pharaoh  whom  the

'  Found  in  a  popular  story,  which  came  in  lati^r  times  to  be  associated  witli  the  traditions  con-
nected with  ^'Esoj) :  cf.  La  Vie  d'Bsope  le  Phrygien,  translated  by  La  Fontaine  (Fables,  ed.  Lemerre,
vol.  i.  pp.  41,  42,  45).  Tlie  correctness  of  this  interpretation  is  called  in  question  by  Piehl,  Varia.
in  the  Zeilachrift,  1885,  p.  00,  note  2.

■  Drawn  from  the  original  by  Faucher-Gudin ;  cf  Cuaiipollion,  Monumtnls  de  V£gypte,  etc.,
pi.  cxci.  .\,  3,  and  Pikuket,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle  Ilistorique  de  la  Galerie  Egyptienne,  p.  153,  No.
(;14  bis.  This  small  object,  which  was  attributed  to  Saqnunri  III.  Tifliiqni,  has  been  restored  to
Tiflia  by  M.\s1'kro,  Une  Enquele  judiciaire  a  Thebes,  p.  78.

'  MASPEno,  Vne  Enquele  judiciare,  pp.  79,  80;  cf.  Revue  Critique,  1870,  vol.  ii.  pp.  119,  120.  In
this,  as  in  many  other  cases,  a  change  of  dynasty  in  the  lists  of  Mauetho  does  not  indicate  the
accession  of  a  new  famdy,  but  a  change  in  the  condition  of  the  reigniug  family.

*  Manetho  gays  so  formally  :  rwv  4k  rijs  (ztrj&aiSus  koI  ttjv  iiAArjs  AlyvirTov  fiaffLKtuv  yfvtadai  (p-ijfflf
iiri  Toiis  iroifx^vas  4 irav da ratjiv,  KoX  TT6\fp.ov  avTo7s  (Tu^ftayqvat  ^{yap  Koi  TroKvxpiJPiov  (MC'LLEK-DlDOT,
Frag.  Hist.  Gnerorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  5G7).  Erman  thinks,  on  the  contrary,  that  Tiiiaa  found  no  support
among  the  petty  princes,  but  that  they  preferred  to  continue  vassals  of  a  foreigner  rather  than
recognise  the  sovereignty  of  one  of  their  equals  (yFgyplen  und  -F(jy[jtisch<:s  Leben,  p.  152).


iS


i)


76


TEK  HYKSUS  IN  EOYPT.


Greek  copyists  of  Manetho  call  Alisphragmoutliosis,  defeated  the  barbarians,
drove  them  away  from  Memphis  and  from  the  western  plains  of  the  Delta,
and   shut   them  up  in  their  entrenched  camp  at  Avaris,^  between  the
Sebennytic  branch  of  the  Nile  and  the  Wady  Tumilat.     The  monuments
bearing  on  this  period  of  strife  and  misery  are  few  in  number,  and  it  is
a  fortunate  circumstance  it  some  insignificant  object  turns  up  which
would   elsewhere   be   passed   over   as  unworthy   of   notice.      One  of
the   officials  of   Tiuaa  I.  has  left  us  his  writing   palette,  on  which
the  cartouches  of  his   master  are  incised  with  a  rudeness  baffling
description.     We  have  also  information  of  a  prince  of  the  blood,
a  king's   son,  Tuau,  who   accompanied    this   same  Pharaoh   in  his
expeditions;  and  the  Gizeh  Museum  is  proud  of  having  in  its  pos-
session the  wooden  sabre  which  this  individual  placed  on  the  mummy
of  a  certain  Aqhoru,  to  enable  him  to  defend  himself  against  the
monsters  of  the  lower  world.     A  second  Saqnunri  Tiuaa  succeeded
the  first,  and  like  him  was  buried  in  a  little  brick  pyramid  on  the
border  of  the  Theban  necropolis.'-     At  his  death  the  series  of  rulers
was  broken,  and  we  meet  with  several  names  which  are  difficult  to
classify  —  Sakhontinibri,     Sanakhtu-niri,*    Hotpuri,    Manhotpuii,

'  Manetho,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Frag.  Eist.  Grssc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  567,  568.  The  variant
readings  Mephramouthosis  and  Misphramouthoais  are  found  in  the  MSS.,  and
much  hibour'has  been  expended  in  the  eflbrt  to  identify  the  disfigured  name  with  one
of  the  known  kings.  Unger  sees  in  it  that  of  Alimassipiri  (cf.  p.  94  of  the  present
work),  one  of  the  sons  of  Ahmosis  who  did  not  reign  {ChronoJogie  des  Manetho,  pp.
155,  156),  but  the  majority  of  Egyptologists  have  identified  it  with  the  name  of
Thiitmosis  III.,  following  Lepsius  in  assuming  that  the  Hyksos  were  not  expelled
until  the  reign  of  that  prince,  which  is  incorrect,  as  we  shall  see  later  on;  others  are
of  opinion  that  the  Hyksos  were  expelled  in  the  reign  of  Ahmosis,  but  consider
Manetho's  account  to  be  a  romance  in  which  facts  and  names  are  jumbled  together
without  auy  regard  to  truth  (Wiedemann,  JSgyplische  Geschichte,  p.  302).

-  Tlie  two  TiQaas  and  their  pyramids  were  maJe  known  by  the  Abbott  Pa-pyrm,
pi.  iii.  11.  8-11,  where  Tifiaa  is  called  Tiuaa-aa,  i.e.  Tin,  the  twice  great.  Their  true
place  in  tlie  series  was  determined  by  Chabas,  Les  Pasteurs  en  Egijpte,  pp.  38-40.  It
is  worth  considering  whether  Tiuaa-aa  is  not  the  same  person  as  Tiiiaqni,  whose
name  is  sometimes  written  in  the  short  form  Tiuaa  (Bockiant,  Notes  de  Voi/age,  §  6,
in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xi.  p.  159),  and  that  there  were,  therefore,  only  two
instead  of  the  usually  assumed  three  Tiiiaas.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-tiudin,  from  a  photograph  taken    by  Emil  BrugscU-Bey;

cf.  Makiette,  Notice  des  Principaux  Monuments,  1864,  p.  210,  and    Maspero,   Une

Enquete  judiciaire  a    Thebes,  pp.  77,  78.      The  object    is  reproduced    by  Maristte,

Monuments  divers,  pi.  51  b,  and    p.   16;    Album  Photographique  du  Musge  de  Boulag,

pi.  37.

'  No  contemporary  monument  of  Sakhontinibri  or  Sanakhtiiniri  lias  yet  been  found.

The  first  is  mentioned,  as  far  as  I  know,  only  in  the  series  of  Theban  kings  to  whom

the  oflScial  of  the  Necropolis,   Khabokbni,   rendered   homage   in  the  time  of  the   XX"'

dynasty   (Burton,  Excerpta    Hieroglyph  ica,  pi.  35;   Wilkinson,    Extracts  from    several

EieroghjpMcal  Subjects,  pi.  v.   2;    Champollion,  Monuments    de    VEgijpte  et  de   la  Nubie,

vol.  ii.   p.  866 ;  Pbisse  d'Avennes,  Monuments,  pi.  iii.  p.  1 ;  Lepsius,  Denkmdler,  iii.  2  a).

itXt's  The  second  is  mentioned  on   the  table  of  oflerings  in  the  Jlarseilles    Museum  (E.  de

SABRE.^  Saulot,  Etudes  sur  la  s€rie  des  rois  inscrits  a  la  Salle  des  AncHres  de  Touthmes  III.,  p.  47,


TEE    THEBAN  PRINCESSES.  77

Hahotpu.^  A8  we  proceed,  Iiowever,  information  becomes  more  plentiful,  and  the
list  of  reigns  almost  complete.  Tlie  part  whicli  the  princesses  of  older  times
played  in  the  transmission  of  power  had,  from  the  XIP"  dynasty  downward,  con-
siderably increased  in  importance,  and  threatened  to  overshadow  that  of  the
princes.^  The  question  presents  itself  whether,  during  these  centuries  of  per-
petual warfare,  there  bad  not  been  a  moment  when,  all  the  males  of  the  family
having  perished,  the  women  alone  were  left  to  perpetuate  the  solar  race  on
the  earth  and  to  keep  the  succession  unbroken.  As  soon  as  the  veil  over  this
period  of  history  begins  to  be  lifted,  we  distinguish  among  the  personages
emerging  from  the  obscurity  as  many  queens  as  kings  presiding  over  the
destinies  of  Egypt.  The  sons  took  precedence  of  the  daughters  when  both
were  the  offspring  of  a  brother  and  sister  born  of  the  same  parents,  and  when,
consequently,  they  were  of  equal  rank ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sons  for-
feited this  equality  when  there  was  any  inferiority  in  origin  on  the  maternal
side,  and  their  prospect  of  succession  to  the  throne  diminished  in  proportion  to
their  mother's  remoteness  from  the  line  of  Ka.  In  the  latter  case  all  their
sisters,  born  of  marriages  which  to  us  appear  incestuous,  took  precedence  of
them,  and  the  eldest  daughter  became  the  legitimate  Pharaoh,  who  sat  in  the
seat  of  Horus  on  the  death  of  her  fiither,  or  even  occasionally  during  his
lifetime.  The  prince  whom  she  married  governed  for  her,  and  discharged
those  royal  duties  wliich  could  be  legally  performed  by  a  man  only, — -such  as
offering  worship  to  the  supreme  gods,  commanding  the  army,  and  administering
justice;  but  his  wife  never  ceased  to  be  sovereign,  and  however  small  the
intelligence  or  firmness  of  which  she  might  be  possessed,  her  husband  was
obliged  to  leave  to  her,  at  all  events  on  certain  occasions,  the  direction  of
affairs.     At  her  death  her  children    inherited  the  crown :    their    father    had

No.  3 ;  Maspeeo,  Catalogue  du  Mui^e  t^gyptien  de  Marseille,  p.  4),  and  ou  oue  of  the  walls  of  the
Hall  of  Ancestors  at  Kamak  (Prisse  d'Avennes,  Monuments  Hgyptiein,  pi.  ii. ;  E.  de  Saulcy,  Etude
ear  la  seria  des  rois,  pp.  35,  30,  in  such  a  position  as  to  associate  him  with  the  end  of  the  XVII"'
dynasty,  and  more  especially  with  the  group  of  Saqnunri  III.,  Tiiiaqni,  and  Kamosii.  They  might,
strictly  speaking,  be  called  secondary  kiugs^,  who  were  contemporaneous  with  the  Saqnunris  or  Ahmosis
(Maspero,  Les  Momies  rnijales  de  Deir-el- Bahari,  in  the  Mimoires  piibli^s  par  lee  membres  de  la  Mission
du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  038,  039.

'  Hotpflri  and  Manhotpflri  are  both  mentioned  in  the  fragments  of  a  fantastic  story  (copied  during
the  XX"'  dynasty),  bits  of  which  are  found  in  most  European  museums  (Maspeiio,  Les  CoiUes  popu-
laires  de  VEgypte  ancienne,  2nd  edit ,  pp.  287-290).  In  one  of  these  fragments,  preserved  in  the  Louvre,
mention  is  made  of  Hotpflri's  tomb,  certainly  situated  at  Thebes  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  291,  292);  we  possess
scarabs  of  this  king,  and  Petrie  discovered  at  Coptos  a  fragment  of  a  stele  bearing  his  name
and  titles,  and  describing  the  works  which  he  executed  in  the  temples  of  the  town  (^History  of
Egypt,  pp.  240,  247).  The  XIV"'  year  of  Manhotpari  is  mentioned  in  a  passage  of  the  story,
as  being  the  date  of  the  death  of  a  personage  born  under  llotpuri  (Maspeko,  Lea  Cuntes  popu-
laires  de  Vligyjite  ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  p.  293).  These  two  kings  belong,  as  far  as  we  are  able
to  judge,  to  the  middle  of  the  XVII"'  dynasty;  I  am  inclined  to  place  beside  them  the  Pharaoh
NCibhotpdri,  of  whom  we  possess  a  few  rather  coarse  scarabs  (Flinders  Petuie,  Historical  Scarabs,
pi.  20).

■  On  the  subject  of  these  queens,  see  Maspeiio,  Daicn  of  Civilization,  pp.  258,  259,  270-270.


78


THE  HYKSoS  IN  E07PT.


formally  to  invest  the  eldest  of  them  with  royal  authority  in  the  room  of  the

deceased,  and  with  him  he  shared  the
externals,  if  not  the  reality,  of  power.'
It  is  doubtful  whether  the  third
Saqnunri  Tiuaa  known  to  us — he
who  added  an  epithet  to  his  name,
and  was  commonly  known  as  Tiuaqni,
"  Tiuaa  the  brave  "  '^ — united  in  his
person  all  the  requisites  of  a  Pharaoh
qualified  to  reign  iu  his  own  right.
However  this  may  have  been,  at  all
events  his  wife,  Queen  Ahhotpu,
possessed  them.  His  eldest  son
Ahmosu  died  prematurely;  the  two
younger  brothers,  Kamosu  and  a
second  Ahmosu,  the  Amosis  of  the
Greeks,  assumed  the  crown  after  him.
It  is  possible,  as  frequently  happened,
that  their  young  sister  Ahmasi-
Nofritari  entered  the  harem  of  both
brothers  consecutively.  We  cannot
be  sure  that  she  was  united  to  Kamosu,
but  at  all  events  she  became  the  wife
of  Ahmosis,  and  the  rights  which  she
possessed,  together  with  those  which
her  husband  had  inherited  from  their  mother  Ahhotpu,  gave  him  a  legal
claim  such  as  was  seldom  enjoyed  by  the  Pharaohs  of  that  period,  so  many  of
them  being  sovereigns  merely  de  facto,  while  he  was  doubly  king  by  right.^
Tiuaqni,   Kamosu,  and  Ahmosis  quickly  succeeded  each  other.     Tiiiaqni

'  Thus  we  fiud  Thfltmosis  I.  formally  enthroning  his  daughter  Hatshopsitfl,  towards  the  close  of
his  reign  (E.  de  Rouge,  Etudes  des  Monuments  du  Massif  de  Karnak.  in  the  MAanges  d'Archeologie
Eijijptieniie  et  Assynenne,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  -18 ;  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir-el-Bahari,  pp.  15,  16).

2  It  would  seem  that  the  epithet  Qeni  (=  the  brave,  the  robust)  did  not  form  an  indispensable
part  of  his  name,  any  more  than  Ahmoai  did  of  the  names  of  members  of  the  family  of  Ahmosis,  the
conqueror  of  the  Shepherds  (Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,  in  the  Memoires  de  la
MissioJi  franfaise,  vol.  i.  p.  622).  It  is  to  him  that  tlie  Tiuaa  cartouche  refers,  which  is  to  be  found
on  the  statue  mentioned  by  Daninos-Pasha,  published  by  Boukiant  (^Notes  de  Voyage,  §  6,  in  the
Bectieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  si.  p.  159),  and  on  wliich  we  find  Ahmosis,  a  princess  of  the  same  name,
together  with  Queen  Ahhotpu  I.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Flinders  Putrie.

■•  I  have  attempted  to  construct  a  genealogy  of  this  family  in  Leg  Momies  royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari
(Menwire  de  la  Mission,  de  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  620-637).  One  part  of  it  is  certain:  (1)  the  marriage  of
Ahhotpu  I.  with  Tiuaa  III.  (Bouuiant,  Notes  de  Voyage,  §  6,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xi.  p.
159),  where  a  deceased  elder  son,  named  Ahmosis,  is  mentioned  together  with  his  mother  Ahhotpu


nofkitaki,  froji  the  wooden  statuette  in  the
turin  museum.'


tiuaqni  and  kamosu.


7i>


>^t--


THE    HKAD    OF    SAQXUN'IU    III.'


very  probably  waged  war  against  the  Shepherds,  and  it  is  not  known  whether

he  fell  upon  the  field  of  battle  or  was  the  victim  of  some  plot ;  the  appearance

of  his  mummy  proves  that  he  died  a  violent  death  when

about  forty  years  of  age.*     Two  or  three  men.

whether    assassins  or    soldiers,  must   have

surrounded  and  despatched  him  before  help

was  available.     A  blow  from  an  axe  must

have  severed  part  of  his  left  cheek,  exposed

the  teeth,  fractured  the  jaw,  and  sent  him

senseless  to  the  ground  ;  another  blow  must

have  seriously  injured  the  skull,  and  a  dagger

orjaveliu  has  cut  open  the  forehead  on  the  right

side,  a  little  above  the  eye.     His  body  must  have

remained  lying  where  it  fell  for  some  time  :  when

found,  decomposition  had  set  in,  and  the  embalming

had  to  be  hastily  performed  as  best  it  might.     The

hair  is  thick,  rough,  and  matted ;  the  face  had  been

shaved    on   the  morning  of  his   deatli,   but   by  touching  the  cheek  we  can

ascertain  how  harsh  and  abundant  the  hair  must  have  been.     The  mummy

is  that  of  a  fine,  vigorous  man,  who  miglit  have  lived  to  a  hundred  years,

and    he   must    have  defended  himself  resolutely  against  his   assailants;   his

features  bear  even  now  an  expression  of  fury.     A  flattened  patch  of  exuded

brain  appears  above  one  eye,  the  forehead  is  wrinkled,  and  the  lips,  which

are  drawn  back  in   a   circle  about   the   gums,  reveal  the   teeth  still  biting

into  the   tongue.     Kamosu  did   not    reign  long ;  ^    we  know  nothing  of  the

and  Lis  sister  Abmosis,  probably  the  future  Queen  Ahmasi-Nofritaii.  The  other  sous  are  not  named
on  this  monument,  which  is  dedicated  to  the  deceased  by  his  fatlier,  his  mother,  and  the  sister  whi)
would  have  reigned  witli  him  had  he  lived  ;  (2)  the  parentage  of  Ahhotpd  I.  and  of  Abmosis  (Stele
of  Edfil,  published  by  U.  Bouuiant,  Petits  Monuments  et  Petita  Texles,  iu  the  Itecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ix.
pp.  92, 93 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Mamies  royales,  pp.  625-628) ;  (3)  tlie  fact  that  Xofritari  was  her  husband's
sister,  botli  oa  the  father's  side,  as  is  shown  Ijy  the  words  "  royal  sister  "  on  lier  protocol  between  the
titles  "  daughter  "  and  "  wife  of  a  king  "  (Les  Momies  royales,  p.  535),  and  al=o  on  the  motlier's  side,
as  is  proved  by  the  place  which  she  occupies  by  the  side  of  Ahhotpu  on  Daninos-Pasha's  statue
(Jiov  HI  AST,  Notes  de  Foyage,  §  6,  iu  the  Ikcueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  i.  p.  159).  The  order  in  which
Kamosii  should  be  placed  is  not  quite  certain  ;  the  probability  is,  liowever,  that  he  ought  to  come
between  Ti(ia.qni  and  -Vhmosis,  and  that  he  was  a  brother  of  tlie  latter.

'  All  these  details  as  to  the  king's  appearance  and  tlie  manner  of  his  death  are  furnished  by  the
mummy  which  is  at  present  in  the  museum  at  Gizeh  (Maspeuo,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,
in  the  Md'moires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  526-529).  The  name  Taaaten,  which  Wiedemann
assigns  to  this  prince  (Jigyplische  Gesehichte,  p.  ^iOl),  is  merely  a  misspelling  of  the  name  Tiuiqni,
due  to  the  engraver  who  executed  the  inscription  on  the  colliu  (Masi'Eko,  Les  Momies  royales,
pp.  526,  527),  The  worship  of  Tifliqui  was  continued  down  to  the  XX"'  dynasty  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,
iii.  2  a,  d).

■  Drawn  by  Bouilier,  from  a  photograph  liy  Emil  Brugscli-Iiey,  taken  in  ISSO.

'  With  regard  to  Kamosu,  we  possess,  in  addition  to  tlie  miniature  Ijark  which  was  discovered  oa
tlio  sarcophagus  of  Queen  ."vlihotpfl,  and  which  is  now  in  the  museum  at  Gizeh  (Virey,  Notice  des
Principaux  Monuments  exposes  au  Musie  de  Giz^h,  pp.  21:5,  214,  No.  955),  a  few  scattered  references
to  his  worship  existing  on  the  mouuiiients,  on  a  stele  at  Gizeh  (Lii;ui,ein,  Diclionnaire  des  Noms


■80  THE  II  YES  OS  IN  EGYPT.

events  of  his  lite,  but  we  owe  to  him  one  of  the  prettiest  examples  of  the
Egyptian  goldsmith's  art— the  gold  bout  mounted  on  a  carriage  of  wood  and
bronze,  which  was  to  convey  his  double  on  its  journeys  through  Hades.  This
boat  was  afterwards  appropriated  by  his  mother  Ahhotpu.  Ahmosis^  must
have  been  about  twenty-five  years  of  age  when  he  ascended  the  throne ;  he
-was  of  medium  height,  as  his  body  when  mummied  measured  only  5  feet  6  inches
in  length,  but  the  development  of  the  neck  and  chest  indicates  extraordi-
jiary  strength.  The  head  is  small  in  proportion  to  the  bust,  the  forehead
low  and  narrow,  the  cheek-bones  project,  and  the  hair  is  thick  and  wavy.
The  face  exactly  resembles  that  of  Tiiiaqni,  and  the  likeness  alone  would
proclaim  the  affinity,  even  if  we  were  ignorant  of  the  close  relationship  which
united  these  two  Pharaohs.'-^  Ahmosis  seems  to  have  been  a  strong,  active,
warlike  man ;  he  was  successful  in  all  the  wars  in  which  we  know  him  to
have  been  engaged,  and  he  ousted  the  Shepherds  from  the  last  towns  occupied
hy  them.  It  is  possible  that  modern  writers  have  exaggerated  the  credit
<lue  to  Ahmosis  for  expelling  the  Hyksos.  He  found  the  task  already  half
accomplished,  and  the  warfare  of  his  forefathers  for  at  least  a  century
must  have  prepared  the  way  for  his  success ;  if  he  appears  to  have  played
the  most  important  role  in  the  history  of  the  deliverance,  it  is  owing  to
-our  ignorance  of  the  work  of  others,  and  he  thus  benefits  by  the  oblivion
into  which  their  deeds  have  passed.  Taking  this  into  consideration,  we  must
still  admit  that  the  Shepherds,  even  when  driven  into  Avaris,  were  not  adver-
saries to  be  despised.  Forced  by  the  continual  pressure  of  the  Egyptian  armies
into  this  corner  of  the  Delta,  they  were  as  a  compact  body  the  more  able  to  make
-a  protracted  resistance  against  very  superior  forces.  The  impenetrable  marshes
of  Menzaleh  on  the  north,  and  the  desert  of  the  Ked  Sea  on  the  south,  com-
pletely covered  both  their  wings ;  the  shifting  network  of  the  branches  of  the
Nile,  together  with  the  artiiicial  canals,  protected  them  as  by  a  series  of  moats
in  front,  while  Syria  in  their  rear  offered  them  inexhaustible  resources  for
revictualling  their  troops,  or  levying  recruits  among  tribes  of  kindred  race.
As  long  as  they  could  hold  their  ground  there,  a  re-invasion  was  always  possible  ;

Sie'roglyphiqnes,  p.  7o0,  No.  1922),  ou  a  table  of  offerings  in  the  Marseilles  Museum  (E.  de  Saulct,
Etude  suT  la  sirie  ties  reds  inscrits  a  la  Salle  des  Ancetres  de  Tliouthmes  HI.,  pp.  48,  96,  97),  and  in  the  list
of  princes  worshipped  by  the  "  servants  of  the  Necropolis  "  (Lepsius,  Denlim.,  iii.  2  a,  d).  His  pyramid
was  at  Drah-Abu'1-Neggah,  beside  those  of  Tiflaa  and  Amenotlies  I.  {AhhoU  Paiiyrug,  1.  iii.  1.  12).

'  The  name  Ahmosu  or  Ahraosi  is  usually  translated  "Child  of  the  Bloon-god"  (Bruqsch,
iretchichte  JEgyptens,  p.  254) ;  the  real  meaning  is,  "  the  Moon-god  has  brought  forth,"  "  him  "  or
■"her"  (referring  to  the  person  who  bears  tlio  name)  being  understood  (Maspero,  in  the  Eevue
Critique,  ISSO,  vol.  i.  p.  lOU).

^  Here  again  my  description  is  taken  from  the  present  appearance  of  the  mummy,  which  is  now  in
the  GIzeh  Mueeum  (Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,  in  the  Mi'moires  de  la  Mission
du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  533-535).  It  is  evident,  from  the  inspection  which  I  have  made,  that  Ahmosis
was  about  fifty  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and,  allowing  him  to  have  reigned  twenty-five
years,  he  must  have  been  twenty-five  or  twenty-six  when  he  came  to  the  throne.


A  HMO  SIS  I.


81


one  victory  would  biing  them  to  Memphis,  and  the  whole  valley  would  again
fall  under  their  suzerainty.  Ahmosis,  by  driving  them  from  their  last  strong-
hold, averted  this  danger.  It  is,  therefore,  not  without  reason  that  the  official
chroniclers  of  later  times  separated  him  from  his  ancestors  and  made  him
the  head  of  a  new  dynasty.  His  predecessors  had  in  reality  been  merely
Pliaraohs  on  sufferance,  ruling  in  the  south  within  the  confines  of  their
Theban  principality,  gaining  in  power,  it  is  true,  with  every  generation,  but
never  able  to  attain  to  the  suzerainty  of  the  whole  country.    They  were  reckoned


THE    .SMALL    GOLD    VOTIVK    B.\1!QUE    UI'    I'HAKAOH    KAMOSU,    IN    THE   GIZEH    MU.SEUM.'

in  the  XVII'"  dynasty  together  witli  the  HyksOs  sovereigns  of  uncontested
legitimacy,  while  their  successors  were  chosen  to  constitute  the  XVIII"',
comprising  Pharaohs  with  full  powers,  tolerating  no  competitors,  and  uniting
under  their  firm  rule  the  two  regions  of  which  Egypt  was  composed — the
possessions  of  Sit  and  the  possessions  of  Horus.^

The  war  of  deliverance  broke  out  on  the  accession  of  Ahmosis,  and  continued
during  the  first  five  years  of  his  reign.^     One  of  his  lieutenants,  the  king's

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emit  Brugsch-Iiey,  taken  in  1878.

'  Manetho,  or  his  abridgers,  call  the  king  wlio  drove  out  the  Shepherds  Amusis  or  Tethmosis
(MtXLEK-DiDOT,  Fragmenta  Historicornm  Gnecorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  572-578).  Lepsiua  thought  he  eaw
grounds  for  preferring  tlie  second  reading,  and  identified  this  Tethmusis  with  Thiltrnosi  Manakljpirri,
the  Tliutmosis  III.  of  our  lists  ;  Ahmosis  could  only  have  driven  out  the  greater  part  of  the  nation.
This  theory,  to  which  Naville  still  adiieres  (Iliihitstis,  pp.  2',l,  :>0),  as  also  docs  Steindorft'  (Zur  Ge-
Kchichle  de.r  Uylcsoe,  pp.  7,  .S),  was  disputed  nearly  fifty  years  ago  by  E.  de  Eougc!  {Exameu  da  I'oavrage
lie  M.  le  Clievulier  d<:  Bmisen,  ii.  pp.  8(J-43)  ;  nowadays  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that,  subsequent  to
the  V"'  year  of -Vhuiosis,  there  were  no  longer  Sheplierd-kings  in  Egyjit,  even  though  a  part  of  the
conquering  race  may  have  remained  in  the  country  in  a  state  of  slavery,  as  we  shall  soon  have  occasion
to  observe  (of  pp.  88,  80  of  the  present  work).

'  This  is  evident  frimi  a  passage  in  the  biography  of  Ahmosi-si-Abiria  (1.  H),  where  it  is  stated
that,  after  the  taking  of  .Vvaris,  the  king  passeil  into  Asia  in  the  year  VI.  (cf.  p.  88  of  the  present
work).  The  first  few  lines  of  tlie  Great  Inncriplioii.  of  El-Kah  (11.  5-15)  seem  to  refer  to  four  succes-
sive campaigns,  i.r.  four  years  of  warfare  up  to  the  taking  of  Avaris,  and  to  a  fifth  year  spent  ii»
pursuing  the  Shejjhords  into  Syria.

G


THE  HYKSOS   IN  EGYPT.


^4n  A       J-iJrjiiij  u.


namesake — Ahmosi-si-Abina — who  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  lords  ot
Nekhabit,  has  left  us  an  account,  in  one  of  the  inscriptions  in  his  tomb,  of  the
numerous  exploits  iu  which  he  took  part  side  by  side  with  his  royal  master,

and  thns,  thanks  to  tliis  fortunate  record
of  his  vanity,  we  are  not  left  in  comj^lete
ignorance  of  the  events  whicli  took  place
during  this  crucial  struggle  between  the
Asiatic  settlers  and  their  former  subjects.^
Nekhabit  had  enjoyed  considerable  pros-
perity in  the  earlier  ages  of  Egyptian  his-
tory, marking  as  it  did  the  extreme  southern
limit  of  the  kingdom,  and  forming  an  out-
post against  the  barbarous  tribes  of  Nubia.^
As  soon  as  the  progress  of
conquest  had  pushed  the
frontier  as  far  south  as  the
first  cataract,  it  declined
in  importance,  and  tlie
remembrance  of  its  former
greatness  found  an  eclio
only  in  proverbial  ex-
pressions or  in  titles  used
at  the  Pharaonic  court.^
The  nomes  situated  to
the  south  of  Thebes,  unlike  those  of  Middle  Egypt,  did  not  comprise  any  ex-
tensive fertile  or  well- watered  territory  calculated  to  enrich  its  possessors  or
to  afford  sufficient  support  for  a  large  population:  they  consisted  of  long  strips
of  alluvial  soil,  shut  in  between  the  river  and  the  mountain  range,  but  above

'  The  iuBcriptions  on  the  tomb  of  Ahmosi-si-Abina  (Ahmosis,  son  of  Abina)  were  copied  by
CHAJiroLLiON,  Monuments  de  I'Egypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  pp.  655-658  ;  alterwards  by  Lepsixj.s,
Denkm.,  iii.  12  a-d,  and  by  Eeinisch,  .3i(i>jptisclte  Chrestomathie,  vol.  i.  pi.  6.  The  principal  inscription
was  hastily  examined  by  Cbampollion,  Letires  gcrites  d'Egypte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  194,  195  (of.  Cham-
POLLioN-FiGEAO,  L'£gypte  Ancicnne,  pp.  168,  300,);  it  was  then  made  use  of  by  E.  deKocge,  Exameu
de  I'ouvrage  de  M.  le  Chevalier  de  Bunseu,  ii.  pp.  31-42,  and  particularly  in  the  Slgmoire  sur
I'inscription  dn  tomheau  d'Ahmi-s,  the  conclusions  iu  wliich  treatise  were  used  by  Brugsch,  Hutoire
d'Egypte,  pp.  80,  81,  86,  90.  It  has  been  translated  in  full  by  Bkugsoh,  Eeiseherichte  aus  MSgyplens.
pp.  217-220,  and  afterwards  in  GescMclite  /Egyptms,  pp.  230-235 ;  by  Chabas,  Les  Fasteurs  en  jSgypte,
pp.  19-22  ;  by  Lepage-Eenocf,  in  Recordsof  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  pp.  5-19 ;  and  lastly,  by  Padre
Cesaee  di  Cara,  GU  Hyksds  o  Re  Pastori  di  Egitio,  pp.  324-328.

'  Of.  Maspero,  Dau-n  of  Cdmlhation,  p.  74.

^  The  vulture  of  Nekhabit  is  used  to  indicate  the  south,  while  the  uraaus  of  Buto  denotes  thi-
extreme  north ;  the  title  Ea-Nekhnit,  "  Chief  of  Nekhnit,"  which  is,  hypothetically,  supposed
to  refer  to  a  judicial  function  (Beugsch,  Bictionnaire  htt'roghjphlque.  Supplement,  pp.  391-398  ;
Erman,  Commentar  zur  hischri/t  des  Vna,  in  the  Zeifschri/t,  p.  5 ;  and  Mgypten  und  JEgyptlsches
Leben,  p.  134),  is  none  the  less  associated  with  the  expression,  "  Nekhabit-Nekhnit,"  as  an  indication
of  the  south,  and,  therefore,  cun  be  traced  to  the  prehistoric  epoch  when  Nekhabit  was  the  primary
designation  of  the  south.


THE   PRINCIPALITY   OF  EL-KAH.


83


the  level  of  the  inundation,  and  consequently  difficult  to  irrigate.  These  nomes
were  cultivated,  moreover,  by  a  poor  and  sparse  population.  It  needed  a  for-
tuitous combination  of  circumstances  to  relieve  them  from  their  poverty-stricken
condition  —  either  a  war,
which  would  bring  into  pro-
minence their  strategic  posi-
tions; or  the  establishment
of  markets,  such  as  those
of  Syene  and  Elephantine,
where  the  commerce  of  neigh-
bouring regions  would  natu-
rally centre;  or  the  erection,
as  at  Ombos  or  Edfu,  of  a
temple  which  would  periodi-
cally attract  a  crowd  of  pil-
grims.' The  principality  of
the  Two  Feathers  comprised,
besides  Nekhabit,at  least  two
such  towns — Anit,'-'  on  its
northern  boundary,  and
Nekhnit  almost  facing  Nek-
habit  OQ  the  left  bank  of  the
river.^  These  three  towns
sometimes  formed  separate
estates  for  as  many  independent  lords : ''  even  when  united  they  constituted  a
fiefdom  of  but  restricted  area  and  of  slender  revenues,  its  chiefs  ranking  below
those  of  the  great  feudal  princes  of  Middle  Egypt.  The  rulers  of  this  iiefdom
led  an  obscure  existence  during  the  whole  period  of  the  Memphite  empire,  and
when  at  length  Thebes  gained  the  ascendancy,  tliey  rallied  to  the  latter  and
acknowledged  her  suzerainty.  One  of  them,  Sovkunakhiti,  gained  the  favour
of  Sovkhotpu  III  yakhemuaztauiri,  who  granted  him  lands  which  made  the

'  In  regard  to  tUe  markets  of  Elepbantinfe  and  Syene,  and  the  profits  derived  from  them  by  the  local
magnates,  cf  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilhaiion,  p.  424,  et  seq. ;  the  greatness  of  Edfu  and  Ombos  dates
principally  from  the  Greek  era,  when  the  I'tolemies  rebuilt  and  enlarged  the  temples  of  these  two  cities.

^  .Vnit  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  occurring  names  of  Esneh  (Bkcgsch,  Dictionnaire  geographique,
pp.  39,  40,  852,  353).

'  Xekhnit  (BitCGsCH,  Die  JE(jijplo1ogie,  p.  441)  is  tlie  Hieraconpolis  of  Greek  and  Roman  times,
Hail-lJaiiku,  the  modern  name  of  which  is  Koni-el-Ahmar  (BliuGSOH,  Dictionnaire  G^oijra^hique,
\t.  210).  A  summary  dc.-criptiou  has  bueu  given  of  it  by  BouitiAXT,  Les  Tombeaux  de  Hie'racSnpulis,
in  the  IClwJes  Ari'/iifologiqneg,  Hiitonques  t.t  Linguidiqiifs,  dediies  ii  M.  le  D'  C.  Leemans,  pp.  35-40.

'  Drawn  by  Fuucljer-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograpli  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey,  taken  in  1882.

*  Pihiri  was,  therefore,  prince  of  Nekhabit  and  of  Anit  at  one  and  the  same  time  (Tylok-Griffitu,
The  Toinh  of  Puheri  at  El-Kah,  pi.  iii.),  whereas  the  town  of  Nekhnit  had  its  owu  special  rulers,
several  of  whom  are  known  to  us  from  tlie  tombs  at  Kom-el-Alimar  (Boi  riant,  Lea  Tombeaux  de
Hiirac6npolia,  pp.  39,  40).


THE   WALLS    OF   EL-KAB    SEEN    FROM    THE    TOMB    OF    PIHIBI.*


84  THE  HTKSOS  IN  EGYPT.

fortune  of  his  house  ;^  another  of  them,  Ai,  married  Khonsu,  one  of  the
daughters  of  Sovkumsauf  I.  and  his  Queen  Niibkhixs,^  and  it  is  possible  that
the  misshapen  pyramid  of  Qulah,  the  most  southern  in  Egypt  proper,  was
built  for  one  of  these  royally  connected  personages.  The  descendants  of
Ai  attached  themselves  faithfully  to  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XVII"'  dynasty,
and  helped  them  to  the  utmost  in  their  struggle  against  the  invaders.  Their
capital,  Nekhabit,  was  situated  between  the  Nile  and  the  Arabian  chain,  at
the  entrance  to  a  valley  which  penetrates  some  distance  into  the  desert,  and
leads  to  the  gold-mines  on  the  Eed  Sea.  The  town  profited  considerably  from
the  precious  metals  brought  into  it  by  the  caravans,  and  also  from  the  extraction
of  natron,  which  from  prehistoric  times  was  largely  employed  in  embalming.*
It  had  been  a  fortified  place  from  the  outset,  and  its  walls,  carefully  repaired
by  successive  ages,  were  still  intact  at  the  beginning  of  this  century.  They
described  at  this  time  a  rough  quadrilateral,  the  two  longer  sides  of  which
measured  some  1900  feet  in  length,  the  two  shorter  being  about  one-fourth
less.  The  southern  face  was  constructed  in  a  fashion  common  in  brick  build-
ings in  Egypt,  being  divided  into  alternate  panels  of  horizontally  laid  courses,
and  those  in  which  the  courses  were  concave ;  on  the  north  and  west  fapades
the  bricks  were  so  laid  as  to  present  an  undulating  arrangement  running  unin-
terruptedly from  one  end  to  the  other.*  The  walls  are  33  feet  thick,  and  their
average  height  27  feet ;  broad  and  easy  steps  lead  to  the  foot-walk  on  the  top.
The  gates  are  unsymmetrically  placed,  there  being  one  on  the  north,  east,
and  west  sides  respectively ;  while  the  southern  side  is  left  without  an  open-
ing. These  walls  afforded  protection  to  a  dense  but  unequally  distributed
population,  the  bulk  of  which  was  housed  towards  the  north  and  west  side?,
where  the  remains  of  an  immense  number  of  dwellings  may  still  be  seen.
The  temples  were  crowded  together  in  a  small  square  enclosure,  concentric
with  the  walls  of  the  enceinte,  and  the  principal  sanctuary  was  dedicated  to
Nekhabit,  the  vulture  goddess,  who  gave  her  name  to  the  city.^  This
enclosure  formed  a  kind  of  citadel,  where  the  garrison  could  hold  out  when

'  Champollion,  Monuments  de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  pp.  273,  (558,  659 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,
in.  13,  6,  c.

'  Tomb  No.  ix.  of  Ransonbi,  at  El-Kab  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  62  a),  interpreted  for  the  first  time  by
LlEBLEiN,  Recherches  sur  la  Chronologie  Egyptienne,  pp.  134,  135  ;  cf.  Bkugscu,  Geschichte  ./Egijptens,
p.  180,  and  the  genealogical  table  appended  thereto.

"  In  regard  to  this  Nekhabit  natron  and  the  use  to  which  it  was  put,  cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  sur
quelques  Papyrus  du  Louvre,  p.  50,  and  DtiMiCHEN,  Der  Grahpalast  des  Petuamenemapt,  pp.  15-18.

*  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  these  arrangements  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  450.

^  A  part  of  the  latter  temple,  that  which  had  been  rebuilt  in  the  Saite  epoch,  was  still  standing  at
the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  with  columns  bearing  the  cartouches  of  Hakori  (Saint-Genis,
Description  des  ruiiies  d'El-Kdb,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  346-350,  and
Antiquitis,  vol.  i.  pi.  66) ;  it  was  destroyed  about  the  year  1825,  and  Champollion  found  only  the
foundations  of  the  walls  {Lttlres  Sorites  d'Egypte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  109,  194,  195,  382).  Cf.  in  regard
to  these  buildings,  Brlgsoh,  Dictionnaire  G&igraphique,  pp.  353-355.


THE  LORDS   OF  EL-KAB.  85


THE  KUINS  OF  THE  rVRAMlD  OF  qClAH,  NEAK  MOHAMMERIEH.'

tlie  outer  part  had  fallen  into  the  enemy's  hands.-  The  times  were  troublous  ;
the  open  country  was  repeatedly  wasted  by  war,  and  tlie  peasantry  had  more
than  once  to  seek  shelter  behind  the  protecting  ramparts  of  the  town,  leaving
their  lands  to  lie  fallow.  Famine  constantly  resulted  from  these  disturbances,
and  it  taxed  all  the  powers  of  the  ruling  prince  to  provide  at  such  times  for
his  people.  A  chief  of  the  Commissariat,  Bebi  by  name,  who  lived  about  this
period,  gives  us  a  lengthy  account  of  the  number  of  loaves,  oxen,  goats,  and
pigs,  which  he  allowed  to  all  the  inhabitants  both  great  and  little,  down  even  to
the  quantity  of  oil  and  incense,  which  he  had  taken  care  to  store  up  for  them  :  his
prudence  was  always  justified  by  the  issue,  for  "  during  the  many  years  in  which
the  famine  recurred,  he  distributed  grain  in  the  city  to  all  those  who  hungered."  ^
Babai,  the  first  of  the  lords  of  El-Kab  whose  name  has  come  down  to  us,
was  a  captain  in  the  service  of  Saqnunri  Tiuaqni.''  His  son  x\hmosi,  having
approached  the  end  of  his  career,  cut  a  touib  for  himself  in  the  hill  which
overlooks  the  northern  side  of  the  town.      He  relates  on  the   walls  of  his

'  Drawn  by  Fauchoi-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Emit  Brugach-Bey,  taken  in  1882.

'  The  (.lescriptiou  of  the  town  of  Nekhabit  is  borrowed  from  Saikt-Genis,  Description  ties  ruines
d'El-Kib  ou  ElffOitjia,  in  the  Description  de  I'Jigypte,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  311-356.

'  Tomb  Xo.  10,  El-Kab  (CuAJiroLLiO-V,  Monuments  de  VEgtjpte  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  i.  pp.  273,  274,
059).  The  inscription  has  been  copied  and  translated  several  times  by  lirngsch  (Ilecueil  de  Monu-
ments, vol.  i.  pi.  Ixxii.  3 ;  Geschichte  jEgy/jtens,  pp.  244-247 ;  Thesaurus  Inscriptionum  2E(jijptiacarwm,
pp.  1527,  1528),  who  thought  it  might  refer  to  the  seven  years  of  famine  described  in  Gen.  xli.,  et  seq.

'  Great  Inscription  of  El-Kab,  1.  4.  There  are  still  some  doubts  as  to  tho  descent  of  this
.Vlimosi.  Some  autliorities  liold  that  Babai  was  the  name  of  his  father  and  Abina  that  of  liis  grand-
father (E.  DE  KoiJGi';,  Mgmoirc  aur  I'inscription  d'Ahmis,  pp.  125,  126) ;  others  think  that  Babai  was
his  father  and  Abina  his  mother  (Tyloh-Guifeith,  Tlie  Tomb  of  I'aheri  at  El-Kab,  p.  7  ;  Eise.nlohu,
Au»  einem  Briefe  an  D'  L.  Stern,  in  tlie  Zeitschrifl,  1885,  p.  57) ;  others,  again,  make  out  iSnbai  and
Abina  to  be  variants  of  the  same  name,  prubably  a  Semitic  one,  borne  by  tlio  father  of  Ahmosi
(iiiivnactt,  Geecltichte  JEgi/ptcns,  p.  227,  etsuq.;  Khall,  /Egijplischc  Studicu,  pp.  70,  71);  the  majority
«f  modern  Egyptologists  (including  myself)  regard  this  last  hypotliesis  as  being  the  most  probable  ono.


80  THE  HTKSOS  IN  EGYPT.

sepulchre,  for  tlie  benefit  of  posterity,  the  most  praiseworthy  actions  of  his-
long  life.  He  had  scarcely  emerged  from  childhood  when  he  was  called  upon
to  act  for  his  father,  and  before  his  marriage  he  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  the  barque  Tlie  Calf.  From  thence  he  was  promoted  to  the  ship  The  North,
and  on  account  of  his  activity  he  was  chosen  to  escort  his  namesake  the  king
on  foot,  whenever  he  drove  in  his  chariot.  He  repaired  to  his  post  at  the
moment  when  the  decisive  war  against  the  Hyksos  broke  out.^  The  tradition
current  in  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies  reckoned  the  number  of  men  under  the
command  of  King  Ahmosis  when  he  encamped  before  Avaris  at  480,000.  This-
immense  multitude  failed  to  bring  matters  to  a  successful  issue,  and  the  siege
dragged  on  indefinitely.  The  king  at  length  preferred  to  treat  with  the
Shepherds,  and  gave  them  permission  to  retreat  into  Syria  safe  and  sound,
together  with  their  wives,  their  children,  and  all  their  goods.^  This  account,
however,  in  no  way  agrees  with  the  all  too  brief  narration  of  events  furnished
by  the  inscription  in  the  tomb.  The  army  to  which  Egypt  really  owed  its
deliverance  was  not  the  undisciplined  rabble  of  later  tradition,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, consisted  of  troops  similar  to  those  which  subsequently  invaded  Syria,  some
15,000  to  20,000  in  number,  fully  equipped  and  ably  officered,  supported,  more-
over, by  a  fleet  ready  to  transfer  them  across  the  canals  and  arms  of  the  river  in
a  vigorous  condition  and  ready  for  the  battle.^  As  soon  as  this  fleet  arrived  at
the  scene  of  hostilities,  the  engagement  began.  Ahmosi-si-Abina  conducted  the
manoeuvres  under  the  king's  eye,  and  soon  gave  such  evidence  of  his  capacity,
that  he  was  transferred  by  royal  favour  to  the  Rising  in  Memphis — a  vessel  with
a  high  freeboard.  He  was  shortly  afterwards  appointed  to  a  post  in  a  division
told  off  for  duty  on  the  river  Zadiku,  which  ran  under  the  walls  of  the  enemy's
fortress.*  Two  successive  and  vigorous  attacks  made  in  this  quarter  were  barren
of  important  results.  Ahmosi-si-Abina  succeeded  in  each  of  the  attacks  in
killing  an  enemy,  bringing  back  as  trophies  a  hand  of  each  of  his  victims,  and
his  prowess,  made  known  to  the  king  by  one  of  the  heralds,  twice  procured  for
him  "  the  gold  of  valour,"  probably  in  the  form  of  collars,  chains,  or  bracelets.^

'   Great  Inscription  of  El-Kah,  11.  5-7.

^  Manetho,  iu  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grxcormn.  vol.  ii.  pp.  567,  568.

'  It  may  be  pointed  out  that  Ahmosi,  son  of  Abiua,  was  a  sailor  and  a  leader  of  sailors  ;  that  he
passed  from  one  vessel  to  another,  until  he  was  at  length  appointed  to  the  command  of  one  of  the
most  important  ships  in  the  royal  fleet.  Transport  by  water  always  played  considerable  part  in  the
wars  which  were  carried  on  in  Egyptian  territory ;  I  have  elsewhere  drawn  attention  to  campaigns
conducted  in  this  manner  under  the  Heraoleopolitan  dynasties  (Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.
■456-458),  and  we  shall  see  that  the  Ethiopian  conquerors  adopted  the  same  mode  of  transit  in  the
course  of  their  invasion  of  Egypt.

*  The  name  of  this  canal  was  first  recognised  by  Brugech  (Eeiseherichte  aiis  JEgypten,  p.  218),  then
misunderstood  and  translated  "  the  waterbearing  the  name  of  the  water  of  Avaris  "  (Sistoired'Egypte,
p.  81 ;  of.  Chabas,  Les  Pasteurs  en  Egypte,  p.  19).  It  is  now  read  "Zadlkii,"  and,  with  the  Egyptian
article,  Pa-zadikft,  or  Pzadikil  (Brugsch,  Diet.  GtTogr.,  p.  1006;  C.  di  Cara,  Gli  Hyltsds  o  Be  PaHori
di  Egitto,  p.  325).  The  name  is  of  Semitic  origin,  and  is  derived  from  the  root  meaning  "  to  be  just ;  "
we  do  not  know  to  which  of  the  watercourses  traversing  the  east  of  the  Delta  it  ought  to  be  applied.

'  Inscription  of  El-Kah,  11.  4-10.     The  fact  that  the  attacks  from  this  side  were  not  successful  is


TEE    TAKING    OF  AVAIiJS.


87


The  assault  having  been  repnlsed  in  this  quarter,  the  Egyptians  made  their
way  towards  the  south,  and  came  into  conflict  with  the  enemy  at  the  village  of
Taqimit.^  Here,  again,  the  battle  remained  undecided,  but  Ahmosi-si-Abina
had  an  adventure.  He  had  taken  a  prisoner,  and  in  bringing  him  back  lost
himself,  fell  into  a  muddy  ditch,  and,  when  he  had  freed  himself  from  the
dirt  as  well  as  he  could,  pursued  his  way  by  mistake  for  some  time  in  the


THE   TOMBS   OF   THE    PRINCES   OF    NEKHABIT,    IN   THE    HILLSIDE    ABOVE    EL-KAB."

direction  of  Avaris.  He  found  out  his  error,  however,  before  it  was  too  late,  came
back  to  the  camp  safe  and  sound,  and  received  once  more  some  gold  as  a  reward
of  his  brave  conduct.^  A  second  attack  upon  the  town  was  crowned  with  complete
success ;  it  was  taken  by  storm,  given  over  to  pillage,  and  Ahmosi-si-Abina  suc-
ceeded in  capturing  one  man  and  three  women,  who  were  afterwards,  at  the  dis-
tribution of  the  spoil,  given  to  him  as  slaves.*  The  enemy  evacuated  in  hasf  c  the
last  strongholds  which  they  held  in  the  east  of  the  Delta,  and  took  refuge
in  the  Syrian  provinces  on  the  Egyptian  frontier.  Whether  it  was  that  they
assumed  here  a  menacing  attitude,  or  whether  Alimosis  hoped  to  deal  them  a

proved  by  tlu)  sequel.  If  they  liad  succeeded,  as  is  usually  supjiused,  the  Egyptians  wnuhl  not  have
fullua  back  ou  another  point  further  south  in  order  to  renew  the  struggle.

'  The  site  of  Taqimtt  is  unknown  (Bbugsch,  Dictionnaire:G(fographique,-p.  841).  Piehl  questions
tlie  existence  of  tliis  place  (_Nute8  de  Philologic  Efjyptie.nne,  in  the  Proceedings  of  tlie  Society  of
liiblical  ArcliiEology,  1892-9^,  vol.  xv.  pp,  256,  2.57).

'  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Eniil  BrugscU-Boy,  taken  in  1884.

'  Imcriplionof  El-Kah,\\.  10-12;  tlio  text  is  not  very  explicit,  but  I  can  see  no  other  posaiblo
interpretation  of  it  than  that  hero  adopted  (cf.  a  different  explanation  in  Piehl,  Notes  de  Philologic
fjgtjplienne,  in  the  Proceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  i)p.  2.')7,  2r)8).

*  Inscription  oj  ElKah,  II.  12,  13.  The  prisoner  who  was  given  to  Ahmosis  after  the  victory,  is
probably  Paamvi,  the  Asiatic,  mentioned  in  the  list  of  his  slaves  which  he  had  engraved  ou  one  of
the  walls  of  his  tomb  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  12,  <\  I.  12).


88  THE  HYKSbs  IN  EGYPT.

crushing  blow  before  they  could  find  time  to  breathe,  or  to  rally  around  them
sufficient  forces  to  renew  the  offensive,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  cross  the  frontier,
which  he  did  in  the  5th  year  of  his  reign.^  It  was  the  first  time  for  centuries  that
a  Pharaoh  had  trusted  himself  in  Asia,  and  the  same  dread  of  the  unknown  which
had  restrained  his  ancestors  of  the  XII"^  dynasty,  doubtless  arrested  Ahmosis  also
on  the  threshold  of  the  continent.  He  did  not  penetrate  further  than  the  border
provinces  of  Zahi,  situated  on  the  edge  of  the  desert,  and  contented  himself  with
pillaging  the  little  town  of  Sharuhaua.^  Ahmosi-si-Abina  was  again  his  com-
panion, together  with  his  cousin,  Ahmosi-Pannekhabit,  then  at  the  beginning
of  his  career,  who  brought  away  on  this  occasion  two  young  girls  for  his
household.^  The  expedition  having  accomplished  its  purpose,  the  Egyptians
returned  home  with  their  spoil,  and  did  not  revisit  Asia  for  a  long  period.  If
the  Hyksos  generals  had  fostered  in  their  minds  the  idea  that  they  could
recover  their  lost  ground,  and  easily  re-enter  upon  the  possession  of  their
African  domain,  this  reverse  must  have  cruelly  disillusioned  them.  Tliey
must  have  been  forced  to  acknowledge  that  their  power  was  at  an  end,  and  to
renounce  all  hope  of  returning  to  the  country  which  had  so  summarily  ejected
them.  The  majority  of  their  own  people  did  not  follow  them  iuto  exile,  but  re-
mained attached  to  the  soil  on  which  they  lived,  and  the  tribes  which  had  suc-
cessively settled  down  beside  them — including  the  Beni-Israel  themselves — no
longer  dreamed  of  a  return  to  their  fatherland.  The  condition  of  these  people
varied  according  to  their  locality.  Those  who  had  taken  up  a  position  in  the
plain  of  the  Delta  were  subjected  to  actual  slavery.  Ahmosis  destroyed  the  camp
at  Avaris,  quartered  his  officers  in  the  towns,  and  constructed  forts  at  strategic
points,  or  rebuilt  the  ancient  citadels  to  resist  the  incursions  of  the  Bedouin.  The

'  ChampoUiou's  copy  is  dated  iu  the  year  V.  {Monuments  (Je  I'iJgyple  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  p.  656,
1.  14,  as  also  that  of  Lepsii's,  Denhm,,  iii.  12,  d,  1.  li);  Brugsch  {lieiseberichten  aus  Jigi/pten,  p.  218,
and  Geschichte  JEgypten,  p.  282)  has  read  "year  VI."  According  to  Piehl  {Notes  de  Philologie
Egyptlenne,  in  the  Fruceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  p.  258),  we  ought  to  assume,  not  that  Shariiliana
was  taken  in  the  year  V.,  but  that  the  Egyptians  besieged  it  for  five  years.

'  Shardhana,  whicli  is  mentioned  again  under  Thutmosis  III.  (Leps:us,  Denkm.,  iii.  31  h,  1.  12),
is  not  the  plain  of  Sliaron,  as  Birch  imagined  {The  Annals  of  Thotmes  III.,  as  derived  from  the  Hiero-
glyphical  Inscriptions,  p.  38),  but  the  Sharuhen  of  tlie  Biblical  texts,  in  the  tribe  of  Simeon  {Josh.
xix.  (J),  as  Brugsch  recognised  it  to  be  {Geographischv  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  p.  32).  It  is  probably
identical  with  the  modern  Tell-esh-Sheriah,  whicli  lies  uortli-west  of  Beersheba.

'  hiseription  of  El-Kah,  11.  13-15  ;  Inscription  of  the  statue  of  Ahmosi  Pannehhahit,  face  A,  11.  3,  4.
Ahmosi  Pannekhabit  lay  in  tomb  No.  2,  at  El-Kab  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  Vtgypte  et  de  la
Nubie,  pi.  cxlv.  4).  His  histary  is  briefly  told  on  one  of  the  walls  (Ephrem  Poitevin,  Notice  sur
Ahmes,  dit  Pensouvan,  in  the  Mevue  ArchAdogique,  1st  series,  vol.  xi.  pp.  65-73;  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.
43  a,  h),  and  on  two  sides  of  the  pedestal  of  his  statues.  We  have  one  of  these,  or  rather  two  plates
from  the  pedestal  of  one  of  them,  in  the  Louvre  (Pkisse  d'Avennes,  Monuments  i:gypticns,-p\.  iv.  2,  3  ;
LEPsros,  Auswahl  der  wichtigsten  Urhunden,  pi.  xiv.  A,  B  ;  cf.  Bikch,  The  Annah  of  Thoutmes  III,  as
derived  from  the  Hieroglyphical  Inscriiilions,  pp.  33,  34;  Chabas,  M€moire  sur  Us  Pas(eurs,  pp.  22,  23;
Brugsch,  Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp.  235,  236 ;  C.  di  Cara,  Gli  Ei/hsos,  pp.  328-330) ;  the  other  is  in  a
good  state  of  preservation,  and  belongs  to  Mr.  Finlay  (Maspero,  Notes  sur  quetques  Points  de  Grammaire,
etc.,  §  xliv.,  in  the  Zeitsckrift,  1885,  pp.  77,  78).  The  inscription  is  found  in  a  mutilated  condition  on
the  wall  of  the  tomb  {Levsivs,  Denhm.,  iii.  43),  but  the  three  monuments  wliich  have  oomo  down  to  us  are
eufliciently  complementary  to  one  another  to  enable  us  to  restore  nearly  the  whole  of  the  original  text.


TJIE    WARS    OF  AHMOSIS   I.    IN  NUBIA.  89

vanquished  people  iu  the  Delta,  hemmed  in  as  they  were  by  a  network  of
fortresses,  were  thus  reduced  to  a  rabble  of  serfs,  to  be  taxed  and  subjected  to
the  corvee  without  mercy.  But  further  north,  the  fluctuating  population  which
roamed  between  the  Sebennytic  and  Pelusiac  branches  of  the  Nile  were  not
exposed  to  such  rough  treatment.  The  marshes  of  the  coast-liuo  afforded  them
a  safe  retreat,  in  which  they  could  take  refuge  at  the  first  threat  of  exactions
on  the  part  of  the  royal  emissaries.  Secure  within  dense  thickets,  upon  islands
approached  by  interminable  causeways,  often  covered  with  water,  or  by  long
tortuous  canals  concealed  in  the  thick  growth  of  reeds,  they  were  able  to  defy
with  impunity  the  efforts  of  the  most  disciplined  troops,  and  treason  alone
could  put  them  at  the  mercy  of  their  foes.  Most  of  the  Pharaohs  felt  that  the
advantages  to  be  gained  by  conquering  tliem  would  be  outweighed  by  the  difS-
culty  of  the  enterprise ;  all  that  could  result  from  a  campaign  would  be  the
destruction  of  one  or  two  villages,  the  acquisition  of  a  few  hundred  refractory
captives,  of  some  ill-favoured  cattle,  and  a  trophy  of  nets  and  worm-eaten
boats.  The  kings,  therefore,  preferred  to  keep  a  close  watch  over  these  un-
disciplined hordes,  and  as  long  as  their  depredations  were  kept  witliin  reason-
able limits,  they  were  left  unmolested  to  their  wild  and  precarious  life.

The  Asiatic  invasion  had  put  a  sudden  stop  to  the  advance  of  Egyptian
rule  in  the  vast  plains  of  tlie  Upper  Nile.  The  Theban  princes,  to  whom
Nubia  was  directly  subject,  had  been  too  completely  engrossed  iu  the  wars
against  their  hereditary  enemy,  to  devote  much  time  to  the  continuation  of
that  work  of  colonization  in  the  south  which  had  been  carried  on  so  vigorously
by  their  forefathers  of  the  XII'"  and  XIII'"  dynasties.^  The  inhabitants
of  the  Nile  valley,  as  far  as  the  second  cataract,  rendered  them  obedience,  but
without  any  change  in  the  conditions  and  mode  of  their  daily  life,  which
appear  to  have  remained  unaltered  for  centuries.  The  temples  of  Usirtasen
and  Amenemhait  were  allowed  to  fall  into  decay  one  after  another,'-  the  towns
waned  in  prosperity,  and  were  unable  to  keep  their  buildings  and  monuments
in  repair ;  the  inundation  continued  to  bring  with  it  periodically  its  fleet  of
boats,  which  the  sailors  of  Kush  had  laden  with  timber,  gum,  elephants'  tusks,
and  gold  dust:  from  time  to  time  a  baud  of  Bedouin  from  Uaiiait  or  Blazaiu
would  suddenly  bear  down  upon  some  village  and  carry  off  its  spoils ;  the  nearest
garrison  would  be  called  to  its  aid,  or,  on  critical  occasions,  the  king  himself,
at  the  head  of  lus  guards,  would  fall  on  the  marauders  and  drive  them  back
into  the  mountains.  Ahmosis,  being  greeted  on  his  return  from  Syria  by
the  news  of  such  an  outbreak,  thought  it  a  favourable  moment  to  impress

'  In  regard  to  Nubiii,  seo  what  is  said  in  MASrEBO,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  391-398,  478,  ot  seq.,
.i32,  533.

■  As  will  be  Been    later   on,  tlio   temples  of  Semnch    aud  Wady-Halfah    were  rebuilt  imUer
Tbutmoais  III.


90  THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  XVIIP"   DYNASTY.

upon  the  nomadic  tribes  of  Nubia  the  greatness  of  his  conquest.'  On  this
occasion  it  was  the  people  of  Khonthanunofir,  settled  in  the  wadys  east  of  the
Nile,  above  Semneh,  which  required  a  lesson.  The  army  which  had  just
expelled  the  Hyksos  was  rapidly  conveyed  to  the  opposite  borders  of  the
country  by  the  fleet,  the  two  Ahmosi  of  Nekhabit  occupying  the  highest
posts.  The  Egyptians,  as  was  customary,  landed  at  the  nearest  point  to  the
enemy's  territory,  and  succeeded  in  killing  a  few  of  the  rebels.  Ahmosi-
si-Abina  brought  back  two  prisoners  and  three  hands,  for  which  he  was
rewarded  by  a  gift  of  two  female  Bedouin  slaves,  besides  the  "gold  of  valour."
This  victory  in  the  south  following  on  such  decisive  success  in  the  north,
filled  the  heart  of  the  Pharaoh  with  pride,  and  the  view  taken  of  it  by
those  who  surrounded  him  is  evident  even  in  the  brief  sentences  of  the  narra-
tive. He  is  described  as  descending  the  river  on  the  royal  galley,  elated  in
spirit  and  flushed  by  his  triumph  in  Nubia,  which  had  followed  so  closely
on  the  deliverance  of  the  Delta.  But  scarcely  had  he  reached  Thebes,  when
an  unforeseen  catastrophe  tui-ned  his  confidence  into  alarm,  and  compelled  him
to  retrace  his  steps.  It  would  appear  that  at  the  very  moment  when  he  was
priding  himself  on  the  successful  issue  of  his  Ethiopian  expedition,  one  of
the  sudden  outbreaks,  which  frequently  occurred  in  those  regions,  had  cul-
minated in  a  Sudanese  invasion  of  Egypt.  We  are  not  told  the  name  of
the  rebel  leader,  nor  those  of  the  tribes  who  took  part  in  it.  The  Egyptian
people,  threatened  in  a  moment  of  such  apparent  security  by  this  inroad
of  barbarians,  regarded  them  as  a  fresh  incursion  of  the  Hyksos,  and  applied
to  these  southerners  the  opprobrious  term  of  "  Fever-stricken/'  already  used  to
denote  their  Asiatic  conquerors.  The  enemy  descended  the  Nile,  committing
terrible  atrocities,  and  polluting  every  sanctuary  of  the  Theban  gods  which
came  within  their  reach.  They  had  reached  a  spot  called  Tentoa,^  before
they  fell  in  with  the  Egyptian  troops.  Ahmosi-si-Abina  again  distinguished
himself  in  the  engagement.  The  vessel  which  he  commanded,  probably  the
Rising  in  Memphis,  ran  alongside  the  chief  galliot  of  the  Sudanese  fleet,  and
took  possession  of  it  after  a  struggle,  in  which  Ahmosi  made  two  of  the  enemy's
sailors  prisoners  with  his  own  hand.  The  king  generously  rewarded  those
whose  valour  had  thus  turned  the  day  in  his  favour,  for  the  danger  had
appeared  to  him  critical ;   he  allotted  to  every  man  on  board  the  victorious

'  Inscription  of  El-Kab,  11.  15-17.  As  to  the  position  of  the  land  of  Konthauiinullr,  cf.  what  is  said
in  Maspero,  Dawii  of  Civilization,  p.  490.

^  The  name  of  this  locality  does  not  occur  elsewhere ;  it  would  seem  to  refer,  not  to  a  village,  but
rather  to  a  canal,  or  the  branch  of  a  river,  or  a  harbour  somewhere  along  the  Nile.  I  am  unable  to
locate  it  definitely,  but  am  inclined  to  think  we  ought  to  look  for  it,  if  not  in  Egypt  itself,  at  any
rate  in  that  part  of  Nubia  which  is  nearest  to  Egypt.  31.  Revillout,  taking  up  a  theory  which  had
been  abandoned  by  Chabas  (M^moire  sur  les  Pastenrf,  pp.  45, 46),  and  recognising  in  this  expedition  an
offensive  incursion  of  the  Shepherds,  suggests  that  Tantoa  may  be  the  modern  Tantah  in  the  Delta
{Eevue  Egyptologique,  vol.  vii.  p.  82,  n.  1).


Tllh:   RESUMING    OF    BUILDING    WORKS.  91

vessel  five  slaves,  and  five  arura  of  land  situated  in  his  native  province  of
each  respectively.^  The  invasion  was  not  without  its  natural  consequences  to
Egypt  itself.  A  certain  Titianu,  who  appears  to  have  been  at  the  head  of  a
powerful  faction,  rose  in  rebellion  at  some  place  not  named  in  the  narrative,
but  in  the  rear  of  the  army.  The  rapidity  witli  which  Ahmosis  repulsed  the
Nubians,  and  turned  upon  his  new  enemy,  completely  baffled  the  latter's
plans,  and  he  and  his  followers  were  cut  to  pieces,  but  the  danger  had  for  the
moment  been  serious."  It  was,  if  not  the  last  expedition  undertaken  in
this  reign,  at  least  the  last  commanded  by  the  Pharaoh  in  person.  By  his
activity  and  courage  Ahmosis  had  well  earned  tlie  right  to  pass  the  remainder
of  his  days  in  peace.

A  revival  of  military  greatness  always  entailed  a  renaissance  in  art,  followed
by  an  age  of  building  activity.  The  claims  of  the  gods  upon  the  spoils  of  war
must  be  satisfied  before  those  of  men,  because  the  victory  and  the  booty  obtained
through  it  were  alike  owing  to  the  divine  help  given  in  battle.  A  tenth,  there-
fore, of  the  slaves,  cattle,  and  precious  metals  was  set  apart  for  the  service  of
the  gods,  and  even  fields,  towns,  and  provinces  were  allotted  to  them,  the
produce  of  which  was  applied  to  enhance  the  importance  of  their  cult  or  to  repair
and  enlarge  their  temples.  The  main  body  of  the  building  was  strengthened,
halls  and  pylons  were  added  to  the  original  plan,  and  the  impulse  once  given
to  architectural  work,  the  co-operation  of  other  artificers  soon  followed.
Sculptors  and  painters  whose  art  had  been  at  a  standstill  for  generations
during  the  centuries  of  Egypt's  humiliation,  and  whose  hands  had  lost  their
cunning  for  want  of  practice,  were  now  once  more  in  demand.  They  had
probably  never  completely  lost  tlie  technical  knowledge  of  their  calling,  and
the  ancient  buildings  furnished  them  with  various  types  of  models,  which  they
liad  but  to  copy  faithfully  in  order  to  revive  their  old  traditions.  A  few  years
after  this  revival  a  new  school  sprang  up,  whose  originality  became  daily  more
patent,  and  whose  leaders  soon  showed  themselves  to  be  in  no  way  inferior  to

'  Inscription  of  El-7^ah,\\.  17-21.

'  Inscription  of  El-Kah,  11.  21-23.  Tlic  wording  of  tlie  text  ia  to  much  condeused  that  it  is  difficult
to  be  sure  of  its  meaning.  Modern  .scholars  agree  with  Brugsch  {Reisehericlite  aus  Jlgyplen,  pp.  21'J,
220,  and  Geschichle  .lujyijtens,  p.  233)  that  Titianu  ia  the  name  of  a  man,  but  several  Jigyptologists
believe  its  bearer  to  have  been  chief  of  the  Etliiopian  tribes  (Wiedemann,  JEijypt itche  Geschichte,  pp.
309,  310),  while  others  thiuli  him  to  have  been  a  rebellious  Egyptian  prince  (Erman,  ^gijpten  und
JEgyptisclies  Lehen,  p.  152;  Maspero,  Histoire  Ancienne  des  Peuples  de  I'Orient,  ith  edit.,  p.  170),  or  a
king  of  tlie  Shepherds  (REViLLOtix,  lierue  Eiji/ptologique,  vol.  vii.  p.  82,  note  1),  or  give  up  the  task  of
identification  in  despair  (Cuabas,  MtTniuire  mr  les  Pasfeurs  eu  h'gypte,  p.  46).  The  tortuous  wording
of  the  text,  and  the  expressions  which  occur  in  it,  seem  to  indicate  that  the  rebel  was  a  prince  of  the
royul  blood,  and  even  that  the  name  he  bears  was  not  his  real  one.  Later  on  we  shall  find  that,  on  a
similar  occasion,  the  ollicial  documents  refer  to  a  prince  who  took  part  in  a  plot  against  Ramses  III.
by  the  IJctitious  name  of  Pentauirit  (DiiviiuiA,  Le  Papyrus  judiciarc  de  Turin,  pp.  (JO-63,  155,  156)  ;
Titianu  was  probably  a  nickname  of  the  same  kind  inserted  in  place  of  the  real  name.  It  seems  that,
in  cases  of  high  treason,  the  crimiuiil  not  only  lost  his  life,  but  his  name  was  proscribed  both  in  this
world  and  in  the  next.


"1)2  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  XVIII^"   DYNASTY.

the  masters  of  the  older  schools.  Ahmosis  could  not  be  accused  of  ingratitude
to  the  gods ;  as  soon  as  his  wars  allowed  him  the  necessary  leisure,  he  began
his  work  of  temple-building.  The  accession  to  power  of  the  great  Theban
families  had  been  of  little  advantage  to  Thebes  itself.  Its  Pharaohs,  on
assuming  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  valley,  had  not  hesitated  to  abandon
their  native  city,  and  had  made  Heracleopolis,  the  Fayum  or  even  Memphis,
their  seat  of  government,  only  returning  to  Thebes  in  the  time  of  the  XIII"'
dynasty,  when  the  decadence  of  their  power  had  set  in.  The  honour  of
furnisliing  rulers  for  its  country  had  often  devolved  on  Thebes,  but  the  city  had
reaped  but  little  benefit  from  the  fact ; '  this  time,  however,  the  tide  of  fortune
was  to  be  turned.  The  other  cities  of  Egypt  had  come  to  regard  Thebes  as
their  metropolis  from  the  time  when  they  had  learned  to  rally  round  its
princes  to  wage  war  against  the  Hyksos.  It  had  been  the  last  town  to  lay
<lown  arms  at  the  time  of  the  invasion,  and  the  first  to  take  tliem  up  again  in
the  struggle  for  liberty.  Thus  the  Egyjit  which  vindicated  her  position
among  the  nations  of  the  world  was  not  the  Egypt  of  the  Memphite  dynasties.
It  was  the  great  Egypt  of  the  Amenemhaits  and  the  Usirtasens,  still  further
aggrandised  by  recent  victories.  Thebes  was  her  natural  capital,  and  its
kings  could  not  have  chosen  a  more  suitable  position  from  whence  to  command
etfectually  the  whole  empire,  Situated  at  an  equal  distance  from  both  frontiers,
the  Pharaoh  residing  there,  on  the  outbreak  of  a  war  either  in  the  north  or
south,  had  but  half  the  length  of  the  country  to  traverse  in  order  to  reach  the
scene  of  action.  Alimosis  spared  no  pains  to  improve  the  city,  but  his
resources  did  not  allow  of  his  embarking  on  any  very  extensive  schemes ;  he
did  not  touch  the  temple  of  Amon,  and  if  he  undertook  any  buildings  in
its  neighbourhood,  they  must  have  been  minor  edifices.  He  could,  indeed,
have  had  but  little  leisure  to  attempt  much  else,  for  it  was  not  till  the  XXI1°"
year  of  his  reign  that  he  was  able  to  set  seriously  to  work."  An  opjjortunity
then  occurred  to  revive  a  practice  long  fallen  into  disuse  under  the  foreign
kings,  and  to  set  once  more  in  motion  an  essential  part  of  the  machinery  of
Egyptian  administration.  The  quarries  of  Turah,  as  is  well  known,  enjoyed
the  privilege  of  furnishing  the  finest  materials  to  the  royal  architects ;
nowhere  else  could  be  found  limestone  of  such  whiteness,  so  easy  to  cut,  or  so
calculated  to  lend  itself  to  the  carving  of  delicate  inscriptions  and  bas-reliefs.*
The  commoner  veins  had  never  ceased  to  be  worked  by  private  enterprise,

'  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  this  neglect  of  Thebes  in  Maspero,  Dmoii  of  Cirilization,  pp.  464,  528.

^  E.  DE  EouGii,  Etude  des  Hlonuments  du  Massif  de  Kama]:,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arch^ologie  Eijyptienne
■et  Assyrienne,  vol.  i.  p.  41.  lu  the  inscription  of  the  year  XXII.,  Ahmosis  expressly  states  th.at  he
■opened  new  chambers  in  the  quarries  of  Turah  for  the  works  iu  connection  with  the  Theban  Amon,
as  well  as  for  those  of  the  temple  of  the  Memphite  Phtah  (Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  3  a,  11.  3,  4).

'  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  the  Tiirah  limestone  in  Maspeuo,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  383,  384.


rilE  REOPENING    OF   THE   QUARRIES   OF   TtjRAH.  9S

gangs  of  quarrj'men  being  always  employed,  as  at  the  present  ilay,  in  cutting
small  stone  for  building  purposes,  or  in  ruthlessly  chipping  it  to  pieces  to
burn  for  lime  in  the  kilns  of  the  neighbouring  villages  ;  but  the  finest  veins
were  always  kept  for  State  jiurposes.  Contemporary  chroniclers  might  have
formed  a  very  just  estimate  of  national  prosperity  by  the  degree  of  activity
shown  in  working  these  royal  preserves  ;  when  the  amount  of  stone  extracted
was  lessened,  prosperity  was  on  the  wane,  and  might  be  pronounced  to  be  at  it&
lowest  ebb  when  the  noise  of  the  quarryman's  liammer  finally  ceased  to  be
heard.  Every  dynasty  whose  resources  were  such  as  to  justify  tlieir  resumption
of  the  work  proudly  recorded  the  fact  on  stelte  which  lined  the  approaches  to-


A    CONVOY   OP   TUIIAH    QVARRYMEN    DRAWING    STONE.'

the  masons'  yards.  Ahmosis  reopened  the  Turah  quarry-chambers,  and  pro-
cured for  himself  "good  stone  and  white"  for  tiie  temples  of  Amon  at  Thebes
and  of  Phtah  at  Memphis.  No  monument  has  as  yet  been  discovered  to  throw
any  light  on  the  fate  of  Memphis  subsequent  to  the  time  of  the  Amenemhaits.
It  must  have  suffered  quite  as  much  as  any  city  of  the  Delta  from  the  Shepherd
invasion,  and  from  the  wars  which  preceded  their  expulsion,  since  it  was
situated  on  the  highway  of  an  invading  army,  and  would  offer  an  attraction
for  pillagers.  By  a  curious  turn  of  fortune  it  was  the  "  Fankhui,"  or  Asiatic
prisoners,  who  were  set  to  quarry  the  stone  for  the  restoration  of  the
monuments  which  their  own  forefathers  had  reduced  to  ruins."  The  bas-reliefs
sculptured  on  the  stelae  of  Ahmosis  shov/  them  in  full  activity  under  the  corvee  ;
we  see  here  the  stone  block  detached  from  the  quarry  being  squared  by  the
chisel,  or  transported  on  a  sledge  drawn  by  oxen.^

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiri,  from  a  sketch  by  Vyse-Perrino^  The  I'ljram'uU  of  Gizeh,  vol.  iii.,.
plate  facing  p.  90  ;  cf.  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  3  a.

^  The  Fankhui  are,  properly  speaking,  all  white  prisoueis,  witliout  distinction  of  race.  Their
name  is  derived  from  the  root  fdlJiu,  fankhu  =  to  bind,  press,  carry  olf,  steal,  destroy  (JIasperu,  Les
Contcs  Pujiulaires  de  V Eijyyle  Ancienne,  Ist  edit.,  p.  126,  note  2 ;  Max  MiiLLER,  Asien  und  Kuropa
nach  AlUcgi/ptifchcn  DenUinlilern,  pp.  20S-212);  if  it  is  sometimes  need  in  the  sense  of  Phtonicians
(Brlgsoii,  Gearhichte  Mjijptens,  pp.  242,  258,  0U3 ;  Wieuejiann,  JEiji/ptieche  Oeschichts,  p.  310),  it
is  only  in  the  Ptolemaic  epoch,  by  assonauco  with  the  Greek  ^oiviKa.  Here  the  term  "Fankhfti"
refers  to  the  Shepherds  and  Asiatics  made  prisoners  in  the  campaign  of  tlio  year  V.  against
Sharuhana.

'  CiiAMPOLLiON,  Monumenti  de  V Kgijple  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  ii.  p.  -188 ;  RosEM.tNr,  Monumenti
Storici,  vol.  i.  pi.  xv.,  and  pp.  195,  196;  Lepsius,  DenUm.,  iii.  3  a,  6;  Vyse-Pehhinu,  The  Fyramidt
of  Gizeh,  vol.  iii.  p.  94,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Buuuscii,  Daa  JE(jyptische  Troja,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1867,  p.  92.


94  THE   BEGINNING    OF    THE  XVIII'"   DYNASTY.

Ahiuosis  had  several  children  by  his  various  wives;  six  at  least  owned
Nofritari  for  their  mother  and  possessed  near  claims  to  the  crown,  but
she  may  have  borne  him  others  whose  existence  is  unrecorded.  The
eldest  appears  to  have  been  a  son,  Sipiri ;  he  received  all  the  honours
due  to  an  hereditary  prince,  but  died  without  having  reigned,'  and  his
second  brother,  Ameuhotpu — called  by  the  Greeks  Amenothes" — took  his
place.  Ahmosis  was  laid  to  rest  in  the  chapel  which  he  had  prepared  for
himself  in  the  cemetery  of  Drah-abu'1-Neggah,  among  the  modest  pyramids
of  the  XI"',  XIII"',  and  XVII'"  dynasties.^  He  was  venerated  as  a  god,
and  his  cult  was  continued  for  six  or  eight  centuries  later,  until  the  in-
creasing insecurity  of  the  Theban  necropolis  at  last  necessitated  the  removal
of  the  kings  from  their  funeral  chambers.''  The  coflin  of  Ahmosis  was  found
to  be  still  intact,  though  it  was  a  poorly  made  one,  shaped  to  the  contours  of
the  body,  and  smeared  over  with  yellow ;  it  represents  the  king  with  the  false
beard  depending  from  his  chin,  and  his  breast  covered  with  a  pectoral  ornament,
the  features,  hair,  and  accessories  being  picked  out  in  blue.  His  name  has
been  hastily  inscribed  in  ink  on  the  front  of  the  winding-sheet,  and  when  the
lid  was  removed,  garlands  of  faded  pink  flowers  were  still  found  about  the  neck,
laid  there  as  a  last  offering  by  the  priests  who  placed  the  Pharaoh  and  his
compeers  in  their  secret  burying-place.^  Amenothes  I.  had  not  attained  his
majority  when  his  father  "  thus  winged  his  way  to  heaven,"  leaving  him  as  heir

'  As  to  Sipiri,  c(.  Birch,  £tuJe  sur  le  Papyrus  Abbott,  iu  the  Heme  Arche'ologique,  1st  series,  vol.  xvi.
pp.  272,  273 ;  Ch.\bas,  Miianges  £gyptologiqes,  3rd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  09 ;  Maspero,  Une  Enquete  judiciaire
a  Titebes  au  temps  de  la  XX"  dynastie,  p.  80,  and  Les  Monies royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,  iu  the  M(fmoires
de  la  Missio/i  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  630,  (337;  Wiedemann,  The  King  Ahmes-Sa-pa-ar,  iu  the  Proceed-
ings of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archfeology,  vol.  viii.,  1SS6,  pp.  220-225.

=  The  form  AmenOphis,  which  is  usually  employed,  is,  properly  speaking,  the  equivaleut  of  the
uame  Amenemaupitu,  or  Amenaujati,  which  belongs  to  a  king  of  the  XXI*'  Tanite  dynasty  (Wiede-
mann, Ziir  XXIdynastie  Manetlw's,  in  the  Zeitsckrift,  1SS2,  pp.  86-SS);  the  true  Greek  transcription
of  the  Ptolemaic  epoch,  corresponding  to  the  pronunciation  Amenhotpe,  or  Amenhopte,  is  Amenothes
(Maspero,  Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  G-rammaire  et  d'Sistoire,  §  xsxvi.,  in  the  Zeitsckrift,  1SS2,  pp.
128,  129).  Under  the  XVIII""  dynasty  the  cuneiform  transcription  of  the  tablets  of  Tel-el  Amarna,
Amankhatbi,  seems  to  indicate  the  pronunciation  Amanhautpi,  Amanhatpi,  side  by  side  with  the
pronunciation  Amanhautpu,  Amenhotpu.

^  The  precise  site  is  at  present  unknown :  we  see,  however,  that  it  was  iu  tliis  place,  when  we
observe  that  Ahmosis  was  worshipped  by  the  Servants  of  the  Necropolis,  amongst  the  kings  uud
X>rinceB  of  his  family  who  were  buried  at  Drah-abu'1-Xeggah  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  2  a,  h).

'  His  priests  aud  the  minor  employes  of  his  cult  are  mentioned  on  a  stele  in  the  museum  at  Turin
(No.  So,  Oecirti,  Catalogo  lUustrato  dei  Monumenti  Eijizii,  vol.  ii.  pp.  42,  43),  and  on  a  brick  in  the
Berlin  Museum  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  25,  his  E).  He  is  worshipped  as  a  god,  along  with  Osiris,  Horus,
and  Isis,  on  a  stele  in  the  Lyons  Museum  (Deveria,  Notices  sur  les  Antiquit^s  Egyptiennes  du  Slus^e
lie  Lyon,  pp.  12,  13,  and  pi.  ii..  No.  85),  brought  from  Abydos:  he  had,  probably,  during  one  of  his
journeys  across  Egypt,  made  a  donation  to  the  temple  of  that  city,  on  condition  that  he  should  be
worshipped  there  for  ever ;  for  a  stele  at  Marseilles  shows  him  oS'ering  homage  to  Osiris  in  the  bark
of  the  god  itself  (Maspero,  Catalogue  du  Mus€e  Egypiien  de  Marseille,  No.  32,  pp.  20,  21),  and  another
stele  in  the  Louvre  informs  us  that  Pharaoh  Thutmosis  IV.  several  times  sent  one  of  his  messengers
to  Abydos  for  the  purpose  of  presenting  laud  to  Osiris  aud  to  his  own  ancestor  Ahmosis  (C  53,  iu
I'lERRET,  Mecueil  d' Inscriptions  inidites  du  Mus^e  Eijyptien  dti  Louvre,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14, 15).

'  Maspero,  Les  Momiex  royales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,  in  the  Mi'moire  de  la  Mission,  vol.  i.  pp.  533,  535.


AMENOTHES  I.   AND   NOFKITABI.


95


to  the  throne.i  Xofritari  assumed  the  imtliority ;  after  having  shared  the
royal  honours  for  nearly  tweuty-five  years  with  her  husband,  she  resolutely
refused  to  resign  them.'-  She  was  thus  the  first  of  those  queens  by  divine
right  who,  scorning  the  inaction  of  the  harem,  took  on  themselves  the  right  to
fiillil  the  active  duties  of  a  sovereign,  and  claimed  the  recognition  of  the
equality  or  superiority  of  their  titles  to  those  of  their  husbands  or  sons.     The


COFFIN    OF    AHMOSIS    IN    THE    GIZEH    MUSEUM.^


aged  Ahhotpu,  who,  like  Nofritari,  was  of  pure  royal  descent,  and  who  might
well  have  urged  her  superior  rank,  had  been  content  to  retire  in  favour  of  her
children  ;  ■*  she  lived  to  the  tenth  year  of  her  grandson's  reign,  respected  by  all
her  family,  but  abstaining  from  all  interference  in  political  affairs.^  When  at
length  she  passed  away,  full  of  days  and  honour,  she  was  embalmed  with
special  care,  and  her  body  was  placed  in  a  gilded  mummy-case,  the  head  of
which  presented  a  faithful  copy  of  her  features."     Beside  her  were  piled  the

'  The  last  date  knowu  is  tliat  of  the  year  XXII.  at  Turah ;  cf.  pp.  'J2,  93  of  the  preseut  work.
Manetho's  lists  give,  in  one  place,  twenty-five  years  and  four  mouths  after  the  expulsion  ;  in  another,
twenty-six  years  in  round  numbers,  as  the  total  duration  of  his  reign  (Mulleu-Didot,  Friujmenta
llistoricorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  572,  et  seq.),  which  has  every  appearance  of  probability.

'  Tliere  is  no  direct  evidence  to  prove  that  Amenothes  I.  was  a  minor  when  he  came  to  the  throne  ;
still  the  presumptions  in  favour  of  tliis  hypothesis,  afforded  by  the  monuments,  are  so  strong  that  many
historians  of  ancient  Egypt  have  accepted  it  (liUL'GsoH,  Hialoire  d'£gypte,  p.  80,  and  Gcschiclili:
.Egyptenn,  pp.  2C0,  201 ;  Wiede.mann,  jEgyplieche  Geachichte,  p.  313).  Queon  Nofritari  is  represented
as  reigning,  side  by  side  witli  her  reigning  son,  on  some  few  Theban  tombs  which  can  he  attributed  to
their  epoch  (Lefsr-.s,  iJtukm.,  iii.  1,  4  e).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograpli  by  Kniil  lirugsch-ISey,  taken  in  18S2.

*  JIasi'eho,  Le»  Monties  roijales  de  Dcir-el-Buhuri,  in  tlie  Me'muire»  de  la  Mhgion  Fran^uiee,  vol.  i.
p.  627,  where  the  true  conditiou  of  this  Ahhotpu  has  been  presented  for  tlie  first  time.

'  The  high  position  whicli  she  occupied  is  clearly  shown  by  (ho  inscriptions  on  the  tondj  of  her
steward  Karasa,  published  by  Bol'biant,  I'idih  Monuments,  in  the  Ikcueil  dc  Travaux,  vol.  ix.
pp.  94,  95  ;  then  by  Tieiil,  Varia,  §  Iviii.,  in  tlic  Zeitschri/t,  1888,  pp.  117,  1 18.

"  Her  portrait  is  given  above  on  p.  3  of  the  present  work,  in  tlie  form  of  an  initial  letter.     For  an


96


THE  JlEOINNINa    OF   THE  XVIIP"   DYNASTY.


jewels  she  had  received  iu  her  lifetime  from  her  husband  and  son.  The
majority  of  them  are  for  feminine  use ;  a  fan  with  a  handle  plated  with  gold,  a
mirror  of  gilt  bronze  with  ebony  handle,  bracelets  and  ankle-rings,  some  of  solid

and  some  of  hollow  gold,  edged  with  fine  chains
of  plaited  gold  wire,  others  formed  of  beads  of
gold,  lapis-Iazuli,  cornelian,  and  green  felspar,
many  of  them  engraved  with  the  cartouche  of
Ahmosis.  Belonging  also  to  Ahmosis  we  have
a  beautiful  quiver,  in  which  figures  of  the  king
and  the  gods  stand  out  in  high  relief  on  a  gold
plaque,  delicately  chased  with  a  graving  tool  ;
the  background  is  formed  of  small  pieces  of  lapis
and  blue  glass,  cunningly  cut  to  fit  each  other.
One  bracelet  in  particular,  found  ou  the  queen's
wrist,  consisted  of  three  parallel  bands  of  solid
gold  set  with  turquoises,  and  having  a  vulture
with  extended  wings  on  the  front.  The  queen's
hair  was  held  in  place  by  a  gold  circlet,  scarcely
as  large  as  a  bracelet ;  a  cartouche  was  afiixed
to  the  circlet,  bearing  the  name  of  Ahmosis  iu
blue  paste,  and  flanked  by  small  sphinxes,  one
on  each  side,  as  supporters.  A  thick  flexible
chain  of  gold  was  passed  several  times  round
her  neck,  and  attached  to  it  as  a  pendant  was
a  beautiful  scarab,  partly  of  gold  and  partly  of
blue  porcelain  striped  with  gold.  The  breast
ornament  was  completed  by  a  necklace  of  several
rows  of  twisted  cords,  from  which  depended
antelopes  pursued  by  tigers,  sitting  jackals,
hawks,  vultures,  and  the  winged  urajus,  all  attached  to  the  winding-sheet  by
means  of  a  small  ring  soldered  on  the  back  of  each  animal.^  The  fastening
of  this  necklace  was  formed  of  the  heads  of  two  gold  hawks,  the  details  of
the   heads   being  worked  out  iu  blue  enamel.      Both  weapons  and  amulets


NOPKITAKI,  THE   BLACK-SKINNED   GODDESS."


account  of  its  discovery,  cf.  Dr.  Maunier's  letter,  Deux  Documents  relatifs  auxfouilles  de  Marietle,  in
the  Bccueil  de  Travaux,  Tol.  xii.  pp.  21G-21S  ;  and  Dkveria,  (JSuvres,  vol.  i.  p.  380,  et  seq.  The  objects
have  been  described  and  reproduced  by  Birch,  On  Gold-jewelled  Ornaments  found  at  Thebes  in  ISo'J,
in  the  Arclaeoloyical  Journal,  vol.  xx.  p.  166,  and  Facsimiles  of  the  Egyptian  Relics  discovered  at
Tlieles  in  the  Tomb  of  Queen  Aah-hotep,  4to,  1863 ;  BIariette,  Notice  desPrincipaux  Monuments,  1864,
pp.  218-227.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograiA  by  M.  de  Mertens  taken  in  the  Berlin  Museum.

-  This  necklace  has  been  reproduced  ou  p.  3  of  the  present  work,  where  it  serves  as  a  frontispiece
to  the  chapter.


THE  JEWELS    OF   QUEEN   AIIHOTPU.  97

were    found    aiiionf^   tlie  jewels,  iucluding  three   gold   flies  suspended  by  a


THE  JEWELS  AND   WEAPONS   OF-QCEEN   AlIIIOTPr    I,    IX  THE   UIZEU   MUSEUJl.


tliin  chain,  nine  gold  and  silver  axes,  a  lion's  head  in  gold  (if  most  ininnte


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pbologrnpli  by  lic'chanl,  in  Mahiette,  Alhiim  yhbiograpMque
du  Muffie  (Z«  lloularj,  pi.  3.  Tbe  dag^'cr  is  reproiluced  by  itself  nn  p.  "204  of  tlio  present  volume,  side
by  side  witli  a  Myociia;an  dagger  of  similur  form  and  ornamentation.

H


98  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  XVIIF"   DYNASTY.

workmanship/  a  sceptre  of  black  wood  plated  with  gold,  daggers  to  defend
the  deceased  from  the  dangers  of  the  unseen  world,  boomerangs  of  hard
wood,  and  the  battle-axe  of  Ahmosis.  Besides  these,  there  were  two  boats,
one  of  gold  and  one  of  silver,  originally  intended  for  the  Pharaoh  Kamosu —
models  of  the  skiff  in  which  his  mummj^  crossed  the  Nile  to  reach  its  last
resting-place,  and  to  sail  in  the  wake  of  the  gods  on  the  western  sea.-

Nofritari  thus  reigned  conjointly  with  Amenothes,  and  even  if  we  have
no  record  of  any  act  in  which  she  was  specially  concerned,  we  know  at  least
that  her  rule  was  a  prosperous  one,  and  that  her  memory  was  revered  by
her  subjects.  While  the  majority  of  queens  were  relegated  after  death  to
the  crowd  of  shadowy  ancestors  to  whom  habitual  sacrifice  was  offered,  the
worshippers  not  knowing  even  to  which  sex  these  royal  personages  belonged,
the  remembrance  of  Nofritari  always  remained  distinct  in  their  minds,  and
her  cult  spread  till  it  might  be  said  to  have  become  a  kind  of  popular
religion.  In  this  veneration  Ahmosis  was  rarely  associated  with  the  queen,
but  Amenothes^  and  several  of  her  other  children  shared  in  it — her  son
Sipiri,  for  instance,^  and  her  daughters  Sitamon,''  Sitkamosi,"  and  Maritamon  ;  ^
Nofritari  became,  in  fact,  an  actual  goddess,  taking  her  place  beside  Amon,
Khousii,  and  Maut,''  the  members  of  the  Theban  Triad,  or  standing  alone  as
an  object  of  worship  for  her  devotees.^  She  was  identified  with  Isis,  Hathor,
and  the  mistresses  of  Hades,  and  adopted  their  attributes,  even  to  the  black  or
blue  coloured  skin  of  these  funerary  divinities.^"      Considerable  endowments

'  It  is  reproduced,  as  nearly  a3  possible  full  size,  as  a  tail-piece  on  p.  lOS  of  the  present  volume.
The  drawing  is  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emit  Brugsch-Bey.

-  See  the  drawing  of  the  gold  skiif  and  its  carriage  on  p.  SI  of  the  present  volume.

'  A  list  of  the  monuments  on  which  she  is  represented  as  being  worshipped  in  conjunction  with  hir
son  Amenothes  I.  has  been  very  carefully  compiled  by  Wiedejiaxn,  ^gyptische  Gesch  ichfe,  pp.  313,  314.

'  Stele  from  Karnak  in  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  89 ;  stele  at  Turin  in  Cha5IPOLlion-
FlGEAC,  £ijypte  Ancienne,  pi.  67,  and  Maspeko,  Bapport  sur  ime  Mission  en  Italie,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.
iii.  p.  113;  coffin  of  Batehamon  in  Schiapakelli,  H  Libro  dei  Funerali,  pp.  17,  IS;  cf.  for  these
representations  collectively,  Maspeko,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir-eJ-JSahari,  p.  630.

'  Sitamon  is  mentioned,  with  her  mother,  on  the  Karnak  stele  (Maf.iette,  Monuments  divers,  p.  S'J)
and  on  the  coffin  of  Butehamon  (Schi.iparelli,  ibid.,  pp.  17,  18);  for  the  position  to  be  assigned  to
this  princess,  cf.  Maspeko,  Les  Momies  royales,  etc.,  p.  621.

^  Akcndale-Bokomi-Birch,  Gallery  of  Antiquities  selected  from  the  Brit.  Mus..  pt.  i.  p.  75,  pi.  30,
fig.  142;  and  Prisse  d'Avexses,  Notice  sur  les  Antiquit^s  Egyptiennes  du  Mus^e  Britannique,  pp.  16,
17;  cf.  Maspeko,  Les  Momiet,  etc.,  pp.  440-543,  623,  624.

"  Coffin  of  Biitehamon  in  Schiapakelli,  II  Libro  dei  Funerali,  pp.  17,  18  ;  tomb  of  Qoni  at  Deir
el-Medineh,  in  Wiedemann,  Tomhs  of  the  XIX"'  Dynasty  at  Der  el-Medineh  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Bibh  Arclu-eol.  Soc,  1SS6,  vol.  viii.  p.  231.

*  She  is  worshipped  with  the  Tbeb.an  Triad  by  Hrihor,  at  Karnak,  in  the  temple  of  Khonsu
(CiiAMroLLiON,  Monuments  de  VKgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  ii.  p.  227 ;  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  246  a).

'  CH.VMPOLLION,  Monumeiits  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  52,  where  her  sacred  bark  is  represented,
and  Seti  I.  in  adoration  before  her.

"  Her  statue  in  the  Turin  Museum  represents  her  as  having  black  skin  (Champoi.lion,
Lettres  a  M.  U  due  de  Blacas,  i.  pp.  21,  22).  She  is  also  painted  black  standing  before  Amenothes
(who  is  white)  in  the  Deir  el-Medineh  tomb,  now  preserved  in  the  Berlin  Museum  (Lepsius,
Denhm.,  iii.  1;  ct"E,Kii.\s,  Ausfilhrliches  Verzeicltuiss  der  JEgyptischen  AUerthilmer,  1894,  pp.  149,  150,
Nos.  2060,  2061),  in  that  of  Nibnuttru  (Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  525,  and  pi.  clxx.  1),


THE  APOTHEOSIS   OF  NOFEITARI.


99


were  given  for  maintaining  worship  at  her  tomb,  and  were  administered  by  a
special  class  of  priests.^  Her  mnmmy  reposed  among  those  of  the  princes  of  her
family,  in  the  hiding-place  at  Deir-el-Bahari :  it  was  enclosed  in  an  enormoiis


THE    TWO   COFFINS   OF    AHUOTPU    II.    AND    NOFRITASI    STANDING    IN    THE   VESTIBULE    OF    THE   OLD

BULAK    MUSEUM.-

woodeu  sarcophagus  covered  with  linen  and  stucco,  the  lower  part  being  shaped
to  the  body,  while  the  upper  part  representing  the  head  and  arms  could  be  lifted
off  in  one  piece.    The  shoulders  are  covered  with  a  networic  in  relief,  the  meshes

ami  in  that  of  Unnofir,  at  Sheikh  Abd  cl-(Juiiiah  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  524).  Her  face  is  painted  blue  in
the  tomb  of  Kasa  (Wikdemann,  Tombs  of  the  XIX"'  Dyn.  at  Dcr  el-iledineh,  iu  the  Proceedings  of  the
Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  188G,  vol.  viii.  p.  22G).  The  representations  of  this  queen  with  a  black  skin  have
cau8e<l  her  to  be  taken  for  a  negress,  the  daughter  of  an  Ethiopian  Pliaraoh  (IIosellini,  Monumenti
Storic.i,  vol.  iii.  1,  p.  02  ;  Auundale-Bonomi-Birch,  Gallenj  of  Antiquities,  ii.  p.  71 ;  Brcgscii,  Ilist.
d' Agijijte,  pp.  83,  80 ;  LErsu's,  Briefe  aus  Jlir/ypten,  p.  2GS ;  Wiedejiann,  jEijyptische  Geiehichte,  p.  ;!(l!)),
or  at  any  rate  the  daughter  of  a  chief  of  some  Nuliian  tribe  (Ei).  Meyer,  Gefchichte  JEijyptens,  p.  221,
note  1);  it  was  thouglit  that  Ahmosis  must  have  married  her  to  secure  the  help  of  the  negro  tribes
in  liis  wars,  and  that  it  was  owing  to  this  alliance  that  he  succeeded  in  expelling  the  Hyksos.  Later
iliscoveries  have  not  confirmed  these  hypotlicees.  Nofritari  was  most  probably  an  Egyptian  of
unmixed  race,  as  we  have  seen,  and  daughter  of  Ahiiotpfi  I.  (see  p.  77  of  this  volume),  and  the  black  or
blue  colour  of  her  skin  is  merely  owing  to  lior  identification  with  the  goddesses  of  the  dead  (Biiuascil,
Qetcli.  Airjyptens,  pp.  2.')9,  2G0  ;  Lautii,  Aus  Airiyptens  Vorzeit,  pp.  210,  24G).

'  The  monuments  connecte<l  with  her  priests,  her  cultiis,  and  tlie  appanage  of  jjcr  tomb  arc  enume-
rated exliuustlvely  in  Wiedemann,  Aigypt.  Gesch.,  p.  315.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brug8ch-Bey,  taken  in  1.SS2.


100  TEE  BEQINNING    OF  THE  XVlir«   DYNASTY.

of  which  are  painted  bhie  on  a  yellow  background.  The  Queen's  hands  are
crossed  over  her  breast,  and  clasp  the  crux  ansata,  the  symbol  of  life.  The  whole
mummy-case  measures  a  little  over  nine  feet  from  the  sole  of  the  feet  to  the
top  of  the  head,  which  is  furthermore  surmounted  by  a  cap,  and  two  long  ostrich-
feathers.  The  appearance  is  not  so  much  that  of  a  cofBn  as  of  one  of  those
enormous  caryatides  which  we  sometimes  find  adorning  the  front  of  a  temple.^
We  may  perhaps  attribute  to  the  influence  of  Nofritari  the  lack  of  zest
evinced  by  Amenothes  for  expeditions  into  Syria.  Even  the  most  energetic
kings  had  always  shrunk  from  penetrating  mucli  beyond  the  isthmus.  Those
who  ventured  so  far  as  to  work  the  mines  of  Sinai  had  nevertheless  felt  a  secret
fear  of  invading  Asia  proper — a  dread  which  they  never  succeeded  in  overcoming.
When  the  raids  of  the  Bedouin  obliged  the  Egyptian  sovereign  to  cross  the
frontier  into  their  territory,  he  would  retire  as  soon  as  possible,  without
attemi^ting  any  permanent  conquest.^  After  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos,
Ahmosis  seemed  inclined  to  pursue  a  less  timorous  course.  He  made  an
advance  on  Shariihana  and  pillaged  it,'  and  the  booty  he  brought  back  ought
to  have  encouraged  him  to  attempt  more  important  expeditions;  but  he  never
returned  to  this  region,  and  it  would  seem  that  when  his  first  enthusiasm  had
subsided,  he  was  paralysed  by  the  same  fear  which  had  fallen  on  his  ancestors.
Nofritari  may  have  counselled  her  son  not  to  break  through  the  traditions
which  his  father  had  so  strictly  followed,  for  Amenothes  I.  confined  his
campaigns  to  Africa,  and  the  traditional  battle-fields  there.  He  embarked  for
the  land  of  Kush  on  the  vessel  of  Ahmosi-si-Abina  "  for  the  purpose  of  enlarging
the  frontiers  of  Egypt."  It  was,  we  may  believe,  a  thoroughly  conventional
campaign,  conducted  according  to  the  strictest  precedents  of  the  XIP"  dynasty.
The  Pharaoh,  as  might  be  expected,  came  into  personal  contact  with  the  enemy,
and  slew  their  chief  with  his  own  hand  ;  the  barbarian  warriors  sold  their
lives  dearly,  but  were  unable  to  protect  their  country  from  pillage,  the  victors
carrying  off  whatever  they  could  seize — men,  women,  and  cattle.  The  pursuit
of  the  enemy  had  led  the  army  some  distance  into  the  desert,  as  far  as  a  halting-
place  called  the  "  Upper  cistern  " — Ehnumit  hirit ;  instead  of  retracing  his
steps  to  the  Nile  squadron,  and  returning  slowly  by  boat,  Amenothes  resolved
to  take  a  short  cut  homewards.  Ahmosi  conducted  him  back  overland  in
two  days,  and  was  rewarded  for  his  speed  by  the  gil't  of  a  quantity  of  gold,
and  two  female  slaves.^     An  incursion  into  Libya  followed  quickly  on  the

'  Maspeko,  Les  Momies  royales  tie  Deir-el-Baliart,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  etc.,
vol.  i.  pp.  535,  536.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject  in  Maspeeo,  Dawn  of  Civilir.ation,  pp.  394,  4G8,  et  seq.,  and  pp.
IG,  17,  and  88  of  the  present  volume.

'  Oreat  Inscription  of  El-Kah,  11.  23-28.  A  monument  at  Vienna  informs  us  that  Amenothes  I.
was  worshipped  in  the  Ethiopian  district  of  Kara  or  Kari  (Bergmans',  InschriftUche  Denlimiiler,  in  the
Recueil  de  Travanx,  vol.  ix.  p.  50;  ef.  Wiedemann,  JitjijiAische  Geschichle,  p.  321).


THE   WARS   OF  AMENOTHES   I.


lOT


Ethiojjiau  campaign.  The  tribe  of  the  Kihaka,  settled  between  Lake  Mareotis
and  the  Oasis  of  Anion,  Lad  probably  attacked  in  an  audacious  manner  the
western  provinces  of  the
Delta  ;^  a  raid  was  organ-
ized against  them,  and  the
issue  was  commemorated  by
a  small  wooden  stele,  on
which  we  see  the  victor
represented  as  brandishing
iiis  sword  over  a  barbarian
lying  prostrate  at  his  feet.^
The  exploits  of  Araenothes
appear  to  have  ended  with
this  raid,  for  we  possess  no
monument  recording  any
further  victory  gained  by
him.  This,  however,  has  not
prevented  his  contemporaries
from  celebrating  him  as  a
conquering  and  victorious
king.  He  is  portrayed  stand-
ing erect  in  his  chariot  ready
to  charge,  or  as  carrying  oil'
two  barbarians  whom  he  holds
half  suffocated  in  his  sinewy
arms,*  or  as  gleefully  smiting
the  princes  of  foreign  lands.^  He  acquitted  himself  of  the  duties  of  the  chase  as
became  a  true  Pharaoh,  for  we  find  him  depicted  in  the  act  of  seizing  a  lion  by
tlie  tail  and  raising  him  suddenly  in  mid-air  previous  to  despatching  him."


STATUE   OP   AMENOTHES  I.   IN   THE   TURIN   MUSEUil.''


'  Statue  of  Ahmoei  Pan-nekhaWt,  A,  11.  5,  G.  The  name  is  written  Amft  Kihaka,  and  the  com-
bination of  these'  two  terms  appears  to  me  to  designate  the  part  of  the  tribe  living  near  Arail  (cf.,  for
a  parallel  construction,  Pieul,  Varia,  §  Ixii.,  in  the  Zeitschri/f,  vol.  xxviii.  p.  IG),  the  capital  of  thi;
Libyan  nomo  (Petrie,  Naucratis,  i.  p.  94,  and  pi.  xxvii.  2).  Brugsch  ideutifies  them  with  the  lolmcclii,
the  Libyans  mentioned  by  Ptolemy  (IV.  v.  T.\ ;  of.  Vivien  db  Saint-Martin,  Le  Nord  de  I'Afrique,
p.  445;  Brugscu,  Geschichte  JE(jijiitcns,pY).  2G1,2G2).  AViedenmnn  would  lool;  for  them  on  the  Asiatic
side  (JEyyplische  GeicliicUte,  Jip.  317,  318).

'  EosELUNi,  Momtmenli  Slorici,  vol.  iii.  1,  pp.  108,  109,  and  pi.  ii.  B.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  supplied  by  Flinders  Petrio.

'  Small  wooden  stele  in  the  British  Museum,  probably  belonging  to  the  same  find  as  the  stelaj  in
the  Louvre  (Arundale-Bonosii-Bircu,  Galhry  of  AnliquitieB,  ii.  p.  74,  and  pi.  30,  fig.  143.

°  Small  wooden  steloo  in  the  Louvre,  Nos.  33:i,  310,  341  (Pikuret,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle
hiflorique,  pp.  81,  82),  published  in  Rosellini,  Monumenii  Storki,  vol.  iii.  1,  pp.  lOS-UO,  and
pi.  ii.  A,  D.

*  EosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Slorici,  vol.  iii.  1,  p.  110,  and  pi.  ii.  E.


102


THE  BEGINNINO    OF   THE  XVIIF"   DYNASTY.


STELE   OF   AMENUTHES   I.    IX    THE    LOVVKE.'


These  are,  indeed,  but  eonventioual  pictures
of  war,  to  which  we  must  not  attach  an
undue    importance.      Egypt  had  need
of  repose  in  order  to  recover  from  the
losses   it   had  sustained   during   the
years  of  struggle  with  the  invaders.
If    Amenothes   courted   peace   from
preference   and    not    from    political
motives,  his  own  generation  profited
as  much  by  his  indolence  as  the  pre-
ceding one  had  gained  by  the  energy
i      of  Ahmosis.     The  towns  in  his  reign
resumed  their  ordinary  life, agriculture
flourished,  and  commerce  again  fol-
lowed its  accustomed  routes.     Egypt
increased  its  resources,  and  was  thus
able  to  prepare  for  future  conquest.
The  taste  for  building  had  not  as  yet
sulhciently  developed  to  become  a  drain  upon  the  public  treasury.     We  have,
however,  records  showing  that  Amenothes  excavated  a  cavern  in  the  mountain
of  Ibrim  in  Nubia,  dedicated  to  Satit,  one  of  the  goddesses  of  the  cataract.^     It
is  also  stated  that  he  worked  regularly  the  quarries  of  Silsileh,  but  we  do  not
know  for  what  buildings  the  sandstone  thus  extracted  was  destined.^     Karnak
was  also  adorned  with  chapels,  and  with  at  least  one  colossus,^  while  several
chambers  built  of  the  white  limestone  of  Tiirah  were  added  to  Ombos."    Thebes
had  thus  every  reason  to  cherish  the  memory  of  this  pacific  king.     As  Nofritari
had    been    metamorphosed    into   a   form   of    Isis,   Amenothes   was   similarly

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudm,  from  the  wooden  stele  No.  3i2  in  the  Louvre  (Pierret,  Cata-
logue de  la  Salle  hisiorique,  p.  82);  of.  Eosellini,  Moiiumenti  Storici,  vol.  iii.  1,  p.  109,  and
pi.  ii.  C.

'  Eosellini,  ibid.,  vol.  iii.  1,  pp.  73-79,  and  pi.  xxviii.  1.

'  A  baa-relief  on  the  western  bank  of  the  river  represents  him  deified  (Champoliion,  Monumenls
de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  p.  249,  and  pi.  cii.  1 ;  Eosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  iii.  1,  pp.  79,  80,
and  pi.  i.  19  of  the  same  volume):  Pauaiti,  the  name  of  a  superintendent  of  the  quan-ies  who  lived
in  his  reign,  has  been  preserved  in  several  graffiti  (Eisenlohr,  An  Historical  Monument,  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1881,  p.  101 ;  Flinders  Petkie,  A  Season  in  Egypt,  pi.  xv.,  No.
476),  while  another  graffito  gives  us  only  the  protocol  of  the  sovereign,  and  indicates  that  the  quarries
were  worked  in  his  reign  (Flinders  Petrie,  ibid.,  pi.  xvi.,  No.  4S0).

*  The  chambers  of  white  limestone  are  marked  I,  K,  on  Mariette's  jilan  (^Earriah,  pi.  v.);  it  is
possible  that  they  may  have  been  merely  decorated  under  Thtitraosis  III.,  whose  cartouches  alternate
with  those  of  Amenothes  I.  (Mariette,  Karnal;  pp.  31,  37).  The  colossus  is  now  in  front  of  the
third  Pylon,  and  Wiedemann  concluded  from  this  fact  that  Amenothes  had  begun  extensive  works
for  enlarging  the  temple  of  Amon  (j:gi/pfische  Geschichte,  p.  318)  ;  Mariette  believed,  with  greater
probability,  that  the  colossus  formerly  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  XII'"  dynasty  temple,  but  was
removed  to  its  present  position  by  Thiltmosis  III.  (^Karnak,  pp.  27,  note  3,  60).

»  Maspero,  Notes  sur  quelguea  points  de  Grain,  et  d'Eist.,  in  the  Z&itschrift,  1883,  p.  78;  the
fragments  have  since  disappeared  (Morgan,  Catalogue  dcs  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  p.  1).


TEE   CULTUS   OF  AMENoTHES  I.    AND    HIS  MUMMY.


103


THE    COFFIN    AND    MU31MV    Of    AMIiSOTUES  I.    IN    THE   GIZEH   MDSEUM.'

represented  as  Osiris,  the  protector  of  the  Necropolis,  and  he  was  depicted  as
such  with  the  sombre  colour  of  the  funerary  divinities  ;  -  his  image,  moreover,
together  with  those  of  the  other  gods,  was  used  to  decorate  the  interiors  of
coffins,  and  to  protect  the  mummies  of  his  devotees.^  One  of  his  statues,  now
in  the  Turin  Museum,  represents  him  sitting  on  his  throne  in  the  posture  of  a
king  giving  audience  to  his  subjects,  or  in  that  of  a  god  receiving  the  homage
of  his  worshippers.  The  modelling  of  the  bust  betrays  a  flexibility  of  handling
which  is  astonishing  in  a  work  of  art  so  little  removed  from  barbaric  times;  the
head  is  a  marvel  of  delicacy  and  natural  grace.  We  feel  that  the  sculptor
has  taken  a  delight  in  chiselling  the  features  of  his  sovereign,  and  in  repro-
ducing the  benevolent  and  almost  dreamy  expression  which  characterised  them.^
The  cult  of  Ameuothes  lasted  for  seven  or  eight  centuries,  until  the  time
when  his  coffin  was  removed  and  placed  with  those  of  the  other  members  of  his
family  in  the  place  where  it  remained  concealed  until  our  own  times.'     It  is

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsoh-Bey,  takeu  in  18S2.

'  The  cult  of  Ameuothes  I.  and  the  principal  monuments  which  are  as  yet  known  connected
with  it  are  given  in  Wiedemann,  JEgypiische  Gischidite,  pp.  319,  3".i0.  A  black  Amenothes,  followed
by  his  son  Sipiri,  is  reproduced  in  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  iii.  1,  pp.  98-lOG,  pi.  xxix.  3.

^  Wiedemann  (JEgyptiache  Gesckickte,  p.  319)  has  collected  several  examples,  to  whicli  it  would  be
easy  to  add  others.  The  names  of  tho  king  are  in  this  case  constantly  accompanied  by  unusual
epithets,  whicli  are  enclosed  in  one  or  other  of  his  cartouches :  Mens.  Revillout,  deceived  by  these  un-
familiar forms,  has  made  out  of  one  of  these  variants,  on  a  painted  cloth  In  the  Louvre,  a  new  AmcnothcB,
whom  he  styles  Ameuothes  V.  (_Le  Boi Amenophis  F.,in  iho  BuHeiin  ihs  Musses,  \o\.  i.  pp.  112-11-1).  For
■'  I'a-abiti-ni-Amon,"  a  surname  of  tlie  deified  Amenotlies  I.,  frequently  met  with,  and  signifying  "  tlio
intimate  friend  or  imago  of  Amon,"  see  Lepsiu.s,  Denktn.,  iii.  2  b,  c;  and  cf.  A.  B.  Edwahds,  On  a
Fraijmcnt  of  Mummy-Case,  in  tlie  Acteg  du  Cotigres  dee  OrienialUica  de  Lcyden,  sect.  3,  pp.  173-175.

'  CnAMPOLLioN,  Lellres  a  M.  le  due  dc  Blacas,  vol.  i.  pp.  20,  21 ;  Ohcl'uti,  Catalogo  Illustrato,  vol.
ii.  p.  71,  No.  37.  Anotlier  statue  of  very  fine  workmanship,  but  mutilated,  is  preserved  in  tlio  Glzch
JIuseum  (Maijikite,  Notice  des  principanx  Monuments,  1871,  p.  260,  No.  870,  and  Monuments  divers,
pi.  101,  Tcxte,  p.  29  ;  Maspeho,  Guide  dit  Visilettr,  p.  241,  No.  4134 ;  ViiiEY,  Notice  des  principaux
Monuments,  p.  172,  No.  G9o);  this  statue  is  of  the  time  of  Soti  I.,  and,  as  is  customary,  represents
Amenothes  in  the  likeness  of  the  king  then  reigning.

^  We  know,  from  the  Abbott  Vapyrus,  pi.  ii.  11. 2-7,7-1 1  (cf.  MasperO,  Une  Enquetejudiciaire  a  T/iibesi
p|i.  13,  15,  71,  72;  Chadas,  Une  Spoliation  des  Uypogeesde  Thebes,  in  tho  Mdanges  Egypluloyiques,  3rd


lO-i  TffE  BEGINNING    OF   TEE  XVIIP"    DYNASTY.

s'laped  to  correspond  with  the  form  of  the  human  body  and  painted  white;

the  face  resembles  that  of  his  statue,  and  the  eyes  of  enamel,  touched  with

kold,  give  it  a  wonderful  appearance  of  animation.     The  body  is  swathed  iu

orange-coloured  linen,  kept  in  place  by  bands  of  brownish  linen,  and  is  further

covered  by  a  mask  of  wood  and  cartonnage,  painted  to  match  the  exterior  of

the  coffin.     Long  garlands  of  faded  flowers  deck  the  mummy  from  head  to

foot.     A  wasp,  attracted  by  their  scent,  must  have  settled  upon  them  at  the

moment  of  burial,  and  become  imprisoned  by  the  lid ;  the  insect  has  been

completely  preserved  from  corruption  by  the  balsams  of  the  embalmer,  and

its  gauzy  wings  have  passed  uncrumpled  through  the  long  centuries.^

Amenothes  had  married  Ahhotpu  II.,  his  sister  by  the  same  father  and

mother;^  Ahmasi,the  daughter  born  of  this  union,  was  given  in  marriage  to  Thut-

mosis,  one  of  her  brothers,  the  son  of  a  mere  concubine,  by  name  Sonisonbu.^

Ahmasi,  like  her  ancestor  Nofritari,  had  therefore  the  right  to  exercise  all  the

royal  functions,  and  she  might  have  claimed  precedence  of  her  husband.  Whether

from  conjugal  affection  or  from  weakness  of  character,  she  yielded,  however,  the

priority  to  Thutmosis,  and  allowed  him  to  assume  the  sole  government.   He  was

crowned  at  Thebes  on  the  21st  of  the  third  month  of  Pirit ;   and  a  circular,

addressed  to  the  representatives  of  the  ancient  seignorial  families  and  to  the

officers  of  the  crown,  announced  the  names   assumed   by  the  new  sovereign.

"  Tiiis  is  the  royal  rescript  to  announce  to  you  that  my  Majesty  has  arisen

king  of  the  two  Egypts,  on  the  seat  of  the  Horus  of  the  living,  without  equal,

foi-  ever,  and  that  my  titles  are  as  follows :  The  vigorous  bull  Horus,  beloved

of  Mait,  the  Lord  of  the  Vulture  and  of  the  Urseus  who  raises  itself  as  a  flame,

most  valiant, — the  golden  Horus,  whose  years  are  good  and  who  puts  life  into

all  hearts,  king  of  the  two  Egypts,  AkhopirkerI,  son  of  the  Sun,  Thutmosis,

living  for  ever.*     Cause,  therefore,  sacrifices  to  be  offered  to  the  gods  of  the

series,  vol.  i.  pp.  (50,  (jl),  that  the  pyramid  of  Amenothes  I.  was  situated  at  Drah  Abou'l-Xeggah,
among  those  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XI'",  XII"',  and  XVII"'  dynasties.  The  remains  of  it  have  not
yet  been  discovered.

'  Masi'EUO,  Les  Momie$  royales,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Fruiicaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  536,  537.

-  Ahhotpd  II.  may  be  seen  beside  her  husband  on  several  monuments  given  by  Wiedemaxs,
JEgypt.  Geschichte,  pp.  316,  317.  The  proof  that  she  was  full  sister^  of  Amenothes  I.  is  furnished  by
the  title  of  "hereditary  princess"  which  is  given  to  her  daughter  Ahmasi ;  this  princess  would  not
have  taken  precedence  of  her  brother  .and  husband  Thutmosis,  who  was  the  sou  of  an  inferior  wife,
had  she  not  been  the  daughter  of  the  only  legitimate  spouse  of  Amenothes  I.  The  marriage  had
already  taken  place  before  the  accession  of  Thiitmosis  I.,  as  Ahmasi  figures  in  a  document  dated  the
first  year  of  his  reign  (EmiAy,  Bundschreiben  Thutmosis'  I  an  die  Behorden  mil  der  Anzeige  seines
Begierungsantrittes,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxis.  p.  117).

'  Erman,  ibid.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  ssix.  pp.  117-119.  The  absence  of  any  cartouche  shows
that  Sonisonbil  did  not  belong  to  the  royal  family,  and  the  very  form  of  the  name  points  her  out  to  have
been  of  the  middle  cla3ses,'aud  merely  a  concubine.  The  acoessiou  of  her  sou,  however,  ennobled  her,
and  he  represents  her  as  a  queeu  on  the  w.ills  of  the  temple  at  Deir  el-Bahari  (Naville,  The  Temple
of  Deir  el-Bahari,  etc.,  pp.  12-14);  even  then  be  merely  styles  her  "Royal  Mother,"  the  only  title  slic
could  really  claim,  as  her  inferior  position  in  the  harem  prevented  her  from  using  that  of  "  Royal  Spouse."

«  This  is  really  the  protocol  of  the  king,  as  we  find  it  on  the  monuments  (LEPSirs,  KSnigibuch,
pi.  sxiv.),  with  bis  two  Horus  names  and  his  solar  titles.


ACCESSION  OF   THUTMOSIS  I.


105


south  aud  of  Elepliautiuo,'  and  hyiuus  to  be  chanted  for  the  well-being  of  the
King  Akhopiikeii,  living  for  ever,  and  then  cause  the  oath  to  be  taken  in
the  name  of  my  Majesty,  born  of  the  royal  motlier  Sonisonbu,  who  is  iu  good
health,  —  This  is  sent  to
thee  that  thou  mayest  know
that  the  royal  liouse  is
prosperous,  and  in  good
health  and  condition,  the
1st  year,  the  21st  of  the
third  month  of  Pirit,  the
day  of  coronation."^  The
new  king  was  tall  in  sta-
ture, broad-shouldered,  well
kuit,  and  capable  of  en-
during the  fatigues  of  war
without  flagging.  His  sta-
tues represent  him  as  hav-
ing a  full,  round  face,  long
nose,  square  chin,  rather
tliick  lips,  and  a  smiling
but  firm  expi'ession.  Thut-
mosis  brought  with  him
on  ascending  the  throne
the  spirit  of  the  younger
generation,  who,  born  shortly
after  the  deliverance  from
the  Hyksos,  had  grown  up
in  the  peaceful  days  of
Amenothes,  and,  elated  by

the  easy  victories  obtained  over  the  nations  of  the  south,  were  inspired  by
ambitions  unknown  to  the  Egyptians  of  earlier  times.  To  this  younger  race
Africa  no  longer  offered  a  sufficiently  wide  or  attractive  field ;  the  whole  country
was  their  own  as  far  as  the  confluence  of  the  two  Niles,  and  the  Tliebau  gods  were
worshipped  at  Napata  no  less  devoutly  than  at  Thebes  itself.'   What  remained  to

'  The  copy  of  the  letter  which  hag  come  down  to  U3  Is  addressed  to  the  commander  of  Elephantiufi  :
hence  the  mention  of  the  gods  of  that  town.  Tlie  mimes  of  tlie  divinities  must  have  been  altered  to
suit  each  district,  to  which  the  order  to  ofl'er  sacritices  for  tlie  prosiierity  of  the  new  sovereign
was  sent.

^  Ostracon  from  tlio  Oizeh  Museum,  published  by  Erman,  Bundschreiben  Thulmoait'  1  an  die
Dehiirdim  mil  der  Anseiije  seines  lleijifrumjuintriUo,  in  the  Zeitscliri/t,  vol.  xxi.\.  pp.  IIO-IIS.

'  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  taljen  in  1882  by  Kniil  Urugsch-Boy.

*  A  misinterpreted  passage  of  Gazzera  {Detcritione  dei  Monumenti  Egixi  del  liegio  Muieo,  p.  23,


^  lULTMu-l^   I.,   I'Buil    A    STATUE   IN    THE   GIZEU   MUSElil,"


106  TEE  BEOINNINQ    OF   THE  XVIIF"   DYNASTY.

he  conquered  in  that  direction  was  scarcely  worth  the  trouble  of  reducing  to
a  province  or  of  annexing  as  a  colony  ;  it  comprised  a  number  of  tribes  hope-
lessly divided  among  themselves,  and  consequently,  in  spite  of  their  renowned
bravery,  without  power  of  resistance.  Light  columns  of  troops,  drafted  at
intervals  on  either  side  of  the  river,  ensured  order  among  the  submissive,  or
despoiled  the  refractory  of  their  possessions  in  cattle,  slaves,  and  precious  stones.
Thutmosis  I.  had  to  repress,  however,  very  shortly  after  his  accession,  a  revolt
of  these  borderers  at  the  second  and  third  cataracts,  but  they  were  easily  over-
come in  a  campaign  of  a  few  days'  duration,  in  which  the  two  Ahmosis  of
El-Kab  took  an  honourable  part.  There  was,  as  usual,  an  encounter  of  the
two  fleets  in  the  middle  of  the  river :  the  young  king  himself  attacked  the
enemy's  chief,  pierced  him  with  his  first  arrow,  and  made  a  considerable
number  of  prisoners.  Thutmosis  had  the  corpse  of  the  chief  suspended  as  a
trophy  in  front  of  the  royal  ship,  and  sailed  northwards  towards  Thebes,  where,
however,  he  was  not  destined  to  remain  long.^  An  ample  field  of  action
presented  itself  to  him  in  the  north-east,  affording  scope  for  great  exploits,
as  profitable  as  they  were  glorious.^  Syria  offered  to  Egyptian  cupidity  a
virgin  prey  in  its  large  commercial  towns  inhabited  by  an  industrious  popu-
lation, who  by  maritime  trade  and  caravan  traffic  had  amassed  enormous
wealth.  The  country  had  been  previously  subdued  by  the  Chaldieans,  who  still
exercised  an  undisputed  influence  over  it,  and  it  was  but  natural  that  the
conquerors  of  the  Hyksos  should  act  in  their  turn  as  invaders.  The  incursion
of  Asiatics  into  Egypt  thus  provoked  a  reaction  which  issued  in  an  Egyptian
invasion  of  Asiatic  soil.  Thutmosis  and  his  contemporaries  had  inherited
none  of  the  instinctive  fear  of  penetrating  into  Syria  which  influenced
Ahmosis  and  his  successor :  the  Theban  legions  were,  perhaps,  slow  to  advance,
but  once  they  had  trodden  the  roads  of  Palestine,  they  were  not  likely  to

and  pi.  1,  No.  8)  has  caused  Wiedemann  {^gyptitche  GescMchte,^.  317)  to  believe  that  a  small  stele  in
the  museum  at  Turin  was  found  at  Meroe,  and  proves  the  presence  of  Egyptian  armies  in  that  town.
Gazzera  does  not  say  that  the  object  in  question  was  discovered  at  Meroe,  but  only  that  the  wood  out
of  which  it  is  cut  is  wood  from  Meroii,  "  un  pezzetto  di  legno  duro  di  Meroe,  tagliato  in  forma  di  stele."
The  date  of  "  I'anno  ventisei,"  attributed  to  this  monument,  is  not  in  reality  traced  on  it,  but  the
Italian  author,  applying  au  erroneous  hypothesis  of  Champollion's,  counted  the  spikes  on  the  palm
stems  sm-rouuding  the  stele ;  as  there  are  twenty-six  on  each  side,  he  thought  that  the  Egyptian
draughtsman  intended  to  notify  in  this  manner  tlie  twenty-sixth  year  of  the  king's  reign.

'  Inscription  of  Ahmosi-si-Abina,  1.  28,  et  seq. :  cf.  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  12  d. ;  Chabas,  Lea
raste.urs  en  A'yi/pfe,  pp.  21,  22,  23,  48,  49;  Bbcgsch,  GeschicMe  JEgyptens,  p.  268.  That  this  expe-
dition must  be  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  king's  reign,  in  his  first  year,  is  shown  by  two
facts:  (1)  It  precedes  the  Syrian  campaign  in  the  biography  of  the  two  Ahmosis  of  El-Kah;  (2)
the  Syriar  campaign  must  have  ended  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign,  since  Thutmosis  I.,  on  the
stele  of  Tombos  which  bears  that  date  (Lepsius,  Benltm.,  iii.  5  a,  II.  13,  14),  gives  particulars  of
the  course  of  the  Euphrates,  and  records  the  submission  of  the  countries  watered  by  that  river  (E.
PE  EovGE,  tltude  des  Monuments  du  Massif  de  Kaniah,  in  the  Melanges  d' Archiologie  J^gyptienne  et
Assyrienne,  vol.  i.  p.  541).

'  It  is  impossible  at  present  to  draw  up  a  correct  table  of  the  native  or  foreign  sovereigns  who
reigned  over  Egypt  during  the  time  of  the  Hyksos.     I  have  given  (M.\sfero,  Damn  of  Civilixation,


THE  NEW   GENERATION   OF   EGYPTIANS.


107


forego  the  delights  of  conquest.  From  that  time  forward  there  was  perpetual
warfare  and  pillaging  expeditions  from  the  plains  of  the  Blue  Nile  to  those
of  the  Euphrates,  so  that  scarcely  a  year  passed  without  bringing  to  the  city
of  Amon  its  tribute  of  victories  and  riches  gained  at  the  point  of  the  sword.
One  day  the  news  would  be  brought  that  the  Amorites  or  the  Klu'iti  had
taken  the  field,  to  be  immediately  followed  by  the  announcement  that  their
forces  had  been  shattered  against  the  valour  of  the  Egyptian  battalions.
Aiiother  day,  Pharaoh  would  re-enter  the  city  with  the  flower  of  his  generals
and  veterans ;  the  chiefs  whom  he  had  taken  prisoners,  sometimes  with  his  own
hand,  would  be  conducted  through  the  streets,  and  then  led  to  die  at  the  foot

pp.  7S9,  790)  the  list  of  the  kings  of  the  XIII"'  ami  XIV"'  dynasties  which  are  known  to  us  from
the  Turin  Papyrus.  I  here  append  that  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the  following  dynasties,  who  are
mentioned  either  in  the  fragments  of  Manetho  or  on  the  monuments  :


XV"'   DYNASTY.
The  Shepherds  in  the  Delta.  The  Thehans  in  the  Said.

I.  [SiialitJ,  Salatis,  Saites.  I.  AmOntimaios.

II.         ?  Bnon.

III.  ?  Apakhnax,  Apakunas.

IV.  [Apupi  I.],  Apophis,  AruoBis.

V.         ?  Staan,  Iannas,  Annas.

VI.  ?  ASSKS,  ASSETH.

XVI'"  DYNASTY.
The  Shepherds  over  tlie  whole  of  Egypt.

SC'SIRNIlti    KlIIANi.

Apopi  II.  AOsmui.


XVII"


The  Sliephcrds  in  the  Delta.
I.  Apopi  III.  AqnCniu.


DYNASTY.

The  Thehans  in  the  Said.
I.  TiUAA  I.  SaqnOnuI  I.
I  II.  TiCaa  II.  SaqnunrI  II.

AlispiiragmCthosis  •■
Tethmosis  ?


Sakhontinibri  y
SanakhtOkI?
IIoTi'Ou!?
ManuotpOm  ?
NObhotpOri

TiijiQNi  SaqnCnrI  III.
UAZKiiopiitui  KamosO.

Nin'.PKMTIut    .VlIMOSC    I.


The  date  of  the  invasion  may  he  placed  between  2300  and  2200  no. ;  if  we  count  Ulil  years  for  tho
three  dynasties  together,  as  Erinan  proposes  (Zur  Chronolngir  der  IIt/l;soii,  in  tlw.Zcitsehri/t,  1879,  pp.
125-127),  we  lind  tliat  the  accession  of  Ahmosis  would  fall  hotwccn  1(J10  and  1590  (see  p.  73,  note  1,
of  the  present  volume).  I  should  place  it  provisionally  in  tho  year  1000,  in  order  not  to  leave  the
position  of  the  succeeding  reigns  uncertain  ;  I  estimate  the  possible  error  at  about  half  a  century.


108  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  XVIIF"   DYNASTY.

of  the  altars,  while  fantastic  processions  of  richly  clothed  captives,  beasts  led
by  haltere,  and  slaves  bending  under  the  weight  of  the  spoil  would  stretch  in
an  endless  line  behind  him.  Meanwhile  the  Timihu,  roused  by  some  unknown
cause,  would  attack  the  outposts  stationed  on  the  frontier,  or  news  would  come
that  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea  had  landed  on  the  western  side  of  the  Delta  ;  the
Pharaoh  had  again  to  take  the  field,  invariably  with  the  same  speedy  and
successful  issue.  The  Libyans  seemed  to  fare  no  better  than  the  Syrians,  and
before  long  those  who  had  survived  the  defeat  would  be  paraded  before  the
Theban  citizens,  previous  to  being  sent  to  join  the  Asiatic  prisoners  in  the  mines
or  quarries ;  their  blue  eyes  and  fair  hair  showing  from  beneath  strangely
shaped  helmets,  while  their  white  skins,  tall  stature,  and  tattooed  bodies  excited
for  a  few  hours  the  interest  and  mirth  of  the  idle  crowd.  At  another  time,  one
of  the  customary  raids  into  the  land  of  Kush  would  take  place,  consisting  of  a
rapid  march  across  the  sands  of  the  Ethiopian  desert  and  a  cruise  along  the
coasts  of  Puanit.  This  would  be  followed  by  another  triumphal  procession,  in
which  fresh  elements  of  interest  would  appear,  heralded  by  flourish  of  trumpets
and  roll  of  drums  ;  Pharaoh  would  re-enter  the  city  borne  on  the  shoulders  of
his  officers,  followed  by  negroes  heavily  chained,  or  coupled  in  such  a  way  that
it  was  impossible  for  tliem  to  move  without  grotesque  contortions,  while  the
acclamations  of  the  multitude  and  the  chanting  of  the  priests  would  resound
from  all  sides  as  the  cortege  passed  through  the  city  gates  on  its  way  to  the
temple  of  Amon.  Egypt,  roused  as  it  were  to  warlike  frenzy,  hurled  her  armies
across  all  her  frontiers  simultaneously,  and  her  sudden  appearance  in  the  heart
of  Syria  gave  a  new  turn  to  human  history.  The  isolation  of  the  kingdoms
of  the  ancient  world  was  at  an  end ;  the  conflict  of  the  nations  was  about  to
begin.


SYRIA   AT    THE    BEGINNING    OF    THE
EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.


NINEVEH    AND   TOE   FIRST    COSS.EAN    KINGS — THE    PEOPLES   OF   SVniA,    THEIR   TOWNS,
THEIR   CIVILIZATION,    THEIR    RELIGION — PH<l:NICrA.

Thr  (lijiKislij  of  Uriia-aijgci — The  Cossceanx:  thiir  nnin/rii,  their  yot/s,  fhrir  eoufjvest  of
Chedilim  —  Tlie  first  seirereupis  of  Assi/rid,  (end  the  first  Cosscean,  liiu/s:  Aiivmldhrime.

The  Efii/pthm  names  for  Sijrld  :  Kheini,  Zahi,  LottinA,  KefUiii—The  inUUanj  hl<ihieay
from  the  Nile  to  the  En pli rotes :  first  seetUm  from.  Zol)i  to  nam— The  Canaanites :  their
fortresses,  their  <i<jrieidtiir<d  ehareieter :  the  forest  between  .T,if,i  and  Mount  ('armel,  Me<iiddo
— The  three  routes  beyond  Meyiddo  :  Qodshn — Alosin,  N<d(iir«im,  ('orehemish:  Mltnnni  and
the  eovntrics  beyond  thr  Euphrates.

Disinfeiiration  of  the  Syrian,  Oauaanite,  Amorile,  and  Khdti  popnlatiou.i ;  obliteration  of
types— Tnflnen.ce  of  Babylon  on  costumes,  ciisto)ns,  and  reliyion— Baalim  and  Astarte,  plani-
ijuds  and  slone-ejods—Reliejion,  human  sacrifices,  festirals  ;  sacred  stones—Tombs  and  the  fate
of  man  after  death — Phcenieian  ecjsnwgony.

Phcenida — Arad,  Marathns,  Simyra,  Botrys—Byhlos,  its  temple,  its  yoddess,  the  myth  of
Adonis:  Aphabi  and  the  redley  of  the  Nahr-Ibrahini ,  the  festirals  of  the  death  and  resurrec-
tion of  Adonis— Berytus  and  its  rjod  El;  Sido-n  and  its  subnrbs—Tyre  :  its  foundation,  its  yods,
its  necropolis,  its  domain  in  the  Lebanon.


(    no    )

Isolation  of  the  Phoenicians  inth  rerjard  to  the  other  nations  of  Syria  :  their  love  of  the  sea
and  the  causes  which  developed  it — Legendary  accounts  of  the  beginning  of  their  colonization —
Their  commercial  proceedings,  their  hanks  and  factories ;  their  ships — Cyprus,  its  wealth,  its
occupations — 27ie  Phoenician  colonies  in  Asia  Minor  and  the  JEgean  Sea:  purple  dye — The
■nations  of  the  ^gean.


ilU,    ;.|..L.Li.N     VII. LA.. I.    Ul     ,:l,l.l.N',    IN    IjAl.U.LI.,    ,-1.1. N     1  l.u.M     1111,    .-ullU.


CHAPTEE    II.

SYRIA    AT    THE    BEGINNING    OF    THE    EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.

Nineveh  and  the  first  Cossasau  kings — The  people.s  of  Syria,  their  towns,
their  civilization,  their  religion — Phoenicia.

rTHE  world  beyond  the  Arabian  desert  presented  to  tlie  eyes

of  the   enterprising   Pharaohs  an   active   and   bustling

scene.     Babylonian    civilization    still    maintained   its   hold

there   without   a   rival,   but    Babylonian    rule    had    ceased

to   exercise   any   longer   a   direct   control,  having  probably

disappeared    with   the   sovereigns    who    had    introduced    it.

When  Ammisatana  died,  about   the  year  2099,  the  line  of

Khammurabi  became  extinct,  and  a  family  from  the  Sea-lands

came  into  power.^      This    unexpected  revolution  of  affiiirs   did

not  by  any  means  restore  to  tlie  cities  of  Lower  Chalda)a  the

supreme  authority  wliich   they  once   possessed.      Babylon   had

made  such  good  use  of  its  centuries  of  rule  that  it  had  gained

.  upon    its    rivals,    and    was    not    likely    now    to     fall     back

■  ./^--       into  a  secondary  place.     Henceforward,  no  matter  what


dynasty  came  into  power,  as  soon  as  the  fortune  of  war  had  placed  it  upon
the  tlirone,  Babylon  succeeded  in  adopting  it,  and  at  once  made  it  its  own.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph ;  the  vignette,  by  Faucher-Gudin,  represents  an  Asiatic
draped  witli  a  blue  and  a  red  shawl;  cf.  CnAiiroLLiON,  Monnments  de  Vligyple  et  de  la  Nitbie,  pi.
cclxvii.  2;  Koski.lixi,  Monumenli  Storici,  pi.  clvii.

'  The  origin  of  this  second  dynasty  and  the  reading  of  its  name  still  afford  matter  for  discussion.
The  name  was  provisionally  written  Shisliku,  Sisku,  by  Pinches,  who  was  the  first  to  discover  it
(Notei  on  a  New  List  of  F.arlij  Babylonian  Kinijs,  in  the  I'ronecdingx  of  the  liibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  lSSO-81,
vol.  iii.  pp.  21,  22)  ;  it  was  at  once  connected  by  Lauth  {Remarks  on  the  Name  Sliishlcu,  ibid.,  1SS0-8I,
vol.  iii,  pp.  10-48)  with  the  name  Sheshach,  which  signifies  Pabylon  in  Jeremiah  (ch.  .\xv.  20  and


112      STRIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE   EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

The  new  lord  of  the  country,  Ilumailu,  having  abandoned  his  patrimonial
inheritance,  came  to  reside  near  to  Merodach.^  He  was  followed  during
the  four  next  centuries  by  a  dynasty  of  ten  princes,  in  uninterrupted  suc-
cession. Their  rule  was  introduced  and  maintained  without  serious  oppo-
sition. The  small  principalities  of  the  south  were  theirs  by  right,  and
the  only  town  which  might  have  caused  them  any  trouble — Assur — was  de-
pendent on  tbem,  being  satisfied  with  the  title  of  vicegerents  for  its  princes, —
Khallu,  Irishum,  Ismidagan  and  his  son  Samsiramman  I.,  Igurkapkapu  and
his  son  Samsiramman  11.'^  As  to  the  course  of  events  beyond  the  Khabur,
and  any  efforts  Ilumailu's  descendants  may  have  made  to  establish  their
authority  in  the  direction  of  the  Mediterranean,  we  have  no  inscriptions  to
inform  us,  and  must  be  content  to  remain  in  ignorance.  The  last  two  of  these
princes,  Melamkurkurra  and  Eagamil,  were  not  connected  with  each  other,
and  had  no  direct  relationship  with  their  predecessors.^    The  shortness  of  their

li.  41).  But  Sheshach  is  only  an  indirect  way  of  writing  Babel  by  aihash,  and  Pinches  had  observed
that  the  group  might  be  read  Shishazag,  Uruazag,  or  Uruku,  as  well  as  Shishku :  the  reading
Uruku  even  inclined  H.  Kawlinson  to  make  Uruk-Erech  the  cradle  of  the  11"''  Babylonian  dynasty
(Proceedings,  1880-81,  vol.  iii.  pp.  48,  49).  Eastlake  endeavoured  to  prove  by  means  of  philology
what  excellent  grounds  there  were  for  this  comparison  (Uruku  versus  Shishku,  ihid.,  1881-82,  vol.  iv.
l)p.  36-40),  which  Tiele  declares  improbable  (Baliijloiiisch-Assijrisclie  Geschichte,  p.  104);  while
Hommel,  after  having  inclined  for  a  short  time  to  the  reading  Uruazagga  (Geschichte  Babijloniens
und  Assyrieiis,  pp.  169,  352),  now  declares  Uruku  to  be  nearly  certain  (A  Supplementary  Note  to
Gihil-Gamish,  iu  the  Proceedings,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  13-15).  Fr.  Delitzsch  accepts  tiie  reading
Uruazagga  and  recognizes  Babylon  in  it,  but  Winckler  (Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assijriens,  pp.
67,  C8,  327,  328)  believes  it  to  be  merely  the  name  of  a  district  of  Baljylon,  where  tlie  dynasty  may
liave  originated.  Finally,  Hilprccht  (Assijriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.  25-28,  101-108)  asserts,  from  Knudtzon's
cojiy  (Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonnengott,  vol.  i.  p.  60),  tliat  the  second  sign  in  the  name  is  the
syllable  Icha;  and  while  recognizing  the  attractiveness  of  H.  Kawlinson's  and  Hommel's  hypothesis,
declares  liimself  unable  to  afhrm  anything  concerning  the  value  and  the  true  signification  of  the
group  written  Shish-kha.  Among  these  conflicting  opinions,  it  behoves  us  to  remember  that
Gulkisliar,  the  only  prince  of  this  dynasty  wliose  title  we  possess,  calls  himself  King  of  the  Country
of  the  Sea,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  marshy  country  at  the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates  (Hilprecht,  Bahyl.
Exped.  vf  Vuiversity  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pi.  30, 11.  3, 6)  :  this  simple  fact  directs  us  to  seek  the  cradle
of  the  family  in  those  districts  of  Southern  Cliahhca  (HiLpnECiiT,  Assyriaca,\o\.  i.  pp.  24-29).  Sayce
rejects  this  identification  on  philological  and  chronological  grounds,  and  sees  in  Gulkishar,  "  King
of  the  8ea-lands,"  a  vassal  Kalda  prince  (Academtj,  March  2,  1895).

'  The  name  has  been  read  An-ma-an  or  Anmauby  Tinches  (Notes  on  a  Neto  List  of  Early  Babylonian
Kings,  in  Proc.  Bib.  Arch.  Soc,  1880-81,  voh  iii.  pp.  43-45;  cf.  Hilprkcht,  vlssi/r/acu,  vol,  i.  pp.  101-106),
subsequently  Ilumailu  (in  Fit.  DELiTZScn-MiiuDTEi!,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Assyr.,  2nd  ed..  Table),  Mallu  (by
WiNCKLEK,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Assyr.,  p.  68),  finally  Anumailu  and  perhaps  Ilumailu  (by  Hommel,  Suppl.
Note  to  Gibil-Gamish,  in  Proceedings,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  p.  14).  The  true  reading  of  it  is  still  unknown.
Hommel  believed  he  had  discovered  in  Hilprecht's  book  (Bub.  Exp.  of  Univ.  of  Pennsylo.,  vol.  i.  pi.  10,
No.  26)  an  inscription  belonging  to  the  reign  of  this  prince ;  but  Hilprecht  (Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.
101-106)  lias  shown  that  it  belonged  to  a  king  of  Erech,  An-a-an,  anterior  to  the  time  of  Au-nia-an.

-  Inscription  of  Irishum,  son  of  Khallu,  on  a  brick  found  at  Kalah-Shergat,  published  in  Raw-
LISSOK,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  2  (cf.  WinckleI!,  Studien  und  Beitrdge  zur  Bahylonisch-
Assyrischen  Geschichte,  in  the  Zcitsckrift  fib-  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pi.  iii.  10;  and  Schiiader,  JEltesii-
Assyrische  Inschriften,  in  the  Keilinschrijtliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  2,  3,  No.  3),  and  an  inscription  of
Samsiramman  II.,  son  of  Igurkapkapu,  on  another  brick  from  the  same  place,  iu  Kawlinso.v,  Cun.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  1  (cf.  V(i\CKLEK,Slud.und  Beit.,  pi.  iii.  4;  and Schrader,  Mteste  Assyr.  Inschrift.,
pp.  2,  3,  No.  1).  Samsiramman  I.  aud  his  father  Ismidagan  arc  mentioned  iu  tlie  great  inscription  of
Tiglath-pileser  II.  (col.  vii.  11.  60-69,  col.  viii.  11.  1-4,  47-49),  as  having  lived  641  years  before  King
Assurdan,  who  himself  had  preceded  Tiglath-pileser  by  sixty  years :  they  thus  reigned  between  1900  aud
1800  years  before  our  era,  according  to  tradition,  whose  authenticity  we  have  no  other  means  of  verifying.

'  The  name  of  the  last  is  read  Eagamil,  for  want  of  anything  better:  Oppert  makes  it  Eftg.i  (Tlie


TEE   COSS JEANS  AND    THEIR    COUNTRY.  113

reigns  presents  a  striking  contrast  with  the  length  of  those  preceding  them,

and  probably  indicates  a  period  of  war  or  revolution.     When  tliese  princes

disappeared,  we  know  not  how  or  why,  about  the  year  1714  B.c,  they  were

succeeded  by  a  king  of  foreign  extraction  ;  and  one  of  the  semi-barbarons  race

of  Kashshu  ascended  the  throne  which  had  been  occupied  since  the  days  of

Kliammurabi  by  Chalda3ans  of  ancient  stcck.^

These  Kashshu,  who  spring  up  suddenly  out  of  obscurity,  had  from  the

earliest  times  inhabited  the  mountainous  districts  of  Zagros,  on  the  confines

of  Elymais  and  Media,  where  the  Cossneans  of  the  classical  historians  flourished

in  the  time  of  Alexander.-    It  was  a  rugged  and  unattractive  country,  protected

by  nature  and  easy  to  defend,  made  up  as  it  was  of  narrow  tortuous  valleys,

of  plains  of  moderate  extent  but  of  rare  fertility,  of  mountain  chains  whose

grim  sides  were  covered  with  forests,  and  whose  peaks  were  snow-crowned  during

half  the  year,  and  of  rivers,    or,  more   correctly  speaking,  torrents,  for  the

rains  and  the  melting  of  the  snow  ■'  rendered  them  impassable  in  spring  and

Sacred  Fieli  of  the  Goddess  Nina,  p.  9),  aimply  transcribing  the  signs ;  and  Hilpreolit  (Assyriaca,  vol.  i.
p.  102,  note),  who  took  up  the  question  again  after  him,  lias  no  reading  to  propose.

'  I  give  liere  the  list  of  the  kings  of  the  second  dynasty,  from  the  documents  discovered  by
PiN'CHES,  Notes  on  a  New  TAst  of  Early  Bahyloninn  Kinris,  in  the  Proceedings,  18S0-S1,  vol.  iii,  pp.
22,  42,  13,  and  TUe  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  tlie  Proceedings,  1883-S4,  vol.  vi.  p.  195;
cf.  the  corrcelions  of  Fu.  Delitzscu,  Assyrische  Miscellen,  in  the  Berichte  of  the  Saxony  Academy  of
Science,  1893,  vol.  ii.  p.  184,  and  of  Knudtzon,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  SonnengotI,  vol.  i.  p.  00:


Amman  [Ilumaild]    .     .     .  2082-2022  c.c.

KiANNiBi  [iTTi-iLU-Nim]     .  2022-19G7

Damkilishu 1967-1931

ISUKIBAL 1931-191C

Shushshi,  his  brother      .     .  1916-1889

GuLKisuAi! 1889-1834


KuRGALALAUMA,  his  Son  .     .  1834-1780  d.c.

Adarakalama,  bis  son.     .     .  1780-1756

Ekurulanna 1756-1730

Melamkurkubra  [Melamma-

TATi] 1730-1723

E.\GAMiL  [Eaga]     ....  1723-1714


No  monument  remains  of  any  of  these  princes,  and  even  the  reading  of  tlieir  names  is  merely  pro-
visional :  those  placed  between  brackets  represent  Delitzsch's  readings.  A  Gulkishar  is  mentioned
in  an  inscription  of  Belnadinabal  (Hilprecht,  The  Babylonian  Expedition  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, vol.  i.  pi.  30,  11.  3,  6,  and  Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.  23-32);  but  Jensen  is  doubtful  if  tho
Gulkishar  mentioned  in  this  place  is  identical  witli  the  one  in  the  lists  {Gulhischar — Muabbil-
Kischschati — KOnig  von  Babylon  aus  der  Dynastic  von  Sis-azag  uud  Gulkischar,  KiJnig  des  Meerlandes,
in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  viii.  pp.  220-224).

'  The  Kashshu  are  identified  with  the  Cossseans  by  Sayco  (_Tlte  Languages  of  the  Cuneiform  In-
scriptions of  Elam  and  Media,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bilil.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  475,  476),  by
Schra<ler  {KeiUnschriflen  und  Gcschichtsforschnng,  pp.  170,  271),  by  Fr.  Delitzsch  {Wo  lag  das
Paradies?  pp.  31,  32,  124,  128,  129,  and  Die  Sprache  der  Kostmer,  pp.  1-4),  by  Halc'vy  {Notes
Assyriologiques,  §  24,  Les  Coss^ens  et  leur  Langue,  in  the  Zcitsrhrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  208,
209),  by  Tide  {Bahylonisch-Assijrische  Geschichtc,  pp.  62,  63,  07-71),  by  Hommol  {Gcschichle  Jlabylo-
niens  und  Assyriens,  pji. 275-278),  and  by  Jcnson{(lulhischar — Muahhit-Kischschati—Konig  von  Babylon
aus  der  Dijnastie  von  Sis-azag  nnd  Gulkischar,  Kii)iig  des  Meerlandes,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  viii.  p.  222,  note  1).  Oppert  maintains  that  they  answer  to  tho  Kissians  of  Herodotus  (III.  xci.,
VII.  Ixii.)  and  of  Strabo  (XV.  iii.,  §  2,  p.  728),  that  is  to  say,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  of  which
Susa  is  the  capital  {La  Langue  Cissienne  on  Cassite  non  Coss^cnite,  in  Iha  Zeit.  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.
pp.  421-423).  Lehmann  supports  this  opinion  {Schamaschchnmuhiu,  Eiinig  von  Jlabylonien,  p.  63,
n.  2,  and  Noch  einrnal  Kassu :  Kiir(nos, nicht  Koaaaius,  Zeilschrifl,  vol.  vii.  pp.  328-334).  WinckUr gives
none  {Gesch.  Babyl.  und  Assyr.,  pp.  78,  79),  und  several  Assyriologists  incline  to  that  of  Kiepcrt
{Lchrbiu-h  der  Allen  Geogr.,  p.  139),  according  to  which  tho  Kissians  are  identical  with  tho  Cossaians.

'  (;f.  the  description  of  it  given  by  Sennacherib  in  his  second  campaign  ((}.  SjllTir,  History  of
Sennacherib,  pp.  43,  44,  11.  3-09),  which  can  be  completed  by  that  given  by  E.  Reclus,  Nouvelle
GAigraphic  VniverscUe,  vol.  ix.  pp.  167,  168,  from  the  accounts  of  modern  travellers.

I


114      SYBIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  C0NQUE8T.

autumn.  The  entrance  to  this  region  was  by  two  or  three  well-fortified  passes:
if  an  enemy  were  unwilling  to  incur  the  loss  of  time  and  men  needed  to  carry
these  by  main  force,  he  had  to  make  a  detour  by  narrow  goat-tracks,  along
which  the  assailants  were  obliged  to  advance  in  single  file,  as  best  they  could,
exposed  to  the  assaults  of  a  foe  concealed  among  the  rocks  and  trees.
The  tribes  who  were  entrenched  behind  this  natural  rampart  made  frequent
and  unexpected  raids  upon  the  marshy  meadows  and  fat  pastures  of
Chaldrea :  they  dashed  through  the  country,  pillaging  and  burning  all  that
came  in  their  way,  and  then,  quickly  regaining  their  hiding-places,  were
able  to  place  tlieir  booty  in  safety  before  the  frontier  garrisons  had  re-
covered from  the  first  alarm.^  These  tribes  were  governed  by  numerous
chiefs  acknowledging  a  single  king — ianzi — whose  will  was  supreme  over
nearly  the  wliole  country  :  ^  some  of  them  had  a  slight  veneer  of  Chaldaian
civilization,  while  among  the  rest  almost  every  stage  of  barbarism  might
be  found.  The  remains  of  their  language  show  that  it  was  remotely  allied
to  the  dialect  of  Susa,  and  contained  many  Semitic  words.^  What  is  recorded
of  their  religion  reaches  us  merely  at  second  hand,  and  the  groundwork  of  it
has  doubtless  been  modified  by  the  Babylonian  scribes  who  have  transmitted
it  to  us.'*  They  worshipped  twelve  great  gods,  of  whom  the  chief — Kashshu,
the  lord  of  heaven — gave  his  name  to  the  principal  tribe,  and  possibly  to  the
whole  race : '  Sliumalia,  queen  of  the  snowy  heights,  was  enthroned  beside

'  It  was  thus  ill  the  time  of  Alexander  and  his  successors  (Polybius,  V.  xliv.  7 ;  Diodorfs
SiCTLCs,  viii.  Ill;  Steabo,  XI.  xiii.,  §  G,  p.  524,  and  XVI.  i.,  §  13, 18,  pp.  742, 744  ;  Arrian,  J«o/«(s/s,
VII.  XV.  1),  and  the  information  given  by  the  classical  historians  about  this  period  is  etjually
applicable  to  earlier  times,  as  we  may  conclude  from  the  numerous  passages  from  Assyrian  inscrip-
tions which  have  been  collected  by  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossieer,  pp.  2,  3,  30-33.

2  Delitzsch  conjectures  that  lanzi,  or  laiizv,  had  become  a  kind  of  proper  name,  analogous  to  the
term  Phtmoh  employed  by  the  Egyptians  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  25,  20-38).

'  A  certain  number  of  Cosssean  words  has  been  preserved  and  translated,  some  in  one  of  the
royal  Babylonian  lists  (Rawlinson,  Cim.  Inn.  11'.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  45,  No.  2,  verso;  Pinches,  Notes  on  a
Neic  List  of  Early  Bidnjkmian  Kinris,  in  the  rmceedinijs  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1880-81,  vol.  iii.  pp.
38,  41),  and  some  on  a  tablet  in  the  British  Museum,  discovered  and  interpreted  by  Fr.  Delitzsch
(Die  Sprache  der  Kossmer,  pp.  23-29).  Several  Assyriologists  think  that  they  show  a  marked  affinity
with  the  idiom  of  the  Susa  inscriptions,  and  with  that  of  the  Achajuienian  inscriptions  of  the  second
type  (Sayce,  Tlie  Lanijuages  of  the  Ouneiform  Inscriptions  of  Elam  and  Media,  in  the  Transactions  of
the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soo.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  475,  476  ;  Hommel,  Geschichtc  Bahyloniens  %md  Assyriens,  pp.
275-278) ;  others  deny  the  proposed  connection  (Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossieer,  pp.  39-50),
or  suggest  that  the  Gosssean  language  was  a  Semitic  dialect,  related  to  the  Chaldieo-Assyrian
(Oppeut,  La  Langue  des  Islamites,  in  the  Revue  d'As-si/rioloriie,  vol.  i.  pp.  45-49;  Halevy,  Notes
Assyriokigiques,  §  24.  Leg  Cossicns  et  leur  Langue,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  A.isyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.
207-222;  cf.  Beime  Critique,  1884,  vol.  i.  pp.  482-486).  Oppert,  who  was  the  first  to  point  out  the
existence  of  this  dialect,  thirty  years  ago,  believed  it  to  be  the  Elamite  {K.rp€dition  de  Me'sopotamie,
vol.  i.  p.  275) ;  he  still  persists  in  his  opinion,  and  has  published  several  notes  in  defence  of  it,  the
principal  of  which  is  La  Langue  Oissienne  ou  Cassite  non  Coss^enne  (Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.
pp.  421-423 :  cf.  vol.  v.  pp.  IOC,  107),  besides  his  memorandum  on  the  Langue  des  Elumites.

■"  It  has  been  studied  by  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Vie  Sprache  der  Kossieer,  pp.  51-54,  who  insists  on  the
influence  which  daily  intercourse  with  the  Chaldajans  had  nn  it  after  tlie  conquest;  Ilale'vy  (liemie
Critique,  1884,  vol.  i.  pp.  482-484),  in  most  of  the  names  of  the  gods  given  as  Cossajan,  sees  merely
the  names  of  ChaldiEan  divinities  .slightly  disguised  in  the  writing.

=  The  existence  of  Kashshu  is  proved  by  the  name  of  Kashshunadinakhe  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Die
Sprache  der  Kosswer,  pp.  29,  51)  :  Ashshur  also  bore  a  name  identical  with  that  of  his  worshippers.


TEE   OODS    OF   THE   COSSjEANS.  115

him,'  ami  the  divinities  next  in  order  were,  as  iu  the  cities  of  the  Euplirates,
the  Moon,  the  Sun  (Sakh  or  Shuriash),  the  air  or  the  tempest  (Ubriash),  and
Khudkha.-  Tlien  followed  the  stellar  deities  or  secondary  incarnations  of  the
sun, — jMirizir,  who  represented  botli  Istar  and  Beltis;^  and  Khala,  answering
to  Gula.*  The  ChaldfeanNinip  corresponded  both  toGidar  and  Maruttash,  Bel
to  Kliarbe  and  Turgu,  JMerodach  to  Shipak,  Nergal  to  Shugalt.''  The  Cosstcan
kings,  already  enriched  by  the  spoils  of  their  neighbours,  and  supported  by  a
warlike  youth,  eager  to  enlist  under  their  banner  at  the  first  call,"  must  have
been  often  tempted  to  quit  their  barren  domains  and  to  swooji  down  on  the  rich
country  which  lay  at  their  feet.  We  are  ignorant  of  the  course  of  events  which,
towards  the  close  of  the  XVIII"'  century  c.c,  led  to  tlieir  gaining  possession
of  it.  The  Cossfean  king  who  seized  on  Babylon  was  named  Gandisb,  and  the  few
inscriptions  we  possess  of  his  reign  are  cut  with  a  clumsiness  that  betrays  the
barbarism  of  the  conqueror.  They  cover  the  pivot  stones  on  which  Sargon  of
Agade  or  one  of  the  Bursins  had  hung  the  doors  of  the  temple  of  Nippur,  but
whicli  Gandisii  dedicated  afresh  in  order  to  win  for  himself,  in  the  eyes  of
posterity,  the  credit  of  the  work  of  these  sovereigns.'     Bel  found  favour  in  the

'  She  is  mentioned  iu  a  rescript  of  Nebucliadrezzar  I.,  at  tlie  iiead  of  the  goua  of  Namar,  that  is
to  say,  the  Cossajau  deities,  as  "  the  lady  of  the  shining  monntains,  the  inhabitant  of  the  summits,  the
frequenter  of  peaks  "(Uawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  II'.  .Is.,  vol.  v.  pi.  57,  col.  ii.  11.46,  47  ;  of.  Fe'^ev.,  Inschrijten
Nebul-adnezar's  I.,  in  ScnKADER,  KeiUnschriftlichi'  Bihliothelc,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  170,  171).  She  is
called  Shimalia  in  Rawlinso.v,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  59,  1.  23,  where  Delitzscli  has  restored
her  name,  which  was  slightly  mutilated  (Die  Sprache  der  Kossxer,  p.  28,  note  1)  ;  one  of  her  statues
was  taken  by  Samsiramman  III.,  King  of  Assyria,  in  one  of  that  sovereign's  campaigns  against
Chaldaja  (Pkiser-Wiscklee,  Die  sngenanntc  synchronistiche  Geschichte,  in  Scuuader,  KeiUuschriflliche
Bibliothel:,  vol.  i.  pp.  202,  203,  col.  iv.  1.  8).

'  All  these  identifications  are  furnished  by  the  glossary  of  Delitzsch  (Die  Sprache  der  Kossxer,
p.  25).  Ubriash,  under  the  form  of  Buriash,  is  met  with  in  a  largo  number  of  proper  names,  Burna-
buriasli,  Shagashaltiburiash,  Ulamburiash,  Kadaahmanburiash,  where  the  Assyrian  scribe  translates
it  Bel-matdti,  lord  of  the  world  :  Buriash  is,  therefore,  an  epithet  of  the  god  who  was  called  Kamman
in  Chaldiea  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  22,  23,  27).  The  name  of  the  moon-god  is  mutilated,  and  only  the  initial
syllable  Shi  .  .  .  remains,  followed  by  an  indistinct  sign :  it  has  not  yet  been  restored.  Halevy
(Notes  Assijrioloijiques,  §  24.  Les  Cossiens  et  lew  Langue,  in  tlio  Zeitschri/t  fiir  Assyridlogie,  vol.  iv.
p.  210)  reads  Kliulakhkha  instead  of  Khudkha.

'  On  the  double  character  of  Mirizir,  cf.  what  is  said  by  Fu.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kotsseer,
pp.  53,  54.

*  Id., ihid., pp.  21,  23,  25,  53.  Halevy (NoUs  Assijriolorjiques, §  24.  Les  Cusf(reiis  el  leiir  Lanijue, iu
the  '/eilschriflfnr  Afsyriologie,  vol.  iv.  p.  210)  considers  Khala,  or  Khali,  as  a  harsh  form  of  Gula  (cf.
Maspeuo,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  (iG5)  :  if  this  is  tljo  case,  the  Cossieans  must  have  borrowed  the
name,  and  perhaps  tlie  goddess  herself,  from  their  Chaldican  neighbours.

»  Fii.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossner,  pp.  20,  21,  23,  25,  27,  28,  39,  52,  53;  for  tlio  reading
Murudas,  JIuruttash,  already  proposed  by  (;.  Smith  (Assyrian  Discoi-eries,  p.  250),  cf.  Hili'Keoht,
Die  Votiv-Inschrift  einet  nicht  e.rhanntcn  Kassitcnhimigs,  in  the  '/.litsrhrift  Jiir  Assijriulogii',  vol.  vii.
pp.  307-311.  Hilprecht  has  established  the  identity  of  Turgu  with  Bel  of  Nippur  (Hii.iMiECUT,  Die
Voliv-Inschrifl,  p.  31G,  note  3);  for  Shipak-Merodach,  cf.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  If.  .4s.,  vol.  v.
pi.  40  J,,  1.  28.

«  Strabo  relates,  from  some  forgotten  historian  of  Alexander,  tliat  the  Cossajans  "  had  formerly
been  able  to  place  as  many  as  thirteen  thousand  archers  in  line,  in  the  wars  wliicli  they  waged  with
the  help  of  the  Elyma;ans  against  the  inhabitants  of  Susa  ami  Babylon  "  (XI.  xiii.,  §  0,  p.  524).

'  Tlie  full  name  of  this  king,  Gandish  or  Gandash,  which  is  furnislied  by  the  royal  lists  (Pi.N'cnES,
The  llabylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  tlie  Proceedings  of  tlio  Bib!.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  vi.,  1883-84,
p.  U).'i),is  written  Giiddash  on  a  monument  in  the  British  Museum  di.scovered  by  I'inclies(««'<;/?'-ii/nn


116      SYBIA  AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF  THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

eyes  of  the  Cossjeans  who  saw  in  him  Kharbe  or  Turgn,  the  recognised  patron
of  their  royal  family :  for  this  reason  Grandish  and  his  successors  regarded  Bel
with  peculiar  devotion.  These  kings  did  all  they  could  for  the  decoration  and
endowment  of  the  ancient  temple  of  Ekur,  which  had  been  somewhat  neglected
by  the  sovereigns  of  purely  Babylonian  extraction,  and  this  devotion  to  one
of  the  most  venerated  Chaldasan  sanctuaries  contributed  largely  towards
their  winning  the  hearts  of  the  conquered  people.^

The  Cos?a3an  rule  over  the  countries  of  the  Euphrates  was  doubtless
similar  in  its  beginnings  to  that  which  the  Hyksos  exercised  at  first  over  the
nomes  of  Egypt.  The  Cossaean  kings  did  not  merely  bring  with  them  an
army  to  protect  their  persons,  or  to  occupy  a  small  number  of  important  posts ;
they  were  followed  by  the  whole  nation,  who  spread  themselves  over  the  entire
country.^  The  bulk  of  the  invaders  instinctively  betook  themselves  to  districts
where,  if  they  could  not  resume  the  kind  of  life  to  which  they  were  accustomed
in  their  own  land,  they  could  at  least  give  full  rein  to  their  love  of  a  free  and
wild  existence.  As  there  were  no  mountains  in  the  country,  they  turned  to  the
marshes,  and,  like  the  Hyksos  in  Egypt,  made  themselves  at  home  about  the
mouths  of  the  rivers,  on  the  half-submerged  low  lands,  and  on  the  sandy  islets
of  the  lagoons  which  formed  an  undefined  borderland  between  the  alluvial
region  and  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  covert  afforded  by  the  thickets  furnished
scope  for  the  chase  which  these  hunters  had  been  accustomed  to  pursue  in  the
depths  of  their  native  forests,  while  fishing,  on  the  other  hand,  sujiplied  them
with  an  additional  element  of  food.  When  their  depredations  drew  down  upon
them  reprisals  from  their  neighbours,  the  mounds  occupied  by  their  foi-tresses,
and  surrounded  by  muddy  swamps,  offered  them  almost  as  secure  retreats  as
their  former  strongholds  on  the  lofty  sides  of  the  Zagros.  They  made
alliances  with  the  native  Aramaeans — with  those  Kashdi,  properly  called  Chal-
da?ans,  whose  name  we  have  imposed  upon  all  the  nations  who,  from  a  very
early  date,  bore  rule  on  the  banks  of  the  Lower  Euphrates.  Here  they  formed
themselves  into  a  State — Karduniash — whose  princes  at  times  rebelled  against
all  external  authority,  and  at  other  times  acknowledged  the  sovereignty  of  the

Notes,  I.  Gaddasli,  an  Enrhj  Babylonian  King,  and  Additional  Note  on  the  Name  of  the  Babylonian
King  Gaddash,  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  i.  pp.  54,  78),  whose  eonehisious  have  been
erroneously  denied  by  Winckler  {Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichtc,  p.  34;  ef. Hommel,
Gescbichte  Bahyloniens  und  Asmjriens,  p.  420,  and  Hilprecht,  Die  Voliv-Inschrift  eines  nicht  crhannlen
Kassitenhiinigs,  in  the  Zeitsrhri/t  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  viii.  pp.  309,310).  A  process  of  abbreviation,
of  which  there  are  examples  in  the  names  of  other  liings  of  the  same  dynasty  (Hili'rkcht,  Assyriaca,
vol.  i.  pp.  85-99),  reduced  the  name  to  Gaude  in  the  current  langunge  (Id.,  The  Babylonian  Expedition
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pp.  28-30,  and  pi.  14).

'  Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  30-30 ;  Hilpreclit  calls  att;  ntion  on  this  point  (p.  30,  note  5)  to  the  fact  that
710  one  haa  yet  discovered  at  Nippur  a  single  ex-voto  consecrated  by  any  king  of  the  two  first
Babylonian  dynasties.

=  Delitzscii-Murdter,  Gescli.  Bab.  und  Assyriens,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  17, 18, 88,  89 ;  HojrjiEL,  Gesnh.  B(d>.
und  Aisyriens.,  p.  428,  et  seq. ;  Winckler,  Gesch.  Bab.  tmd  Assyriens,  pp.  77-79,  84,  85.


OCCUPATION   OF   CHALDJEA   BY    THE   COSS JEANS.  I  1 7

Eabylonian  inouarclis.*  The  people  of  Sumir  and  xVkkaJ,  already  a  composite
of  many  difforeut  races,  absorbed  thus  another  foreign  element,  which,  while
modifying  its  homogeneity,  did  not  destroy  its  natural  charaoter.  Tiiose
Cosstean  tribes  who  had  not  quitted  their  own  country  retained  their  original
barbarism,  but  the  hope  of  plunder  constantly  drew  them  from  their  haunts,
and  they  attacked  and  devastated  the  cities  of  the  plain  unhindered  by  the
tiiought  that  tiiey  were  now  inhabited  by  their  fellow-countrymen.  The  raid  once
over,  many  of  them  did  not  return  home,  but  took  service  under  some  distant
foreign  ruler — the  Syrian  princes  attracting  many,  who  subsequently  became  the
backbone  of  their  armies,^  while  others  remained  at  Babylon  and  enrolled  them-
selves in  the  body-guard  of  the  kings.  To  the  last  they  were  an  undisciplined
militia,  dangerous,  and  difficult  to  please  :  one  day  they  would  hail  their  chiefs
with  acclamations,  to  kill  them  the  next  in  one  of  those  sudden  outbreaks
in  which  they  were  accustomed  to  make  and  unmake  their  kings.'^    The  first

'  The  state  of  Karduniash,  whose  name  appears  for  the  first  time  on  the  monuments  of  the
Cossman  period,  lias  been  localised  in  a  somewhat  vagiio  manner,  in  the  south  of  Babylonia,  in  the
country  of  the  Kaslxdi,  by  Pognon  (Ulnscriplion  de  Hainan,  pp.  122-125),  and  afterwards  formally
identified  with  the  Countries  of  the  Sea,  and  with  the  principality  which  was  called  Bit-Yakin  in  the
Assyrian  period,  by  Tiele  (Bab.-Assi/rische  Geschichie,  pp.  78-80),  whose  opinion  AVinckler  first  rejected
(Sumer  anil  Alckail,  in  the  Mittcilnngeii  des  Akademisch-Orienlalisclien  Vereins  zii  Berlin,  vol.  i.  pp.  13,
14),  but  afterwards  accepted  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  80).  lu  the  Tel-el-Amarua  tablets  the  name  is
alreaily  applied  to  the  entire  country  occupied  by  the  Cossaian  kings  or  their  descendants,  (hat  is
to  say,  to  the  whole  of  Babylonia.  Sargon  II.  at  that  time  distinguislies  between  an  Ui^pcr  and  a
Lower  Karduniash,  Karduniash  elish  u  shaplisli  (Great  Inscription  of  Kliorsahad,  1.  21) ;  and  in  con-
sequence tlie  earliest  Assyriologists  considered  it  as  an  Assyrian  designation  of  Babylon,  or  of  the
district  surrounding  it  (Fit.  Lenormant,  Les  Premieres  Civ.,  vol.  ii.  p.  250,  n.  2;  Etudes  Acead.,  vol.  i.
pt.  3,  pp.  G8,  G9),  an  opinion  which  was  opposed  by  Delitzsch,  as  he  believed  it  to  be  an  indigenous  term
which  at  first  indicated  the  district  round  Babylon,  and  afterwards  tlie  whole  of  Babylonia  (  R^.i  Icuj  das
Paradiesi  pp.  133-13G  :  cf.  Delitzsch-Mludter,  Geseh.  Bahijl.  und  Assyr.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  80;  Hommel,
Gcseh.  Balyl.  und  Asiyr.,  pp.  433, 434).  From  one  frecpient  spelling  of  the  name,  the  meaning  appears
to  have  been  Fortress  of  JJuniash  (Fii.  Lenohmant,  Les  Premieres  Civ.,  vol.  ii.  p.  250,  note  2,  where
Duniash  is  considered  to  be  a  hero,  not  a  goJ)  ;  to  this  Delitzsch  preferred  the  translation  Garden  of
Duniash,  from  an  erroneous  difTerent  reading — Ganduniash  (TCo  lay  das  Parodies?  pp.  135,  Io(J):
Duniash,  at  first  derived  from  a  Chaldiuan  god  Dun,  whose  name  may  e.xist  in  Dungki  (ibid.,  p.  130),  is
a  Cossajan  name,  which  the  Assyrians  translated,  as  tliey  did  Buriash,  Belmaliiti,  lord  of  the  country.
Winckler  rejects  the  ancient  etymology  {Untersuelmngen  zur  AUoriental.  Gesch.,  pp.  135,  13G),  ami
proposes  to  divide  the  word  as  Kardu-niash,  and  to  see  in  it  a  Cossajan  translation  of  the  expression
matlcaldi,  country  of  the  Chaldajans  :  Hommel  on  his  sid(^,  as  well  as  Delitzsch,  had  thought  of
seeking  in  the  Chaldicans  proper — Kaldi  for  Kashdi,  or  Kash-da,  "domain  of  the  Cossa;ans" — the
descendants  of  the  Cossaians  of  Karduniash,  at  least  as  far  as  race  is  concerned  (IIu.mmel,  Gcschichte
Bab.  und  Ass-,  p.  42G,  note  1 ;  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  ]).  120 ;  and  Hie  Sprache  der
Kosixer,  p.  Gl).  In  the  cuneiform  texts  tlie  name  is  written  Kara — D.  1'.  Dnniya.s,  "tlie  Wall  of  tlie
god  Duniyas"  (cf.  the  Median  Wall  or  Wall  of  Seniiramis  which  defended  Babylonia  on  the  north).

'  Uali'vy  has  at  least  proved  that  the  Klmbiri  mentioned  in  the  Tel  cl-Amarna  tablets  were
Ck>8s:cans  {Note  sur  quehjues  Noms  propres  Assyro-Palcstiniens,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  ISOI,  vol.
xvii.  pp.  547,  548,  and  Ueeherehes  Bild.,  pp.  720,  724;  cf.  Sciieii,,  Notes  d'Fpigraphie,  in  the  Bee.  de
Traeaux,  vol.  xvi.  p.  32,  and  Iln.iMiECiiT,  Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  p.  33,  note  1),  contrary  to  the  opinion  of
Sayce,  who  makes  tliem  trilies  grouped  round  Hebron  {llabyl.  Tablets  from  Tel  el-Amarna,  in  the  Pro-
ceedings, 1887-88,  vol.  X.  p.  49G ;  The  Higher  Criticism,  etc.,  p.  175,  and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  1 IG-
149),  which  W.  Jlax  Miiller  seems  to  accept  (Asicn  und  Europa,  p.  39(;)  ;  Winckler  (Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.
pp.  lG-21),  returning  to  an  old  opinion,  believes  them  to  have  been  Hebrews.

'  This  is  the  opinion  of  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  434),  supported  by  the  testimony  of  the
Synchronous  Hist. :  in  this  latter  document  the  Cossajans  are  found  revolting  against  King  Kadush-
mankharbc,  and  replacing  him  on  the  throne  by  a  certain  Nazibugash,  who  was  of  obscure  origin  (i.,
11.  8-12;  cf.  Winckler,  Altorientalische  Fortchungen,  pp.  115,  110).


118      SYBIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

invaders  were  not  long  ia  acquiring,  by  means  of  daily  intercourse  with  the  old
inhabitants,  the  new  civilization:  sooner  or  later  they  became  blended  with
the  natives,  losing  all  their  own  peculiarities,  with  the  exception  of  their
outlandish  names,^  a  few  heroic  legends,"  and  the  worship  of  two  or  three  gods
— Shiimalia,  Sliugab,  and  Shukamuna.^  As  in  the  case  of  the  Hyksos  in  Africa,
the  barbarian  conquerors  thus  became  merged  in  the  more  civilized  people  which
they  had  subdued.  This  work  of  assimilation  seems  at  first  to  have  occupied
the  whole  attention  of  both  races,  for  the  immediate  successors  of  Gaudish
were  unable  to  retain  under  their  rule  all  the  provinces  of  which  the  empire
was  formerly  composed.  They  continued  to  possess  the  territory  situated  on
the  middle  course  of  the  Euphrates  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Balikh,  but
they  lost  the  region  extending  to  the  east  of  the  Khabur,  at  the  foot  of  the
Masios,  and  in  the  upper  basin  of  the  Tigris :  the  vicegerents  of  Assur  also
withdrew  from  them,  and,  declaring  that  they  owed  no  obedience  excepting
to  the  god  of  their  city,  assumed  the  royal  dignity.  The  first  four  of  these
kings  whose  names  have  come  down  to  us,  Sulili,  Belkapkapu,  Adasi,  and
Belbani,''  appear  to  have  been  but  indifferent  rulers,  but  they  knew  how
to  hold  their  own  against  the  attacks  of  their  neighbours,^  and  when,  after  a
century  of  weakness  and  inactivity,  Babylon  reasserted  herself,  and  endeavoured
to  recover  her  lost  territory,  they  had  so  completely  established  their  in-
dependence that  every  attack  on  it  was  unsuccessful.  The  Cossfean  king  at
that  time — an  active  and  enterprising  prince,  whose  name  was  held  in  honour

'  Tiele  has  called  attention  (BahyJonisch-Assijrische  Geschichte,  p.  63)  to  tbe  fact  that  a  considerable
number  of  these  names  are  constructed  with  Cossa;an  words  after  the  Babylonian  manner ;  cf.  Delitzscu,
Die  S2}rache  der  Koss!eer,  p.  54 ;  Homjiel,  Geschichte  Bahtjlouiens  and  Assyricn$,  p.  434,  note  1.

■  Fr.  Delitzsch  (TT'o  lag  das  I'aradies?  pp.  53-55, 124, 12S,  aaiDie  Sprache  der  Kossseer,  p.  61)  and
Schrader  {Die  Keilinschriften  ttnd  das  Alte  Test,  2ud  ed.,  pp.  87-80)  comjiare  their  name  with  that  of
Kusli,  who  appears  in  the  Bible  as  the  father  of  Nimrod  (Gen.  x.  8-12)  ;  Hommel  {Gesch.  Bah.  ttnd  Assyr.,
pp.  27G-27S)  and  Saycc  {Higher  Criticism  and  the  Monuments,  pp.  122,  123, 148-151,  and  I'atriarchat
Palestine,  p.  269)  think  that  the  history  of  Nimrod  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  Cossfean  rule.  .Jensen  is  alone
in  his  attempt  {Gischgimaseh-Gilgamisch,  ein  Kossiier,  in  Zeits.f.  Assyr.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  340-342)  to  attribute
to  the  Cossreans  the  first  idea  of  the  epic  of  Gilgames  (cf.  Masvero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  574-501).

'  What  the  goddess  Shflmalia  became  has  been  shown  above,  p.  115,  note  1,  of  the  present  volume.
The  god  Shukamuna,  or  Shuqamuna,  is  mentioned  in  the  text  published  by  Kawlinson,  Can.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  50,  col.  2,  1.  23,  side  by  side  with  Shimalia.

'  These  four  names  do  not  so  much  represent  four  consecutive  reigns  as  two  separate  traditions
which  were  current  respecting  the  beginnings  of  Assyrian  royalty.  The  most  ancient  of  them  gives
the  chief  place  to  two  personages  named  Belkapkapu  and  Sulili;  this  tradition  has  been  transmitted
to  us  by  Eammannirari  III.,  because  it  connected  the  origin  of  his  race  with  these  kings  (Kawlinsonj
Cun.  Ins.  ir.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  35,  No.  3,  11.  23-27;  cf.  Abel,  Lischri/leii  Tlamiiuin-nirdri's,  iu  Schkader,
Keilinschriftliehe  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  188-191).  The  second  tradition  placed  a  certain  Belbani,  the
son  of  Adasi,  in  the  room  of  Belkapkapu  and  Sulili :  Esarhaddou  made  use  of  it  in  order  to  ascribe
to  his  own  family  an  .antiquity  at  least  equal  to  tliat  of  tlie  family  to  whieli  Kammannirari  III.
belonged  (G.  Sjutu,  Assyrian  History,  in  the  Zcitsehrlft  Jilr  JEgyptische  Sprache,  1869,  pp.  93,  04).
Each  king  appropriated  from  the  ancient  popular  traditions  those  names  which  seemed  to  him  best
calculated  to  enhance  the  prestige  of  hia  dynasty,  but  wo  cannot  tell  how  far  the  personages  selected
enjoyed  an  authentic  historical  existence  :  it  is  best  to  admit  them  at  least  provisionally  into  the
royal  series,  witliout  trusting  too  much  to  what  is  related  of  them.

'  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  uad  As.''yrieHs,  pp.  425,426 ;  DelitZscii-MOrdteb, Geschichte  Bahy-
loniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  17,  18,  88,  89 ;  Winckler,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyfiens,  pp.  152-154.


AGUMKAKItlME.  I  I  i)

up  to  the  days  of  the  Ninevito  supremacy — was  Aj^iiiukakriiue,  the  sou  of
Tassiguruuuxsh.'  This '' brilliant  scion  of  Shukamuna"  entitled  himself  lord
of  the  Kashshu  aud  of  Akkad,  of  Babylou  tiie  widespread,  of  Padan,  of  Alman,
and  of  the  swarthy  Guti.^  Ashnunak  had  been  devastated ;  he  repeopled  it,
aud  the  four  "  liouses  of  the  world  "  rendered  him  obedience ;  on  the  other  hand,
Elam  revolted  from  its  allegiance,  Assur  resisted  him,  and  if  he  still  exercised
some  semblauce  of  authority  over  Northern  Syria,  it  was  owing  to  a  traditional
respect  wlu'ch  the  towns  of  that  country  voluntarily  rendered  to  him,  but  which
did  not  involve  either  subjection  or  control.  The  people  of  Khani  still  retained
possession  of  the  statues  of  Merodach  and  of  his  consort  Zarpanit,  which
had. been  stolen,  we  know  not  how,  some  time  previously  from  Chaldaea."*
Agumkakrime  recovered  them  and  replaced  them  iu  their  proper  temple.  This
was  an  important  event,  and  earned  him  the  good  will  of  the  priests.  The  king
reorganised  public  worship ;  he  caused  new  fittings  for  the  temples  to  be  made
to  take  the  place  of  those  which  had  disaj^peareJ,  aud  the  inscription  which
records  this  work  enumerates  with  satisfaction  the  large  quantities  of  crystal,
jasper,  and  lapis-lazuli  which  he  lavished  on  the  sanctuary,  the  utensils  of
silver  and  gold  which  he  dedicated,  together  witli  the  "  seas  "  of  wrought  bronze
decorated  with  monsters  and  religious  emblems.^    Tliis  restoration  of  the  statues,

'  The  tablet  discovered  by  Pinches  {Tlie  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  the  Proceedings
of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1883-Si,  vol.  vi.  p.  195,  auj  pi.  1,  col.  1)  is  broken  after  the  fifth  king  of  tho
dynasty  (cf.  Fu.  Dehtzsch,  Assyrische  Miscellen,  in  the  Berichle  of  the  Saxony  Academy  of  Science,
1893,  ii.  pp.  184-186,  and  Knudtzon,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonnencjott,  vol.  i.  p.  GO).  The
inscription  of  Agumkakrime,  containing  a  genealogy  of  this  prince  which  goes  back  as  far  as  the  fifth
generation,  has  led  to  the  restoration  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  list  as  follows  :

Gandish,  Gaddash,  Gand£  .     1714-1707  b.c.      i       Addmitash IGSS-V  a.c.

Agumuabi,  his  son  ....     1707-1685  '       Tas-sigurumash ?

[AJglyashi 1685-1663  Agumkakrime ?

UsHSHi,  his  son 1663-1655

This  restoration  is  accepted  by  Tiele  {Bahylonisch-Assyrische  GescMchte,  p.  104)  and  by  Homniol  (Ge-
schicMe  Bahyhniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  420,  421);  Winckler  has  not  yet  endorsed  it  {Untersuchungen
zur  AUorienlalischen  Gescliichle,  pp.  30,  31,  and  llcschiclite  Babylouiens  mid  Arsyriens,  pp.  7!),  80).

'  Inscription  of  Aginnhahrinie,  II.  3,  4,  31-30  ;  cf.  Jensen,  Iiischrifl  Agumhakrimi's,  d.i.  Agum's  des
Jilngeren,  in  Scukadeu,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihllothek,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  134-137.  The  translation
Kac/.-ZaatZeti,  i.e.  dark-haired  and  complexioned,  Guti,  is  uncertain;  Jensen  ((./.,  p.  1.S7)  interprets
the  epithet  nishi  saldati  to  mean  "  the  Guti,  stupid  (foolish  ?  culpable  ?)  people."  The  Guti  hold  both
banks  of  tho  lower  Zab,  iu  the  mountains  on  the  east  of  Assyria.  Delitzsch  has  placed  I'iidan  aud
Almau  in  tho  mountains  to  tlie  east  of  tho  Diyaleh  (IFo  lag  due  Faradies'/  p.  205);  Jen.sen  places
thoni  ill  tlie  chain  of  the  Khamriu  (/Hsc/in/f  Agnmhahrimi's.  p.  137,  note),aiid  Winckler  compares  Almau
or  Haluian  with  the  Hohvan  of  the  present  clay  {Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  81,  82).

'  The  Khani  have  been  placed  by  Uelitzsch  {Wo  lug  das  I'aradusl  pp.  102,  101,  105,  270,  271,
and  Die  Hprache  der  Kmsxer,  p.  60)  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Khana,  mentioned  iu  the  accounts
of  the  Assyrian  campaigns,  that  is  to  say,  iu  tlio  Amanos,  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  bay  ol
Alexandretta  :  he  is  inclined  to  regard  the  name  as  a  form  of  that  of  the  Khati,  but  on  this  point
Tiele  disagrees  with  him  {Itahylonisch-Assyrische  Geschichtu,  p.  130,  note  1),  and  is  followed  by
Hommel  (Gcschichtc  Bahyhniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  418,  note  1),  by  Jensen  {Inschrifl  Agamkalcrimi'i,  in
the  Keilinschriftliche  Biljliothck,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  135,  note),  and  by  Hali-vy  (Deuj:  Liscriptions  hdli'ennes
de  Zindjirli,  iu  the  licvue  Simili'iuc,  vol.  i.  p.  328).  Winckler  places  the  Khiliii  in  Western  Media
(Gesch.  Bah.  und  Assyr.,  p.  S3)  owing  to  an  observation  made  by  G.  Smith  (Assyrian  Discoveries,  p.  228).

♦  Wo  do  not  po8.se83  the  original  of  the  inscription  which  tells  us  of  these  facts,  but  merely  an
early  copy  (G.  Sjirnr,  Account  of  llecent  Excavations  and  Discoveries  made  on  the  Site  of  Nineveh,  iu
the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  452,  453).


120      STBIA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

so  flattering  to  the  national  pride  and  piety,  would  have  been  exacted  and  insisted
upon  by  a  Kiaammurabi  at  the  point  of  the  sword,  but  Agumkakrime  doubtless
felt  that  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  run  the  risk  of  war ;  he  therefore  sent
an  embassy  to  the  Khani,  and  such  was  the  prestige  which  the  name  of  Baby-
lon still  possessed,  from  the  deserts  of  the  Caspian  to  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean,  that  he  was  able  to  obtain  a  concession  from  that  people
which  he  would  probably  have  been  powerless  to  extort  by  force  of  arms.^

The  Egyptians  had,  therefore,  no  need  to  anticipate  Chald.-ean  interference
when,  forsaking  their  ancient  traditions,  they  penetrated  for  the  first  time  into
the  heart  of  Syria.  Not  only  was  Babylon  no  longer  supreme  there,  but  the
coalition  of  those  cities  on  which  she  had  depended  for  help  in  subduing  the
West  was  partially  dissolved,  and  the  foreign  princes  who  had  succeeded  to
her  patrimony  were  so  far  conscious  of  their  weakness,  that  they  voluntarily
kept  aloof  from  the  countries  in  which,  previous  to  their  advent,  Babylon
had  held  undivided  sway.  The  Egyptian  conquest  of  Syria  had  already  begun
in  the  days  of  Agumkakrime,  and  it  is  possible  that  dread  of  the  Pharaoh  was
one  of  the  chief  causes  which  influenced  the  Cossaeans  to  return  a  favourable
answer  to  the  Khani.'^  Thutmosis  I.,  on  entering  Syria,  encountered  there-
fore only  the  native  levies,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that,  in  spite  of  their
renowned  courage,  they  were  not  likely  to  prove  formidable  adversaries  in
Egyptian  estimation.  Not  one  of  the  local  Syrian  dynasties  was  sufficiently
powerful  to  collect  all  the  forces  of  the  country  around  its  chief,  so  as  to
oppose  a  compact  body  of  troops  to  the  attack  of  the  African  armies.  The
whole  country  consisted  of  a  collection  of  petty  states,  a  complex  group  of
peoples  and  territories  which  even  the  Egyptians  themselves  never  completely
succeeded  in  disentangling.  They  classed  the  inhabitants,  however,  under  three
or  four  very  comprehensive  names — Kharu,  Zahi,^  Lotanu,  and  Kefatiu— all  of
which  frequently  recur  in  the  inscriptions,  but  without  haviug  always  that
exactness  of  meaning  we  look  for  in  geographical  terms.  As  was  often  the
case  in  similar  circumstances,  these  names  were  used  at  first  to  denote  the
districts  close  to  the  Egyptian  frontier  with  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Delta
had  constant  intercourse.  The  Kefatiii  seem  to  have  been  at  the  outset  the
people  of  the  sea-coast,  more  especially  of  the  region  occupied  later  by  the
Phcenicians,  but  all  the  tribes  with  whom  the  Phcenicians  came  in  contact  on

'  Strictly  speaking,  one  might  suppose  tliat  a  war  took  place  (Tiele,  Bahyhnisch-Assyrische
Ocschichtr,  p.  130)  ;  but  most  Assjriologists  declare  uuhesitatingly  that  there  was  merely  an  embassy
and  a  diplomatic  negotiation  (Hommel,  Oeschkhle  Babyloniens  uud  Assijriem,  pp.  82-S-t).

■  This  is  Hommol's  explanation  {ibid,  pp.  424,  425),  which  I  admit,  but  only  indirectly,  the
Kliani  being,  as  I  believe,  situated  near  Media.

'  W.  Mas  MuUer  {Asien  uud  Eurapa,  pp.  17G-1S3),  after  E.  de  Rouge  (Notice  de  quelques  fragmenU
de  Vlnscription  de  KarnaJt,  p.  24),  gives  the  name  of  Zaha  or  Zahi  to  the  whole  of  Phcenicia,  and,  by
a  misapplication,  to  Ccele-Syria;  for  the  original  meaning  of  the  name  and  for  the  probable  history
of  tlie  subsequent  changes  which  it  underwent,  cf.  Maspeijo,  Note»  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire
et  d'Eistoire,  §  x.,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  140-142.


KEFATIU,   ZAIII,    KIIARU,   LOTANU.  121

the  Asiatic  and  Europeau  border  were  before  long  included  uu<lor  tlie  same
name.^  Zahi  originally  comprised  that  portion  of  the  desert  and  of  the  mari-
time plain  on  the  north-east  of  Egypt  which  was  coasted  by  the  fleets,  or  traversed
by  the  armies  of  Egypt,  as  they  passed  to  and  fro  between  Syria  and  tlio  banks
of  the  Nile.  This  region  had  been  ravaged  by  Ahmosis  during  his  raid  upon
Sharuhana,tlie  year  after  tlie  fall  of  Avaris.'-^  To  the  south-east  of  Zahi  lay  Kluuu;
it  iucduded  the  greater  part  of  Blount  Seir,  whose  wadys,  thinly  dotted  over  witii
oases,  were  inhabited  by  tribes  of  more  or  less  stationary  habits.  The  approaches
to  it  were  protected  by  a  few  towns,  or  rather  fortified  villages,  built  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  springs,  and  surrounded  by  cultivated  fields  and  poverty-stricken
gardens ;  but  the  bulk  of  the  people  lived  in  tents  or  in  caves  on  the  mountain-
sides. The  Egyptians  constantly  confounded  those  Khauri,  whom  the  Hebrews
in  after-times  found  scattered  among  the  children  of  Edom,  with  the  other  tribes
of  Bedouin  marauders,  and  designated  them  vaguely  as  Shausu.''  Lotauil  lay
beyond,  to  the  north  of  Khani  and  to  the  north-east  of  Zahi,  among  the  hills
whicli  separate  the  "Shephelah"  from  the  Jordan.^  As  it  was  more  remote
from  the  isthmus,  and  formed  the  Egyptian  horizon  in  that  direction,  all  the
new  countries  with  wliich  the  Egyptians  became  acquainted  beyond  its
northern  limits  were  by  degrees  included  under  the  one  name  of  Lotauu,  and
this  term  was  extended  to  comprise  successively  the  entire  valley  of  the  Jordan,
then  that  of  the  Orontes,  and  finally  even  that  of  the  Euphrates.     Lotauu

'  The  Kefalia,  whose  name  was  first  read  Kefa,  and  later  Kefto,  were  originally  identified  with
the  inhabitants  of  Cyprus  or  Crete  (Bkugsoh,  G.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pj).  87,  8S ;  of.  Pietschmann,  (k'schichte
der  I'hunizier,  pp.  255-257,  and  Steindouff,  Aigijpten  nnil  die  Myhenische  Cultur,  in  the  Jahrhuch  des
K.  Arch.  Instituts,  1892,  vol.  vii.  p.  15,  who  hesitates  wliether  to  place  them  in  Cyprus  or  Northern
Syria),  and  subsequently  with  those  of  Cilicia  (W.  Max  Mullek,  Anien  und  Europa,  pp.  337-353),
althougli  the  decree  of  Canopus  locates  them  in  Ph(unicia  {I.  0  ki^r.  —  1. 17  gr.).  Cf.  Maspeuo,  Notes
»ur  quelques  points  de  Grummaire  et  d'llistoire,  §  x.,  iu  the  Itecueil,  vol.  xvii.  p.  138,  et  seq.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  above  with  regard  to  this  campaign  on  p.  S8  of  the  present  volume.

"  Kharu  has  been  identified  with  the  whole  of  Syria  by  Birch  {Ohservatioiis  on  the  Slalistwal
Tablet  of  Karnah,  pp.  49,  50),  by  Brugsch  (GeotjrapMsche  Inschri/ten,  vol.  i.  pp.  59,  CO),  and  by
Chabas  {Voijage  d'un  Ji/jyptien,  pp.  97,  112-115);  \V.  Max  Midler  restricts  the  name  to  tlic  land  of
Canaan  (Aslen  und  Europa,  pp.  148-15G).  Tlie  identitication  of  the  name  with  that  of  the  Horim  or
Horites  of  the  Bible  (_Gen.  xiv.  G,  xxxvi.  20-30 ;  Dcut.  il.  12,  22)  has  been  proposed  by  Haigh  (Xaru,
Helen  and  Shasu,  in  the  Zeilschri/t,  1875,  pp.  29-31)  and  by  L.  Stern  {Vie  XXII  Manethonisehe
Dijnastie,  in  the  Ziitschrift,  1883,  p.  20,  note  1),  acknowledged  to  be  possible  by  Ed.  M-fycr  {Gesrliithte
JEijijptens,  p.  217,  note  3),  but  opposed  by  W.  Jlax  Miiller  {Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  155, 150) ;  cf.  MASrKiio,
Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'llistoire,  iu  the  lieeueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  110-112.

'  The  name  of  Lotauu  or  Kotauil  has  becu  assigned  by  Brugsch  {Geographische  Inschri/li  n,  vol.
ii.  pp.  31,  .599)  to  the  Assyrians,  but  subsequently,  by  connecting  it,  more  ingeniously  than  plausibly,
with  the  Assyrian  iltdnu,  he  extended  it  to  all  the  peo|iIc3  of  the  north  {Die  alliigijptische  Vollartu/il,
in  the  Abluindlungen  of  the  Interu;itioiial  Congress  at  Berlin,  Africau  section,  pp.  27-29) :  we  now
know  that  iu  the  te.Kts  it  denotes  the  whole  of  Syria,  and,  more  generally,  all  the  peoples  dwelling  in
the  basins  of  the  Orontes  and  the  Kiiphrates  (W.  BIax  MOi.i.i;ii,  Asien  und  Europa  nach  allugrjptisehen
Dcnlimiilern,  p.  143,  et  seq.).  The  attempt  to  connect  tlio  name  Uotanu  or  Lotauu  with  tliat  of  the
Edomitc  tribe  of  Lotan  {Gen.  xxxvi.  2(J,  22)  was  first  made  by  F.  do  Saulcy  {Lettres  it  M.  Chabas  sur
quelques  points  de  la  Ge'ugrapUie  antique  de  la  Syrie  selon  la  Science  Egyptiennc,  in  the  Mdlanges
d'Archeologic  Egyjjticnne  et  Assyrienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  98-100);  it  was  afterwards  taken  up  by  Ilaigh
(A'arM,  Reica  and  Shasu,  in  the  /Ceitschrift,  1875,  p.  30)  and  ado])ted  by  Kennii  {llixl.  dti,  Veuph-  d'hraiil,
vol.  i.  pp.  12,115;  cf.  p.  GU,  note  7,  of  the  present  volume).  For  further  remarks  on  Lotanu.cf.  JIaspeiio,
Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'llistoire,  iu  the  lieeueil  de  Travtiux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  141, 142.


122      SYBIA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

became  thenceforth  a  vague  and  fluctuating  term,  which  the  Egyptians  applied
indiscriminately  to  widely  differing  Asiatic  nations,  and  to  which  they  added
another  indefinite  epithet  when  tliey  desired  to  use  it  in  a  more  limited
sense :  that  part  of  Syria  nearest  to  Egypt  being  in  this  case  qualified  as
Upper  Lotauu,  wliile  the  towns  and  kingdoms  further  north  were  described
as  being  in  Lower  Lotanu.  In  the  same  way  the  terms  Zahi  and  Kharu  were
extended  to  cover  other  and  more  northerly  regions.  Zahi  was  applied  to  the
coast  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Nahr  el-Kebir  and  to  the  country  of  the
Lebanon  which  lay  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  middle  course  of
the  Orontes.  Kharii  ran  parallel  to  Zahi,  but  comprised  tiie  mountain  district,
and  came  to  include  most  of  tlie  countries  which  were  at  first  ranged  under
Upper  Lotanu  ;  it  was  never  applied  to  the  region  beyond  the  neighbourhood
of  Mount  Tabor,  nor  to  the  trans-Jordanic  provinces.  The  three  names  in
their  wider  sense  preserved  the  same  relation  to  each  other  as  before,
Zahi  lying  to  the  west  and  north-west  of  Kharu,  and  Lower  Lotanu  to  the
nortli  of  Kharu  and  north-east  of  Zahi,  but  the  extension  of  meaning  did  not
abolish  the  old  conception  of  their  position,  and  hence  arose  confusion  in  the
minds  of  those  who  employed  them ;  the  scribes,  for  instance,  who  registered
in  some  far-off  Theban  temple  the  victories  of  the  Pharaoh  would  sometimes
write  Zahi  where  they  should  have  inscribed  Kharu,  and  it  is  a  difiicult  matter
for  us  always  to  detect  their  mistakes.  It  would  be  unjust  to  blame  them
too  severely  for  their  inaccuracies,  for  what  means  had  they  of  determining
the  relative  positions  of  that  confusing  collection  of  states  with  whicli  the
Egyptians  came  in  contact  as  soon  as  they  had  set  foot  on  Syrian  soil  ?

A  choice  of  several  routes  into  Asia,  possessing  unequal  advantages,  was
open  to  the  traveller,  but  the  most  direct  of  them  passed  through  the  town
of  Zalu.^  The  old  entrenchments  running  from  the  Ked  Sea  to  the  marshes
of  the  Pelusiac  branch^  still  protected  the  isthmus,  and  beyond  these,  forming
an  additional  defence,  was  a  canal  on  the  banks  of  which  a  fortress  was  con-
structed. This  was  occupied  by  the  troops  who  guarded  the  frontier,  and  no
traveller  was  allowed  to  pass  without  having  declared  his  name  and  rank,  signified
the  business  which  took  him  into  Syria  or  Egypt,  and  shown  the  letters  with
which  he  was  entrusted.^     It  was  from  Zalu  that  the  Pharaohs  set  out  with

'  Zarfl  or  Zalii  is  the  Sellc  of  the  Roman  itineraries.  The  approaches  to  the  route  from  this  end
have  been  somewhat  minutely  described  by  BiiUCSCH,  La  Soriie  des  Sebreux  d'Etjypte  et  les  Muiiumeiitx
Jiijyptiens,  Alexandria,  1874,  pp.  34-39 ;  cf.  Geechichte  JEgyptcns,  p.  269.  For  one  reading  of  the  name,
Tharu,  and  its  consequent  identification  with  the  wall  of  Egypt,  cf.  W.  Mas  Muller,  A  Contribution
to  the  Exodus  Geography,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1887-88,  vol.  x.  pp.  467-477.

'  For  the  wall  and  forts  of  (lie  isthmus,  cf.  Maspero,  Daicn  of  Civilization,  pp.  351,  352,  4G9.

'  The  notes  of  an  oiHcial  living  at  Zalu  in  the  time  of  Mineptah  are  preserved  on  the  back  of
pis.  v.,  vi.  of  the  Anastasi  Papyrxm  111.;  liis business  was  to  keep  a  register  of  the  movements  of  the
comers  and  goera  between  Egypt  and  Syria  during  a  few  days  of  the  month  PaUhons,  in  the  year  III.
This  text  was  first  translated  by  Chabas,  Recherches  pour  eervir  a  I'Uist.  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  95-98  ;


THE  MILITARY  ROUTE  FROM  ZALU   TO    GAZA.


123


their  troops,  whun  summoned  to  Kharii  by  a  hostile  coniedenicy ;  ^  it  was  to
Zalu  they  returned  triumphant  after  the  campaign,  and  there,  at  the  gates  of
the  town,  they  were  welcomed  by  the
magnates  of  the  kingdom.^  The  road
ran  for  some  distance  over  a  region
which  was  coyered  by  the  inundation
of  the  Nile  during  six  months  of
the  year;  it  then  turned  eastward,
and  for  some  distance  skirted  the
sea-shore,  passing  between  the  Medi-
terranean and  the  swamp  which
writers  of  the  Greek  period  called
the  Lake  of  Sirbonis.^  Tin's  stage
of  the  journey  was  beset  with  diffi-
culties, for  the  Sirbonian  Lake  did
not  always  present  the  same  aspect,
and  its  margins  were  constantly  shift-
ing. When  the  canals  which  con-
nected it  with  the  open  sea  happened
to  become  obstructed,  the  sheet  of
water  subsided  from  evaporation,  leav-
ing in  many  places  merely  an  expanse
of  shifting  mud,  often  concealed
under  the  sand  which  the  wind  brought
up  from  the  desert.     Travellers  ran

imminent  risk  of  sinking  in  this  quagmire,  and  the  Greek  historians  tell  of
large  armies  being  almost  entirely  swallowed  up  in  it.  About  halfway  along
the  length  of  the  lake  rose  the  solitary  hill  of  Mount  Casios ;  beyond  this  the
sea-coast  widened  till  it  became  a  vast  slightly  undulating  plain,  covered  witli

subsequently  by  Bhugsch,  Gcschichle  JEgyplenit,  pp.  579-581  ;  and  riimlly  by  Eh.man,  Taijihuch  eiiicn
Grenzheamtes,  in  the  Zcitachri/t,  1879,  pp.  29-:J2,  and  ASijijpten  und  J'^ijijiitiwhes  Lubcn,  pp.  708,  70'J.

'  Ae,  for  example,  Tlj&tmosis  III.  (Masi'ero,  ll(^cit  tie  la  camparjne  coiiire  Mmjeddo,  in  iha  Jiecm  il
de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  p.  19),  Seti  I.  ((iuiEYSSE,  Inscriptiuri  historique  de  Sili  I ,  in  tliu  Jiecucil,  vol.  .\i.
p.  55), and  Kanises  If.  (E.  de  ItouGi;,  Le  I'oime de  I'enlaour,  in  the  licviw  J'gi/plologiquc,  vol.  iii.  p.  150).

'  See  the  pieture  from  the  temple  of  Karnak,  which  represents  the  triumphant  entry  of  Seti  1.
into  Zalu  (Burton,  Excerpta  Hiermjlyphica,  pi.  xxxvi. ;  CiiAMroLLiov,  Monuments  de  I'Aji/pte  ct  de  la
Nulle,  pi.  ecxcii. ;  Roseli.ini,  Monnmenti  Storki,  pis,  1.,  Ii. ;  liErsiu.-*,  Denhn.,  iii.  128  a,  b).

'  For  the  Lake  of  Sirbouis,  cf.  DiODOilus  Sicui.us,  I.  xxx,  nnd  XVI.  llj ;  Sthabo,  I.  iii.,  §  13,  p.  50,
who,  however,  i[i  other  places  confounds  the  Dead  Sea  with  the  Lake  of  Sirbonis.  The  Sirboniuu  Lake  is
sometimes  half  fidl  of  water,  sometimes  almost  entirely  dry  ((iHATIEN  le  Vkui',,Extriiit  d'wn  mifmuire
sur  les  Lacs  el  Di'serh  de  la  Bame  Erjtjpte,  in  tlie  Description  de  V Eyypte,  \o\.  xvi.  pp.  200-211;
(iiiiFEiTii,  The  Anliquilles  of  Tell  el-Yahudiijeh,  pp.  35,  ;!0) ;  at  the  present  time  it  bears  the  name
of  Sebkhat  Berdawil,  from  King  Baldwin  I.  of  Jerusalem,  who  on  his  rehnn  from  his  Egypliun
campaign  died  on  its  shores,  in  IMS,  before  he  could  reach  El-Arisli.

*  Drawn  by  Eaucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  lusinger;  el'.  Ciia.mI'OLLIOn,  ilunumtnts  de
I'Eijypte  et  de  la  Nvhie,  pi.  ecxcii. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenii  Storici,  pi.  1. ;  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  128.


THE   FOBTRESS   AKI)   CRIPGE   OF   ZALU,*


124      SYRIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

scanty  herbage,  and  dotted  over  witli  wells  containing  an  abundant  sujiply  of
water,  which,  however,  was  brackish  and  disagreeable  to  drink.'  Beyond  these
lay  a  grove  of  palms,  a  brick  prison,  and  a  cluster  of  miserable  houses,  bounded
by  a  broad  wady,  usually  dry.  The  bed  of  the  torrent  often  served  as  the  boundary
between  Africa  and  Asia,  and  the  town  was  for  many  years  merely  a  convict
prison,  where  ordinary  criminals,  condemned  to  mutilation  and  exile,  were  con-
fined ;  indeed,  the  Greeks  assure  us  that  it  owed  its  name  of  Khinocolura  to  the
number  of  noseless  convicts  who  were  to  be  seen  there.^  At  this  point  the
coast  turns  in  a  north-easterly  direction,  and  is  flanked  with  high  sand-
hills, behind  which  the  caravans  pursue  their  way,  obtaining  merely  occasional
glimpses  of  the  sea.  Here  and  there,  under  the  shelter  of  a  tower  or  a  half-
ruined  fortress,  the  traveller  would  have  found  wells  of  indifferent  water,  till  on
reaching  the  confines  of  Syria  he  arrived  at  the  fortified  village  of  Raphia,
standing  like  a  sentinel  to  guard  the  approach  to  Egypt.^  Beyond  Eaphia
vegetation  becomes  more  abundant,  groups  of  sycomores  and  mimosas  and
clusters  of  date-palms  appear  on  the  horizon,  villages  surrounded  with  fields
and  orchards  are  seen  on  all  sides,  while  the  bed  of  a  river,  blocked  with
gravel  and  fallen  rocks,  winds  its  way  between  the  last  fringes  of  the  desert
and  the  fruitful  Shephelah ;  •*  on  the  further  bank  of  the  river  lay  the  suburbs
of  Gaza,  and,  but  a  few  hundred  yards  beyond,  Gaza  itself  came  into  view  among
the  trees  standing  on  its  wall-crowned  hill.^  The  Egyptians,  on  their  march  from
the  Nile  valley,  were  wont  to  stop  at  this  spot  to  recover  from  their  fatigues ;  it

'  GKiFriTH,  The  AniiquUies  of  Tell  el-  Yahudii/eh,  pp.  3G,  37,  where  this  part  nf  the  road  is  described.

*  GuKUiN,  La  Judge,  vol.  ii.  pp.  237-240 :  tlie  ruius  of  tlie  ancient  town,  wliioh  were  of  consider-
able extent,  are  half  buried  under  the  sand,  out  of  which  an  Egyptian  naos  of  tlic  Ptolemaic
period  haH  been  dug,  and  placed  near  the  well  which  supplies  the  fort,  where  it  serves  as  a
drinking  trougli  for  tjie  horses  (In., /6«i,  vol.  ii.  pp.  241,2-12;  cf.  Gkiffitu,  The  Antiquities  of  Tell  el-
Yahudiyeh,  pp.  70-74,  and  Maspeko,  Daum  of  Civilization,  p.  IGO).  Brugsch  believed  lie  could
identify  its  site  witli  that  of  the  Syrian  town  Ilurnikheri,  which  he  erroneously  reads  Plarinkola
{Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  3G9);  the  ancient  form  of  the  name  is  unknown,  the  Greek  form  varies
between  Rhinocorfira  (Stephen  of  BYZANTirH,  «.  v.  I. :  JosEPncs,  Antiquities  of  the  Jews,  XIII.  xv.  4,
and  XIV.  xiv.  2)  and  Ehinooolura.  The  history  of  the  mutilated  convicts  is  to  be  found  in  Diodorus
SiciiLus,  I.  Ix.,  as  well  as  in  Strabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  31,  p.  759  ;  it  rests  on  a  historical  fact.  ^Uuder  the
XVIII"'  dynasty  Zalii  was  used  as  a  place  of  confinement  for  dishonest  officials  (Boukiant,  A  Thehes,  in
the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  43, 11.  17,  22).  For  this  pm-pose  it  was  probably  replaced  by  Khino-
colura, wlien  the  Egyptian  frontier  was  removed  from  tlie  neighbourliood  of  Selle  to  that  of  El-Arish.

'  For  all  this  part  of  the  road,  cf.  Gukrin,  La  JiuUe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  233-237.  Eapljia,  wliosc  name  is
preserved  in  tliat  of  the  well  Bir-Rafah,  is  nientioucd  once  during  the  XIX"'  dynasty  uuder  the  name
of  Kapihui  {Anastasi  Tapyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xxvii.  11.  7,  8  ;  cf.  Cuabas,  Voyage  d'un  %(/;)(«•»,  pp.  291-
293) ;  it  is  also  found  under  tliat  of  Rapikhi  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  of  tlic  time  of  Sargon  II.,
King  of  Assyria  (Oiteut-Menant,  La  Grande  Inscription  du  Palais  de  Khorsahad,  1.  25,  p.  74.

*  The  term  Shephelah  signifies  the  plain  (cf.  p.  13  nf  the  present  volume);  it  is  applied  by  the
Biblical  writers  to  the  plain  bordering  tlic  coast,  from  the  licights  of  Gaza  to  those  of  Jojipa,  whicli
were  inhabited  at  a  later  period  by  the  Thilistines  (Juah.  xi.  10;  Jer.  xxxii.  44  and  xsTxiii.  13).

'  Gi'ERiN,  La  Jude'e,  vol.  ii.  pp.  223-233,  describes  at  length  the  road  from  Gaza  to  Itapliia.  The
only  town  of  importance  between  them  in  tlio  Greek  period  was  Icuysos  (Herodotus,  III.  v.  and  V.
liii.),  the  ruins  of  which  arc  lo  be  found  near  Khan  Yunes,  but  the  Egyptian  name  for  tliis  locality
is  unknown  :  Auuangasa,  tlie  name  of  wliicli  Brugsch  thought  he  could  identify  with  it  (Geschichte
Aigyptens,  p.  269),  should  bo  placed  much  furtlier  away,  in  Northern  or  in  Coole-Syria.


126      SmiA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

was  their  first  halting-place  beyond  the  frontier,  and  the  news  which  would
reach  them  here  prepared  them  in  some  measure  for  what  awaited  them
further  on.  The  army  itself,  the  "  trcop  of  Ra,"  was  drawn  from  four  great
races,  the  most  distinguished  of  which  came,  of  course,  from  the  banks  of  the
Nile :  the  Amii,  born  of  Sokhit,  the  lioness-lieaded  goddes=,  were  classed  in  the
second  rank ;  the  Nahsi,  or  negroes  of  Ethiopia,  were  placed  in  the  third ;
while  the  Timihu,  or  Libyans,  with  the  white  tribes  of  the  north,  brought  up
the  rear.^  The  Syrians  belonged  to  the  second  of  these  families,  that  next  in
order  to  the  Egyptians,  and  the  name  of  Amu,  which  for  centuries  had  been
given  them,  met  so  satisfactorily  all  political,  literary,  or  commercial  require-
ments, that  the  administrators  of  the  Tharaohs  never  troubled  themselves
to  discover  the  various  elements  concealed  beneath  the  term.^  We  are,  how-
ever, able  at  the  present  time  to  distinguish  among  them  several  groups  of
peoples  and  languages,  all  belonging  to  the  same  family,  but  possessing
distinctive  characteristics.  The  kinsfolk  of  the  Hebrews,  the  children  of
Ishmael  and  Edom,  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  who  were  all  qualified  as
Shausii,  had  spread  over  the  region  to  the  south  and  east  of  the  Dead
Sea,  partly  in  the  desert,  and  partly  on  the  confines  of  the  cultivated  land.^
The  Canaanites  were  not  only  in  possession  of  the  coast  from  Gaza  to  a  point
beyond  the  Nahr  el-Kebir,  but  they  also  occupied  almost  the  whole  valley  of
the  Jordan,  besides  that  of  the  Litany,  and  perhaps  that  of  the  Upper  Orontes.'*
There  were  Aramaean  settlements  at  Damascus,  in  the  plains  of  the  Lower
Orontes,  and  in  Naharaim.'^  The  country  beyond  the  Aramaean  territory,
including  the  slopes  of  the  Amanos  and  the  deep  valleys  of  the  Taurus,  was
inhabited  by  peoples  of  various  origin  ;  the  most  powerful  of  these,  the  Khati,
were  at  this  time  slowly  forsaking  the  mountain  region,  and  spreading  by
deo-vees  over  the  country  between  the  Afiin  and  the  Eui^hrates.^

'  This  is  tlie  way  they  are  frequently  represented  in  the  tombs  of  tlie  Theban  kings  of  the
XVIII"'  and  XX"'  dynasties  (CuAMrOLLlON,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  ISIuhie,  pis.  ccxxxviii.-
ccxH. ;  RosELLiNi,  Monumenti  StoHci,  pis.  clv.-clix. ;  Lepsibs,  BeHfrm.,  iii.  135,  136).

=  For  the  comprehensive  use  at  this  period  of  the  name  Anm,  cf.  W.  Mas.  Miller,  Asien  mid
Euro-pa,  pp.  121-125.

'  See  what  is  said  of  the  Shausu  on  p.  54  of  the  present  volume.  W.  Max  Muller  {Asien  und
Europa,  pp.  131-142)  appears  to  me  to  restrict  too  closely  the  area  of  country  inhabited  by  the
people  to  whom  the  Egyptians  gave  this  name.

«  I  use  the  term  Canaanite  with  the  meaning  most  frequently  attached  to  it,  according  to  tlie
Hebrew  use  (Gen.  x.  15-19).  For  the  presence  of  this  word  in  the  Egyptian  texts,  cf.  the  examples
collected  by  W.  Max  JU'li.kr,  Asien  und  Europa.  pp.  205-208.  It  is  found  several  times  under  the  forms
Kinakhna,Kinakhkhi,  and  probably  Kunakhiiiii.iu  the  cuneiform  texts  of  Trl  el-Amarna  (Winckleh,
Verzeich.  drr  aus  dem  Funde  ron  El-Amarna  herriihrcnden  Thonlafel,  in  Zdtschrlft,  1889,  p.  45,  n.  4).

^  As  far  as  I  know,  the  term  Aramxan  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  Egyptian  text  of  tlie  time  of  the
Pharaohs:  the  only  known  example  of  it  (Anastasi  Papyrus  III.  pi.  v.,  verso,  1.  5)  is  a  writer's  error
corrected  by  Chabas  (  Recherclws  pour  I'Uistoire  de  VEgypte  sous  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  97, 107).  W.  Max
Mliller  (Asien  ttnd  Europa,  p.  234)  very  justly  observes  that  the  mistake  is  itself  a  proof  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  name  and  of  the  acqn.ainlance  of  the  Egyptians  with  it.

«  Thiitmosis  III.  .shows  that,  at  any  rate,  they  were  established  in  these  regions  about  the  XVI'"
century  B.C.     The  Egyptian  pronunciation  of  their  name  is  Ehtii,  with  the  feminine  Kliilail,  Khiiit,  as


TEE   CANAANITES.


127


AN    ASIATIC   MIGDOL.-


The  Canaanites  were  the  most  numerous  of  all  these  groups,  and  had  they
been  able  to  amalgamate  under  a  single  king,  or  even  to  organize  a  lasting
confederacy,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  Egyptian  armies  to
have  broken  through  the  barrier  thus  raised  between  them  and  the  rest  of
Asia;  but,  unfortunately,  so  far  from  showing  the  slightest  tendency  towards
unity  or  concentration,  the  Canaanites  were

more  hopelessly  divided  than  any  of  the  '~^"' — ^^ — •■■•  ■'-.•->~.*i--  "  —
surrounding  nations.  Their  mountains  con-
tained nearly  as  many  states  as  there  were
valleys,  while  in  the  plains  each  town  repre-
sented a  separate  government,  and  was  built
on  a  spot  carefully  selected  for  purposes  of
defence.  The  land,  indeed,  was  chequered
witii  these  petty  states,  and  so  closely  were
they  crowded  together,  that  a  horseman,
travellingat  leisure, could  easily  passthrougli
two  or  three  of  them  in  a  day's  journey.^  Not
only  were  the  royal  cities  fenced  with  walls,
but  many  of  the  surrounding  villages  were

fortified,  while  the  watch-towers,  or  migdols^  built  at  the  bends  of  the  roads,  at
the  fords  over  the  rivers,  and  at  the  openings  of  the  ravines,  all  testified  to
the  insecurity  of  the  times  and  the  aptitude  for  self-defence  shown  by  the  in-
habitants. The  aspect  of  these  migdols,  or  forts,  must  have  appeared  strange  to
the  first  Egyptians  who  beheld  them.  These  strongholds  bore  no  resemblance
to  the  large  square  or  oblong  enclosures  to  which  they  were  accustomed,  and
which  in  their  eyes  represented  the  highest  skill  of  the  engineer.^  In  Syria,
however,  the  positions  suitable  for  the  construction  of  fortresses  hardly  ever
lent  themselves  to  a  symmetrical  plan.    The  usual  sites  were  on  the  projecting

I  have  long  ago  pointed  out  (cf.  W.  Max  Mullek,  Asien  und  Eurojxt,  p.  324,  note  3) ;  but  the  Tel  el-
Amarna  texts  employ  the  vocalisation  Khali,  Khulc,  which  must  be  more  correct  than  that  of  the
Ei'vptians.  The  form  KhUi  seems  to  mo  to  bo  explicable  by  an  error  of  popular  etymology.  Egyptian
ethnical  appellations  in  -iti  formed  their  plural  by  -uliu,  -ateu,  -lUi,  -die,  so  that  if  Khi'ile,  KluUi,  were
taken  for  a  plural,  it  would  naturally  have  suggested  to  tho  scribes  the  form  Khit!  for  the  .singular.

'  Thiitmosis  III.,  speaking  to  his  soldiers,  tells  them  that  all  the  chiefs  in  the  country  are  shut
up  in  Mciddo,  so  that  "  to  take  it  is  to  take  a  thousand  cities"  (llAsrERO,  Itecil  dt:  hi  caiiipuijiie.
r.onlre  Mugeddo,  in  the  Jltcueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  yi.  148) :  this  is  evidently  a  hyperbole  in  the  mouth
of  the  conqueror,  but  the  exaggeration  itself  shows  how  numerous  were  tlie  chiefs  and  conseqnontly
the  small  states  in  Central  and  Southern  Syiia.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Boato.  It  is  one  of  the  migdols  built  by
Seti  I.  on  the  high-road  to  Syria;  cf.  (^HAMroLi.ioN',  Monuments  de  VRpjpte  et  de  la  Niilic,  vol.  ii.
p.  90  ;  KosEi.i.iNi,  Monwiiienli  Storici,  pi.  xlix.  1 ;  LErsiu.s,  Veulim.,  iii.  12G  b.

'  This  Canaanite  word  was  borrowed  by  the  Kgyplians  from  the  Syrians  at  the  beginning  of  their
Asiatic  wars;  they  employed  it  in  forming  the  names  of  the  military  posts  whicli  they  established  on
the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Delta :  it  appears  for  t!ie  lirst  time  among  Syrian  places  in  tlie  list  of  cities
conquered  by  Thutmosis  III.  (Mauietts,  Karnali,  pi.  11),  No.  71,  and  Texts,  p.  34).

*  Cf.  what  is  said  of  Egyptian  fortiiications  in  Masi'euo,  Dawn  o/  CirUizalion,  pp.  4.")0-152.


128      SYRIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.


spur  of  some  mountain,  or  on  a  solitary  and  more  or  less  irregularly  shaped
eminence  in  the  midst  of  a  plain,  and  the  means  of  defence  had  to  be  adapted
in  each  case  to  suit  the  particular  configuration  of  the  ground.  It  was  usually
a  mere  wall  of  stone  or  dried  brick,  with  towers  at  intervals ;  the  wall  measuring
from  nine  to  twelve  feet  thick  at  the  base,  and  from  thirty  to  thirty-six  feet

high,  thus  rendering  an
assault  by  means  of  port-
able ladders  nearly  im-
practicable.^ The  gate-
way had  the  appearance
of  a  fortress  in  itself.
It  was  composed  of  three
large  blocks  of  masonry,
forming  a  re-entering  face,
considerably  higher  than
the  adjacent  curtains,  and
pierced  near  the  top  with
square  openings  furnished
with  mantlets,  so  as  to
give  both  a  front  and
flank  view  of  the  as-
sailants. The  wooden
doors  in  the  receded  face
were  covered  with  metal
and  raw  hides,  thus  afford-
ing a  protection  against  axe  or  fire.^  The  building  was  strong  enough  not
only  to  defy  the  bands  of  adventurers  who  roamed  the  country,  but  was  able
to  resist  for  an  indefinite  time  the  operations  of  a  regular  siege.  Sometimes,
however,  the  inhabitants  when  constructing  their  defences  did  not  confine
themselves  to  this  rudimentary  plan,  but  tiirew  up  eartliworks  round  the
selected  sile.     On  the  most  exposed  side  they  raised  an  advance  wall,  not

'  This  is,  at  least,  the  result  of  investigations  made  by  modern  engineers  who  have  studied  these
questions  of  military  archaeology;  wilh  regard  to  this,  cf.  the  elementary  information  furnished  by
A.  DE  RocHAS  d'Aiglvn,  Frincipcs  de  la  Forlijication  antique,  p.  12.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograpli  taken  at  Karnak  by  Beato.  Another  represen-
tation of  the  same  town  was  found  at  Luxor,  on  one  of  the  walls  which  have  been  e.xcavated  since  1884.

'  Most  of  the  Canaanite  towns  taken  by  Eamses  II.  in  the  campaign  of  his  VIII"'  year  were
fortified  in  this  manner  (Ch.^mi'Ollion,  Monnmenls  de  VlCijijpte  el  de  la  Ntdtie,  vol.  i.  pp.  SSO,  8S1 ;
Lepsius,  Dcnlim,  iii.  15G).  It  must  have  been  the  usual  method  of  fortification,  as  it  seems  to  liave
served  as  a  type  for  conventional  representation,  and  was  sometimes  used  to  denote  cities  wliich  had
fortifications  of  another  kind.  For  instance,  Dapir-Tabor  is  represented  in  this  way  in  tlie  list
referred  to  above,  while  a  picture  on  another  monument,  which  is  reproduced  in  the  illustration  on
this  page,  represents  what  seems  to  have  been  the  particular  form  of  its  encomjiassiug  walls  (Cailliaud,
Voyage  a  Mgrog,  vol.  ii.  pi.  Ixsiii.  1 ;  Cuampollion,  Monuments  de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  cccxsxi.
LEPSiUf,  Denim.,  iii.  IGG).


THE    WALLED    rlTY    nf    HAM  R,    IN    GALILLi:.


THE   OANAANITE  FORTRESSES.


■j;>


THE  MIGDOL  OF  EAMSES  III.   AT  THEDES,   IN  THE   TEMPLE   OP  MEDINET  AliU.'

exceeding  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  in  height,  at  the  left  extremity  of  whicli  the
entrance  was  so  placed  that  the  assailants,  iu  endeavouring  to  force  their
way  through,  were  obliged  to  exijose  an  uiqH-otected  fiauk  to  the  defenders.
By  tliis  arrangement  it  was  necessary  to  break  through  two  lines  of
fortification  before  the  place  could  be  entered.  Supposing  the  enemy  to
have  overcome  these  first  obstacles,  they  would  find  themselves  at  their
next  point  of  attack  confronted  with  a  citadel  which  contained,  in  addition
to  the  sanctuary  of  the  principal  god,  the  palace  of  the  sovereign  himself.
This  also  had  a  double  enclosing  wall  and  massively  built  gates,  which  could
be  forced  only  at  the  expense  of  fresh  losses,  unless  the  cowardice  or  treason
of  the  garrison  made  the  assault  an  easy  oue.^  Of  these  bulwarks  of  Canaanite
civilization,  which  had  been  thrown  up  by  hundreds  on  the  route  of  the  invad-
ing hosts,  not  a  trace  is  to  be  seen  to-day.  Tiiey  may  have  been  razed  to  the
ground  during  one  of  those  destructive  revolutions  to  which  the  country  was
often  exposed,  or  their  remains  may  lie  hidden  underneath  the  heajjs  of  ruins
which  thirty  centuries  of  change   have   raised   over  them/^     The  records  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  by  De'veria  iu  18G5.

^  The  type  of  town  described  in  the  text  is  based  on  a  representation  on  the  walls  of  Karnak,
where  the  siege  of  Dapur-Taljor  by  Ranisus  11.  is  depicted  (Cailliaud,  Voyage  a  Mine,  vol.  ii.  pi.
Ixxiii.  1 ;  CiiAMroLLiON,  MonumentH  <le  VKgijplc  et  de  la  Niihie.  pi.  cccxxxi. ;  LErsins.  Denlnn.,  iii.  IGU).
Another  type  h  given  in  tlie  ease  of  Asculon  (Ciiami'dllion,  Monuments  de  I'Egyple,  etc.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  194,  195  ;  Lei'sius,  Denkm.,  iii.  14.5  c).     Cf.  the  vignette  on  p.  128,  whore  Dapiir  is  represented.

'  The  only  remains  of  a  Cauaanito  fortilicatiou  whicli  can  be  assigned  to  the  Egyptian  period
are  those  which  Professor  Fl.  I'etrie  brought  to  light  in  the  ruins  of  Tell  el-llesy,  and  in  which  ho
rightly  recognised  the  remains  of  Lacliisli  (Fi,.  I'etrie,  Tall  cl-Uetij  {Lachish),  pp.  15,  21,  22,  pi.  iii.).

K


130       *J7,7.1    AT   THE  BEGINNJ.WG    OF   THE   EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

victories  graveu  on  the  walls  of  the  Tliebau  temples  furuisli,  it  is  true,  a  general
conception  of  their  appearance,  but  the  notions  of  them  which  we  should  obtain
from  this  source  would  be  of  a  very  confused  character  had  not  oue  of  the  last
of  the  conquering  Pharaohs,  Eamses  III.,  taken  it  into  his  head  to  have  oue
built  at  Thebes  itself,  to  contain  within  it,  in  addition  to  his  funerary  chapel,
accommodation  for  the  attendants  assigned  to  the  conduct  of  his  worship.'  In
the  Greek  and  Koman  period  a  portion  of  this  fortress  was  demolished,  but  the
external  wall  of  defence  still  exists  on  the  eastern  side,  together  with  the
gate,  which  is  commanded  on  the  right  by  a  projection  of  the  enclosing- wall,
and  flanked  by  two  guard-houses,  rectangular  in  shape,  and  having  roofs  which
jut  out  about  a  yard  beyond  the  wall  of  support.  Having  passed  through
these  obstacles,  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  a  niigdol  of  cut  stone,  nearly
square  in  form,  with  two  projecting  wings,  the  court  between  their  loop-holed
walls  being  made  to  contract  gradually  from  the  point  of  approach  by  a  series
of  abutments.  A  careful  examination  of  the  place,  indeed,  reveals  more  than
one  arrangement  which  the  limited  knowledge  of  the  Egyptians  would  hardly
permit  us  to  expect.  We  discover,  for  instance,  that  the  main  body  of  the
building  is  made  to  rest  upon  a  sloping  sub-structure  which  rises  to  a  height
of  some  sixteen  feet.  This  served  two  purposes  :  it  increased,  in  the  first  place,
the  strength  of  the  defence  against  sapping ;  and  in  the  second,  it  caused  the
weapons  launched  by  the  enemy  to  rebound  with  violence  from  its  inclined
surface,  thus  serving  to  keep  the  assailants  at  a  distance.'-^  The  whole  struc-
ture has  an  imposing  look,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  royal  architects
charged  with  carrying  out  tiieir  sovereign's  idea  brought  to  their  task  an  atten-
tion to  detail  for  which  the  people  from  whom  the  plan  was  borrowed  had  no
capacity,  and  at  the  same  time  preserved  the  arrangements  of  their  model  so
faithfully  that  we  can  readily  realise  what  it  must  have  been.  Transport  this
migdol  of  Eamses  III.  into  Asia,  plant  it  upon  one  of  those  hills  which  the
Canaanites  were  accustomed  to  select  as  a  site  for  their  fortifications,  spread  out
at  its  base  some  score  of  low  and  miserable  hovels,  and  we  have  before  us  an
improvised  pattern  of  a  village  which  recalls  in  a  striking  manner  Zeriu  or
Beitin,  or  any  other  small  modern  town  which  gathers  the  dwellings  of  its
fellahiu  round  some  central  stone  building — whether  it  be  a  hostelry  for  be-
nighted travellers,  or  an  ancient  castle  of  the  Crusading  age.

There  were  on  the  littoral,  to  the  north  of  Gaza,  two  large  walled  towns,
Ascalon  and  Joppa,  in  whose  roadsteads  merchant  vessels  were  accustomed  to

'  The  idea  that  the  royal  paUice  of  Mediuet-Abu  is  a  reproductiou  of  a  migdol  was  first
suggested  by  Makiette,  Itin^raire  des  Invites  aux  fetes  d' inauguration  du  Canal  de  ,S«(i, pp.  129, 130;
cf.  Itine'raire  de  la  Ilaute-Egypte,  p.  213.  Uiimichen,  at  about  the  same  time,  could  not  see  iu  it
auy thiug  but  the  remaius  of  the  gate  of  an  Kgyptian  fortress (Resultate  der  photo.  E.rpid  ,  vol.  i.  p.  21),

'•'  This  arrangement  was  brought  into  notice  for  the  first  time  by  Maspero,  Arch.  Egyptitnne,  p.  33.


THE   CANAANITES— THEIR    AORIOULTUPE.


31


THE    MODERN    VILLAGE    OF    BEITIN,    SEEN    t'KOM    THE    SOUTH-WEST.'

take  hasty  refuge  in  tempestuous  weather.^  There  were  to  be  fouud  on  the  plains
also,  and  on  the  lower  slopes  of  the  mountains,  a  number  of  similar  fortresses
and  villages,  such  as  lurza,  Migdol,  Lachisli,  Ajalon,  Shocho,  Adora,  Aphuldu,
Keilah,  Gezer,  and  Ono ;  and,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  roads  wliich  led  to
the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  Gibeah,  Beth-Anoth,  and  finally  Urusalim,  our  Jeru-
salem.^    A  tolerably  dense  population  of  active  and  industrious  husbandmen

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograph.  This  is  tlio  ancient  Betliel.  A  view  of  Zeriu,  Uic
•Teiireel  of  Scripture,  appears  as  a  heading  to  this  chapter  (see  p.  111).

'  Ascalon  was  not  actually  on  the  sea.  Its  port,  "Maiumas  Ascalouis,"  was  probably  merely  a
narrow  bay  or  creeli,  now,  for  a  long  period,  filled  up  by  the  sand.  Neither  the  site  nor  the  remains
of  the  port  have  been  discovered  (Gderik,  Jude'e,  vol.  ii.  pp.  140-152).  The  name  of  the  town  is
always  spelled  in  Egyptian  with  an  "s" — Askaluna  (E.  de  Rouge,  Mgmoire  sar  V Alphabet  Egyptien,
p.  71),  which  gives  us  the  pronunciation  of  the  time.  The  name  of  Joppa  is  written  Yapu,  Yaphu,
and  the  gardens  which  then  surrounded  the  town  are  mentioned  in  the  Anaatasi  I'apijrus  /.,  pi.  .kxv.
U.  2-5;  cf.  Chabas,  Voyage  d'un  i!gypticii,  pp.  250,  251.

'  Urusalim  is  mentioned  only  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  (Abel-Wincklek,  Dcr  Tliuidafelfund
von  El-Amarna,  pp.  lO-la-108 ;  cf.  Zijimern,  Diu  Keilschriftbriefc  aus  Jerusalem,  in  the  Zcitschrij'l
fur  Auyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  245-2G3),  alongside  of  Kilti  or  Keilah  (Sayce,  Babylonian  Tablets
from  Tel  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings,  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  x.  1S87-S8,  p.  496),  Ajalon,  and
Lachish  (Abel-Winckler,  Der  Tlwntafel/uiid  von  El-Amarna,  pi.  119,  No.  123,  1.  6,  No.  124,  1.  5).
The  remaining  towns  are  noticed  in  the  great  lists  of  ThCitmosis  III.  (Makiette,  iiarnoA-,  pis.  17,  18,
19)— lurza  under  No.  GO  (identified  with  Kharbot  Yarzeh,  Kharbet  Erzeh  by  G.  Key,  jlliidc  tupv-
graphiquc  de  la  Tribu  de  Juda,  p.  121,  and  generally  accepted ;  cf.,  nevertheless,  Max  Mt'LLEii,  Js/tre
unil  E'lropa,  p.  152,  note  1),  Sauka  under  No.  G7  (identified  with  Shocho  of  Judah  by  Mariette,  Leg
Listcs  Giugraphiques  des  Pylones  de  Karnali,  p.  33),  Migdol  under  No.  71  (Migdal-Gad  of  tuo  tribu
of  Judah,  now  El-Mejdel,  according  to  Mariette.  ibid.,  p.  34),  Adora  under  No.  91  (tho  scriptural
Adoraim,  now  Dura  near  Hebron,  Mariette,  ibiil.,  p.  39)  Aphukin,  under  No.  CG  (now  Fukin  near
Suweikah,  according  to  Maspero,  Sur  h  h  Noma  tjtl'ographiqucii  de  la  liste  de  'Tlioulmus  III,  qu'on  pent
rapporter  ii  la  JudA:,  p.  4),  Gezer  under  No.  104  (Maspero,  Notes  sur  qtielques  points  de  (lraminatre,etc.,
in  the  Zcilschrift,  1881,  p.  129),  Ono  under  No.  05  (F.  dk  Sauloy,  LettrcliM.  Chabas,  in  tho  Miflanges
d'Arch.  Kyypt.  et  Assyr.,  vol.  i.  pp.  98,  99),  Gaba,  Gibeon  of  Benjamin  [see  Josh,  xviii.  24. — Tr.J  under
No.  114  (Maiuette.  Le»  Listcs  GAigraphiqms,  p.  43),  Bit-Aniti  under  \o.  Hi,  with  another  fnriii


132      SYRIA   AT   rilE  BEQINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


V:Ca^-


AM:


*>-f.;^«^N>


:.i-:Mllliit


VINISYABDS  IN   THE  KEIGHBOUUUOOD  OF   HEBKON.'

maiutained  themselves  upon  the  soil.     The

plough  which  they  employed  was  like  that

used  by  the   Egyptians   and  Babylonians,

being  nothing  but  a  large  hoe  to  which  a  couple  of  oxen  were  harnessed.^     The

scarcity  of  rain,  except  in  certain  seasons,  and  the  tendency  of  the  rivers  to  run

low,  contributed  to  make  the  cultivators  of  the  soil  experts  in  irrigation  and

agriculture.     Almost   the   only  remains   of  these    people  which   have  come

down  to  us  consist  of  iudestructible  wells  and  cisterns,  or  wine  and  oil  presses

hollowed  out  of  the  rock.'^     Fields  of  wheat  and  barley  extended  along  the  fiats

of  the  valleys,  broken  in  upon  here  and  there  by  orchards,  in  which  the  white

and  pink  almond,  the  apple,  the  fig,  the  pomegranate,  and  the  olive  flourished  side

by  side.     If  the  slopes  of  the  valley  rose  too  precipitously  for  cultivation,  stone

dykes  were  employed  to  collect  the  falling  earth,  and  thus  to  transform  the  sides

of  the  hills  into  a  series  of  terraces  rising  one  above  the  other.     Here  the  vines,

planted  in  lines  or  in  trellises,  blended  their  clusters  with  the  fruits  of  the

orchard-trees.*     It  was,  indeed,  a  land  of  milk  and  honey,  and  its  topographical

Bit-Bauiti,  which  may  indicate  the  presence  in  this  region  of  a  temple  of  Anat  with  its  priestly
attendants  (identified  with  Anathoth  by  Maspeko,  Sur  les  Noms  Gcugraphiques,  etc.,  pp.  IS,  19).

'  Drawn  by  Boiidier,  from  a  photograph  and  original  sketches.

■  This  is  the  form  of  plough  still  employed  by  the  Syrians  in  some  places.  It  resembles  the
ancient  Egyptian  plough  illustrated  in  Datcn  of  Civilization,  p.  67.

'  Monuments  of  this  kind  are  encountered  at  every  step  in  Judrea,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  date
them.  The  aqueduct  of  Siloam,  which  goes  back  perhaps  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  and  the  cauals
which  conducted  water  into  Jerusalem,  possibly  in  part  to  be  attributed  to  the  reign  of  Solomon,  are
the  only  instances  to  which  anything  like  a  certain  date  may  be  assigned.  But  these  are  long  posterior
to  the  XVIII"'  dyuasty.  Good  judges,  however,  attribute  some  of  these  monuments  to  a  very  distant
period  :  the  masonry  of  the  wells  of  Beersheba  is  very  ancient  (H.  Paljieb,  Tlie  Desert  of  the  Exodus,
vol.  ii.  pp.  3S7-390),  if  not  as  it  is  at  present,  at  least  as  it  was  when  it  was  repaired  in  the  time
of  the  CiBsars  (GnEKiN,  Judge,  vol.  ii.  pp.  283,  2S1);  the  olive  and  wine  presses  hewn  in  the  rock  do
not  all  date  back  to  the  Iloniau  empire,  but  many  belong  to  a  still  earlier  period,  and  modern
descriptions  (cf.  Guekin,  JiulA;  vol.  iii.  pp.  261-273)  correspond  with  what  we  know  of  such  presses
from  the  Bible  (e.g.  Micah  vi.  15;  Isa.  v.  2,  svi.  10 ;  Jer.  xxv.  30,  xlviii.  33).

*  Gtjerin,  Description  de  la  Palestine,  Judge,  vol.  iii.  pp.  260,  261,  288,  etc.


THE  FOREST  BETWEEN  JAFFA    AND    CARMEL.


133


SHECHE3I   IN   THE   MIDDLE    OP    AN
AMPHITHEATRE    OF    HILLS.'


nomenclature  in  tlie  Egyptian  geographical  lists  reflects  as  in  a  mirror  the
agricultural  pursuits  of  its  ancient  inhabitants  :  one  vilhxge,  for  instance,  is  called
Aubila,  "  the  meadow ; "  while  others  bear  such  names  as  Ganutu, "  the  gardens  ;  "
Magraphut,  "  the  mounds;"  and  Karman,  "  the  vineyard."-  The  further  we
proceed  towards  the  north,  we  find,  with  a  diminishing  aridity,  the  hillsides
covered  with  richer  crops,  and  the  valleys  decked  out  with  a  more  luxuriant  and
warmly  coloured  vegetation.  Shechem  lies  in  an  actual  amphitheatre  of  verdure,
which  is  irrigated  by  countless  unfailing  streams ;  rushing  brooks  babble  on
every  side,  and  the  vapour  given  off  by  them  morning  and  evening  covers  the
entire  landscape  with  a  luminous  haze,  where  the  outline  of  each  object  becomes
blurred,  and  quivers  in  a  manner  to  which  we  are  accustomed  in  our  Western
lands."'  Towns  grew  and  multijilied  upon  this  rich  and  loamy  soil,  but  as  these
lay  outside  the  usual  track  of  the  invading  hosts — which  j^referred  to  follow  the
more  rugged  but  shorter  route  leading  straight  to  Carmel  across  the  plain
— the  records  of  the  conquerors  only  casually  mention  a  few  of  them,
such    as    Bitshailu,    Birkana,    and    Dntiua.*      Beyond    Ono    reddish-coloured

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  plate  in  Chesney's  Survey  of  Rivers  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  vol.  i.  p.  490.

■  Masi'KUO,  Sur  les  Koms  G^ographiques  de  la  Iistc  de  Tlinulmos  III,  qii'oii  pent  rapporter  u  la
Judi'e,  pp.  If),  22.

'  Van  hen  Velde,  vol.  i.  pp.  386,  388 ;  Gauhiel  Charme?,  Voyage  en  Palestine,  pp.  249,  250.
Sheehem  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  geographical  lists,  but  Max  Miiller  thinks  ho  lias  dis-
covered it  in  tlie  name  of  the  mountain  of  Sikima  which  figures  in  the  Anastasl  I'apyrus,  No.  1,
pi.  xxii.  1.  9  (_Asien  und  Europa,  p.  394).

■•  Bilsliallu,  identified  by  Chabas  {Voyage  d'tm  Egyplien,  pp.  203-20.5)  with  Bethshan,  and  with
Rhiloli  by  Mariette  {Les  Listes  (leograjMques,  p.  42)  and  Maspero  (Shj-  Ics  Noms  GifograjMques  qu'on
pent  rapporter  a  la  Judi'e,  pp.  17,  18),  is  more  probal)ly  Betliel,  written  Bit-sha-iiu,  eitlier  with  sh.


134      SYBIA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

sandy  clay  took  the  place  of  the  dark  and  compact  loam  :  oaks  began  to  appear,
sparsely  at  first,  but  afterwards  forming  vast  forests,  which  the  peasants  of  our
own  days  have  thinned  and  reduced  to  a  considerable  extent.     The  stunted
trunks  of  these  trees  are  knotted  and  twisted,  and  the  tallest  of  them  do  not
exceed  some  thirty  feet  in  height,  while  many  of  them  may  be  regarded  as
nothing  more  imposing  than  large  bushes.^     Muddy  rivers,  infested  with  croco-
diles,  flowed   slowly  through   the   shady   woods,   spreading  out  their  waters
here  and  there  in  pestilential  swamps.     On  reaching  the  seaboard,  their  exit
was  impeded   by  the   sands   which   they  brought  down  with  them,  and  the
banks  which  were  thus  formed  caused  the  waters  to  accumulate  in  lagoons
extending  behind  the  dunes.     For  miles  the  road  led  through  thickets,  inter-
rupted here  and  there  by  marshy  places  and  clumps  of  thorny  shrubs.     Bands
of  Shaiisu  were  accustomed  to  make  this  route  dangerous,  and  even  the  bravest
heroes  shrank  from  venturing  alone  along  this  route."     Towards  Aluna  the  way
began  to  ascend  Mount  Carmel  by  a  narrow  and  giddy  track  cut  in  the  rocky
side  of  the  precipice.^     Beyond  the  Mount,  it  led  by  a  rapid  descent  into  a
plain  covered  with  corn  and  verdure,  and  extending  in  a  width  of  some  thirty
miles,  by  a  series  of  undulations,  to  the  foot  of  Tabor,  where  it  came  to  an  end.
Two   side  ranges  running  almost  parallel — little  Hermon  and  Gilboa — dis-
posed in  a  line  from  east  to  west,  and  united  by  an  almost  imperceptibly  rising
ground,  serve  rather  to  connect  the  plain  of  Megiddo  with  the  valley  of  the  Jordan
than  to  separate  them.   A  single  river,  the  Kishou,  cuts  the  route  diagonally — or,
to  speak  more  correctly,  a  single  river-bed,  which  is  almost  waterless  for  nine
months  of  the  year,  and  becomes  swollen  only  during  the  winter  rains  with  the
numerous  torrents  bursting  from  the  hillsides.    As  the  flood  approaches  the  sea  it
becomes  of  more  manageable  proportions,  and  finally  distributes  its  waters  among
the  desolate  lagoons  formed  behind  the  sand-banks  of  the  open  and  wind-swept

the  old  relative  pronoun  of  the  Phcenician  (Ekman,  Varia,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1877,  p.  36),  or  with  tlie
Assyrian  s/m  (Sayce,  Jtecords  of  the  Past,  2ud  series,  vol.  v.  p.  52);  on  the  latter  supijosition  one
must  suppose,  as  Sayce  does,  that  tlie  compiler  of  the  Egyptian  lists  had  before  him  sources  of
information  in  the  cuneiform  character.  Birkaua  appears  to  be  tlie  modern  Brukin  (Maspero,  Sui-
tes Noms  G^ographiques,  etc.,  pp.  19,  20),  and  Dulina  is  certainly  Dothain,  now  Tell-Dothan  (Masperii,
Notes  sur  quelqties  points  de  G-rammaire  et  d'llistoire,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1881,  p.  122).

'  The  Ibrobt  was  well  known  to  the  geographers  of  tlie  Greco-Roman  period  (Strabo,  xvi.  2,  §  28,
p.  758),  and  was  still  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the  Crusades;  cf.  Conder,  Mediasval  Topography  of
Palestine,  in  tbe  Pal.  Expl.  Fund,  Quarterly  Statements,  1875,  pp.  91,  92.  Its  present  condition  is
described  by  Guerin,  Description  de  la  Palestine,  Samarie,  vol.  ii.  p.  388.

'  For  all  this  part  of  the  route,  which  had  been  previously  wrongly  placed  owing  to  the  ignorance
of  the  existence  of  a  forest  in  tliis  region,  see  Maspeho,  Fntre  Jopp€et  Mageddo,  iu  the  Etudes  Arche'ol.
Linguist,  et  Historiques,  d^liges  a  M.  le  V  C.  Leemans,  pp.  3-6.

'  This  defile  is  described  at  length  in  the  Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xxiii.  1.  1,  et  seq.,  and  the
terms  used  by  the  writer  are  in  themselves  sufficient  evidence  of  the  terror  with  which  the  place
inspired  the  Egyptians.  Tbe  annals  of  Thutmosis  III.  are  equally  explicit  as  to  the  difficulties  which
au  army  had  to  encounter  here  (Maspero,  Le  Eeeit  de  la  vampagne  contre  Mageddo  sous  Thuutmos
III.,  in  tlie  Remeil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  51-56,  HO,  Ml).  I  have  placed  this  defile  near  the  point
wliieh  is  now  called  Umm-el-Fahm  {Sur  les  Noms  Gc^ographiques,  etc.,  pp.  6,  7),  and  this  site  seems
to  me  to  agree  better  with  tlie  ancount  of  the  expedition  of  Thutmosis  III.  than  that  of  Arranch
proposed  by  Conder  {Palestine  Expl.  Fund,  Quarterly  Statements,  1880,  p.  223).


MEGIDDO.


■  >0


TUE    EVERGREKN    OAKS    BETWEEN    JOPl'A    AND    OARMEL.'

bay,  towered  over  by  the  sacred  summit  of  Carmel.'  No  comer  of  the  world
has  been  tlie  scene  of  more  sanguinary  engagements,  or  has  witnessed  century
after  century  so  many  armies  crossing  its  borders  and  coming  into  conflict
with  one  another.  Every  military  leader  who,  after  leaving  Africa,  was
able  to  seize  Gaza  and  Ascalon,  became  at  once  master  of  Southern  Syria.
He  might,  it  is  true,  experience  some  local  resistance,  and  come  into  con-
flict with  bands  or  isolated  outposts  of  the  enemy,  but  as  a  rule  he  had  no
need  to  anticipate  a  battle  before  he  reached  the  banks  of  the  Kishon.  Here,
behind  a  screen  of  woods  and  mountain,  the  enemy  would  concentrate  his  forces
and  prepare  resolutely  to  meet  the  attack.  If  the  invader  succeeded  in  over-
coming resistance  at  this  point,  the  country  lay  open  to  him  as  far  as  tlie
Oroutes  ;  nay,  often  even  to  the  Euphrates.  The  position  was  too  important  for
its  defence  to  have  been  neglected.  A  range  of  forts,  Ibleam,  Taanach,^  and
jMegiddo,''  drawn  like  a  barrier  across  the  line  of  advance,  protected  its
southern  face,  and  beyond  these  a  series  of  strongholds  and  villages  followed  one

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pencil  sketch  by  Lortet.

-  In  the  lists  ol'Thutmosis  III.  we  find  under  No.  -18  the  town  of  Rosh-Qodshu,  the  "Sucrcd
Cape,"  which  was  evidently  situated  lit  the  end  of  the  mountain  range  (Maspero,  A'o/p«  sur  riuelqucs
points  de  (Irammaire  ft  (Vllintoirc,  in  tlie  Zeiischri/1, 1881,  i)i).  54,  55),  or  probably  on  tlie  site  of  Haifali  ;
thi'  n;ime  itself  suggesls  tlie  veneration  with  which  Carniel  was  iuvesled  from  the  earlirst  times.

'  Ililffim,  the  Egyptian  lablafimu,  is  No.  43  in  the  lists  of  Thitiiiosis  III.  (Makiktti:,  /ycs
Lislea  Oe'oijrnphhjues,  p.  2G).  Osbiirn  liad  recognised  at  the  outset  TaaiiaUu  or  'ruaiiach  on  the
list  of  Slicahonq  {Eijypt,  her  Tcflimoiuj  In  lite  Truth,  ]).  158).

'  Mcgiddo,  the  "Legio"  of  the  Itoniiin  period,  has  been  identified  since  Robinson's  time  {Dihllcal


136       SrniA    AT   TEE   BEOINNINQ    OF   THE    EOTPTIAN   CONQUEST.

another  at  intervals  in  the  bends  of  the  valleys  or  on  the  heights,  such  as
Shunem,  Kasuna,  Anaharath,  the  two  Aphuls,  Cana,i  and  other  places  which
we  find  mentioned  on  the  triumphal  lists,  but  of  which,  up  to  the  present,  the
sites  have  not  been  fixed.

From  this  point  the  conqueror  had  a  choice  of  three  routes.     One  ran


ACRE    AND    THE   FRINGE    OF    REEFS   SHELTERING    THE    ANCIENT    PORT."

in   an  oblique  direction   to   the   west,  and   struck   the   Mediterranean   near

Acre,  leaving  on  the  left  the  promontory  of  Carmel,  with  the  sacred  town,

Eosh-Qodshu,  planted  on  its  slope.**     Acre  was  the  first  port  where  a  fleet

could  find  safe  anchorage  after  leaving  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  and  whoever

was  able  to  make  himself  master  of  it  had  in  his  hands  the  key  of  Syria,  for

it  stood  in  the  same  commanding  position  with  regard  to  the  coast  as  that

held  by  Megiddo  in  respect  of  the  interior.     Its  houses  were  built  closely

together  on  a  spit  of  rock  which  projected  boldly  into  the  sea,  while  fringes  of

reefs  formed  for  it  a  kind  of  natural  breakwater,  behind  which  ships  could  find

Researches,  vol.  ii.  p.  330)  with  Khurbet-Lejiin,  and  more  especially  with  the  little  mound  known
by  the  name  of  Tell-el-Mutesallim.  Conder  proposed  to  place  its  site  more  to  the  east,  in  the  valley
of  the  Jordan,  at  Khiirbet-el-Mujeddah  {Megiddo,  in  the  Falest.  Expl.  Fund,  Quarterly  Statnnentf,
1887,  pp.  13-20).

'  The  name  of  Shunem  (Shunama)  was  recognised  by  E.  de  Rouge',  together  with  that  of  Anakharath
(Anukharotu)  and  Kana-Cana  (Etude  sur  divers  Monuments  der  regne  de  Tlwutmosis  III.,  pp.  49,  51, 53).
The  identity  of  the  two  Apuru-Aphulu  with  Fulch  and  Afuleh  of  Galilee  was  discovered  by
Conder,  Palestine  before  Joshua,  Quarterly  Statements  of  Palest.  E.rpl.  Fund,  187G,  p.  141.

2  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Lortet.

'  M.1SPER0,  Notes  sur  quelques  2}oints  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  1879,  p.  55;  cf.  JIax
MiJLl.EB,  Asien  und  Earopa  nach  altagyptischen  Denkmdlern,  p.  163.


138       SriilA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


THE  TOWN  OF  QODSHIT.'


a  safe  harbourage  from  the  attacks  of  pirates  or  the  perils  of  bad  weather.^  From
this  poiut  the  hills  come  so  near  the  sliore  that  one  is  sometimes  obliged  to
wade  along  the  beach  to  avoid  a  projecting  spur,  and  sometimes  to  climb  a  zig-
zag path  in  order  to  cross  a  headland.     In  more  than  one  place  the  rock  has

been  hollowed  into  a  series  of  rough  steps,
giving  it  the  appearance  of  a  vast
ladder.^  Below  this  precipitous
path  the  waves  dash  with  fury,
and  when  the  wind  sets  towards
the  land  every  thud  causes
the  rocky  wall  to  tremble,  and
detaches  fragments  from  its
surface.  The  majority  of  the
towns,  such  as  Aksapu  (Ec-
dippa),  Mashal,  Lubiaa,  Ushu-
Shaklian,  lay  back  from  the  sea  on
the  mountain  ridges,  out  of  the
reach  of  pirates;  several,  however,
were  built  on  the  shore,  under  the
shelter  of  some  promontory,  and  the
inhabitants  of  these  derived  a  miserable  subsistence  from  iishing  and  the  chase.^
Beyond  the  Tyriau  Ladder  Phoenician  territory  began.  The  country  was  served
throughout  its  entire  length,  from  town  to  town,  by  the  coast  road,  which
turning  at  length  to  the  right,  and  passing  through  the  defile  formed  by  the
Nahr-el-Kebir,^  entered  the  region  of  the  middle  Orontes.

The  second  of  the  roads  leading  from  llegiddo  described  an  almost  symme-
trical curve  eastwards,  crossing  the  Jordan  at  Bethshan,  then  the  Jabbok,  and
finally  reaching  Damascus  after  having  skirted  at  some  distance  the  last  of  the
basaltic  ramparts  of  the  Hauran.      Here  extended  a  vast  but  badly  watered

'  Acre  (Aku)  was  already  noticed  by  Brugsch,  Geograpliische  Iiischriften,  vol.  ii.  pp.  10,  41.

"  Heuee  the  name  Tyrian  Ladder,  icAiVaf  Tupiaif  (Josephus,  Bell.  Jiul,  xi.  10.  2),  which  is  applied
to  one  of  these  passes,  eitlier  Ras-en-Nakurah  or  Eas-el-Ahiad.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.  The  vignette  is  taken  from  the  bas-
reliefs  of  the  Ramesseum  :  cf.  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgijiite,  etc.,  pi.  cccxxx.;  Rusellini,
Monumenii  Storici,  pi.  ex. ;  Lepsids,  Denkm.,  iii.  164.  The  portions  missing  have  been  supplied  in
outline.  Elsewhere  the  town  is  given  a  more  elongated  form  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'J.'gypU,
etc.,  pis.  xiii.,  xxi.,  xxii.,  xxvii.,  cccxsiv. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenii  Slorici,  pis.  Ixxxvii.,  xci.,  civ.).

•  The  site  of  Aksapu  was  recognised  by  Buugsch,  Geogr.  Insch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  44,  and  that  of  Mashal
(the  Biblical  Misheal)  by  E.  de  Rouge,  Etude  sur  divers  Monuments  du  regne  de  Thoutmes  III ,  p.  51.
Lubina  may  be  Khurbet-Lubban,  Khurbet-Lubbuna,  at  some  distance  from  Ras-en-Nakurah,  almost
in  sight  of  the  sea  (Maspero,  Sur  Ics  Noms  Geographiques,  etc.,  qu'on  peut  rapporter  ii  la  Galilee,  p.  3)
Ushu-Shakhau,  which  appears  to  be  the  Ushu  of  the  Assyrians,  was  probably  the  Alexandroschajne  of
classical  times,  situated  possibly  at  Umm-el-AwamId  (Maspeko,  De  Quelques  Localite's  roisines  de
SidoH,  in  the  Eecueil  des  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  102,  103).

'  This  is  the  road  indicated  in  the  Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pis.  xx.  1.  7,  xxi.  1.  4,  of  which  I
shall  have  occasion  to  say  something  hereafter  in  describing  the  Phoenician  littoral;  see  p.  169,  et
seq.,  of  the  present  work.


^^'^■;  /y.  ''^)  im


THE    TYBIAN     LADDEl!     AT     HAS     11,-AIilAll.

Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotogrupli.


140      SYJilA    AT  niE   BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

pasture-laud,  which  attracted  the  Bedouiu  from  every  side,  and  scattered  over
it  were  a  number  of  walled  towns,  such  as  Hamath,  Magato,  Ashtaroth,  and
Ono-Kepha.i  Probably  Damascus  was  already  at  this  period  the  dominant
authority  over  the  region  watered  by  these  two  rivers,  as  well  as  over  the  villages
nestling  in  the  gorges  of  Hermon, — Abila,  Helbon  of  the  vineyards,  and
Yabrud, — but  it  had  not  yet  acquired  its  renown  for  riches  and  power.  Pro-
tected by  the  Anti-Lebanon  range  from  its  turbulent  neighbours,  it  led  a  sort
of  vegetative  existence  apart  from  invading  hosts,  forgotten  and  hushed  to
sleep,  as  it  were,  in  the  shade  of  its  gardens.

The  third  road  from  Megiddo  took  the  shortest  way  possible.  After  crossing
the  Kisbon  almost  at  right  angles  to  its  course,  it  ascended  by  a  series  of  steep
inclines  to  arid  plains,  fringed  or  intersected  by  green  and  flourishing  valleys,
which  afforded  sites  for  numerous  towns, — Pahira,  Merom  near  Lake  Huleh,
Qart-Nizanu,  Beerotu,  and  Lauisa,  situated  in  the  marshy  district  at  the  head-
waters of  the  Jordan.^  From  this  point  forward  the  land  begins  to  fall,  and  taking
a  hollow  shape,  is  known  as  Coele-Syria,  with  its  luxuriant  vegetation  spread
between  the  two  ranges  of  the  Lebanon.  It  was  inhabited  then,  as  at  the  time
of  the  Babylonian  conquest,  by  the  Amorites,  who  probably  included  Damascus
also  in  their  domain.^  Their  capital,  the  sacred  Qodshu,  was  situated  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Orontes,  about  five  miles  from  the  lake  which  for  a  long  time  bore  its
name,  Bahr  el-Kades.''     It  crowned  one  of  those  barren  oblong  eminences  which

'  Proof  tliat  the  Egyptians  knew  this  route,  followed  even  to  this  day  iu  certain  circnmstances,
is  furnished  by  the  lists  of  Thutmosis  HI.,  in  which  the  principal  stations  whicli  it  comprises  are
enumerated  among  tlie  towns  given  up  after  tlie  victory  of  Megiddo  (Nos.  13-17,  28-30).  Dimasqu
was  identified  witli  Damascus  by  E.  de  Rouge,  Etude  sur  divers  Monuments  du  regne  de  Tliontmes  III.,
p.  47,  and  Astarotu  with  Ashtarotli-Qarnaim  (ibid.,  p.  49).  Hamatu  (No.  16)  is  probably  Hamath  of
the  Gadarenes ;  Magato  (No.  30),  the  Maged  of  tlie  Maccabees,  is  possibly  the  present  Mulcatta ;  and
Ono-Eepba  (No.  29),  Raphun,  Rajihana,  Arpha  of  Decapolis,  is  the  modern  Er-Rafeh  (Maspeko,  Sur
les  Noms  G^jgraphiques,  etc.,  qu'on  pent  rapporter  a  la  Galilee,  pp.  4,  5).

-  Pahira  is  probably  Safed ;  Qart-Nizanu,  the  "  flowery  city,"  the  Kartha  of  Zabulon  (_Josh.  xxi.
31);  and  Beerut,  the  Berotlia  of  Josephus  (Hist,  of  the  Jeu-s,  v.  1.  18),  near  Merom  (MAsPEno,  Sur  les
Noms,  etc.,  qu'on  pent  rapporter  a  la  Galilie,  pp.  3-5).  Maroma  and  Lauisa,  Laisa,  have  been  identified
with  Merom  and  Laish  by  Brugsch  (G.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  72,  74)  and  by  E.  de  Rouge'  (Etude  sur  divers
Mo7i.  du  regne  de  TlioutmcsIIL,  p.  50).

'  The  identification  of  the  country  of  Amauru  with  that  of  tlie  Amorites  was  admitted  from  the
first  by  OsmjRN,  Egypt,  her  Testimony  to  Truth,  pp.  65,  66 ;  Hinces,  An  Attempt  to  ascertain  Ike  Number,
etc.,  of  Hieroglyphic  Alphabet,  p.  45  ;  Bkcgsch,  Geog.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21,  48,  61,  etc.  The  only  doubt  was
as  to  the  locality  occupied  by  these  Amorites :  the  mention  of  Qodshu  on  the  Orontes,  in  tlie  country  of
the  Amurru,  showed  that  Cojle-Syriawas  the  region  in  question.  lutlie  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  the  name
Amnrru  is  applied  also  to  the  country  east  of  the  Phoenician  coast  (Bezold-Bcdge,  The  TeU  el-Amarna
Tablets  in  the  Brit.  Mus.,  pi.  xlvii.,  note  2),  and  we  have  seen  that  there  is  reason  to  believe  tliat  it
was  used  by  the  Babylonians  to  denote  all  Syria  (cf.  p.  IS,  note  5,  of  this  volume).  If  the  name  given
by  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  to  Damascus  and  its  neighbourhood,  "  Gar-Imirlshu,"  "  Iinirishu,"
"Imirish,"  really  means  "the  Fortress  of  the  Amorites"  (Satce,  in  the  Academy,  ISSl,  p.  101;
H0M5IEL,  Die  Seinitischen  VSllcer,  p.  17S;  Fk.  Lexoemant,  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.  pp.  288,
338),  we  should  have  in  this  fact  a  proof  that  this  people  were  in  actual  possession  of  the  Damascene
Syria.  This  must  have  been  taken  from  them  by  the  Hittitcs  towards  the  XX"'  century  before  our
era,  according  to  Hommel ;  about  the  end  of  the  XVIll"'  dynasty,  according  to  Lenorniant.  If,  on  the
otlicr  liand,  the  Assyrians  read  tlie  name  " Sha-imiri-sliu,"  with  the  signification,  "the  town  of  its
asses  "  (Hai'pt,  Her  Keihchriftliche  Name  des  Eeiches  von  Damaskus,  in  the  Zcits.  fiir  Assyr.,  vol.  ii.  ])p.
321,  322),  it  is  simply  a  play  ujjon  words,  and  lias  no  bearing  upon  the  primitive  meaning  of  the  name.

*  The  name  Qodshu-Kndesh  was  for  a  long  time  read  Uatesh,  Badesh,  Atesh,  and,  owing  to  a


QODSHU.


I  I  I


THE    DYKE   AT    BAHR    EL-KADES   IN    ITS    IKL.SE.N T    CONDITION.'

are  so  frequently  met  with  in  Syria.  A  muddy  stream,  the  Taunur,  flowed,  at
some  distance  away,  around  its  base,  and,  emptying  itself  into  the  Orontes  at  a
point  a  little  to  the  north,  formed  a  natural  defence  for  the  town  on  the
west.  Its  encompassing  walls,  slightly  elliptic  in  form,  were  strengthened  by
towers,  aud  surrounded  by  two  concentric  ditches  which  kejit  the  sapper  at
a  distance.  A  dyke  running  across  the  Orontes  above  the  town  caused  the
waters  to  rise  aud  to  overflow  in  a  northern  diiection,  so  as  to  form  a  shallow
lake,  which  acted  as  an  additional  protection  from  the  enemy.  Qodshu  was
thus  a  kind  of  artificial  island,  connected  witii  the  surrounding  country  by  two

confusion  with  Qodi,  Ati,  or  Atet.  The  town  was  identified  by  ChampoUion  with  Bactria  {Lettres
icriles  (Vlitjypte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  2G7,  268,  compared  with  2S7),  then  transferred  to  Mesopotamia  by
Kosellini,  in  the  land  of  Omira,  whicli,  according  to  Tliny  {Hist.  Nat.,  v.  24),  was  close  to  the  Taurus
(Monumenti  Slorici,  vol.  iii.,  pt.  1,  pp.  441-413),  not  far  from  the  KUabur  or  from  tlie  province  of
Aleppo  (BiKCH,  Ohservationn  on  the.  Statidical  Tablet  of  Kariiuk,  pp.  19-23) :  Osbura  {i-'ijijpl,  her
Tettimoni/  to  the  Truth,  pp.  65,  66,  85,  86)  tried  to  connect  it  with  Hadashah  (Josh.  xv.  21),  an  Amorito
town  ill  tlie  .southern  part  of  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  while  Hindis  placed  it  in  Edessa  {Report  Si/ru-Kjypt.
Soc,  1847,  p.  6 ;  cf.  BnrGscH,  Beueherichte  aus  JEgypten,  p.  126).  The  reading  Kedesh,  Kadesh,  (Judshu,
the  result  of  the  observations  of  Lepsius,  has  finally  prevailed.  Brugsch  couuocted  this
name  with  that  of  Bahr  el-Kades,  a  designation  attached  in  the  Middle  Ages  to  the  lake  through
which  the  Orontes  flows,  and  placed  the  town  on  its  slioresor  on  a  small  island  on  tho  lake  (Geo.  Ins.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  21,  23).  Thomson  {The  Land  and  the  Hook,  p.  110)  pointed  out  Tell  Nuby-Mondeh,  tho
ancient  Laodicea  of  tbc  Lebanon,  as  satisfying  the  rcfiuirements  of  the  site.  Condor  developed  this
idea,  and  showed  tliat  all  the  conditions  prescribed  by  the  Egyptian  texts  in  regard  to  (iodahu  find
here,  and  here  alone,  their  application  {luidi'sli,  in  I'al.  lixpl.  Fund,  Quaitcrlij  Statement,  1881,  pp.
163-173).     The  description  given  in  tlje  text  is  based  on  Couder's  observations.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  ;  cf.  Saouau,  Reise  in  !<ijrien  und  Mcsopotantic,  pi.  vii.  p.  61 .


142       SYIUA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

flyiug  bridges,  which  coukl  be  opened  or  shut  at  pleasure.  Once  the  bridges
were  raised  aud  the  gates  closed,  tlie  boldest  euemy  had  no  resource  left  but  to
arm  himself  with  patience  and  settle  down  to  a  leugtlieued  siege.  The  invader,
fresh  from  a  victory  at  Megiddo,  and  following  up  bis  good  fortuue  in  a  forward
movement,  had  to  reckon  upon  further  and  serious  resistance  at  this  point,  and
to  prepare  himself  for  a  second  conflict.  The  Amorite  cliiefs  and  their  allies
had  the  advantage  of  a  level  and  firm  ground  for  the  evolutions  of  their
chariots  during  the  attack,  while,  if  they  were  beaten,  the  citadel  afforded  them
a  secure  rallying-phxce,  whence,  having  gathered  their  shattered  troops,  they
could  regain  their  respective  countries,  or  enter,  with  tlie  helji  of  a  few  devoted
men,  upon  a  species  of  guerilla  warfare  in  which  they  excelled.

The  road  from  Damascus  led  to  a  point  south  of  Qodshu,  while  that  from
Phcenicia  came  right  up  to  the  town  itself  or  to  its  immediate  neighbourhood.
The  dyke  of  Bahr  el-Kades  served  to  keep  the  plain  in  a  dry  condition,  and  thus
secured  for  numerous  towns,  among  which  Hamath  stood  out  pre-eminently,
a  prosperous  existence.^  Beyond  Hamath,^  and  to  the  left,  between  the
Orontes  and  the  sea,  lay  the  commercial  kingdom  of  Alasia,  protected  from
the  invader  by  bleak  mountains.^  On  the  right,  between  the  Orontes  aud
the  Balikh,  extended  the  land  of  rivers,  Naharaim.  Towns  had  grown  up
here  thickly, — on  the  sides  of  the  torrents  from  the  Amanos,  along  the  banks
of  rivers,  near  springs  or  wells — wherever,  in  fact,  the  presence  of  water
made  culture  possible.  The  fragments  of  the  Egyptian  chronicles  which  have
come  down  to  us  number  these  towns  by  the  hundred,*  aud  yet  of  how  many
more  must  the  records  have  perished  with  the  crumbling  Theban  walls  upon
which  the  Pharaohs  had  their  names  incised  I  Khalabu  was  the  Aleppo  of  our
own  day,^  and  grouped  around  it  lay  Turmanuna,  Tunipa,  Zarabu,  Nii,  Dur-
baniti,  Nirabu,  Sarmata,"  and  a  score  of  others  which  depended  upon  it,  or

'  For  the  i-lyke  of  Bahr  el-K;ides,  sfu  Burtok-Draee,  Unexplored  Syria,  voh  ii.  p.  2G9,  et  seq.

'  Haiuath  is  meutionetl  in  the  great  list  of  Thutmusis  III.  (Makette,  Karnal:,  pi.  21),  without
tlie  initial  breathing,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  in  Assyrian  (No.  122;  cf.  H.  G.  Tomkixs,  On  the
Topography  of  N.  Syria,  in  Trans.  Bib].  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  ix.  p.  231,  and  Notes  on  the  Geog.  of  N,  Syria,
in  the  Sah.  and  Orient.  Record,  vol.  iii.  p.  6).

'  The  site  of  Alasia,  Alashia,  was  determined  from  the  Tel  cl-Amarua  tablets  by  Maspero,  Le
Pays  d' Alasia,  in  the  Itecueil,  vol.  ix.  pp.  209,  210  ;  cf.  Tojikins,  On  the  Name  Nepiriuriu,  etc.,  in  tlie
Proceedings,  1S8S-S9,  vol.  xi.  p.  79.  Niebnhr  had  placed  it  to  the  west  of  Cilicia,  opposite  the  island  of
Elcousa  mentioned  by  Strabo  (XIV.  v.,  §  G,  p.  671),  Stttdienzur  Gcsch.  des  alien  Orients,  i.  pp.  97-102.
Condor  connected  it  with  the  scriptural  Elishali  (Pal.  Expl.  Fund,  Quart.  Stat.,  1S92,  p.  45),  and  W.  Max
Miiller  confounds  it  with  Asi  or  Cyprus  (Das  Land  A  laschia,  in  the  Zeits.  fiir  Assyr.,  vol.  x.  pp.  257-2G4).

'  Two  hundred  aud  thirty  names  belonging-  to  Naharaim  are  still  legible  on  the  lists  of  Tliilt-
mosis  III.  (Makiette,  Karnal;  pis.  20,  21),  and  a  hundred  others  have  been  eflaced  from  the  inouument.

'  Khalabu  was  identified  by  Chabas  (Voyage  d'un  Egyptien,  pp.  100-102)  with  Khalybon,  the
modern  Aleppo,  and  his  opinion  has  been  adopted  by  most  Egyptologists;  cf.  Max  Muller,  Asieu
U7td  Eurojia,  pp.  256,  257.  Brugsch  (Geog.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pp.45,  46)  had  Khelbijn,  near  Damascus,  in
his  eye ;  Hale'vy  would  read  Kharabu,  and  iinds  this  name  in  the  Tel  el-Amarua  tablets  (Notes  Gibgr.,
in  tlie  Bevue  Simitique  d' Epigraphie,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  3S1).

'  Tuuijia  has  been  found  in  Tcnnib,  Tiunab,  by  Noldeko  (Tvnip  und  Charhu,  in  the  Zeitschrift,
1876,  pp.  10,  11) ;  Zarabu  in  Zarbi,  and  Surmata  in  Sarmeda,  by  Tomkins  (On  the  Topog.  of  N.Syria,


144      SYJilA    AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.


upon  one  of  its  rivals.'  Tlie  boundaries  of  this  portion  of  the  Lower  Lotanu
have  come  ilown  to  us  in  a  singularly  indefinite  form,  and  they  must  also,
moreover,  have  been  subject  to  continual  modifications  from  the  results  of
tribal  conflicts.  We  are  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  the  various  principalities
were  accustomed  to  submit  to  the  leadership  of  a  single  individual,  or  whether
we  are  to  relegate  to  the  region  of  popular  fancy  that  Lord  of  Naharaim  of

whom    the    Egyptian   scribes   made
such  a  hero  in  their  fantastic  narra-


~^»'«v


of    C a  r  c  K  e  m  i  s  h'   ^^J<

.a.  •■ .     Am""


^  tioTuiianA


fives."  Carchemish  represented  in
this  region  the  position  occupied  by
Megiddo  in  relation  to  Kharu,  and  by
Qodshu  among  tlie  Amorites;  that  is
to  say,  it  was  the  citadel  and  sanctuary
of  the  surrounding  country.  Who-
ever could  make  himself  master  of  it
would  have  the  whole  country  at  his
feet.  It  lay  upon  the  Euphrates,  the  winding  of  the  river  protecting  it  on  its
southern  and  south-eastern  sides,  while  around  its  northern  front  ran  a  deep
stream,  its  defence  being  further  completed  by  a  double  ditch  across  the  inter-
vening region.  LikeQodshu,it  was  thus  situated  iuthe  midst  of  an  artificial  island
beyond  the  reach  of  the  battering-ram  or  the  sapper.  The  encompassing  wall,
which  tended  to  describe  an  ellipse,  hardly  measured  two  miles  in  circumference  ;
but  the  suburbs  extending,  in  the  midst  of  villas  and  gardens,  along  the  river-
banks  furnished  in  time  of  peace  an  abode  for  the  surplus  population.  The  wall
still  rises  some  five  and  twenty  to  thirty  feet  above  the  plain.  Two  mounds  divided
by  a  ravine  command  its  north-western  side,  their  summits  being  occupied  by
the  ruins  of  two  fine  buildings — a  temple  and  a  palace.*^     Carchemish  was  the

iu  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  voh  ix.  pp.  2o2,  244) ;  Durbaniti  in  Deir  el-Banat,  the
Castrum  PueHarum  of  the  chroniclers  of  the  Crusades ;  Nirabu  iu  Nirab,  and  Tirabu  in  Tereb,  now
el-Athrib  (MASi'Er.o,  Notes  sur  difgrents  points  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeilsclirift,  1885,  pp.  5,  6).
Xirab  is  luentioneJ  under  the  form  N-qpaBas  by  Nicholas  of  Damiiscus  (Frag.  25,  in  MOlleb-Didot,
Frag.  Hist.  Gnecorum,  vol.  iii.  p.  372).  Xii,  long  confounded  with  Nineveh  after  Chnmpollion
(Gram,  ^gyplienne,  p.  150),  was  identified  by  Leuormant  (Zes  Origines,  vol.  iii.  p.  31C,  et  seq.)
with  Niuus  Yetus,  Membidj,  and  by  Max  Miiller  (Asien  und  Europa,  p.  267)  with  Balis  on  the
Euphrates:  I  am  inclined  to  make  it  Kefer-Naya,  between  Aleppo  and  Turmanla.

'  These  names  have  been  studied  partially  by  Lenobm.^kt,  Les  Grig,  de  I'Hist.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  322-331,
and  exhaustively  by  TojiKixs,  Anc.  Geog.  of  X.  Syria,  in  Proc.  Bibl.  Aich.  Soc,  1882-83,  pp.  58-G2 ;  On
the  Topog.  of  N.  Syria,  in  the  Transactions,  vol.  ix.  pp.  227-254  ;  liecords  of  the  Past,  new  ser.,  v.  pp.  25-
42;  Xotes  on  Geog.  of  N.  Syria,  in  the  Bah.  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2-6,  41-46.  Max  Miiller
has  devoted  a  few — unfortunately  too  few — pages  to  them  in  his  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  286-292.

-  In  the  "  Story  of  the  Predestined  Prince  "  the  heroine  is  daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Naharaim,  who
seems  to  exercise  authority  over  all  the  chiefs  of  the  country  (Maspero,  Les  Coutes  popidaires  de
VEgypte  Aneienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  231-234) ;  as  the  manuscript  does  not  date  back  further  than  the
XX"'  dynasty,  we  are  justified  in  supposing  that  the  Egyptian  writer  had  a  knowledge  of  the  Hittitc
domination,  during  which  the  King  of  the  KhiUi  was  actually  the  ruler  of  all  Naharaim.

'  Karkamisha,  Gargamish,  was  from  the  beginning  associated  with  the  Carchemish  of  the  Bible


N AH  A  It  AIM  AND    OARCHEMISTI


145


THE    TELL    OF   JEBABIS    IN    ITS    PRESENT    CONDITION.'

last  stage  in  a  conqueror's  march  coming  from  the  soutli.  For  an  invader
approacliing  from  the  east  or  north  it  formed  his  first  station.  He  had  before
liim,  in  fact,  a  choice  of  the  tliree  chief  fords  for  crossing  the  Euphrates.
That  of  Thapsacus,  at  the  bend  of  the  river  where  it  turns  eastveard  to  the
Arabian  plain,  lay  too  far  to  the  south,  and  it  could  be  reached  only  after
a  mareli  through  a  parched  and  desolate  region  where  the  army  would  run
the  risk  of  perishing  from  thirst.  For  an  invader  proceeding  from  Asia  Minor,
or  intending  to  make  his  way  through  the  defiles  of  the  Taurus,  Samosata
offered  a  convenient  fording-place ;  but  this  route  would  compel  the  general,
wlio  had  Naharaim  or  tlie  kingdoms  of  Chald;ea  in  view,  to  make  a  long
detour,  and  although  the  Assyrians  used  it  at  a  later  period,  at  the  time  of
their  expeditions  to  the  valley  of  the  Halys,  the  Egyptians  do  not  seem  ever
to  have  travelled  by  this  road.  Carchemish,  the  place  of  the  third  ford,  was
about  equally  distant  from  Thapsacus  and  Samosata,  and  lay  in  a  rich  and

(HiNCKS,  An  Attempt  to  ascertain  the  Number,  etc..  of  the  Hieroglyphic  Alphabet,  p.  4G  :  Biitcii,  Ohs.  on
the  Statistical  Tablet  of  Karnak,  p.  15);  but  a.s  the  latter  was  wrongly  identified  witli  Cireesiuru,  it  was
nuturiilly  located  at  the  confiueuee  of  the;  Khabur  with  the  Euphrates.  Hincks  (TliiTroglyphes  et
Cuneiformes,  in  Ciubas  ,M^langes  Kgyptologiqucs,  2ud  series,  p.  280)  fixed  the  site  at  Rum-Kaloh.
a.  Rawlinsou  (Carchemish,  in  Smith's  Diet.)  referred  it  cursorily  to  Hierapolis-Mabog,  which  position
llaspero  (De  Carchemis  Oppidi  situ  et  historiu  nntiguissimd,  1873)  endeavoured  to  confirui.  Finzi
(Ricerche  per  lo  Studio  dell  Aniichitu  Assira,  pp.  257,  200),  and  after  him  G.  Smith,  thouglit  to  tind  the
site  at  .lerabis,  the  ancient  Europos  (Fu.  Delitzsoh,  ]Vo  lag  das  Paradies?  p.  25lj),  and  exeavation.s
carried  on  there  by  the  Englibh  have  brought  tu  light  in  this  place  Hittilo  monuments  which  go  back-
in  part  ti)  the  Assyrian  epoch.  This  identification  is  now  generally  accepted  (cf.  J.  Mionant,  Kar-
Knnish,  sa  position  d'apres  les  d&ouvcrtes  modcrnes,  1891),  although  tliere  is  still  no  direct  proof  attain-
able, and  competent  judges  (Wilson,  Itecent  Bibl.  Researches,  in  the  Pal.  Kxpl.  Fund,  Quart.  Slat.,  188-J,
p.  41))  continue  to  prefer  tlie  site  of  Membij.  I  fall  in  with  tlio  current  view,  hut  with  all  lesorvo.
The  descri|)tion  of  Carcliemisli  given  in  the  text  refers  to  the  Jerabis  site  ;  it  is  taken  from  rEniiOT-
Chipiez,  nistoirc  de  I'Art  dans  I'Anliquitc;  vol.  iv.  pp.  531,  532,  807-8();i.

'  Kiproduced  by  Fauchcr-Gudin  from  a  cut  in  the  Graphic  of  December  II,  1880.     Cf.  I*ei[rot-
Cuii'iEZ,  Uist.  de  I'Art,  vol.  iv.  p.  8]0.

I,


A  Northern  svkias.


146       STRIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF    THE    EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.

fertile  province,  which  was  so  well  watered  that  a  drought  or  a  famine  would
not  be  likely  to  enter  into  the  expectations  of  its  inhabitants.  Hither  pilgrims,
merchants,  soldiers,  and  all  the  wandering  denizens  of  the  world  were  accus-
tomed to  direct  their  steps,  and
the  habit  once  established  was
perpetuated  for  centuries.^  On
the  left  bank  of  the  river,  and
almost  opposite  Carchemish,  lay
the  region  of  Mitanni,-  which
was  already  occupied  by  a
people  of  a  different  race,  who
used  a  language  cognate,  it
would  seem,  with  the  imper-
fectly classified  dialects  spoken
by  the  tribes  of  the  Upper
Tigris  and  Upper  Euphrates.^
Harran  bordered  on  Mitanni,
and  beyond  Harran  one  may
recognize,  in  the  vaguely  de-
fined Singar,  Assur,  Arrapkha,
and  Babel,  states  that  arose  out  of  the  dismemberment  of  the  ancient  Chalda^an
Empire.'^     The  Carchemish  route  was,  of  course,  well  known  to  caravans,  but

'  For  the  fords  of  the  Euphrates,  bee  Maspero,  I)e  Carchemig  Oppidi  situ,  etc.,  pp.  1-3;  for  that
of  Samosata,  cf.  Ammiaxcs  Marcellisus,  xii.  11  ;  for  that  of  Thapsaous,  Strabo,  xvi.  1,  §  21,  p.  747;
for  those  of  Zeugma  and  Europos,  Flint,  N.  Hist.,  xxxiv.  43.

'  Blitiinni  is  mentioned  on  several  Egyptian  monuments  (E.  DE  EocGE,  Etude  sur  diven  Monu-
ments dii  rerjne  de  Thoutmes  III.,  p.  28;  Dumiches,  Hist.  Inschr.,  vol.  i.  pis.  11,  12,  16,  17)  ;  but  its
importance  was  not  recognised  until  after  the  discovery  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  and  of  its
situation  (W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  tind  Europa,  pp.  2S1-28G).  The  fact  that  a  letter  from  the  Prince  of
Jlitauni  is  stated  in  a  Hieratic  docket  to  have  come  from  Naharaim  (Erman,  Naehtrag  zu  Winchhr's
Verzeichniss,  in  the  Zeitschrijt,  1889,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  63)  has  been  used  as  a  proof  that  the  countries
were  identical  (Erjian,  Der  ThontafeJfund  von  Tell-Amarna,  in  the  Buliner  Sitziingsherichfe,  1888,
vol.  ii.  p.  5S4 ;  also  the  observations  of  Schrader,  p.  587 :  cf.  Brugsch,  Tlie  Land  Mitani  on  the  Egyptian
Monuments,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  clxiv.-clxvii.)  ;  I  have
shown  that  the  docket  proves  only  that  Mitanni  formed  a  part  of  Naharaim  (Journ.  des  D^hats,
October  12,  1888).  It  extended  over  the  province  of  Edessa  and  Harran,  stretching  out  towards  the
sources  of  the  Tigris  (cf.  Jensen,  Vorstudien  zur  Entziffering  des  Mitanni,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir
Assijriohgie,  vol.  vi.  p.  62).  Niebuhr  places  it  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  Masios,  in  Mygdonia
(Sludien  und  Bemerhungen  zur  Geschiclite  des  Alien  Orients,  i.  pp.  88-96)  ;  Th.  Keinach  connects  it
with  the  Maticni  (C»  Peujile  oublig,  les  Matienes,  in  the  lievue  des  Htudes  Crrecques,  1894,  pp.  317,
318),  and  asks  whether  this  was  not  the  region  occupied  by  this  people  before  their  emigration
towards  the  Caspian.

'  Several  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  are  couched  in  this  language,  and  three  experts  are  now
engaged  in  an  attempt  to  decipher  them  (Jensen,  Vorstudien  zur  Entzifferung  des  Mitanni,  in  the
Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  v.  pp.  166-208,  and  vol.  vi.  pp.  34-72  ;  Brvnnow,  Die  Mitdni-Sprache,
ibid.,  vol.  V.  pp.  209-259;  and  Savce,  The  Language  of  Mitanni,  ibid.,  vol.  v.  pp.  260-340).

*  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudin,  from  a  photograph :  cf.  Petrie,  Racial  Types,  No.  69.

^  These  names  were  recognised  from  the  first  in  the  inscriptions  of  Thutmosis  III.  and  in  those  of
other  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIII""  and  XIX"'  dynasties :  cf.  W.  Mas  Mr ller,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.
277-280.


TEE  DISINTEGRATION   OF   TEE  SYRIAN  POPULATION.


147


armed  bodies  had  rarely  occasion   to  make  use    of  it.      It  was    a    far    cry
from  Memphis  to  Carchemisli,  ami  for  tlie  Egyptians  this  town  continued  to
be  a  limit  which  they  never  passed,  except  incidentally,  when  they  had  to
chastise  some  turbulent  tribe,  or  to  give  some  ill-guarded  town  to  the  flames.^
It  would  be  a  difficult  task  to  define  with  any  ajjproach  to  accuracy  the


THE    UEADS    OF    THREE    AMuRITE    CAI'TIVES/


distribution  of  the  Canaanites,  Amorites,  and  Aramaeans,  and  to  indicate  the
precise  points  where  they  came  into  contact  with  their  rivals  of  non-Semitic
stock.  Frontiers  between  races  and  languages  can  never  be  very  easily  de-
termined, and  this  is  especially  true  of  the  peoples  of  Syria.  They  are  so
broken  up  and  mixed  in  this  region,  that  even  in  neighbourhoods  where  one
predominant  tribe  is  concentrated,  it  is  easy  to  find  at  every  step  representatives
of  all  the  others.  Four  or  five  townships,  singled  out  at  random  from  the  middle
of  a  province,  would  often  be  found  to  belong  to  as  many  different  races,  and
their  respective  inhabitants,  while  living  within  a  distance  of  a  mile  or  two.
would  be  as  great  strangers  to  each  other  as  if  they  were  separated  by  the
breadth  of  a  continent.^  It  would  appear  that  the  breaking  up  of  these
populations  had  not  been  carried  so  far  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times,  but  the
confusion  must  already  have  been  groat  if  we  are  to  judge  from  the  number  of
diffcroiit  sites  where  we  encounter  evidences  of  people  of  the  same  language  and

'  A  certain  miinljer  of  towns  nienlioncd  in  tlio  lists  of  Tlifltmosis  III.  were  situuteil  Ijcjov.d  tlio
Euphrates,  and  tliey  belonged  some  to  Mitanni  and  some  (o  the  regions  furtlicr  away.  Various  etlbrts
have  been  made  to  identify  them,  cr/.  Fit.  I.enoijmant,  Les  Oriijines,  vol.  iii.  pp.  322,  331;  H.  G.
TOMKIN'S,  On  the  Toporirnphy  of  Nurtheru  SijrUi,  etc.,  in  the  Transactions  Bibl.  Arrh.  I^oe.,  vol.  ix.
pp.  '227-J51 ;  and  W.  Max  MCller,  Asien  und  liurojta.  pp.  290,  291.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograph  ;  cf.  I^etrie,  Itacial  Types,  No.  117.

'  Cf.  Renan,  yiiuion  lie  I'lii'nieie,  pp.  (132,  (J33,  for  tlie  eomplote  .separation  whicli  still  exists,  for
instance,  between  the  Metualis  and  the  other  peoples  of  Syria.


148      SYRIA    AT   THE   BEOINNINO    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


A    NORTIJEltN    SYRIAN — INNC'AM.^


blood.  The  bulk  of  the  Khati  had  not  yet  departed  from  the  Taurus  region,
but  some  stray  bands  of  them,  carried  away  by  the  movement  which  led  to  the
invasion  of  the  Hyksos,  had  settled  around  Hebron,  where  the  rugged  nature  of
the  country  served  to  protect  them  from  their  neighbours.^     The  Amorites  had

their     head  -  quarters     around

Qodshu^  in  Cojle-Syria,  but  one
section  of  them  had  taken  up
;i  position  on  the  shores  of  the  •
Lake  of  Tiberias  in  Galilee,
others  had  established  them-
selves within  a  short  distance
of  Jaffa  ^  on  the  Mediterranean,
while  others  had  settled  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  southern
Hittites  in  such  numbers  that
their  name  in  the  Hebrew  Scrip-
tures was  at  times  employed
to  designate  the  western  moun-
tainous region  about  the  Dead
Sea  and  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.^  The'ir  presence  was  also  indicated  on
the  table-lands  bordering  the  desert  of  Damascus,  in  the  districts  frequented
by  Bedouin  of  the  tribe  of  Terah,  Am  men  and  Moab,  on  the  rivers  Yarmuk  and
Jabbok,  and  at  Edrei  and  Heshbon.^     The  fuller,  indeed,  our  knowledge  is

'  In  very  early  times  they  are  described  as  dwelling  near  Hebron  or  in  the  mountains  of  Judah
(Gen.  xxiii.,  xxv.  9,  10,  xxvi.  34,  35,  xlix.  29-32  ;  Numb.  xiii.  29  ;  cf.  Josh.  xi.  3).  Since  we  have
learned  from  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  monuments  that  the  Khati  dwelt  iu  Northern  Syria,  the
majority  of  commentators  have  been  indisposed  to  admit  the  existence  of  southern  Hittites:  this  name,
it  is  alleged,  having  been  introduced  into  the  Biblical  text  through  a  misconception  of  the  orio-inal
documents,  where  the  term  Hittite  was  the  equivalent  of  t'anaanite  (Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Altcrthums,
vol.  i.  pp.  213,  214 ;  Bvdi.'E,  Die  Bihlische  Urfjesclii elite,  p.  347,  n.  1 ;  Stade,  Geschichte  des  VuV;es
Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  143).

*  Cf.  the  present  volume,  pp.  IS,  19, 142, 143.  Ed.  Meyer,  Kriiilc  der  Berichte  iiher  die  Kroherunn
Palastina's,  in  the  Zeitschrifl  fur  alttesfamentliche  Wissenscha/t,  ISSl,  vol.  i.  p.  117,  et  seq.,  and  vol.
iii.  p.  306,  et  scq.,  has  established  the  fact  that  the  term  Amorite,  as  well  as  the  parallel  word
Canaanite,  was  the  designation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  before  the  arrival  of  the  Hebrews :  the
former  belonged  to  the  prevailing  tradition  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  the  latter  to  that  which  was
current  in  Judah  (cf.  Winckler,  GesckiMe  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  51-54).  This  view  confirms  the  con-
clusion which  may  be  drawn  from  the  Egyptian  monuments  as  to  the  power  of  expansion  and  the
diffusion  of  the  people ;  cf.  for  the  Egyptian  side  of  the  question,  W.  Max  Muller,  Asieii  und  Europa.
pp.  229-233.

'  These  were  the  Amorites  which  the  tribe  of  Dan  at  a  later  period  could  not  dislodge  from  the
lands  whicli  had  been  allotted  lo  them  (Josli.  xi.  3 ;  Judges  i.  34).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  in  Pktrie's  Bacial  Types,  No.  81  a.

^  The  southern  Amorites  are  mentioned  in  Gen.  xiv.  7,  13;  in  Numb.  xiii.  29;  in  Dent.  i.  7  19,
27,  44;  Josli.  x.  5,  6,  12,  xi.  3;  their  southern  limit  coincided  with  the  Ascent  of  Scorpions  [in  the
Revised  Version  the  "  ascent  of  Akrabbim." — Tr.]  to  the  south-west  of  the  Dead  Sea  (Judges  i.  3U).

'  This  was  afterwards  the  domain  of  Sihon,  King  of  the  Amorites  (Numb,  xxi,  21-32,  34  ;  Deut.  ii.
24,  iii.  2,  xxix.  7;  Judges  xi.  19-23),  and  that  of  Og(iVH»i6.  xxi.  33-35;  Deut.  iii.  8-11,  xxix.  7).


DISAPPEARANCE  OF  IIACIAL  CBAUACTERISTICS  AMONG  SYRIANS.     1  4'J


of  the  condition  of  Syria  at  the  time  of  the  Egyjitiuu  conquest,  the  more  we
are  forced  to  recognise  the  mixture  of  races  therein,  and  their  almost  infinite
subdivisions.  The  mutual  jealousies,  however,  of  these  elements  of  various
origin  were  not  so  inveterate  as  to  put  an  obstacle  in  the  way,  I  will  not  say
of  political  alliances,  but  of  daily  intercourse  and  frequent  contracts.  Owing
to  intermarriages  between  the  tribes,
and  the  continual  crossing  of  the
results  of  such  unions,  peculiar  cha-
racteristics were  at  length  eliminated,
and  a  uniform  type  of  face  was  the
result.  i'"rom  north  to  south  one
special  form  of  countenance,  that
which  we  usually  call  Semitic,  pre-
vailed among  them.^  The  Syrian
and  Egyptian  monuments  furnish  us
everywhere,  under  different  ethnical
names,  with  representations  of  a
broad-shouldered  people  of  high  sta-
ture, slender-figured  in  youth,  but
with  a  fatal  tendency  to  obesity  in  old  age.  Their  heads  are  large,  somewhat
narrow,  and  artificially  flattened  or  deformed,  like  those  of  several  modern  tribes
in  the  Lebanon.^  Their  high  cheek-bones  stand  out  from  their  hollow  cheeks,
and  their  blue  or  black  eyes  are  buried  under  their  enormous  eyebrows.  The
lower  part  of  the  face  is  square  and  somewhat  heavy,  but  it  is  often  concealed
by  a  thick  and  curly  beard.  The  forehead  is  rather  low  and  retreating,  while
the  nose  has  a  distinctly  aquiline  curve.  The  type  is  not  on  the  whole  so  fine
as  the  Egyptian,  but  it  is  not  so  heavy  as  that  of  the  Chaldaeans  in  the  time  of
Gudea.  The  Theban  artists  have  represented  it  in  their  battle-scenes,  and  while
individualising  every  soldier  or  Asiatic  prisoner  with  a  happy  knack  so  as  to  avoid
monotony,  they  have  with  much  intelligence  impressed  upon  all  of  them  the
marks  of  a  common  parentage.  One  feels  that  the  artists  must  have  recognised
them  as  belonging  to  one  common  family.  They  associated  with  their  eflbrts
after  true  and  exact  representation  a  certain  caustic  humour,  which  impelled
them  often  to  substitute  for  a  portrait  a  more  or  less  jocose  caricature  of  their


■I     IIIE    -ViaAN    TYI'E.-


'  Cf.  on  this  subject  the  remarkis  of  W.  JIax  Mi'LLHit,  Aden  und  Europa,  pp.  293,  294,  and,  in  a
contrary  sunae,  Sayck,  TheBar.ee  of  the  Old  Tcslamtid,  pp.  100-129,  wlio  distinguishes  sovcriil  types  on
tlio  Egyptian  monuments:  the  Anidritca  must  liavo  had  tliu  saino  pliysiognomy,  and  must  liavo
belonged  to  tliu  same  race  as  the  Liliyans  of   tlio  monuments  (ef.   Savce,  rutriarchal  I'alcstine,

pp.  47,  IS).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiii,  from  a  pliotogrnpli  by  riiTuli:,  Racial  Type/'.  No.  222.

■■■  IIamv,  jtlude  tur  Us  jiciitturesclhuiquee  d'un  Tinnlnau  Thdlaiii  dela  XVllt  dijnaslic,  pp.  lli,  KJ.


150      STBIA   AT   THE  BEQINNINQ    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.

adversaries.  On  the  walls  of  the  Pylons,  and  in  places  where  the  majesty  of  a
god  restrained  them  from  departing  too  openly  from  their  official  gravity,  they
contented  themselves  with  exaggerating  from  panel  to  panel  the
contortions  and  pitiable  expressions  of  the  captive  chiefs  as  they
followed  behind  the  triumphal  chariot  of  the  Pharaoh  on  his
return  from  his  Syrian  campaigns.^  Where  religious  scruples
offered  no  obstacle  they  abandoned  themselves  to  the  inspi-
ration of  the  moment,  and  gave  themselves  freely  up  to  carica-
ture. It  is  au  Amorite  or  Canaanite — that  thick-lipped,  flat-
nosed  slave,  w'ith  his  brutal  lower  jaw  and  smooth  conical
skull — who  serves  for  the  handle  of  a  spoon  in  the  museum
of  the  Louvre.  The  stupefied  air  with  which  he  trudges
under  his  burden  is  rendered  in  the  most  natural  manner,
and  the  flattening  to  which  his  forehead  had  been  subjected
in  infancy  is  unfeelingly  accentuated.  The  model  which
served  for  this  object  must  have  been  intentionally  brutalised
and  disfigured  in  order  to  excite  the  laughter  of  Pharaoh's
subjects.-

The  idea  of  uniformity  with  which  we  are  impressed  when

examining  the  faces  of  these  people  is  confirmed  and  extended

when  we   come  to  study  their  costumes.     Men  and  women —

we  may  say  all  Syrians  according  to  their  condition  of  life —

AN  ASIATIC.^         ijad  a  choice  between  only  two  or  three  modes  of  dress,  which,

whatever  the  locality,  or  whatever  the  period,  seemed  never  to  change.^     On

closer  examination  slight  shades  of  difterence  in  cut  and  arrangement  may,

however,  be  detected,  and  it  may  be  affirmed  that  fashion  ran  even  in  ancient

'  An  illustratiou  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  liue  of  prisoners,  brought  by  Seti  I.  from  his  great
Asiatic  campaigu,  which  is  depicted  on  the  outer  face  of  the  north  wall  of  the  hypostyle  at  Karnak
(Champolliox,  Monuments  de  VEyy-pte,  etc.,  pi.  ccxcii. ;  Eosellim,  Monumenti  Storlci,  pi.  1.).  With
regard  to  the  humorous  representation  of  foreign  races  on  the  Egyptian  monuments  of  the  second
empire,  see  Ekman,  ^gypten  mid  ^gyptisches  Lehen,  p.  USl.

°  Dr.  Regnaclt,  Les  Deformations  crdniennes,  etc.  (in  La  Nature,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  157,  15S),  thinks
that  the  head  was  artificially  deformed  in  infoncy :  the  bandage  necessary  to  eft'ect  it  must  have  been
applied  very  low  on  the  forehead  in  front,  and  to  the  whole  occiput  behind.  If  this  is  the  case,  the
instance  is  not  an  isolated  one,  for  a  deformation  of  a  similar  character  is  found  in  the  case  of  the
numerous  Semites  represented  on  the  tomb  of  Rakhmiri :  a  similar  practice  still  obtains  in  certain
parts  of  modern  Syria  (Hamy,  Etude  sue  les  Peintures  ethmques  .  .  .  de  la  XVIII'  dyiiastie,  pp.  12,
13)  ;  see  p.  149  of  this  volume.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  wooden  object  (eonsigued  to  the  Louvre  since
ChampoUiou's  travels);  cf.  Champoli.ion,  Monuntents  de  I'L'ijypte,  pi.  clsvii.  4;  and  Maspeko  in
O,   Rayet,  its  Monuments  de  I'Art  antique,  vol.  i.

*  The  costume  and  the  industrial  instruments  of  the  Syrians  as  tliey  are  represented  on  the
Egyptian  monuments  was  studied  in  a  general  way  by  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  245-261  ;  by  Osbubn,  Egypt,  her  Testimony  to  the  Truth,  pp.  114-145;  and  by  W.  Max
MtJLLER,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  294-301,  305-308,  which  constitute  all  the  existing  literature  on
the  subject.


COSTUME.


151


SYUIANS    DRESSED    IN    THE    LOIN-CLOTH    AND    DOlIiLE    SHAWL/


Syria  through  as  many  capricious  evolutions  as  with  ourselves ;  but  these
variations,  which  were  evident  to  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  the  time,  are  not
sufficiently  striking  to  enable  us  to  classify  the  people,  or  to  fix  their  date.
The  peasantsandthelower
class  of  citizens  required
no  other  clothing  than  a
loin-cloth  similar  to  tliat
of  the  Egyptians,^  or  a
shirt  of  a  yellow  or  white
colour,  extending  below
the  knees,  and  furnished
with  short  sleeves.'^  The
opening  for  the  neck  was
cruciform,  and  the  hem
was  usually  ornamented
with  coloured  needle-
work or  embroidery.  The  burghers  and  nobles  wore  over  this  a  long  strip  of
cloth,  which,  after  passing  closely  round  the  hips  and  chest,  was  brought  up  and
spread  over  the  shoulders  as  a  sort  of  cloak.^  This  was  not  made  of  the  light
material  used  in  Egypt,  which  offered  no  protection  from  cold  or  rain,  but  was
composed  of  a  thick,  rough  wool,  like  that  employed  iu  Chaldsea,  and  was
commonly  adorned  with  stripes  or  bands  of  colour,  in  addition  to  spots  and  other
conspicuous  designs.  Rich  and  fashionable  folk  substituted  for  this  cloth  two
large  shawls— one  red  and  the  other  blue— iu  which  they  dexterously  arrayed
themselves  so  as  to  alternate  the  colours  :  ^    a  belt  of  soft  leather  gathered  the

'  The  loin-cloth  is  represeuted  on  the  preceding  page  as  the  garment  of  the  Asiatic  slave.  See  also
CHA3IP0LLI0N,  Monuments  de  VUgypte,  etc.,  ccxvii. ;  Bosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pis.  xlviii.  2,  lii.,  liii.,
Ixrii.,  civ ,  clviii. ;  Lepsius,  Ihnhm.,  iii.  92,  116  «,  S,  127,  12S,  136  «,  6;  Boduiant,  Le  Tomheau  de
Harmhahi,  pi.  iv. ;  and  ViiiEY,  Tomheau  de  Riimenhhepersenh,  pi.  i.  pp.  204,  205,  in  the  Mffmoires  de  la
MUsimi  fran^aise,  vol.  v.  It  differs  from  the  Egyptian  in  having  pendent  cords;  the  Syrian  i'ellahin
still  wear  it  when  at  work.

"  This  was  the  hethuneth  of  tlie  Hebrews  and  Phceniciens  which  became  the  x'tiu;'  of  the  Greeks
[and  the  Latin  Ctuuica,  tunica,  our  tunic.— Tr.}.  It  is  illustrated  iu  Champollion,  Monuments  de
l'£(jypte,  etc.,  pis.  Ixv.,  ccvi.,  clviii.  1,  clx.  1,  clxvii.  5,  clxxvi.  1,  clxxix.  1 ;  iu  Rosellini,  Monu-
menti  Storici,  pi.  Ixviii. ;  in  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iil.  92,  109,  IIG  a,  b,  126  a,  127,  128,  145  c,  160;  in
ViREY,  Tomheau  de  Jielchmara,  pi.  vii.,  Tomheau  de  Eamenhhepersenh,  p.  204,  and  Le  Tomheau
d' Atnenemheh,  p.  214.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger ;  of.  Lepsius,  Denlmiilei;  iii.  116.
The  figures  are  taken  from  the  tomb  of  Kljamliait,  who  lived  towards  the  en  I  of  the  XVIII"'
dynasty.

*  Champollion,  Mon.  de  VK/ypte,  etc.,  pi.  Ixvii. ;  IIosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pis.  xlvi.-l.,  lix.,lxviii.-
Ixx.,  Ixxx.,  clviii.;  Lepsius,  Venkm.,  iii.  109,  llGa,  t,  145  c,  156,  166;  Virey,  Le  Tomheau  de
Jtel.-hmaro.  pi.  vii.,  and  Tomheau  de  Eamenkhepersent),  pi.  i. ;  Bouriant,  Le  Tomheau  de  Uarmhabi,
pi.  iv.  The  Hebrew  simlah  corresponded  probably  witli  tliis  part  of  the  Syrian  costume  as  it  is
represeuted  on  the  Egyptian  monuments.

'  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VRjypte,  etc.,  cclxvii.  2  ;  Kosellini,  Mou.  Storici,  pis.  xlvi.,  xlvii.,
liii.,  Ixviii.,  clvii.  ;  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  97  d,  116  a,  h,  145  h.


152      STEM   AT  THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


A    SYKIAN  WITH  HAIK  TIHEl)
PENT-HOrSE    TASHION.*


AN    ASIATIC    OF   THE   CPPER
CLASS.'


folds  around  the  figure.^     Eed  morocco  buskins,^  a  soft  cap,  a
handkerchief,  a  heffiyeU  confined  by  a  fillet,  and  sometimes  a
wig  after  the  Egyptian  fashion,  completed  the
dress.^      Beards    were   almost    universal
among  tlie  men,  but  the  moustache  was
of  rare  occurrence.''     In  many  of  the
figures  represented  on  the  monuments
we   find  that  the  head  was   carefully
shaved,  while   in  others  the  hair  was
allowed   to  grow,   arranged    in    curls,

frizzed  and  shining  with  oil  or  sweet-smelling  pomade,  some-
times thrown  back  behind  the  ears  and  falling  on  the  neck
in  bunches  or  curly  masses,  sometimes  drawn  out  in  stiff  spikes
so  as  to  serve  as  a  projecting  cover  over  the  face.''  The  women
usually  tired  their  hair  in  three  great  masses,  of  which  the
thickest  was  allowed  to  fall  freely  down  the  back;  while  the
other  two  formed  a  kind  of  framework  for  the  face,
the  ends  descending  on  each  side  as  far  as  the  breast.
Some  of  the  women  arranged  their  hair  after  the
Egyptian  manner,  in  a  series  of  numerous  small
tresses,  brought  together  at  the  ends  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  plat,  and
terminating  in  a  flower  made  of  metal  or  enamelled  terra-cotta.     A  network  of

'  Champollion,  Moil,  de  I'Egijple,  etc.,  pi.  clviii ;  Eosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  xlvi. ;  Lepsius,
Deiikm.,  iii.  127  h,  136.

'  EosEi.LiNi,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  slvi.      People  of  all  classes  are  geuerally  represented  barefooted.

'  The  rolled-up  handkerchief,  the  cap,  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  and  the  fillet,  are  illustrated
in  Chajii'Ollion,  Mo7i.  de  I'Egypte,  xii.,  xxxvi.  2,  5,  xxxvii.,  clxxvi.  1,  cclvii.,  etc.;  Rosellini,  Mon.
Storici,  pis.  xlvi.,  xlviii.  2,  xlix.  2,  1.,  Ixvii.,  Ixxx.,  civ.,  clvli.,  clviii.,  clx.  1,  3;  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  92,
07  d,  109,  116  a,  h,  126  a,  127,  12S,  136  a,  h,  d,  145  c,  156,  166 ;  Virey,  Torabeau  de  Bamenkhepertenb,
in  the  Mgmoires  dc  la  Mission  franraisc,  vol.  v.  p.  204.

*  As  to  the  beard,  see  Champollion,  Mon.  de  I'ligypte,  xxvi.,  civ.  1,  clxxvi.,  elxxxix,,  cclvii.  ;
KosELLiNi,  Mon.  Storici,  pis.  clvii,,  clviii. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  116  «,  6,  136  a,  h,  d  ;  Max  Mullee,
Asien  mid  Europa  nach  aliagypt.  Denkm.,  pp.  29."),  296,  where  the  history  of  the  fashion  of  wearing  it
is  cursorily  given.

'  Drawn  by  Fancher-Gudin,  from  Champollion,  Mon.  de  I'Jigypte,  pi.  clxxvi.  2 ;  Kosellini,
Monumenti  Cicili,  pi.  xxii.,  No.  3.  Cf.  for  coiffures  with  masses  of  curls,  the  vignette  on  table  of
contents  of  (Jhapter  III.  of  the  present  volume.

_"  A  singular  instance  of  dressing  the  hair  in  this  fashion  is  given  in  Champollion,  A/o«.  de
I'Egypte,  pis.  civ.  1,  clxxxvi.  2,  and  elxxxix.  (cf.  Rosellini,  Mon.  Civtli,  pi.  xxii..  No.  3).  The  figure
exhibiting  it  on  the  tomb  of  Rakhmiri  has  been  since  mutilated,  as  is  evident  from  the  sketches  of
Prisse  d'Avennes  (Hamy,  Etude  sur  les  Peintures  etlniiques  cVun  Tombeau  Thehain,  p.  11,  and  Vikey,
Le  Tombeau  de  Reklimard,  in  the  Mem.  de  la  Mission  J'ranfaise,  vol.  v.  pi.  vii.).  The  curious  shape
would  lead  one  to  believe  that  the  artist  had  in  his  eye  a  primitive  straw  hat  (W.  Max  Mullek,  Asien
und  Europa,  p.  295).  Wilkinson  saw  clearly  that  it  was  really  a  special  form  of  coiffure  {Manners
and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  246,  No.  76  b,  and  p.  254).  Other  examples,  where  the  form  is  less
exaggerated  (Virey,  Le  Tomheau  de  Bckhmari!,  pi.  vii.),  leave  no  doubt  on  the  subject.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  figure  on  the  tomb  of  R;imses  III,  (Champollion,  Mon.  de
TEgyptc,  pi.  cclvii.  2  ;  Rosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  clviii.)  A  Syrian,  draped  in  a  double  shawl,  is
given  as  a  vignette  to  this  chapter,  p.  HI.


CHALDEAN  INFLUENCE   ON  SYRIAN   CUSTOMS.


15;3


y;lass  ornaments,  arranged  on  a  semicircle  of  beads,
or  on  a  background  of  embroidered  stuff',  was  fre-
quently used  as  a  covering  for  the
top  of  the  head.'  The  shirt  had  no
sleeves,  and  the  fringed  garment
which  covered  it  left  half  of  the
arm  exposed.^  Children  of  tender
years  had  their  heads  shaved,  and
A  svuiAN  wnu  A  KKKcuiEF  reioiccd  ill  no  more  clothing  than

AS  A  HEAD-DRESS.^  _

the  little  ones  among  the  Egyp-
tians.'* With  the  exception  of  bracelets,  anklets,  rings
on  the  fingers,  and  occasionally  necklaces  and  earrings,  the
Syrians,  both  men  and  women,  wore  little  jewellery.  The
Chaldsean  women  furnished  them  with  models  of  fashion
to  which  they  accommodated  themselves  in  the  choice  of
stuffs,  colours,  cut  of  their  mantles  or  petticoats,  arrangement
of  the  hair,  and  the  use  of  cosmetics  for  the  eyes  and  cheeks.
In  spite  of  distance  the  modes  of  Babylon  reigned  supreme.  The
Syrians  would  have  continued  to  expose  their  right  shoulder  to
the  weather  as  long  as  it  plea.sed  the  people  of  the  Lower  Euphrates
to  do  the  same ;  but  as  soon  as  the  fashion  changed  in  the  latter
region,  and  it  became  customary  to  cover  the  shoulder,  and  to  wrap
the  upper  part  of  the  person  in  two  or  three  thicknesses  of  heavy  wool,
they  at  once  accommodated  themselves  to  the  new  mode,  although
it  served  to  restrain  the  free  motion  of  the  body.  Among  the
upper  classes,  at  least,  domestic  arrangements  were  modelled  upon
the  fashions  observed  in  the  palaces  of  the  nobles  of  Carchemish  or  Assur :
the  same  articles  of  toilet,  the  same  ranks  of  servants  and  scribes,  the  same
luxurious  habits,  and  the  same  use  of  perfumes  were  to  be  found  among  both.''

'  Examples  of  Syrian  'eminiuc  costume  are  somewhat  rare  on  the  Egyptian  uiouuments.  In  the
scenes  of  the  capturing  of  towns  we  see  a  few.  Here  the  women  arc  represeuted  on  the  walls  Im-
ploring; the  mercy  of  the  besieger  (CuAJiroLLiON,  Mon.  de  VEyypte,  pis.  xii.,  Ixv.,  civ.  ],  where  the
draughtsman  has  restored  the  head  of  a  male  figure;  Eosellini,  jl/on.  S'onci,  Ixvii.,  Ixviii.,  ixxx. ;
Lepsics,  Vaihn.,  iii.  1-15  c).  Other  figures  are  those  of  prisoners  being  led  captive  into  Egypt  (Viuey,
Le  Tombeau  de  Rekhmard,  in  the  M£m.  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  v.  pi.  vii.).

'  For  tliis  form  of  covering,  see,  in  addiliou  to  the  figure  on  the  right  of  the  page,  CuajipollioX,
Mon.  de  I'Jiijijple,  pi.  xii. ;  Koselli.ni,  Mon.  Storici,  Ixvii.,  Ixxx. ;  Lepsius,  Denlim.,  iii.  145  c.

'  Drawn  \>y  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Champollion,  Mon.  de  I'KyijiAe,  pi.  xxxvi.  3;  Bosellini,  Mon.
Storici,  pi.  clx.,  No.  3.

*  See  the  naked  children  in  Champollion,  Mon.  de  rjJgypie,  etc.,  pi.  xii. ;  Eosellini,  Mon.  Storici,
Ixviii.,  ixxx. ;  Vihev,  Le  Tomheuu  de  Itelihmard,  in  tlie  M^m.  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  v.  pi.  viii.,
and  Tombeau  d'Ainenemlieb,  p.  244.

'  Drawn  by  FaucUer-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Louvre :  cf.  Champollion',  Mon.  de  VLCgypte,
pi.  clxix.  1;  and  I'risse  d'Avexxes,  Hist,  de  I'Art  Etjijptien.

'  See  the  ancient  Asiatic  costume,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  718,  et  acq.,  and  the  statues  of  Gudea
furnisliiug  tlic  prototype,  ibid.,  611,  GI3.     An  example  of  the  fashion  of  leaving  the  shoidder  baro  is


YOUNO
SYltlAN  GIKL.^


154      SYRIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

From  all  that  we  can  gather,  in  short,  from  the  silence  as  well  as  from  the
misunderstandings  of  the  Egyptian  chroniclers,  Syria  stands  before  us  as  a
fruitful  and  civilized  country,  of  which  one  might  be  thankful  to  be  a  native,
in  spite  of  coutiuual  wars  and  frequent  revolutions.

The  religion  of  the  Syrians  was  subject  to  the  same  influences  as  their
customs;  we  are,  as  yet,  far  from  being  able  to  draw  a  complete  picture  of
their  theology,  but  such  knowledge  as  we  do  possess  recalls  the  same  names
and  the  same  elements  as  are  found  in  the  religious  systems  of  Chald;\3a.^  The
myths,  it  is  true,  are  still  vague  and  misty,  at  least  to  our  modern  ideas;  the
general  characteristics  of  the  principal  divinities  alone  stand  out,  and  seem
fairly  well  defined.  As  with  the  other  Semitic  races,  the  deity  in  a  general
sense,  the  primordial  type  of  the  godhead,  was  called  EI  or  Ih),  and  his
feminine  counterpart  Bat,  but  we  find  comparatively  few  cities  in  which  these
nearly  abstract  beings  enjoyed  the  veneration  of  the  faithful.^  The  gods  of  Syria,
like  those  of  Egypt  and  of  the  countries  watered  by  the  Euphrates,  were  feudal
princes  distributed  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  their  number  corresponding  with
that  of  the  independent  states.  Each  nation,  each  tribe,  each  city,  worshipped
its  own  lord — Adoiii''^ — or  its  master — Baal^ — and  each  of  these  was  designated
by  a  special  title  to  distinguish  him  from  neighbouring  Baalim,  or  masters.
The  Baal  who  ruled  at  Zebub  was  styled  "Master  of  Zebub,"  or  Baal-Zebub;  ^

found  even  in  the  XX"'  dynasty  (Champoli.ion,  Mon.  de  t'Egypte,  pi.  xxix. ;  Eosellini,  Mon.  Reali,
pi.  clviii.).  The  Tel  el-Amarua  tablets  prove  that,  as  far  as  the  scribes  were  coucerned,  the  customs
and  training  of  Syria  and  Chaldsea  were  ideotioal.  The  Syrian  princes  are  there  represented  as
employing  the  cuneiform  character  in  their  correspondence,  being  accomiJauied  by  scribes  brought  up
after  the  Chalda;an  manner.  (For  the  materials  used  by  the  scribe,  see  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  370,
et  seq.)  We  shall  sec  later  on  that  the  king  of  the  Khati,  who  represented  in  the  time  of  Ramses  II.
the  type  of  an  accomplished  Syrian,  had  attendants  similar  to  those  of  the  Chaldasan  kings.

'  The  Syrian  deities  which  have  been  reproduced  by  the  Egyptians  on  their  monuments  have
been  studied  by  M.  de  y OGi: e,  Sl^langes  d'Arch.  Onc/ifak,  pp.  41-85;  then  by  Ed.  Meter,  tjber  cinige
Semltische  Goiter,  in  the  Zeitscltrift  der  D.  Morgenl.  Gcsellscha/t,  1S77,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  716,  ct  seq.,  and
Gescliichte  des  AHerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  20G-212,  240-252 ;  cf.  Pietschhann,  Gescliichte  der  Phonizier,
pp.  147-152,  and  W.  Max  Mixler,  Asien  und  Earopa,  pp.  309-318.

'  The  frequent  occurrence  of  the  term  Ilu  or  El  in  names  of  towns  in  Southern  Syria  seems  to
indicate  pretty  conclusively  that  the  inhabitants  of  these  countries  used  this  term  by  preference  to
designate  tlieir  supreme  god  (Maspero,  Sur  les  Noms  G^ograpli.  de  la  liste  de  Thoutmos  III.,  etc.,  p.  10;
cf.  Bitshailn,  on  p.  1.S3,  n.  4,  of  the  present  work).  Similarly  we  meet  with  it  in  Aramaic  names  (Levy,
Pliom'zische  Sltid.,  ii.  29,  31, 32),  and  later  on  among  theNabathoeans(M.  de  VogiIe,  Jjiscr.  Se'init.,  p.  107) ;
it  predominates  at  Byblos  and  Berytus  (cf.  pp.  172,  178,  170  of  the  present  work)  in  Phoenicia  and
among  the  Aramaic  peoples  of  North  Syria;  in  the  Samalla  country,  for  instance,  during  the  VIII"'
century  u.o.  (Halevy,  Deux  Inscrijitions  he't^ennes  de  Zindjirli,  in  the  Revue  Se'mitique,  vol.ii.  p.  28).

'  The  extension  of  this  term  to  Syrian  countries  is  proved  in  the  Israelitish  epoch  by  Canaanitish
names,  such  as  Adonizedek  {Josh.  x.  1)  and  Adonibezek  (Judges  i.  5-7),  or  Jewish  names  such  as
Adonijah  (2  Siiiii.  iii.  4;  2  Cliron.  xvii.  8;  A'eli.  x.  16),  Adonikam  (Ezra  ii.  13,  viii.  13),  Adoniram-
Adoram  (2  Sam.  xx.  24 ;  1  Kings  iv.  6,  xii.  IS).

*  Blovers  tried  to  prove  that  there  was  one  particular  god  named  Baal  (Die  Phonizier,  vol.  i.  pp.
169-190),  and  his  ideas,  popularised  in  France  by  M.  de  VoGiii  (Melanges  d'Arch.  Orientale.  pp.  50-
53),  prevailed  for  some  time :  since  then  scholars  have  gone  back  to  the  view  of  Miinter  (Religion  der
Karthaginier,  p.  5,  et  seq.)  and  of  the  writers  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  who  regarded  the  term
Baal  as  a  common  epithet  applicable  to  all  gods.

'  Baal-Zebub  was  worshipped  at  Ekron  during  the  Philistine  supremacy  (2  Kings  i.  2).     As  to


THE  SYRIAN  BAALIM.


ii)J


LOTANU   WOMEN   AND   CHILDREN  FltOJI  THE   TOMB   OF  EAKHMIBI/


aud  the  Baal  of  ilermou,  who  was  au  ally  of  Gad,  goddess  of  fortuue,  was

sometimes  called  Baal-Her-

moD,  or  '•  Jlaster  of  Hermon,"

sometimes     Baal  -  Gad,    or

"Master     of    Gad;"i     the

Baal  of  Shechem,  at  the  time

of  the  Israelite  invasion,  was

"  Master  of  tlie  Covenant "

— Baal-Berith — doubtless  in

memory  of  some  agreement

which  he  had  concluded  with

his    worshippers   in    regard

to  the    conditions    of   their

allegiance.^  The  prevalent
conception  of  the  essence
and  attributes  of  these  dei-
ties was  not  the  same  in  all
their    sanctuaries,   but    the

more  exalted  among  them  were  regarded  as  personifying  the  sky  in  the  day-
time or  at  night,  the  atmosphere,  the  light,^  or  the  sun,  Shamash,  as  creator
and  prime  mover  of  the  universe ; "  aud  each  declared  himself  to  be  king
— melelc—oyev  the  other  gods.^     Kasliuf  represented  the   lightning  and  the

the  origiu  of  tho  name,  cf.  Halevy,  Becherchcs  Bibliques,  §  xxvii.,  in  the  Revue  St'mUique,  vol.  i.
p.  23,  who  iiointed  out  the  name  of  the  town  of  Zebub  on  one  of  the  tablets  of  Tel  cl-Amarna.  [This
is  not  quite  certain,  as  tlie  last  character  of  the  name  is  written  ma  instead  of  ba,  and  Bozohl  claims
to  have  found  the  name  of  hil-zabahi  in  one  of  the  Konyunjik  tablets. — Ed.]

'  The  mountain  of  Baal-Hermou  {Judijea  iii.  3 ;  cf.  1  Citron,  v.  2.3)  is  the  mountain  of  Biinisls,
where  the  Jordan  has  one  of  its  sources,  and  the  town  of  Baal-Hermon  is  Banias  itself.  The  variant
Baal-Gad  occurs  several  times  iu  the  Biblical  books  (/osA.  xi.  17,  xii.  7,  xiii.  5);  as  to  Gad  the
goddess  of  good  luck,  cf.  p.  158  of  the  present  work.

'  Baal-Berith,  like  Baal-Zebub,  only  occurs,  so  far  as  we  know  at  present,  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures

{Judges  viii.  33,  ix.  4,  40),  where,  by  the  way,  the  first  element,  Baal,  is  chan;,ed  to  El,  El-Berith  (ix.  id).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  coloured  sketches  by  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Au  Mus.  d'Uiat.  imlunlle.

*  This  appears  under  the  name  Or  or  Ur  in  the  Samalla  inscriptions  of  the  VIII"'  century  B.C.

(Hallvy,  Sur  deux  Inscriplious  hete'ennes  dc  Zindjirli,  iu  the  Revue  Se'initiqne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29,  30);  it

is,  so  far,  a  unique  instance  among  the  Semites.

^  Tile  designation  of  this  god  is  found  among  the  Canaanites  in  tlie  names  of  cities  such  as  Beth-
shemcsh  or  Irshemcsh  {Jueh.  xv.  10,  xxi.  IG ;  1  Sam.  vi.  12 ;  I  Chron.  vi.  59,  etc.),  Shemeshaduma
(ilASFERo,  Notes  sur  quelquen  points  de  Gram.,  etc.,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  1879,  p.  126;  cf.W.  Max  JU'lleu,
Europa  und  Agien,  pj).  2U."),  3l(j).  He  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  texts  of  Tel  el-Amarna,  among
the  titles  given  to  the  Pharaoh  ;  we  meet  with  it  again  iu  the  Samalla  inscriptions  of  the  VIII"'
century  n.e.  iu  Southern  Syria  (llALiivy,  Deux  Inscrip.  hmeunes  de  Zind.,  in  Bevm  Sginit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  29).
"  We  find  the  term  applied  in  the  Bible  to  the  national  god  of  the  Ammonites,  uuder  the  forms
Moloch,  Molech,  MUI;6iii,  Mllham,  and  especially  with  the  article,  llam-molek;  the  real  name  hidden
beneath  this  epithet  was  jirobably  Amnion  or  Aimmin,  and,  strictly  speaking,  the  god  Molocli  only
exists  iu  the  imagination  of  scholars  (for  a  contrary  opinion,  however,  of.  Baudissin,  lahve  et  Moloch,
etc.,  pp.  24-30).  The  epithet  was  u.sed  among  the  Canaanites  iu  the  name  Melchizedck  {Gen.  xiv.
18),  a  similar  form  to  Adonizedek  {Josh.  x.  1),  Abiiiielech  (Gen.  xx.  2;  Judges  ix.  1),  Ahimeloch
(1  Sum.  xxi.  1);  it  was  in  cuirent  use  among  the  Phccnicians,  in  reference  to  the  god  of  Tyre,
Melek-Iiarta  or  Melkarth,  aud   in    many    proper   names,    such   as   Melckiathon    (M.   dk  VoGiiii,


156      SYRIA    AT  TEE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

tliuuderbolt ;  1  Shalmau,  Hadad,  aud  his  double  Kimmou  held  sway  over  the
air  like  the  Babylonian  Rammanu;^  Dagon,  patron  god  of  fishermen  and
husbandmen,  seems  to  have  watched  over  the  fruitfulness  of  the  sea  and  the
land.^  We  are  beginning  to  learn  the  names  of  the  races  whom  they  spe-
cially protected :  Eashuf  the  Amorites,  Hadad  and  Eimmon  the  Aramaeans  of
Damascus,  Dagon  the  peoples  of  the  coast  between  Ashkelon  and  the  forest

MelaiKjes  d'Arch.  Oricntale,  pp.  5,  6),  Baalmelek,  Bodmalek,  etc.,  not  to  mention  the  god  Milichua
worsliipped  in  Spain  (SiLius  Italicus,  iii.  101),  who  was  really  none  other  than  Melkarth.  As  to  the
identification  of  Melolc  with  the  Chaldrean  Malili,  cf.  Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  82,  258,  259.

'  The  character  and  nature  of  the  god  Ecslieph  or  Eashuf  were  elucidated  by  M.  de  VoGiJE,
Mtflangcs  d'Arch.  Urientale,  pp.  49,  78-92.  The  Egyptian  name  of  the  god  had  been  read  as  Ecnpu
by  the  early  Egyptologists  (Wilkin.son,  Maimers  and  Cnstoms,  1st  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  234,  235,  and  jjl.
iv. ;  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Monuments  Egyptiens,  pi.  xsyii.,  and  Notice  sur  les  Antiquiits  Egyptiennes  du
Musie Britanniqiie,  pp.  17,  18;  E.  de  Eouge,  Letter  inserted  in  Lajabd,  Recherches  sur  le  Culte  du
Cyprh  Pyramidal,  etc.,  in  the  M^m.  de  VAcad.  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Lettres,  vol.  sx.,  pt.  2,  j).  174) ;
Birch  was  the  first  to  restore  it  to  its  real  form  (Me'nwirc  sur  unc  Patere  Jigyptienne  du  Mus^e  du
Louvre,  p.  59).  Eashuf  has  since  been  made  an  object  of  study  by  Ed.  Meter,  Vher  einige  Semilische
Goiter,  m  the  Zeitschrift  der  B.  Morgenl.  Gesellschaft,  1877,  vol.  xxi.  p.  710 ;  by  Clermont-Ganneau,
Eorus  et  Saint  Georges,  d'apres  nn  bas-relief  ingdit  du  Louvre,  pp.  15-25,  and  Recueil  d'Arch.  Orientate,
vol.  i.  pp.  176-1S2  ;  by  Ledrain,  JEgyplo-Semit-ica,  in  the  Gazette  Arch^ohgique,  1880,  pp.  199-202 ;  by
PlETSCHMANN,  Geschichte  der  Phonizier,  pp.  149-152  ;  by  W.  Max  Mullek,  Asien  ttnd  Europa,  pp.  311,
312;  and  by  Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  250,  251,  256.  Eeshepli  has  been  vocalised  Rashuf  in
deference  to  the  Egyiitian  orthography  Eashupu.  It  was  a  name  common  to  a  whole  family  of  lightning
and  storm-gods,  and  M.  de  Eouge  pointed  out  long  ago  tlie  passage  in  the  Great  Inscription  of  Eanises
III.  at  Medinet-Habu,  in  which  the  soldiers  who  man  the  chariots  are  compared  to  the  Eashupu;  the
Eabbinic  Hebrew  still  employs  this  plural  form  in  the  sense  of  "demons"  (M.  de  Vogije,  Mdanges
d'Arch.  Oricntale,  pp.  7(J-79  ;  cf.  W.  Max  Mulleu,  Asien  und  Europa,  p.  313).  The  Phoenician  inscrip-
tions coutaiu  references  to  several  local  Eashufs;  tlie  way  in  which  tliis  god  is  coupled  with  the
goddess  Qodshu  on  the  Egyptian  stelss  leads  me  to  think  that,  at  the  epoch  now  under  consideration,
ho  was  specially  worsliipped  by  tlie  Amorites,  just  as  his  equivalent  Hadad  was  by  the  inliabitants  of
Damascus,  neiglibour.s  of  the  Amorites,  and  perhaps  themselves  Amorites  (cf.  p.  142  of  the  present  work).

^  Hadad  and  Eiuimon  are  represented  in  Assyro-Chaldasun  by  oue  and  the  same  ideogram,  which
may  Ije  read  either  Dadda-Hadad  or  Rammauu  ;  cf.  on  this  point  what  is  said  in  BIaspero,  Baton  of
Civilization,  p.  658,  note  5.  The  identity  of  the  expressions  employed  shows  how  clo.se  the  connection
between  the  two  divinities  must  have  been,  even  if  they  were  not  similar  in  all  respects;  from  the
Hebrew  writings  we  know  of  the  temple  of  Eimmon  at  Damascus  (2  Kings  v.  IS)  and  that  oue  of  the
kings  of  that  city  was  called  TabiimmOn  =  "Eimmon  is  good"  (1  Kings  xv.  IS),  while  Hadad  gave
his  name  to  no  less  than  ten  kings  of  the  same  city  (Nicholas  op  Damascus,  Fragm.  31,  in  MiJLLER —
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Eist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  373;  cf.  Josephcs,  Ant.  Jud.,  VII.  v.  2).  Even  as  late  as  the
Grteco-Eoman  epoch,  kingship  over  the  other  gods  was  still  attributed  both  to  Eimmon  (Hesychies-
8.  V.  'Pajuos,  compared  with  Stephen  op  Byzantium,  s.  v.  'PafidfOas,  who  again  quotes  Philo  of  Byblos
as  his  authority ;  cf.  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Eist.  Graic. ,  vol.  iii.  p.  575)  and  to  Hadad  (Phieo  of  Byblos,
Fragm.  2,  §  24,  in  Mi'LLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Eist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  p.  5G9 ;  Mackobius,  Saturn.,  i.  23),  but
this  latter  was  identified  with  the  sun.  As  to  the  true  status  of  Eimmon  aud  Hadad,  ef.  Sohrader,
Ramman-Rimmun,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  prot.  Theohgie,  1875,  vol.  i.  p.  334,  et  seq.,  342,  aud  Bie  Keilin-
schriften  und  das  Alte  Test.,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  205,  206;  Baudissin,  Studien  zur  Semit.  Religionsgesch.,  vol.  i.
pp.  305-317 ;  Sayce,  The  Eigher  Criticism,  pp.  89,  394,  and  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  82,  257.

"  The  documents  which  we  possess  in  regard  to  Dagon  date  from  the  Hebrew  epoch,  and  represent
bim  as  worshipped  by  the  Philistines  (^Judges  xvi.  23-30 ;  1  Sam.  v.  2 ;  1  Cliron.  x.  10).  AVe  know,
however,  from  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets,  of  a  Dagautakala(BEZOLD-BuDGE,  The  TellAmarna  Tablets,
p.  Ixxxiii.),  a  name  whicli  proves  the  presence  of  the  god  among  the  Canaanites  long  before  the  Philis-
tine invasion,  aud  we  find  two  Beth-Dagons — one  in  the  plain  of  Judah  {Josh.  xv.  41),  the  other  in
the  tribe  of  Asher  (Jos/i.  xix.  27);  Philo  of  Byblos  makes  Dagon  a  Phoenician  deity  (i^ragim.  ~',
§  14,25;  MiiLLER-DiDOT,  J'l-aym.  Eist.  Griec.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  507-569),  and  declares  him  to  be  the  genius
of  fecundity,  master  of  grain  and  of  labour.  The  representation  of  his  statue  which  appears  on  the
Grieco-Koman  coins  of  Abydos,  reminds  us  of  the  fish-god  of  Chaldoea  (cf.  Maspero,  Bawn  of  Civiliza-
tion, pp.  5i6,  5il);  as  to  his  attributes,  cf.  Clermont-Ganneae,  iJonis  et  Saint  Georges,  d'apres  du
bas-relief  ingdil  du  Louvre,  pp.  12, 13,  22,  24-31  ;  Pietscbmann,  Geschichtc  der  Phonizier,  pp.  141-146,
and  Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  259,  260.


TEE  SYRIAN  ASTARTES.


157


ASTARTE    AS    A    SPHINX. -


of  Carmel.  Rasliuf  is  the  only  ouo  whose  appearance  is  known  to  us.  He
possessed  the  restless  temperament  usually  attributed  to  the  tliuuder-gods,
and  was,  accordingly,  pictured  as  a  soldier  armed  witli  javelin  and  mace,
bow  and  buckler ;  a  gazelle's  head  with  pointed  horns  surmounts  his  helmet,
and  sometimes,  it  may
be,  serves  him  as  a  cap.
Each  god  had  for  his  com-
plement a  goddess,  who
was  proclaimed  "  mis-
tress "  of  the  city,  Baalaf,
or  "queen,"  Milkat,  of
heaven,  just  as  the  god
himself  was  recognised  as
"  master  "  or  "  king."  ^
As  a  rule,  the  goddess
was  contented  with  the  generic  name  of  Astarte ;  but  to  this  was  often  added
some  epithet,  which  lent  her  a  distinct  personality,  and  prevented  her  from
being  confounded  with  the  Astartes  of  neighbouring  cities,  her  companions  or
rivals.^  Thus  she  would  be  styled  the  "good"  Astarte,  Ashtoreth  Naamah,''
or  the  "  horned  "  Astarte,  Ashtoreth  Qarnaim,  because  of  the  lunar  crescent
which  appears  on  her  forehead,  as  a  sort  of  head-dress.''     She  was  the  goddess

'  As  to  the  general  character  of  the  goddesses,  cf.  Ed.  Meyeb,  Geschichte  des  AUerthums,  vol.  i.
pp.  211,  246-248,  250,  251.  Among  goddesse-s  to  whom  the  title  "Baalat"  was  referred,  we  have  the
goddess  of  Byblos,  Baalat-Gebal  {Corpus  Ins.  Semii.,  vol.  i.  pp.  4, 5),  also  the  goddess  of  Berytus,  Baalat-
Beritli,  or  Beyrut  (Philo  op  Byblos,  Fragm.  .',  §  12,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graic,  vol.  iii.
p.  567).  The  epitliet  "queeu  of  heaveu"  is  applied  to  the  Phcenician  Astarte  by  Hebrew  {Jer.  vii.
18,  xliv.  18-29)  and  classic  writers  (Herodianus,  v.  6,  10  :  OiipavUv  iomKes  'Aarpodpx'n''  ofo^idi^ovcn,
at\rivqii  fho.i  S(\ovTis).  The  Egyptians,  when  they  adopted  these  Canaanitisli  goddesses,  preserved
tlie  title,  and  called  each  of  them  nihil  pit,  "lady  of  heaven"  (Pjiisse  d'Avennnes,  Monuments
fjgijpliens,  pi.  xxxvii.  and  p.  7 ;  Bergmann,  Die  Inschriftliche  Benlcmiiler,  in  the  Itecueil  de  Trai-au.i;
vol.  vii.  p.  196).  In  the  Phoenician  inscriptions  their  names  are  frequently  preceded  by  the  word
Rahhat :  rabbat  Baalat-Gebal,  "  (my)  lady  Baalat-Gebal"  (Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  p.  4).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Guden,  from  a  copy  of  an  original  in  chased  gold ;  cf.  Prisse  d'Avennei^,
Hist,  de  I'.irt  fjgyptien,  p.  99.

'  The  Hebrew  writers  frequently  refer  to  the  Canaanitc  goddesses  by  the  general  title  "  the  Asli-
tarOth  "  or  "Astartes"  {Judges  ii.  Vi,  x.  6 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  3,  4,  xii.  10),  and  a  town  in  Northern  Syria
bore  the  significant  name  of  Istarati  =  "  the  Ishtars,  the  Ashtaroth  "  (Bezold-Budge,  The  Tell  Amarita
Tablets,  No.  43,  pi.  88,  1.  10),  a  name  which  linds  a  parallel  in  Anathotli  =  "  the  Anats,"  a  title
assumed  by  a  town  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin;  .similarly,  the  Assyro-Chaldjeans  called  their  goddesses
by  the  plural  of  Ishtar  (cf  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Cirilization,  p.  674).  The  inscription  on  an  Egyptian
amulet  in  tlie  Louvre  tells  us  of  a  personage  of  the  XX"'  dynasty,  who,  from  his  name,  Rabrabina,  must
have  been  of  Syrian  origin,  and  who  styled  him.self  "  Prophet  of  the  Astartes,"  Honndtiii  Astikatu
(Maspero,  Mimoire  sur  quelques  Paitijrus  du  Lourre,  pp.  2,  3;  cf,  W.  Max  MiiLLER,  Asien  und  Eurojia,
etc.,  p.  313,  n.  5).

*  This  is  the  AstroniJe  mentioned  by  Damascius,  a  name  which  ouglit  rather  to  be  written
'fuTTpovifiri,  as  suggested  by  Movers  {Die  I'iilinizier,  vol.  i.  p.  636,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Pr.  Lenormant,  Lettres
Asgyriologiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  285,  note  1).

'  The  two-horned  Astarte  gave  her  name  to  a  city  beyond  tlie  Jordan,  of  wliieh  she  was,  probably,
the  eponymous  goddess  {Gen.  xiv.  5):  she  would  seem  to  bo  represented  on  the  curious  monument
called  by  the  Arabs  "  the  stone  of  Job,"  which  was  discovered  by  M.  Schumacher  in  the  centre  of  the
llauran  (in  the  Zeitschrift  des  Palestina  Vereins,  vol.  xiv.  p.  142,  et  seq. ;  cf.  vol.  xv.  p.  206).     It  was


158       SYRIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   TEE   EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

of  good  luck,  and  was  called  Gad  ; '  she  was  Anat,^  or  Asiti,^  the  chaste  and  the

warlike.    The  statues  sometimes  represent  her  as  a  spliinx  with  a  woman's  head,

but  more  often  as  a  woman  standing  on  a  lion  passant,  either  nude,  or  encircled

round  the  hips  by  merely  a  girdle,  her  hands  filled  with  flowers  or  with  serpents,

her  features  framed  in  a  mass  of  heavy  tresses — a  faithful  type  of  the  priestesses

who  devoted  themselves  to  her  service,  the  Qedeshot.  She  was  the  goddess  of  love  in

its  animal,  or  rather  in  its  purely  physical,  aspect,  and  in  this  capacity  was  styled

Qaddishat  the  Holy,  like  the  hetairte  of  her  family  ;  Qodshu,  the  Amorite  capital,

was  consecrated  to  her  service,  and  she  was  tliere  associated  with  Eashuf,  the

thunder-god.*   Eut  she  often  comes  before  us  as  a  warlike  Amazon,  brandishing

a  club,  lance,  or  shield,  mounted  on  horseback  like  a  soldier,  and  wandering

through  the  desert  in  quest  of  her  prey.^     This  dual  temperament  rendered

her  a   goddess   of  uncertain    attributes    and  of  violent   contrasts ;    at   times

reserved  and  chaste,  at  other  times  shameless  and  dissolute,  but  always  cruel,

an  analo^oiis  goddess  whom  the  Egyptians  sometimes  identified  with  their  Hathor,  and  whom  tliey
represented  as  crowned  with  a  crescent.

'  Gad  the  goddess  of  fortune,  is  mainly  known  to  us  in  connection  with  the  Aram^ans  ;  we  find
mention  made  of  her  by  the  Hebrew  writers  (ha.  Ixv.  11),  and  geographical  names,  such  as  Baal-Gad
and  Migdol-Gad  (Josh.  xi.  17,  xv.  37),  prove  that  she  must  have  butn  worshipped  at  a  very  early  date
in  the  Canaanite  countries.

=  Anat,  or  Anaiti,  or  Aniti,  has  been  fountl  in  a  Phoenician  inscription  by  M.  de  Vogue,  Melanges
d'Arch.  Orientale,  pp.  30-38,  which  enables  us  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  the  goddess  (ibid.,  p.  41,
et  scq.).  Her  worship  was  largely  practised  among  the  Canaanites,  as  is  proved  by  tlie  existence  in
the  Hebrew  epoch  of  several  towns,  sucli  as  Beth-Anath  (Josh.  xix.  38  ;  Judges  i.  33),  Bcth-Anoth
(Josh.  XV.  59),  AnathC.th  (Josh.  xxi.  18  ;  1  Kings  ii.  2G  ;  Jer.  i.  1,  xxix.  27)  ;  at  least  one  of  which,  Blt-
Aniti,  is  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  geographical  lists  (Makiette,  Les  Listes  G^ographiques  des
rylcii'ies  de  Karnalc.  p.  42 ;  Kart-Aniti  is  a  correction  by  W.  Max  Muli.er,  Asien  und  Eiimpa,  p.  195).
The  appearance  of  Anat-Aniti  is  known  to  us,  as  she  is  represented  in  Egyptian  dross  on  several
stelaj  of  the  XIX"'  and  XX'"  dynasties;  cf.  Frkse  T)'AvEmiS,s,  Monuments  L'gijptiens,  pi.  xxxvii.
Her  name,  like  that  of  Astarte,  had  become  a  generic  term,  in  the  plural  form  Anathoth,  for  a  whole
o-roup  of  goddesses  :  cf.  as  to  her  attributes,  Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  pp.  256,  257.

»  Asitl  is  represented  at  Eadcsieh,  on  a  stele  of  the  time  of  ^*eti  I.  (Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  138 ;  cf.
GoLENiscHEPF,  Vne  Excursion  «  Berenice,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  p.  76,  where  the  correct
readin"  is  given  for  the  first  time);  slie  enters  into  the  composition  of  a  compound  name,  AsitiialiMrii
(perhaps  "the  goddess  of  Asiti  is  enflamcd  with  anger  "),  which  we  find  on  a  monument  in  the  Vienna
Museum  (E.  de  Bekgmann,  Inschriflliche  Denlmiiler,  in  the  Becneil,  vol.  vii.  p.  1915).  W.  Max  Miller
makes  her  out  to  have  been  a  divinity  of  the  desert  (Asien  mid  Europa,  pp.  310,  317),  and  the  place  in
which  the  picture  representing  her  was  found  would  seem  to  justify  this  hypothesis;  the  Egyi^tians
connected  lier,  as  well  as  the  other  AstartOs,  with  Sit-Typhon,  owing  to  her  cruel  and  warlike  character.

<  Qaddishat  is  known  to  us  from  the  Egyptian  monuments  referred  to  above,  p.  157,  note  5.  The
name  was  sometimes  written  Qodshu,  like  that  of  the  town:  E.  de  Rouge'  argued  from  this  tliat
Qaddishat  must  have  been  the  eponymous  divinity  of  Qodshu  (M.  de  Vogue,  M^anges  d'Arch.
Orieidale,  p.  44),  and  that  her  real  name  was  Kashit  or  Kesh  (RoBiou,  Lerons  de  M.  de  Rougif,  etc.,
in  the  Mdanqes  d'Arch.  Egypt,  et  Assyr.,  vol.  ii.  p.  209);  he  recalls,  however,  the  role  played  by  the
Qedeshoth,  and  admits  that  "  the  Holy  here  means  the  prostitute."  Chabas  (  Voyage  d'un  Egypticn,
p  110)  and' Ed.  Meyer (f/efer  einije  Semitischen  Golter,inthe  Zeilschrift  der  D.  Morgenl.  GesclUchaft,
1877,  vol.  xsxi.  p.  729,  and  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  241,  242)  adopt  E.  de  Rouge's  theory
in  its  entirety;  Max  Miiller  rejects  the  geographical  connection,  and  deals  only  with  the  wanton
temperament  of  the  goddess  (^si'ett  und  Europa,  p.  315).

5  Cf  the  pictures  of  Aniti  and  of  Asiti ;  a  fragment  of  a  popular  tale  preserved  in  the  British
Museum,  and  mentioned  by  Birch  (  Varia,  in  the  Ziitschrift,  1871,  pp.  119, 120),  seems  to  show  us  Astarte
in  her  character  of  war-goddess,  and  the  sword  of  Astarti-  is  mentioned  by  Chabas  (Le  Papyrus  Magique
Earris,  pp.  55, 125,  127).  A  bas-relief  at  Edfii,(NAViLLE,  Le  Mythe  d'Horus,  pi.  xiii.)  represents  lier
standing  upright  in  her  chariot,  drawn  by  horses,  and  trampling  her  enemies  underfoot :  she  is  there
identified  with  Sokhit  the  warlike,  destroyer  of  men;  cf.  Maspero,  Daim  of  Civilization,  pp.  1G5,  IGO.


THE  PLANT-GODS   AND    STOXE-GODS    OF    THE   SYRIANS.


59


always  barren,  for  the  countless  multituiu.'
of  her  excesses  for  ever  shut  her
out  from  motherhood :  she  con-
ceives   witliout     ceasing,    but
never  brings  forth  children. ^
The  Baalim  and  Astartus  fre-
quented by  choice  tlie  tops
of  mountains,  such  as  Leba-
non,   Carmel,     Hermon,     or
Kasios :  -     they    dwelt    near
springs!,  or  hid  themselves  in
tiie  deptlis  of    forests.^      They
revealed  themselves  to  mortals
through  the  heavenly  bodies,  and
in  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  :
the  sun  was  a  Baal,  the  moon  was
Astarte,   and    the    whole    host   of
heaven  was  composed  of  more  or
less  powerful  genii,  as  we  find  iu
Chalda3a.  Tiiey  required  that  offer-
ings and  prayers  should  be  brought
to  tliem  at  the  high  places,*  but
they  were  also  pleased — and  espe-
cially the  goddesses — to  lodge  in

trees ;  tree-trunks,  sometimes  leafy,  sometimes  bare  and  branchless  (asherah),
long  continued  to  be  living  emblems  of  the  local  Astartes  among  the  peoples  of

'  This  conception  of  tbe  Syrian  goddesses  had  already  become  firmly  established  at  the  period
with  which  we  are  dealing,  for  an  Egyptian  magical  formula  defines  Aniti  and  Astarte  as  "  the  great
goddesses  who  conceiving  do  not  bring  forth  young,  for  the  Hoiuses  have  sealed  them  and  Sit  hatli
established  them  "  (Chabas,  Le  Papyrtis  Maglque  Harris,  pp.  .05-58).

^  For  details  iu  regard  to  the  mountains,  streams,  and  forests  held  sacred  by  the  Syrian  populations,
see  Bacdissin,  Studien  zur  Sr.initischen  Religionngeschichte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  H5-2(J9.  The  liaal  of  Lebanon
is  menticmed  in  an  archaic  Phceiiician  inscrijition  (Corpus  Ins.  Semit.,\o\.  i.  pp.  22-20),  and  the  name
"  Holy  Gape  "  {Rosh-Qodshu),  homo  in  the  time  of  ThCltmosia  HI.  eitlier  liy  Haifa  or  by  a  neighbouring
town,  proves  lliat  Carmel  was  held  sacred  as  far  back  as  the  Egyptian  epocli  (cf.  supra,  p.  135,  note  5).
liaal-llermon  lias  already  been  mentioned  on  p.  154 ;  the  evidence  iu  reference  to  tlio  worsliip  of  F-1-
Kasiii  (Zeus  Ka'-ioi)ha9  been  collected  by  M.  lk  Vogije  {Sijrie  Centrale,  Inscriptionx,  pp.  10:-!-105).

^  The  source  of  the  Jordan,  near  Banias,  was  the  seat  of  a  Baal  wliom  the  Greeks  identified  with
Pan.  This  was  probably  tbe  l!aal-Gad  who  often  lent  his  name  to  tlie  neiglilmuring  town  of  Baal-
Hermon  (cf.  supra,  p.  155) :  many  of  the  rivers  of  Phoenicia  were  called  after  tlio  divinities  worsliipped
in  the  nearest  city,  e.g.  tlie  .\donis,  tlic  Bclos,  the  Asclepios,  the  Damuras  (Baudissin,  Studien  zur
Semilischcn  Edigionsijcschichtc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159-1C5).

'  These  are  tlio  "  liigli  places  "  (havidth)  so  frequently  referred  (,o  by  the  llelirew  prophets,  and
which  we  find  in  tlie  country  of  Moab,  according  to  the  Mesha  inscription  (1.  ;i),  and  in  tho  place-
name  Bamotli-Baal  (Nuiuh.  xxi.  Ill,  xxii.  41;  Josh.  xiii.  17);  mauy  of  them  seem  to  have  served  for
Canaanitish  places  of  worship  before  they  were  resorted  to  by  the  childien  of  Tsnicl.  Cf.  Baudissin,
Studien  zar  Semitisclmn  Religionsijeschichte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  252-2G1.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Louvre.


QOD.SHU    AND    RASHUP   ON    A    STELE   IN    THE    lOUVRK.


160      SYRIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

Southern  Syria.^  Side  by  side  with  these  plant-gods  we  find  everywhere,  in  the
inmost  recesses  of  the  temples,  at  cross-roads,  and  in  the  open  fields,  blocks  of
stone  hewn  into  pillars,  isolated  boulders,  or  natural  rocks,  sometimes  of  meteoric
origin,  which  were  recognised  by  certain  mysterious  marks  to  be  the  house  of
the  god,  the  Betyli  or  Beth-els  in  which  he  enclosed  a  part  of  his  intelligence
and  vital  foi'ce."

The  worship  of  these  gods  involved  the  performance  of  ceremonies  more
bloody  and  licentious  even  than  those  practised  by  other  races.  The  Baalim
thirsted  after  blood,  nor  would  they  be  satisfied  with  any  common  blood  such
as  generally  contented  their  brethren  in  ChakL-pa  or  Egypt :  they  imperatively
demanded  human  as  well  as  animal  sacrifices.  Among  several  of  the  Syrian
nations  they  had  a  prescriptive  right  to  the  firstborn  male  of  each  family  ;3
this  right  was  generally  commuted,  either  by  a  money  payment  or  by  sub-
jecting the  infant  to  circumcision.''  At  important  junctures,  however,  this
pretence  of  bloodshed  would  fail  to  appease  them,  and  the  death  of  the  child
alone  availed.""'  Indeed,  in  times  of  national  danger,  the  king  and  nobles
would  furnish,  not  merely  a  single  victim,  but  as  many  as  the  priests  chose
to  demand.''  While  they  were  being  burnt  alive  on  tlie  knees  of  the  statue,
or  before  the  sacred  emblem,  their  cries  of  pain  were  drowned  by  the  piping
of  flutes  or  the  blare  of  trumpets,  the  parents  standing  near  the  altar,  without
a  sign  of  pity,  and  dressed  as  for  a  festival :  the  ruler  of  the  world  could
refuse   nothing   to   prayers   backed    by   so   precious   an   offering,   and   by  a

'  As  to  the  Asheroth  (or,  sometimes  iu  the  masculine,  Aslierim),  who  Imve  been  made  out  to  have
been  regular  divinities,  analogous  to  the  Astartes,  or  distinct  from  them  (cf.  especially  Movers,  Die
Phiinizier,  vol.  i.  pp.  560-584),  see  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  458-4G1,  and  Vernes,
Du  prgtendu  Polyllnfisme  des  Hdhreux,  vol.  i.  pp.  94-98.

'  A  stone  hewn  into  a  pillar,  or  stele,  was  called  a  mcissehah  by  the  Hebrews  and  Phoenicians  (Corpus
Ins.  Semil.,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  68,  76-80),  loss  frequently  ne^tb  (Gen.  six.  26,  A.V.,  "pillar  of  salt ; "  Corpus
Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  154,  155,  194).  As  to  the  Beli/U  and  their  history,  cf.  the  very  exhaustive
article  by  Fh.  Lenokmant,  Les  Bdtyles,  in  the  Bevue  de  VBistoire  des  Religions,  vol.  iii.  pp.  31-53,  and
Ph.  Berger,  Note  sur  les  pierres  sacrges,  extracted  from  the  Journcd  Asiatiqiii;  1877.

'  This  fact  is  proved,  in  so  far  as  the  Hebrew  people  is  concerned,  by  the  texts  of  the  Penta-
teuch (Exod.  xxii.  29,  xxxiv.  19,  20)  and  of  the  prophets  (Micah  vi.  7;  Ezek.  xx.  26);  amongst  the
Moabites  also  it  was  his  eldest  son  whom  King  Jlesha  took  to  offer  to  his  god  (2  Kings  iii.  27).
We  find  the  same  custom  among  other  Syrian  races :  Philo  of  Byblos  (Fragm.  2,  §  24,  iu  Muller-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graic,  vol.  iii.  p.  569)  tells  us,  in  fact,  that  El-Kronos,  god  of  Byblos,  sacrificed
his  firstborn  son  and  set  the  example  of  this  kind  of  offering.  Cf.  for  the  antiquity  of  this  practice,
Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterlhums,  vol.  i.  pp.  249,  250,  who  does  not  hesitate  to  conclude  that  it
was  in  full  force  from  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  supremacy  onwards.

*  lledemption  by  a  payment  in  money  was  the  case  .imong  the  Hebrews  (Nnmh.  xviii.  15,  16),
as  also  the  substitution  of  an  animal  in  the  place  of  a  child  (Gen.  xxii.  1  -13)  ;  as  to  redemption  by
circumcision,  cf.  the  story  of  Moses  and  Zippor.ah,  where  the  mother  saves  her  sou  from  Jahveh  by
circumcising  him  (Exod.  iv.  24-26).  Circumcision  was  practised  among  the  Syrians  of  Palestine  in
the  time  of  Herodotus  (II.  civ.:  cf.  Wiede-mann,  Herodots  sweites  Bach,  pp.  410-413;  Ed.  Meter,
GesoMchle  des  AUerthums,  vol.  i.  p.  250 ;  and  Th.  Eeinach,  De  Quelqucs  faits  relatifs  it  Vhistoire  de  la
cin-oncision,  in  V Anthropologic,  1893,  pp.  28-31).

5  As  to  sacrifices  of  children  among  peoples  of  Syrian  origin,  cf.  the  texts  collected  by  Movers,
Die  Phonizier,  vol.  i.  pp.  299-311.

«  PiAiTAROH,  De  Superstitione,  §  13  :  if  we  may  credit  Tertullian  (Apohg.,  9),  the  custom  of  offering
up  children  as  sacrifices  lasted  down  to  the  proconsulate  of  Tiberius.


STIilAX    WORSHIP  AND    FESTIVALS.


IGl


^


W^^tt^-


A    TRANSJORDANIAN    DOLMEN.'

purpose    so    determined
• -- '"  to  move  him.    Such  sacrifices  were,

however,  the  exception,  and  the
shedding  of  their  own  blood  by  his  priests  sufficed,  as  a  rule,  for  the  daily
wants  of  the  god.  Seizing  their  knives,  they  would  slash  their  arms  and
breasts  with  the  view  of  compelling,  by  this  offering  of  their  own  persons,
the  good  will  of  the  Baalim.^  The  Astartes  of  all  degrees  and  kinds  were
hardly  less  cruel ;  they  imposed  frequent  flagellations,  self-mutilation,  and
sometimes  even  emasculation,  on  their  devotees.^  Around  the  majority  of
these  goddesses  was  gathered  an  infamous  troop  of  profligates  (hedeshim),
"dogs  of  love"  (Jcelabim),  and  courtesans  (Jcedeshnt).*  The  temples  bore
little  resemblance  to  those  of  the  regions  of  the  Lower  Euphrates :  nowhere
do  we  find  traces  of  those  ziggurdt  which  serve  to  produce  the  peculiar
jagged  outline  characteristic  of  Chaldtean  cities.''  The  Syrian  edifices  were
stone  buildings,  which  included,  in  addition  to  the  halls  and  courts  reserved
for  religious  rites,  dwelling-rooms  for  the  j^riesthood,  and  storehouses  for
provisions :  though  not  to  be  compared  in  size  with  the  sanctuaries  of  Thebes,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.  It  is  one  of  the  dolmens  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Amman,

'  Cf.,  for  the  Hebraic  epoch,  the  scene  where  the  priests  of  Baal,  in  a  trial  of  power  with  Elijah
before  Ahab,  offered  up  sacrifices  on  the  highest  point  of  Carmel,  and  finding  tliat  their  offerings  diil
not  meet  with  the  usual  success,  "  cut  themselves  .  .  .  with  knives  and  lancets  till  the  blood  gushed
out  upon  them  "  (1  Kings  xviii.  28).

'  See,  on  this  point,  the  passages  collected  by  Movers,  Die  PliiJnizier,  vol.  i.  pp.  681-688.  The
legend  of  Combabos  at  Hierapolis  (LuciAN,  De  Bed  Syria,  §§  19-27)  is  supposed  to  explain  the  origin
of  emasculation  in  honour  of  the  goddess.

'  As  to  the  hedeshim  and  keileahul,  cf.  Movers,  Die  PhSiiizier,  vol.  i.  pp.  677-681,  where  most  of
the  facts  concerning  them  have  been  collected.  The  expression  "  dog,"  sometimes  employed  in  the
Hebrew  texts  (Deut.  xxiii.  17,  18),  is  met  with  in  a  Phoenician  inscription  at  Cyprus  ^Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  92-99).

'  In  regard  to  the  Phoenician  and  Canaanite  temples,  cf.  Perrot-Ciiifiez,  Uistoire  de  I'Arl  dans
V Antiquum,  vol.  iii.  pp.  211-322;  vol.  iv.  pp.  474-479;  and  Pietschjiann,  Geschichtc  der  Phlhiizier.
pp.  200-203.

M


162      SYRIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

they  yet  answered  the  purpose  of  strongholds  in  time  of  need,  and  were
capable  of  resisting  the  attacks  of  a  victorious  foe.^  A  numerous  staff,  con-
sisting of  priests,  male  and  female  singers,  porters,  butchers,  slaves,  and
artisans,  was  assigned  to  each  of  these  temples :  here  the  god  was  accus-
tomed to  give  forth  his  oracles,  either  by  the  voice  of  his  prophets,  or  by  the
movement  of  his  statues.'^  The  greater  number  of  the  festivals  celebrated  in
them  were  closely  connected  with  the  pastoral  and  agricultural  life  of  the
country ;  they  inaugurated,  or  brought  to  a  close,  the  principal  operations  of
the  year — the  sowing  of  seed^  the  harvest,  the  vintage,  the  shearing  of  the
sheep.  At  Shechem,  when  the  grapes  were  ripe,  the  people  flocked  out  of
the  town  into  the  vineyards,  returning  to  the  temple  for  religious  observances
and  sacred  banquets  when  the  fruit  had  been  trodden  in  the  winepress.^  In
times  of  extraordinary  distress,  such  as  a  prolonged  drought  or  a  famine,  the
priests  were  wont  to  ascend  in  solemn  procession  to  the  high  places  in  order
to  implore  the  pity  of  their  divine  masters,  from  whom  they  strove  to  extort
help,  or  to  obtain  the  wished-for  rain,  by  their  dances,  their  lamentations,  and
the  shedding  of  their  blood.*  Almost  everywhere,  but  especially  in  the  regions
east  of  the  Jordan,  were  monuments  which  popular  piety  surrounded  with  a
superstitious  reverence.  Such  were  the  isolated  boulders,  or,  as  we  should  call
them,  "  menhirs,"  reared  on  the  summit  of  a  knoll,  or  on  the  edge  of  a  table-
land ;  dolmens,  formed  of  a  flat  slab  placed  on  the  top  of  two  roughly  hewn
supports,  cromlechs,  or,  that  is  to  say,  stone  circles,  in  the  centre  of  which
might  be  found  a  beth-el.  We  know  not  by  whom  were  set  up  these  monuments
there,  nor  at  what  time :  the  fact  that  they  are  in  no  way  different  from  those
which  are  to  be  met  with  in  Western  Europe  and  the  north  of  Africa  has  given
rise  to  the  theory  that  they  were  the  work  of  some  one  primeval  race  which
wandered  ceaselessly  over  the  ancient  world.  A  few  of  them  may  have  marked
the  tombs  of  some  forgotten  personages,  the  discovery  of  human  bones  beneath
them  confirming   such  a  conjecture  ;    while  others  seem  to  have  been  holy

'  The  story  of  Abimelech  gives  us  some  idea  of  what  the  Cnnaanite  temple  of  Baal-Berith  at
Shechem  was  like  (Judges  is.  27,  46-49).

^  As  to  the  regular  organisation  of  Baal-worship,  we  possess  only  documents  of  a  comparatively
late  period,  such  as  the  fragments  of  accounts  published  in  the  Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  92-99,  or
the  remnants  of  sacrificial  tarifl's  discovered  at  Marseilles  and  in  Africa.  In  the  Hebraic  era  we
have  incidental  mention  of  the  prophets  and  priests  of  Baal,  e.g.  in  1  Kings  xviii.  19,  22-29,  40.
The  priesthood  of  Baal,  Astarte,  and  Qaddishat,  as  organised  in  Egypt  under  the  Theban  dynasties,
is  familiar  to  us  from  the  stela)  so  frequently  quoted  (of.  sujira,  pp.  155,  161),  and  from  other  small
monuments  ;  the  titles  are,  naturally,  those  assumed  by  the  Egyptian  ijriests,  the  inscriptions  being
written  in  hieroglyphics.

'  Judges  ix.  26,  27.  It  is  probable  that  the  vintage  festival,  celebrated  at  Sliiloh  in  the  time  of
the  Judges  (Judges  xxi.  19-23),  dated  back  to  a  period  of  Cauaanite  history  prior  to  the  Hebrew
invasion,  i.e.  to  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  supremacy.

'  Cf.,  in  the  Hebraic  period,  the  scene  where  the  priests  of  Baal  go  up  to  the  top  of  Mount  Carmel
with  the  prophet  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  20-40).


THE   SACRED   STONES.


IG3


A    CHOMLECU    IN    THE    NEXGHBOnRHOOD    OF    HESBAN,   IN    THE    COUNTKY    OF    3I0AB.'

places  and  altars  from  the  beginning.^  The  nations  of  Syria  did  not  in  all
cases  recognise  the  original  purpose  of  these  monuments,  but  regarded  them  as
marking  the  seat  of  an  ancient  divinity,  or  the  precise  spot  on  wliich  he  had
at  some  time  manifested  himself.  When  the  children  of  Israel  caught  sight
of  them  again  on  their  return  from  Egypt,  they  at  once  recognised  in  them
the  work  of  their  patriarchs.  The  dolmen  at  Shechem  was  the  altar  which
Abraham  liad  built  to  the  Eternal  after  his  arrival  in  the  country  of  Canaan.*
Isaac  had  raised  that  at  Beersheba,  on  the  very  spot  where  Jehovah  had
appeared  in  order  to  renew  with  him  the  covenant  that  He  had  made  with
Abraham.^  One  might  almost  reconstruct  a  map  of  the  wanderings  of  Jacob
from  the  altars  which  he  built  at  each  of  his  principal  resting-places — at
Gilead  [Galeed],  at   Ephrata,  at   Bethel,  and  at   Shechem.''     Each  of  sutjli

'  Druwu  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.

-  The  Syrian  dolmens  were  first  mentioned  by  Irby-Mangles,  Travels  in  Egypt  and  Nubia,  ttc,
duriiifi  the  Years  ISIT-IS,  pp.  99,  143,  probably  tliose  at  Alu-Safat  and  at  Manfumieli;  others  were
afterwards  discovered  by  l'\  de  Saulcy,  in  the  land  of  Ammou,  at  Sfleimeh  (T'of/aye  en  Terre-Saiiile,  vol.  i.
pp.  312-310),  and  at  ShaUibun,  not  far  north  of  Nazareth  {ihid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  27.5,  276)  ;  both  one  and
the  other  have  been  carefully  examined  by  Lortet  in  the  work  of  tlie  Due  de  Ldtnes,  Voyage  d'ex-
plorution  autour  de  la  mer  Morte,  vol.  i.  pp.  131-137,  and  vol.  iii.  pp.  233-240.  Since  tlien,  quite  a  large
number  of  these  remains  have  been  reported,  especially  near  the  JauUm  and  the  Hainan,  where  tliere
are  whole  fields  of  them  (Sculmaouer,  Across  the  Jordan,  p.  62,  et  seq.,  and  Tlie  Jaulan,  p.  123,  et
seq.).  In  the  Hebrew  books,  menliirs  are  classed  with  sacred  stela;,  under  the  name  of  maf/ttuA,
and  dolmens  with  altars  (ridzhealih)  ;  cromlechs  are  called  gilgal,  or  circles  of  stone  {Josh.  iv.  20).

'  Gen.  xii.  6,  7;  there  is  an  altar-menhir  by  Jacob  in  the  same  locality  (Gen.  xxxiii.  20),  probably
identical  with  that  which  another  tradition  attributes  to  Abraham.

'  den.  xxvi.  23-25.

'  The  heap  of  stones  at  Galeed,  in  Aramaic  Jcgar-Saltadutha,  •■  the  heap  of  witness,"  marked  the
spot  where  Laban  and  .Jacob  were  reconciled  {Gen.  xxxi.   15-51,  ef.  stq/ra,  pp.  OS,  G9);  the  stele  on


164      SrSIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

still  existing  objects  probably  had  a  history  of  its  own,  connecting  it  insepar-
ably with  some  far-off  event  in  the  local  annals.  Most  of  them  were  objects
of  worship :  they  were  anointed  with  oil,  and  victims  were  slaughtered  in
their  honour ;  the  faithful  even  came  at  times  to  spend  the  night  and  sleep
near  them,  in  order  to  obtain  in  their  dreams  glimpses  of  the  future.^

Men  and  beasts  were  supposed  to  be  animated,  during  their  lifetime,  by  a
breath  or  soul  which  ran  in  their  veins  along  with  their  blood,  and  served  to  move
their  limbs ;  the  man,  therefore,  who  drank  blood  or  ate  bleeding  flesh  assimi-
lated thereby  the  soul  which  inhered  in  it.^  After  death  the  fate  of  this  soul  was
similar  to  that  ascribed  to  the  spirits  of  the  departed  in  Egypt  and  ChakLea.
The  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  world  were  always  accustomed  to  regard  the
surviving  element  in  man  as  something  restless  and  unhappy — a  weak  and
pitiable  double,  doomed  to  hopeless  destruction  if  deprived  of  the  succour
of  the  living.  They  imagined  it  as  taking  up  its  abode  near  the  body  wrapped
in  a  half-conscious  lethargy ;  or  else  as  dwelling  with  the  other  rephaim
(departed  spirits)  in  some  dismal  and  gloomy  kingdom,  hidden  in  the  bowels
of  the  earth,  like  the  region  ruled  by  the  Chaldtean  Allat,  its  doors  gaping
wide  to  engulf  new  arrivals,  but  allowing  none  to  escape  who  had  once  passed
the  threshold.^  There  it  wasted  away,  a  prey  to  sullen  melancholy,  under  the
sway  of  inexorable  deities,  chief  amongst  whom,  according  to  the  Phoenician
idea,  was  Mout  (Ueath),^  the  grandson  of  El ;  there  the  slave  became  the
equal  of  his  former  master,  the  rich  man  no  longer  possessed  anything  which
could  raise  him  above  the  poor,  and  dreaded  monarchs  were  greeted  on  their
entrance  by  the  jeers  of  kings  who  had  gone  down  into  the  night  before  them.^
The  corpse,  after  it  had  been  anointed  with  perfumes  and  enveloped  in  linen,

the  way  to  Ephrata  was  the  tomb  of  Kachel  (Gen.  xxxv.  20);  the  altar  and  stele  at  Bethel  marked
the  spot  where  God  appeared  unto  Jacob  ((?«».  xxviii.  10-22,  xxxv.  1-15);  for  the  altar  at  Sheehem,
see  Gen.  xxxiii.  20.

'  For  the  anointing  with  oil,  cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  18,  xxxi.  13,  xxxv.  14;  and  for  sacrifices.  Gen.  xxxi.
54.  The  menhir  at  Bethel  was  the  identical  one  whereon  Jacob  rested  his  head  on  the  night  in  which
Jehovah  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  (Gen.  xxviii.  18).  In  Phoenicia  there  was  a  legend  which  told  how
Usoos  set  up  two  stelse  to  the  elements  of  wind  and  fire,  and  how  he  oflered  the  blood  of  the  animals
he  had  killed  in  the  chase  as  a  libation  (Philo  of  Bvblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  8,  in  Mijller-Didot,  Fraijm.
Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  iii.  p.  566)  ;  cf.  infra,  p.  184,  for  what  is  said  on  this  subject.

^  This  is  the  nephesh  of  the  Bible.  As  to  the  Hebrew  view  of  the  blood  and  the  soul,  of.
Dent.  xii.  23;  1  Sam.  xiv.  32-34.  The  Phcenician  doctrines  in  regard  to  the  soul  and  its  condition
have  been  very  clearly  summarised  by  Pekrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'AH  dans  VAntiquitg,  vol.  iii.
jjp.  137-144,  and  by  Pietschmann,  Geschiclde  der  Phonizier,  pp.  191-196.

'  The  expression  rephaim  (Corp.  Ins.  Semil.,  vol.  i.  pp.  13,  14,  19,  20,  1.  S)  means  "the  feeble"
(cf.  Isa.  xiv.  10) ;  it  was  the  epithet  applied  by  the  Hebrews  to  a  part  of  the  primitive  races  of
Palestine  (cf.  supra,  p.  48).  A  description  of  this  kingdom  of  the  departed,  as  conceived  by  the
Hebrews  as  late  as  the  VI""  century,  occurs  in  Isa.  xiv.  9-20,  and  in  Ezel:  xxxii.  17-32;  cf  the
description  of  the  Chaldoean  hell  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  689,  et  seq.

'  PatLO  OF  Byblos,  Fraijm.  2,  §  24,  in  Muller-Dcdot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gr,rc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  568  ;  among
the  Hebrews  his  name  was  Mawetli,  who  feeds  the  departed  like  sheep,  and  himself  feeds  on  them  in
liell  (Ps.  xlix.  14).  Some  writers  have  sought  to  identify  this  or  some  analogous  god  with  the  lion
represented  on  a  stele  of  Pirseus  (Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  139-141,  pi.  xxiii.)  which  threatens  to
devour  the  body  of  a  dead  man  (Pietschmann,  Geschichte  der  FMnizier,  pp.  193,  194).

'  Job  iii.  11-19  ;  Isa.  xiv.  9-20 ;  Ezeh.  xxxii.  17-32,


TEE    TOMBS  AND   DESTINIES    OF  MEN  AFTEU   DEATH.


165


-"•-i:-"-


A    1  UKNEIC    (Jl-    THE    I'HCENICIAN    NECROPOLIS    AT    ADLUN.'

aud  impregnated  with  substances  which  retarded  its  decomposition,  was
placed  in  some  natural  grotto  or  in  a  cave  hollowed  out  of  the  solid  rock :
sometimes  it  was  simply  laid  on  the  bare  earth,  sometimes  in  a  sarcophagus
or  coABd,  and  on  it,  or  around  it,  were  piled  amulets,  jewels,  objects  of  daily
use,  vessels  filled  with  perfume,  or  household  utensils,  together  with  meat  and
drink.^  The  entrance  was  then  closed,  and  on  the  spot  a  cippus  was  erected
—  in  popular  estimation  sometimes  held  to  represent  the  soul — or  a  monu-
ment was  set  up  on  a  scale  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  family
to  which  the  dead  man  had  belonged.^  On  certain  days  beasts  ceremonially
pure  were  sacrificed  at  the  tomb,  and  libations  poured  out,  which,  carried  into
the  next  world  by  virtue  of  the  prayers  of  those  who  offered  them,  and  by  the
aid  of  the  gods  to  whom  the  prayers  were  addressed,  assuaged  the  hunger  and
tliirst  of  the  dead  man.*     The  chapels  and  stelai  which  marked  the  exterior  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograijh  in  Lortet,  La  tiyrie  d'aujaurd'hui,  p.  113.

^  Fragments  of  textile  fabrics  liave  been  found  in  tlie  tombs  at  Amrit  (Eenan,  Mmion  de  Ph^nicie,
pp.  78,  421,  422);  tbe  furniture  and  remains  of  offerings  are  described  in  Perhot-Chii'Iez,  Mistoire
de  I'Art,  vol.  iii.  pp.  VJ7-2()7.  Tbe  Jews  sometimes  embalmed  the  bodies  of  tlie  dead,  ut  any  rate  iu
the  case  of  their  kin!,'s(2  67iro«.  xvi.  14).  As  to  burial  in  caverns,  see  Gcn.xxiii.  3-20,  xxv.  9, 10,  1.  13  ;
the  caves  were  merely  artificial,  or  partly  artiUcial  grottoes  (Eenan,  Musiou  de  Fhgnicia,  p.  832).

'  The  pillar  or  stele  was  used  among  both  Hebrews  {Gen.  xxxv.  I'J,  20)  and  Pbronicians  (Kenan,
.VmeiOH  de  Phfnicie,  pp.  70,  80)  to  mark  tlie  graves  of  distinguished  persons.  Amuug  the  Semites
speaking  Aramaic  it  was  called  nephesh  {Corji.  Im.  Semit.,  p.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  117,  118,  etc.),  especially
when  it  took  the  form  of  a  pyramid  {Corp.  jns.  Semit,  p.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  105,  and  Rubens  Duval,  Note
»>'r  le  monument  fnne'raire  a pjieU  nifphenh,  iu  the  Mevue  Se'mitique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  259-263);  the  word
means  "  breath,"  "  soul,"  and  clearly  shows  the  ideas  associated  with  the  object.

All  altar  was  sometimes  placed  in  front  of  the  surcophagus  to  receive  these  offerings  (F.  de


166       SYRIA    AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

these  "eternal"'  houses  have  disappeared  iu  the  course  of  the  various  wars  by
which  Syria  suffered  so  heavily :  in  almost  all  cases,  therefore,  we  are  ignorant
as  to  the  sites  of  the  various  cities  of  the  dead  in  which  the  nobles  and
common  people  of  the  Canaanite  and  Amorite  towns  were  laid  to  rest.^  In
Phoenicia  alone  do  we  meet  with  burial-places  which,  after  the  vicissitudes
and  upheavals  of  thirty  centuries,  still  retain  something  of  their  original
arrangement.*  Sometimes  the  site  chosen  was  on  level  ground :  perpendicular
shafts  or  stairways  cut  in  the  soil  led  down  to  low-roofed  chambers,  the
number  of  which  varied  according  to  circumstances :  they  were  often  arranged
in  two  stories,  placed  one  above  the  other,  fresh  vaults  being  probably  added
as  the  old  ones  were  filled  up.  They  were  usually  rectangular  in  shape,  with
horizontal  or  slightly  arched  ceilings;  niches  cut  in  the  walls  received  the
dead  body  and  the  objects  intended  for  its  use  in  the  next  world,  and  were
then  closed  with  a  slab  of  stone.*  Elsewhere  some  isolated  hill  or  narrow
gorge,  with  sides  of  fine  homogeneous  limestone,  was  selected.''  In  this  case
the  doors  were  placed  in  rows  on  a  sort  of  fapade  similar  to  that  of  the
Egyptian  rock-tomb,  generally  without  any  attempt  at  external  ornament.
The  vaults  were  on  the  ground-level,  but  were  not  used  as  chapels  for  the
celebration  of  festivals  in  honour  of  the  dead :  they  were  walled  up  after  every
funeral,  and  all  access  to  them  forbidden,  until  such  time  as  they  were  again
required  for  the  purposes  of  burial.  Except  on  these  occasions  of  sad  necessity,
those  whom  "  the  mouth  of  the  pit  had  devoured  "  dreaded  the  visits  of  the
living,  and  resorted  to  every  means  afforded  by  their  religion  to  protect
themselves  from  them.  Their  inscriptions  declare  repeatedly  that  neither
gold  nor  silver,  nor  any  object  which  could  excite  the  greed  of  robbers,
was  to  be  found  within  their  graves ;  they  threaten  any  one  who  should  dare
to  deprive  them  of  such  articles  of  little  value  as  belonged  to  them,  or  to  turn
them  out  of  their  chambers  in  order  to  make  room  for  others,  with  all  sorts
of  vengeance,  divine  and  human.*     These  imprecations  have  not,  however,

Saulct,  Voyage  autour  de  la  mer  Morfe  et  dans  les  Terres  Bihiiques,  vol.  i.  p.  46,  pi.  v.;  Ren'an,
Mission  de  I'henicie,  pp.  706,  707,  pi.  i.).

'  This  expression,  which  is  identical  with  that  used  by  the  Egyptians  of  the  same  period,  is
found  in  one  of  the  PhcBuician  inscriptions  at  Malta  (^Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  156-158).

"  The  excavations  carried  out  by  M.  Gautier  iu  1893-94,  on  the  little  island  ;of  Bahr-el-Kadis,
at  one  time  believed  to  have  been  the  site  of  the  town  of  Qodshu,  have  revealed  the  existence  of  a
number  of  tombs  in  the  enclosure  which  forms  the  central  part  of  the  tumulus :  some  of  these  may
possibly  date  from  the  Amorite  epoch,  but  they  are  very  poor  in  remains,  and  contain  no  object  which
permits  us  to  fix  the  date  with  accuracy.

'  A  summary  of  the  researches  undertaken  by  Renan,  and  described  in  detail  iu  the  3Iissinn  de
Pli^nicie,  will  be  found  in  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art,  vol.  iii.  pp.  144-17.S.

'  E.g.  the  Arabian  tombs  described  by  Renan,  Missio7i  de  Phe'nicie,  pp.';75-79.

^  Such  was  the  necropolis  at  Adliin,  the  last  rearrangement  of  which  took  place  during  the
Grseco-Roman  period  (RENAN,[ilf«'ssion,  etc.,  pp.  657,  660,  et  seq.),  but  whicli  externally  bears  so  strong
a  resemblance  to  an  Egyptian  necropolis  of  the  XVIII'"  or  XIX"'  dynasty,  that  we  may,  without
violating  the  probabilities,  trace  its  origin  back  to  the  time  of  the  Pharaonic  conquest.

°  Cf.  the  curses  with  which  Eshmunazar  threatens  any  one  who  should  venture  to  decorate  Ids


THE  PBCENICIAX   COSMOGONY.  167

availed  to  save  them  from  the  desecration  the  danger  of  which  they  foresaw,
and  tliere  are  few  of  their  tombs  which  were  not  occupied  by  a  succession
of  tenants  between  the  date  of  their  first  making  and  the  close  of  the  Koman
supremacy.  When  the  modern  explorer  chances  to  discover  a  vault  which
has  escaped  the  spade  of  the  treasure-seeker,  it  is  hardly  ever  the  case  that  the
bodies  whose  remains  are  unearthed  prove  to  be  those  of  the  original  proprietors.
The  "-ods  and  legends  of  Chaldsea  had  penetrated  to  the  countries  of
Amauru  and  Canaan,  together  with  the  language  of  the  conquerors  and  their
system  of  writing :  the  stories  of  Adapa's  struggles  against  the  south-west
wind,  or  of  the  incidents  which  forced  Irishkigal,  queen  of  the  dead,  to  wed
Nergal,  were  accustomed  to  be  read  at  the  courts  of  Syrian  princes.^  Chaldaean
theology,  therefore,  must  have  exercised  influence  on  individual  Syrians  and  on
their  belief;  but  although  we  are  forced  to  allow  the  existence  of  such  influence,
we  cannot  define  precisely  the  eifects  produced  by  it.  Only  on  the  coast  and
in  the  Phcenician  cities  do  the  local  religions  seem  to  have  become  formulated
at  a  fairly  early  date,  and  crystallised  under  pressure  of  this  influence  into
cosmogonic  theories.  The  Baalim  and  Astartes  reigned  there  as  on  the  banks
of  the  Jordan  or  Orontes,  and  in  each  town  Baal  was  "  the  most  high,"  master
of  heaven  and  eternity,  creator  of  everything  which  exists,  though  the  character
of  his  creating  acts  was  variously  defined  according  to  time  and  place.  Some
regarded  him  as  tlie  personification  of  Justice,  Sydyk,  who  established  the
universe  with  the  help  of  eight  indefatigable  Cabiri."  Others  held  the
whole  world  to  be  the  work  of  a  divine  family,  whose  successive  generations
gave  birth  to  the  various  elements.  The  storm-wind,  Colpias,  wedded  to  Chaos,
had  begotten  two  mortals,  tTlom  (Time)  and  Kadmon  (the  First-Born),  and
these  in  their  turn  engendered  Qen  and  Qenath,  who  dwelt  in  Phoeuicia  :
then  came  a  drought,  and  they  lifted  up  their  heads  to  the  Sun,  imploring
him,  as  Lord  of  the  Heavens  (Baalsamin),  to  put  an  end  to  their  woes.^     At

tomb  {Oirp.  Ins.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  9-20),  and  the  last  Hues  of  the  stele  at  Byblos  (Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  1-8).

'  These  fragments  were  (llscovereil  at  Tel  el-Amaraa,  amonp;  the  diplomatic  correspoudonce
between  the  Syrian  princes  and  Amenuthes  III.  and  IV.  (Bezold-Btdge,  The  Tell  el-Amarna  TableU,
pp.  Ixxxv,,  Ixxxvi.).  The  lef;end  of  Adapa  will  be  found  in  Maspebo,  Daicn  of  Civilization,  pp.  659-
661 ;  as  to  the  significance  attached  to  it  in  Syria,  cf.  Satce,  I'atriarclnd  Palestine,  pp.  265,  266.

'  This  is  the  account  of  the  cosmogony  preserved  for  us  by  Photius  from  a  fragment  cf  Dainascius
(Sanehoniathonis  Berytii  quat  feruntur  fragmenla,  ed.  Okellf,  p.  32) ;  its  general  tenor  recalls  the
teaching  of  the  Hermopolitan  Ennead  (cf.  Masfero,  Dawv  of  CiviliznUon,  p.  145,  et  seq.),  a  fact
which  may  be  due  to  Egyptian  influence.

'  Philo  of  Byblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  5,  in  MUllek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gra-c,  vol.  iii.  pp.  565,  566.
Colpias  is  most  probably  a  transliteration  of  the  composite  name  Kol-piakha,  "  the  Voice  of  the
Breath "  (Roth,  Oeachichte  unserer  Abendlandischen  Philosophic,  vol.  i.  p.  251 ;  Schroder,  Die
I'hSnizische  Sprache,  p,  86)  :  as  with  the  Hebrews,  Chaos  is  Bulm.  Eonan  {Mgmoire  sur  I'origine  el
snr  le  caractere  v^ritahle.  de  I'Histoire  Ph^idcienne  que  parte  le  nom  de  Sanchonialhon,  pp.  257-260)  has
shown  that  the  words  Aiwc  and  Wpandjovoi  in  the  Greek  text  correspond  to  the  expressions  OUm,
in  Phcenician  Ulom  (ScuRiiDEi!,  Die  VhSnizische  Sprache,  pp.  125-132),  and  Kadmon.  Baalsamin  is  an
Aramaic  form  of  Baal-samlm  or  Bal-samem  (Schroder,  Die  Philnizische  Sprache,  p.  131,  note  2,  p.  175).


168       SYBIA   AT   THE  BEQINNINO    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

Tyre  it  was  thought  that  Chaos  existed  at  the  beginning,  but  chaos  of  a  dark
and  troubled  nature,  over  which  a  Breath  (riiahh)  floated  without  affecting  it ;
"  and  this  Chaos  had  no  ending,  and  it  was  thus  for  centuries  and  centuries. —
Then  the  Breath  became  enamoured  of  its  own  principles,  and  brought  about
a  change  in  itself,  and  this  change  was  called  Desire : — now  Desire  was  the
principle  which  created  all  things,  and  the  Breath  knew  not  its  own  creation. —
The  Breath  and  Chaos,  therefore,  became  united,  and  Mot  the  Clay  was  born,
and  from  this  clay  sprang  all  the  seed  of  creation,  and  Mot  was  the  father  of
all  things  ;  now  Mot  was  like  an  egg  in  shape. — And  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the
stars,  the  great  planets,  shone  forth. ^  There  were  living  beings  devoid  of
intelligence,  and  from  these  living  beings  came  intelligent  beings,  who  were
called  Zopliesamin,  or  'watchers  of  the  heavens.'^  Now  the  thunder-claps  in
the  war  of  separating  elements  awoke  these  intelligent  beings  as  it  were
from  a  sleep,  and  then  the  males  and  the  females  began  to  stir  themselves
and  to  seek  one  another  on  the  land  and  in  the  sea."^  A  scholar  of  the  Koman
epoch,  Philo  of  Byblos,  using  as  a  basis  some  old  documents  hidden  away  in
the  sanctuaries,  which  had  apparently  been  classified  by  Sanchoniathon,  a
priest  long  before  his  time,  has  banded  these  theories  of  the  cosmogony
down  to  us :  after  he  has  explained  how  the  world  was  brought  out  of  Chaos,
he  gives  a  brief  summary  of  the  dawn  of  civilization  in  Phoenicia  and  the
legendary  period  in  its  history.*  No  doubt  he  interprets  the  writings  from
which  he  compiled  his  work  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  his  time  :  he  has
none  the  less  preserved  their  substance  more  or  less  faithfully.  Beneath  the
veneer  of  abstraction  with  which  the  Greek  tongue  and  mind  have  overlaid  the
fragment  just  quoted,  we  discern  that  groundwork  of  barbaric  ideas  which  is  to  be
met  with  in  most  Oriental  theologies,  whether  Egyptian  or  Babylonian.   At  first

'  Mot,  the  clay  formed  by  tlie  corruption  of  earth  and  water,  i5aTiu5oi/j  ^f£ews  ari^iv,  is  probably  a
Phoenician  form  of  a  word  wliich  means  water  in  the  Semitic  languages  (Koth,  Geschichte  unserer
abendlandischtu  Philotophie,  vol.  i.  p.  251  ;  Scheodek,  Die  PhSnizische  Sprache,  p.  133).  Cf.  the
Egyptian  theory,  according  to  which  the  clay,  heated  by  the  sun,  was  supposed  to  have  given  birth  to
animated  beings  (Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  155-157);  this  same  clay  modelled  by  Khnflmu
into  tlie  form  of  an  egg  was  supposed  to  have  produced  the  heavens  and  the  earth  (Maspeeo,  Daun
of  Civilization,  p.  128).  As  to  an  emendation  of  the  text  which  proposes  to  alter  Mot,  clay,  into
Tomot  or  Tamat,  sea,  cf.  Halevt,  Melanges  do  Critique  et  d'Histoire,  pp.  387,  388.

'  Like  the  name  Baalsamin,  Zophcsamlu  has  been  handed  down  to  us  by  Philo  of  Byblos  in  iU
Aramaic  form  (Schrodeu,  Die  PhSnizische  Sprache,  pp.  131,  175,  note  2,  209).

'  PiULO  OF  Btblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  1,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  5G5.  I  have
quoted  this  passage  from  the  projjosed  restoration  of  the  original  text  suggested  by  Eenan  (Memoire
siir  Vorigine  et  sur  le  caractere  veritable  de  I'Histoire  Phgnicienne,  etc.,  pp.  275,  276).

*  Philo  of  Byblos'  work  no  longer  exists,  but  the  fragments  of  it  will  be  found  collected  by
MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  5l>0-573,  and  by  Bunsen,  Philonis  Byhlii  Fragmenta,
etc.,  in  Egypt's  Place  in  Universal  History,  vol.  v.  pp.  789-854.  They  have  been  studied,  amongst
others,  by  Eenan,  Mgmoire  sur  I'Origiue,  etc.,  in  the  Meinoires  de  V Academic  des  Inscriptions,  vol.  xxiii.,
pt.  2,  pp.  241-334 ;  cf.  Baudissin,  Sludien  zur  Semitischen  Seligiomgeschichte,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-4G ;
Pr.  Lenorjiant,  Les  Origines  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  i.  pp.  532-552.  All  these  works  ought  properly  to  be
revised  in  the  light  of  the  new  elements  contributed  by  Assyriologists.


BAAL    OF   ABVAD.'


riKENICIA.  169

we  have  a  black  mysterious  Chaos,  stagnating  in  eternal  waters,  the  primordial
Nu  or  Apsu;  then  the  slime  which  precipitates  in  this  chaos  and  clots  into  the
form  of  an  egg,  like  the  mud  of  the  Nile  under  the  hand  of  Khnumu ;  then  the
hatchin"  forth  of  living  organisms  and  indolent  generations  of  barely  conscious
creatures,  such  as  the  Lakhmii,  the  Anshar,  and  the  lUinu  of  Chaldasan  specula-
tion ;  finally  the  abrupt  appearance  of  intelligent  beings.'  The  Phoeiiicians,  how-
ever, accustomed  as  they  were  to  the  Mediterranean,
with  its  blind  outbursts  of  fury,  had  formed  an  idea  of
Chaos  which  differed  widely  frorn  that  of  most  of  the
inland  races,  to  whom  it  presented  itself  as  something
silent  and  motionless :  they  imagined  it  as  swept  by
a  mighty  wind,  which,  gradually  increasing  to  a  roaring
tempest,  at  length  succeeded  in  stirring  the  chaos  to
its  very  depths,  and  in  fertilising  its  elements  amidst
the  fury  of  the  storm.     No  sooner  had  the  earth  been

thus  brought  roughly  into  shape,  than  the  whole  family  of  the  north  winds
swooped  down  upon  it  and  reduced  it  to  civilized  order.^  It  was  but  natural
that  the  traditions  of  a  seafaring  race  should  trace  its  descent  from  the  winds.

In  Phoenicia  the  sea  is  everything:  of  land  there  is  but  just  enough  to
furnish  a  site  for  a  score  of  towns,  with  their  surrounding  belt  of  gardens.'*
Mount  Lebanon,  with  its  impenetrable  forests,"  isolated  it  almost  entirely  from
Coele-Syria,  and  acted  as  the  eastward  boundary  of  tlie  long  narrow  quadrangle
liemmed  in  between  the  mountains  and  the  rocky  shore  of  the  sea.  At
frequent  intervals,  spurs  run  out  at  right  angles  from  the  principal  chain,
forming  steep  headlands  on  the  sea-front :  these  cut  up  the  country,  small
to  begin  with,  into  five  or  six  still  smaller  provinces,  each  one  of  which
possessed  from  time  immemorial  its  own  independent  cities,  its  own  religion,
and  its  own  national  history.  To  the  north  were  the  Zahi,  a  race  half  sailors,
half  husbandmen,  rich,  brave,  and  turbulent,  ever  ready  to  give  battle  to
their  neighbours,  or  rebel  against  an  alien  master,  be  he  who  he  might.''
Arvad,'   which   was   used  by  them  as  a  sort  of  stronghold  or  sanctuary,  was

'  Cf.  Maspeho,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  127,  et  aecj.,  for  the  concepts  of  Nu,  and  p.  537,  et  seq.,  for
those  of  Apsil  and  of  the  gods  which  gave  him  life :  as  to  Khnuiuii  and  the  gods  who  model  the  clay
of  the  Nile,  see  p.  156  of  the  same  work.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles  ;  of.  a  similar  medal,
])ubliehed  in  Babelon,  Leg  I'ersea  Ach^m^nides,  pi.  xxii.,  No.  1,  tlie  verso  of  wldch,  also  drawn  by
Fuucher-Gudiu,  Bervee  as  a  head-piece  to  the  eontents  uf  the  present  chapter,  p.  107.

'  Philo  of  Bybi.os,  Frciym.  2,  tj  4,  in  MI'llek-Didut,  Fraym.  Eid.  Greec,  vol.  iii.  p.  5U5.

*  RiCNAN,  Miteion  de  I'henicie,  p.  836 :  "  La  Phcuicie  no  fut  pas  un  pays,  ce  lut  une  sc'rio  de  jjorta
avec  une  banlieue  assez  e'troite,"

'  A  briefdescription  of  these  forests,  as  they  existed  in  tlie  time  of  Eamses  II.,  is  given  by  the  author
of  the  Anastaei  fapyrm.  No.  1,  pi.  xix.  1.  2,  et  secj. ;  cf.  Ghaisas,  Lc  Voyage  d'un  Etjyplien,  pp.  116-155.

"  As  to  tlie  force  of  the  term  Zahi  among  the  Egyptians,  vide  supra,  pp.  122-124.

'  The  name  Arvad  was   identified  in  the  Egyjitian  inscriptions  by  Birch  (On  Ike  llierorjlyphiml


170       SYBTA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


^=      AhTgj-ad'osf:]

THE

^--^'

ARVAD  ISLANDS

^em   Renan.

^^

4

=^

^J^^^^^--^^^Si^

J    ,      Enhydra  ?

=Bnh-K17rra^

1

^™     j

^

^^^==

\  NJ2:A=B!i.

\lVlaYath

A        «'

f==#=H=b-l«

Istand==^

;\

huddled  together  on  an  ishmd  some  two  miles  from  tiie  coast :  it  was  only
about  a  thousand  yards  in  circumference,  and  the  houses,  as  though  to  make

up  for  the  limited  space  available  for  their
foundations,  rose  to  a  height  of  five  stories.*
An  Astarte  reigned  there,  as  also  a  sea-
Baal,  half  man,  half  fish,  but  not  a  trace
of  a  temple  or  royal  palace  is  now  to  be
found.^  The  whole  island  was  surrounded  by
a  stone  wall,  built  on  the  outermost  ledges
of  the  rocks,  which  were  levelled  to  form
its  foundation.  The  courses  of  the  masonry
were  irregular,  laid  without  cement  or  mortar
of  any  kind.  Tliis  bold  piece  of  engineering
served  the  double  purpose  of  sea-wall  and
rampart,  and  was  thus  fitted  to  withstand
alike  the  onset  of  hostile  fleets  and  the
surges  of  tlie  Mediterranean.^  There  was
no  potable  water  on  the  island,  and  for
drinking  purposes  the  inhabitants  were
obliged  to  rely  on  the  fall  of  rain,  which  they  stored  in  cisterns — still  in  use
among  their  descendants.*  In  the  event  of  prolonged  drought  they  were  obliged
to  send  to  the  mainland  opposite ;  in  time  of  war  they  had  recourse  to  a  sub-
marine spring,  which  bubbles  up  in  mid-channel.  Their  divers  let  down  a  leaden
bell,  to  the  top  of  which  was  fitted  a  leathern  pipe,  and  applied  it  to  the  orifice
of  the  spring ;  the  fresh  water  coming  up  through  the  sand  was  collected  in  this
bell,  and  rising  in  the  pipe,  reached  the  surface  uncontamiuated  by  salt  water.®

Inscription  of  the  Obelisk  of  the  Atmeiddn  at  Constantinople,  p.  9,  note  30),  who,  with  Hincks,  at  first
saw  in  the  name  a  reference  to  the  peoples  of  Ararat  (^Ohservations  oh  the  Statistical  Tablet  of  Karnak,
pp.  14,  15);  Birch's  identification,  adopted  by  Brugsoh  (Geogr.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  p.  35),  is  now  accepted  by
all  Egyptologists.  The  name  is  written  Aruada  or  Arada  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  (Bezold-
BuDGE,  The  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  p.  lis.,  n.  1  ;  cf.  Bezold,  Oriental  Diplo-
maaj,  p.  xii.,  §  4,  as  to  the  reading  of  one  of  the  signs  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  name).

'  The  ancient  Arvad  of  the  Grseoo-Eoman  period  has  been  described  by  Strabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  13,
p.  754 ;  for  details  in  regard  to  the  modern  Arvad,  see  Kenan,  Mission  de  Ph^nicie,  pp.  19-42.

^  The  Arvad  Astarte  had  been  identified  by  the  Egyptians  with  their  goddess  Bastit  (Kenan,
Mission  de  Phenieie,  pp.  56,  57;  cf.  Bsogsch,  Die  fremde  Aphrodite  in  Memphis,  in  tbe  Zeitschrift,
1863,  p.  9).  The  sea-Baal,  who  has  been  connected  by  some  with  Dagon  of  Askalon,  is  represented  on  the
earliest  Arvadian  coins :  cf.  one  of  them  on  the  preceding  page.  He  has  a  fisli-like  tail,  tlie  body  and
bearded  head  of  a  man,  with  au  Assyrian  head-dress ;  on  his  breast  we  sometimes  find  a  circular
opening  which  seems  to  show  the  entrails  (Babelon,  Les  Perses  Ach^mfnides,  les  Satrapes  et  les
Dynastes  tributaires  de  leur  Empire,  Ci/pre  et  Ph^nicie,  pp.  cliv.-clvl.,  and  pi.  ssii.,  Nos.  1-G).

'  The  antiquity  of  the  wall  of  Arvad,  recognised  by  travellers  of  the  last  century,  is  now  universally
admitted  by  all  archieologists  (Kenan,  Mission  de  Phe'nicie,  pp.  39,  40  ;  Perrot-Chipiez,  Hisloire  de
VArt  dans  VAntiquitg,  vol.  iii.  p.  106).

<  STRABO.XVI.ii.,  §13,  p.  754;  cf.  what  is  said  as  to  these  cisterns  in  Ken.\n,  Mission,  etc.,  pp.  10-41.

'  Stkabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  13,  p.  754.  Kenan,  Mission  de  Phinicie,  pp.  41,  42,  tells  us  that  "M.
Gaillardot,  when  crossing  from  the  island  to  the  mainland,  noticed  a  spring  of  sweet  water  bubbling
up  from  the  bottom  of  the  sen.  .  .  .  Thomson  and  Walpole  noticed  the  same  spring  or  similar  springs
a  little  to  the  north  of  Tortosa."


j


ABAD,   MARATH,    SIMYRA.  171

The  harbour  opened  to  the  east,  facing  the  mainland :  it  was  divided  into  two
basins  by  a  stone  jetty,  and  was  doubtless  insufScient  for  the  sea-traffic,  but
this  was  the  less  felt  inasmuch  as  there  was  a  safe  anchorage  outside  it — the

best,  perhaps,  to  be  found  in
these  waters.^  Opposite  to
Arvad,  on  an  almost  continu-
ous line  of  coast  some  ten  or
twelve  miles  in  length,  towns
and  villages  occurred  at  short
intervals,    such     as    Maratli,


PART   OP    THE    RUINS   OF   THE    OLD   PHCENICIAN    WALL    OF    ARVAD."

Antarados,  Enhydra,  and  Karne,  into  which  the  surplus  population  of  the  island
overflowed.  Karne  possessed  a  harbour,  and  would  have  been  a  dangerous
neighbour  to  the  Arvadians  had  they  themselves  not  occupied  and  carefully
fortified  it.^  The  cities  of  the  dead  lay  close  together  in  the  background,
on  the  slope  of  the  nearest  chain  of  hills ;  *  still  further  back  lay  a  plain
celebrated  for  its  fertility  and  the  luxuriance  of  its  verdure  :  Lebanon,  with  its
wooded  peaks,  was  shut  in  on  the  north  and  south,  but  on  the  east  the  mountain
sloped  downwards  almost  to  the  sea-level,  furnishing  a  pass  through  which  ran
the  road  which  joined  the  great  military  highway  not  far  from  Qodshu.^  The
influence  of  Arvad  penetrated  by  means  of  this  pass  into  the  valley  of  the

'  Eenax,  Mission  de  Phenicie,  p.  40 ;  W.  Allan,  On  the  Island  of  Ruad,  North  Syria,  in  Journ.
Geogr.  Society,  vol.  xxiii.  pp.  154,  15.5,  who  was  the  first  to  determine  the  divisions  of  the  hiirbour.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  engraving  published  iu  Renan's  Mission  de  Fh^nicie,  pi.  2.

'  Maratli,  now  Amrit,  possesses  some  ancient  ruins  which  have  been  described  at  some  length  by
Ucnan  (Misxion  de  I'henicv',  p.  43,  et  seq.).  Antarados,  which  prior  to  the  Grajco-Roinan  era  was  a
place  of  no  importance  (Ptolemy,  V.  xv.  16),  occupies  the  site  of  Tortosa  (Kenan,  Mission  de
PMnicie,  pp.  20,  21,  47,  et  seq.).  Enhydra  (Strabo,  L.  XVI.  ii.,§  12,  p.  7.53)  is  not  known,  and  Karne
has  been  replaced  by  Kiirnftn  to  the  north  of  Tortosa  (Renan,  Mission  de  Flti'nicie,  pi).  21,  22).
None  of  the  "  neighlraurs  of  .\rados"  (oi  'ApaSc^  -wpiiroiKoi,  Arrian,  Anah.,  11.  xiii.  17)  are  mentioned
by  name  in  the  A.ssyrian  texts;  but  W.  Max  Miiller  has  with  great  ingenuity  demonstrated  that  the
Egyptian  form  Aratut  or  Andiut  corresponds  with  a  Semitic  plural  ArinxdGl,  and  consequently  referjj
not  only  to  Arad  itself,  but  also  to  the  fortified  cities  and  towns  which  formed  its  continental  .suburbs
{Asien  and  Kiiropa,  pp.  18G,  187).

'  Rexan,  Mission  de  I'hinicic,  pp.  75-80.

•■'  In  regard  to  this  pass,  see  what  is  said  on  pp.  138-141,  sw^ira.


172      SYBIA    AT   TBE  BJiGlNNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

Orontes,  and  is  believed  to  have  gradually  extended  as  far  as  Hamath  itself —
in  other  words,  over  the  whole  of  Zahi.^  For  the  most  part,  however,  its  rule
was  confined  to  the  coast  between  Gabala  and  the  Nahr  el-Kebir ;  Simyra  at
one  time  acknowledged  its  suzerainty,  at  another  became  a  self-supporting
and  independent  state,  strong  enough  to  compel  the  respect  of  its  neighbours.^
Beyond  the  Orontes,  the  coast  curves  abruptly  inward  towards  the  west,  and
a  group  of  wind-swept  hills  ending  in  a  promontory  called  Phaniel,^  the
reputed  scene  of  a  divine  manifestation,  marked  the  extreme  limit  of  Aradian
influence  to  the  north,  if,  indeed,  it  ever  reached  so  far.  Half  a  dozen  obscure
cities  flourished  here,  Arka,*  Siani,^  Mahallat,  Kaiz,  Maiza,  and  Botrys,^  some
of  them  on  the  seaboard,  others  inland  on  the  bend  of  some  minor  stream.
Botrys,''  the  last  of  the  six,  barred  the  roads  which  cross  the  Phaniel  headland,
and  commanded  the  entrance  to  the  holy  ground  where  Byblos  and  Berytus
celebrated  each  year  the  amorous  mysteries  of  Adonis.

Gublu,  or — as  the  Greeks  named  it — Byblos,"^  prided  itself  on  being  the
most  ancient  city  in  the  world.^     The  god  El  had  founded  it  at  the  dawning

'  Stephen  of  Bizanticm,  s.v.  'Zwicjiiveia,  where  the  town  is  said  to  be  iv  neBopwis  rwy  'ApaSiaif.

■  Simyra  is  the  modern  Sumrah,  near  tlie  Nalir  el-Kebir;  it  was  already  known  from  the  passage
in  Gen.  x.  18,  when  E.  de  Kouge'  discovered  a  reference  to  it  in  the  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III.  (^Notice
de  quelques  fragments  de  Vlmcription  de  Karnak,  pp.  15,  note  5,  24).

"  The  name  has  only  come  down  to  us  under  its  Greek  form,  @iov  trpSauTrov,  the  Face  of  God
(ScTLAX,  §  104,  in  MuLLEK-DiDOT,  Geographi  Graeci  Minores,  vol.  i.  p.  78 ;  Strabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  15,
p.  754),  but  its  original  form,  Phaniel  or  Pendel,  is  easily  arrived  at  from  the  analogous  name  used  in
Canaan  to  indicate  localities  where  there  had  been  a  theophany  (Gen.  xxxii.  22-31).  Renan  questions
whether  Phaniel  ought  not  to  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Pne-Baal  of  the  Carthaginian  in-
scriptions, and  applied  to  a  goddess  to  whom  the  promontory  had  been  dedicated  ;  he  also  suggests
that  the  modern  name  Cap  Madorme  may  be  a  kind  of  echo  of  the  title  Rabbath  borne  by  this  goddess
from  the  earliest  times  (iUsssion  de  Phenicie,  p.  145).

'  Arka  is  perhaps  referred  to  in  the  tablets  of  Tel  el-Amarna  under  the  form  Irkata  or  Irkat
(BEZOLD-BrDGE,  Tlw  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  p.  Ixxii.)  ;  it  also  appears  in  the
Bible  {Gen.  x.  17)  and  in  the  Assyrian  texts  (Fk.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  282).  It  is
the  Cffisarea  of  classical  geographers,  which  has  now  resumed  its  old  Phrenician  name  of  Tell-Arka
(Kenan,  Mission  de  la  Phenicie,  pp.  115,  116).

=  Sianu  or  Siani  is  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  texts  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  t
p.  282)  and  in  the  Bible  {Gen.  x.  17)  ;  Strabo  knew  it  under  the  name  of  Sinna  (XVI.  ii.,  §  IS,  p.  755),
and  a  village  near  Arka  was  called  Sin  or  Syn  as  late  a.s  the  XV"'  century  (B.  ton  Breydenbach,
Beise  des  Heiligen  Landes,  vol.  i.  p.  115).

"  According  to  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  these  were  the  names  of  the  three  towns  which  formed
the  Tripolis  of  Grajco-Eoman  times  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  TI'o  lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  282,  283).

■  Botrys  is  the  hellenized  form  of  the  name  Bozruna  or  Bozrun,  which  appears  on  the  tablets  of
Tel  el-Amarna  (Bezold-Budge,  Tablets  of  Tell  el-Amarna,  p.  Ixxiii.) ;  the  modern  name,  Butrun  or
Batrun,  preserves  the  final  letter  which  the  Greeks  had  dropped.

»  Gublu  or  Gubli  is  the  pronunciation  indicated  for  this  name  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets
(Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  p.  148) ;  the  Egyptians  transcribed  it  Kupuna  or  Kupna  by
substituting  n  for  1,  as  Chabas  was  the  first  to  point  out  {Voyage  d'un  Egyptien,  pp.  157-161).  The
Greek  name  Byblos  was  obtained  from  Gublu  by  substituting  a  b  for  the  g,  as  in  0\i^afov  from
yhf^apov,  eyelid  (Kenan,  Mission  de  Phenicie,  p.  153).

"  Phjlo  op  Byblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  17,  in  Mtjller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  568;  of.
Stephen  of  Byzantium,  s.v.  Bu/SAds,  TriiAis  ^otvln-ns  apxa-Mrar-q  iraaHv.  The  distinction  between  the
two  sites  successively  occupied  by  the  town,  one  of  which  was  supposed  to  be  preserved  in  the  name
PaL-ebyblos  (Movers,  Des  Phonizische  Alierthum,  vol.  i.  pp.  108,  109),  is  now  no  longer  admitted
(Kenan,  Mission  de  Phenicie,  pp.  3S2-335 ;  Pietschmann,  Geschichte  der  Phonizier,  p.  48).


BYBLOS  AND   HIS    TEMPLE.


178


THE  TEMPLE   OF    BTBLOS.'


of  time,  on  the  flank  of  a  hill  which  is  visible  from  some  distance  out  at
sea.'  A  small  bay,  now  filled  up,  made  it  an  important  shipping  centre.-
The  temple  stood  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  a  few  fragments  of  its  walls  still
serving  to  mark  the  site ;  it  was,  perhaps,  identical  with  that  of  which  we
find  the  plan  engraved  on  certain  imperial  coins.^  Two  flights  of  steps  led
up  to  it  from  the  lower  quarters  of  the  town,  one
of  which  gave  access  to  a  chapel  in  the  Greek
style,  surmounted  by  a  triangular  pediment,  and
dating,  at  the  earliest,  from  tlie  time  of  the  Se-
leucides ;  the  other  terminated  in  a  long  colon-
nade, belonging  to  the  same  period,  added  as  a
new  fapade  to  an  earlier  building,  apparently  in
order  to  bring  it  abreast  of  more  modern  require-
ments. The  sanctuary  which  stands  hidden  be-
hind this  incongruous  veneer  is,  as  represented
on  the  coins,  in  a  very  archaic  style,  and  is  by  no
means  wanting  in  originality  or  dignity.  It  con-
sists of  a  vast  rectangular  court  surrounded  by  cloisters.  At  the  point  where
lines  drawn  from  the  centres  of  the  two  doors  seem  to  cross  one  another  stands
a  conical  stone  mounted  on  a  cube  of  masonry,  which  is  the  beth-el  animated  by
the  spirit  of  the  god :  an  open-work  balustrade  surrounds  and  protects  it  from
the  touch  of  the  profane.  The  building  was  perhaps  not  earlier  than  the  Assyrian
or  Persian  era,  but  in  its  general  plan  it  evidently  reproduced  the  arrangements
of  some  former  edifice.^  At  an  early  time  El  was  spoken  of  as  the  first  king
of  Gablu  in  the  same  manner  as  each  one  of  his  Egyptian  fellow-gods  had  been
in  their  several  nomes,  and  the  story  of  his  exploits  formed  the  inevitable  pre-
lude to  the  beginning  of  human  history.''    Grandson  of  Eiiun  who  had  brought

'  Stuabo,  XVI.  i.,  §  18,  p.  756  :  KelTUi  8'  itp'  '^ou!  rwhs  ixiKphv  &irae(V  tt)!  floAoTT))?.  The  present
condition  of  tlie  town  is  described  tit  some  length  by  Renan,  Mission  de  Ph^nicie,  pp.  153-174.

^  Renan,  Mission  de  PMnicie,  pp.  159-161 ;  the  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III.  mention  Giblito  ships
(Jcupniu)  which  sailed  to  Egypt  (Brcgsoh,  Geschichte  /T'gijplens,  p.  316).

'  Renan,  Mission  de  Ph€nicie,  pp.  173-180,  carried  out  excavations  in  the  hill  of  Kasaubah  which
brought  to  light  some  remains  of  a  Grseco-Roman  temple  :  lie  puts  forward,  subject  to  correction,  the
hypothesis  which  I  liave  adopted  above.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin.  from  the  original  in  tlic  Cabinet  des  Me'dailles ;  of.  Babelon,  Les
Perses  Ach^m^nides,  pi.  xxxii.,  Nos.  11,  12.

'  The  author  of  the  De  Ded  Syrd  classed  the  temple  of  Byblos  among  tlie  Plioonician  temples  of
the  old  order,  which  were  almost  as  ancient  as  the  temples  of  Egypt,  Ipa  .  .  .  ov  irapct  tto\\i  toTs  alyvirTloidi
iiroxpoviotiTo.  (§  2-9),  and  it  is  probable  that  from  the  Egyptian  epoch  onwards  tlie  plan  of  this  temjilo
must  have  been  that  shown  on  the  coins  ;  the  cloister  arcades  ought,  however,  to  be  represented  l)y
pillars  or  by  columns  supporting  architraves,  and  the  fact  of  their  presence  leads  me  to  the  conclusion
that  the  temple  did  not  exist  in  the  form  known  to  iis  at  a  date  earlier  than  the  last  Assyrian  period.
Cf.  Pebbot-Chii'IEZ,  nidoire  de  I'Art  dans  I'Antiguittf,  vol.  iii.  pp.  247-219.

"  TIds  concept  of  his  history  forms  the  Imsis  of  one  of  tlie  Phmniciau  cosmogonies  recorded  by
Sanchoniathon  (I'niLO  of  Bybi.os,  Frar/m.  2,  §  12-27,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec,  vol.  iii.
pp.  567-569).


174       SYRIA   AT   TBE  BEGINNING    OF    THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.


Chaos  into  order,  son  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  he  dispossessed,  vanquished,
and  mutilated  his  father,  and  conquered  the  most  distant  regions  one  after
another — the  countries  beyond  the  Euphrates,  Libya,  Asia  Minor  and  Greece :
one  year,  when  the  plague  was  ravaging  his  empire,  he  burnt  his  own  son
on  the  altar  as  an  expiatory  victim,  and  from  that  time  forward  the  priests

took  advantage  of  his  example  to  demand  the  sacri-
fice of  children  in  moments  of  public  danger  or
calamity.^  He  was  represented  as  a  man  with  two
faces,  whose  eyes  opened  and  shut  in  an  eternal
alternation  of  vigilance  and  repose :  six  wings  grew
from  his  shoulders,  and  spread  fan-like  around  him.-
He  was  the  incarnation  of  time,  which  destroys  all
things  in  its  rapid  flight;  and  of  the  summer  sun,
cruel  and  fateful,  which  eats  up  the  green  grass  and
parches  the  fields.  An  Astarte  reigned  with  him
over  Byblos— Baalat-Gublu,  his  own  sister ;  like  him,  the  child  of  Earth  and
Heaven.''  In  one  of  her  aspects  she  was  identified  with  the  moon,  the  per-
sonification of  coldness  and  chastity,  and  in  her  statues  or  on  her  sacred  pillars  °
she  was  represented  with  the  crescent  or  cow-horns  of  the  Egyptian  Hathor ;  •*
but  in  her  other  aspect  she  appeared  as  the  amorous  and  wanton  goddess  in
whom  the  Greeks  recognised  the  popular  concept  of  Aphrodite.  Tradition
tells  us  how,  one  spring  morning,  she  caught  sight  of  and  desired  the  youthful
god  known  by  the  title  of  Adoni,  or  "My  Lord."'     We  scarce  know  what  to


THE   GOD    EL    OF   BYBLOS.^


'  PuiLO  OP  Byblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  24,  3-5,  in  Mf  ller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grasc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  569
570,  571.

=  Philo  of  Btblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  26,  iu  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  569,  where  it
is  stated  that  the  third  pair  of  wings  is  on  ihe  head  of  the  god,  eVl  -rfis  Ke(pa\fis  ;  the  figure  reproduced
on  the  coiua  show  the  wings  rising  to  the  right  an<i  left  of  the  head,  but  they  are  attached  to  the
god's  shoulders.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles ;  of.  Baeelon,  les
Perses  Ach^m^nides,  pi.  xsvii.,  Nos.  4-7.     The  coin  is  shown  twice  its  natural  size.

*  Philo  of  Btblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  19, 20,  in  Mcllee-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  569.  She
is  mentioned  under  her  title  Bilti  shd  Gublu  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  despatches  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell
el-Amarna  TaUets,  pi.  12,  11.  2,  3,  14, 11.  3,  15, 1.  4).

^  The  sacred  pillar  is  shown  on  a  stele  of  the  XX"'  dynasty  in  the  Turin  Museum  (Maspeko,
Bapport  eur  une  Mission  en  Italic,  in  the  Recueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  ii.  p.  120).

«  Philo  of  Btblos,  Fragm.  2,  §  24,  in  MIller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  569,  where
we  are  told  how  Astarte  put  on  her  head  the  head  of  a  bull  as  a  badge  of  royalty,  eVefljjKe  t>7  ISia
Ke(pa\rj  ffa(Ti\ilas  Trapd(niij.oy  K«f)a\T]v  ravpov.  The  Egyptian  monuments,  which  assign  to  Hathor  the
title  of  mistress  of  Byhlos,  show  us  what  the  goddess  was  supposed  to  bo  like  from  the  XX*  dynasty
onwards  (JIaspebo,  Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'Histoire,  in  the  Pecueil  de  Tracaux,
vol.  ii.  p.  120,  and  iu  Eajiport  sur  une  Mission  en  Italie,  ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  140).  Baaltis  is  also  shown  in
the  character  of  Hathor  on  a  stele  of  Jehavmelek,  King  of  Byblos,  in  the  Persiau  era  (Corp.  Ins.  Semit.,
vol.  i.  pi.  i.,  and  p.  1  ;  cf.  Eenan,  Mission  de  Ph£nicie,  p.  179).

'  The  Cypriote  form  of  the  name  Adonis  was  Guuas  (TzETzfes,  In  Lycophrontem,  v.  S3),  which
Movers  (art.  PhSnizien,  iu  Ersch-Gbcber's  Encyclopedia,  p.  390)  considers  to  be  a  Semitic  word
meaning  the  exalted,  high  one.  Movers  {Die  PhSnizier,  p.  542,  et  seq.),  Fr.  Lenormant  {Ldtres
Assi/riologiques,  pp.  192-196),  Baudissin  (Studien  zur  Semitischen  Peligionsgeschichte,  vol.  i.  p.  205,


AFEAKA   AND    THE    VALLEY   OF  NAIIR-IBRAEIM.  175

make  of  the  origin  of  Adonis,  and  of  the  legends  which  treat  bim  as  a  hero — the

representation  of  him  as  the  incestuous  offspring  of  a  certain  KingKinyras  and

his  own  daughter  Myrrha  is  a  comparatively  recent  element  grafted  on  the

original  myth  ;  at  any  rate,  the  happiness  of  the  two  lovers  had  lasted  but  a  few

short  weeks  when  a  sudden  end  was  put  to  it  by  the  tusks  of  a  monstrous  wild

boar.     Baalat-Cniblu  wept  over  her  lover's  body  and  buried  it;   then  her  grief

triumphed  over  death,  and  Adonis,  ransomed  by  her  tears,  rose  from  the  tomb,

his  love  no  whit  less  passionate  than  it  had  been  before  the  catastrophe.^

This   is   nothing   else   than   the   Chaldtean    legend    of    Ishtar  and   Dumiizi

presented  in  a  form   more  fully  symbolical  of  the  yearly  marriage  of  Earth

and  Heaveu.     Like  the  Lady  of  Byblos  at  her  master's  approach.  Earth  is

thrilled  by  the  first  breath  of  spring,  and  abandons  herself  without  shame

to  the  caresses  of  Heaven :   she  welcomes  him  to  her  arms,  is  fructified  by

him,  and  pours  forth  the  abundance  of  her  flowers  and  fruits.     Then  comes

summer  and  kills  the  spring:  Earth  is  burnt  up  and  withers,  she  strips  herself

of  her  ornaments,  and  her  fruitfulness  departs  till  the  gloom  and  icy  numbness

of  winter  have  passed  away.     Each  year  the  cycle  of  the  seasons  brings  back

with  it  the  same  joy,  the  same  despair,  into  the  life  of  the  world ;  each  year

Baalat  falls  in  love  with  her  Adonis  and  loses  him,  only  to  bring  him  back

to  life  and  lose  him  again  in  the  coming  year.

The  whole  neighbourhood  of  Byblos,  and  that  part  of  Mount  Lebanon  in

which  it  lies,  were  steeped  in  memories  of  this  legend  from  the  very  earliest

times.^     We  know  the  precise  spot  where  the  goddess  first  caught  sight  of  her

lover,  where  she  unveiled  herself  before  him,  and  where  at  the  last  she  buried

his  mutilated  body,  and  chanted  her  lament  for  the  dead.     A  river  which

flows  southward  not  far  ofl'  was  called  the  Adonis,^  and  the  valley  watered

by  it  was  supposed  to  have  been  the  scene  of  this  tragic  idyll.     The  Adonis

rises  near   Aphaka,^   at   the   base  of  a   narrow   amphitheatre,   issuing    from

the  entrance  of  an  irregular  grotto,  the  natural  shape  of  which  had,  at  some

remote  period,  been  altered  by  the  hand  of  man  ;  in  three  cascades  it  bounds

et  Beq.)  have  discussed  the  question  as  to  whether  the  proper  name  of  Adonis  was  not  lao  or  leuo.
That  of  Tammuz,  which  he  takes  after  his  death,  probably  came  to  him  through  Chaldfeaii  influence,
when  he  was  assimilated  to  Dumuzi  (cf.  Maspeko,  Daicn  vf  Civilization,  p.  G93,  et  seq.).

'  In  MoTEiiS,  Die  Phoiiider,  pp.  191-253,  542-5-15,  585,  et  seq.,  will  be  found  a  collection  of  texts
of  the  ancient  writers  who  enable  us  to  reconstitute  the  linal  forms  of  the  Adonis  legend.

'  As  to  this  aspect  of  Bjblos  and  of  the  localities  in  its  ueiglibnurhood,  cf.  what  Rknan  says  in
Mission  de  Ph^nicie,  yp.  210-222 ;  they  possessed  tlio  legend  from  the  very  earliest  times,  and  tlie  scribe
of  Ihe  Anaetaei  Papi/rus,  No.  l,pl.  xx.  7,  8,  speaking  of  them  in  the  time  of  Kamses  II.,  refers  to  Byblos
as  a  mysterious  city,  whose  tutelary  goddess  he  prefers  to  name  at  another  time,  being  no  doubt  actuated
by  the  same  motive  of  religious  discretion  which  deterred  Herodotus  from  uttering  tlie  name  of  Osiris
(CuAliAS,  Le  Yoijarje  d'un  £gyptien,  pp.  5G-G1 ;  cf.  W.  Max  Mijllkr,  Asien  unci  Euroj)a,  pp.  188-191).

'  Renan,  Mission  tie  Phenicie,  pp.  282-284.     Tliis  is  the  Nalir-lbrahim  (cf.  supra,  p.  9).

*  Aphaka  means  "spring"  in  Syriao  (Renan,  Mission  <le  Ph€nicie,  p.  299).  Thu  site  of  the
temple  and  town  of  Aphaka,  where  a  temple  of  Aplirodite  and  Adonis  still  stood  in  the  time  of  tlio
Emperor  Julian,  had   long  been   identified  (Sozojien,  Hist.   Kcclts.,  1.  ii.  5;  Zosiuus,  I.  i.,  Iviii. ;


17(i       SrRTA    AT   THE  BEGINNINQ    OF    THE   EGYPTIAN    CONQUEST.


VALLEY   OF   THE    ADONIS,    SEEN    FROM
THE    RUINS    OF    APHAKA.'


into  a  sort  of  circular  basin,
where  it  gathers  to  itself  the
waters  of  the  neighbouring  springs,  then  it  dashes  onwards  under  the  single  arch
of  a  Roman  bridge,  and  descends  in  a  series  of  waterfalls  to  the  level  of  the  valley
below.  The  temple  rises  opposite  the  source  of  the  stream  on  an  artificial
mound,  a  meteorite  fallen  from  heaven  having  attracted  the  attention  of  the
faithful  to  the  spot.  The  mountain  falls  abruptly  away,  its  summit  presenting  a
red  and  bare  appearance,  owing  to  the  alternate  action  of  summer  sun  and  winter
frost.  As  the  slopes  approach  the  valley  they  become  clothed  with  a  garb  of
wild  vegetation,  which  bursts  forth  from  every  fissure,  and  finds  a  foothold  on
every  projecting  rock  :  the  base  of  the  mountain  is  hidden  in  a  tangled  mass
of  glowing  green,  which  the  moist  yet  sunny  Spring  calls  forth  in  abundance
whenever  the  slopes  are  not  too  steep  to  retain  a  shallow  layer  of  nourishing
mould.  It  would  be  hard  to  find,  even  among  the  most  picturesque  spots  of
Europe,  a  landscape  in  which  wildness  and  beauty  are  more  happily  combined,
or  where  the  mildness  of  the  air  and  sparkling  coolness  of  the  streams  offer  a
more  perfect  setting  for  the  ceremonies  attending  the  worship  of  Astarte.-     In

EnsEBins,  Life  of  Constantine,  iii.  55)  either  with  Fakra  (Manneut,  Syrien,  p.  o21),  or  with  El-
Yamuni  (Seit,  Jerusalem  und  das  Heilige  Land,  vol.  ii.  p.  335).  Seetzen  was  the  tirst  to  place  it  at
El-Afka,  auil  his  pioposed  identification  lias  been  anipl_v  confirmed  by  the  researches  of  Renan
{Mission  de  PMnicie,  pp.  299,  300,  305-309).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  ;  cf.  Lortet,  La  Sijrie  d'aujourd'hui.  p.  649.

'  A  full  description  of  the  site  and  ruins  is  given  by  Kenan,  Mission  de  Ph^nicic,  pp.  295-301.
The  temple  had  been  rebuilt  during  the  Roman  period,  as  were  nearly  all  the  temples  of  this  region.


THE    AMI'lllTIiEATliE    (JF    AI'IIAKA    AND   THE    SOURCE   Of   THE    NAIlK-IIiliAlliM.

Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  n  [iliotograpli.


N


178      SYRIA   AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

the    basin   of   the    river    and    of    the    torrents    by   which    it    is    fed,  there

appears    a    succession  of  charming   and  romantic   scenes — gaping   chasms

with  precipitous  ochre-coloured  walls ;  nai-row  fields  laid  out  in  terraces  on

the    slopes,  or  stretching    in   emerald  strips  along    the    ruddy  river-banks;

orchards   thick  with   almond   and  walnut  trees;  sacred  grottoes,  into  which

the  priestesses,  seated   at   the   corner   of  the  roads,  endeavour   to   draw  tlie

pilgrims  as  they  proceed  on  their  way  to  make  their  prayers  to  the  goddess ;  ^

sanctuaries  and  mausolea  of  Adonis  at  Yanukh,  on  the  table-land  of  Mashnaka,

and  on  the  heights  of  Ghineh.^     According  to  the  common  belief,  the  actual

tomb  of  Adonis  was  to  be  found  at  Byblos  itself,^  where   the  people  were

accustomed  to  assemble  twice  a  year  to  keep  his  festivals,  which  lasted  for

several  days  together.*     At  the  summer  solstice,  the  season  when  the  wild

boar  had  ripped  open  the  divine  hunter,  and  the  summer  had  already  done

damage  to  the  spring,  the   priests  were   accustomed  to   prepare  a  painted

wooden  image  of  a  corpse  made  ready  for  burial,^  which  they  liid  in  what

were  called  the  gardens  of  Adonis — terra-cotta  pots  filled  with  earth  in  which

wheat  and  barley,  lettuce  and  fennel,  were  sown.     These  were  set  out  at  the

door  of  each  house,  or  in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  where  the  sprouting  plants

had  to  endure  the  scorching  effect  of  the  sun,  and  soon  withered  away.^     For

several  days  troops  of  women  and  young  girls,  with  their  heads  dishevelled  or

shorn,  tlieir  garments  in  rags,  their  faces  torn  with  their  nails,  their  breasts

and  arms  scarified  with  knives,  went  about  over  hill  and  dale  in  search  of  their

idol,  giving  utterance  to  cries  of  despair,  and  to  endless  appeals :  "  Ah,  Lord  !

Ah,  Lord !  what  is  become  of  thy  beauty." '    Once  having  found  the  image,  they

upon  the  site  of  a  more  ancient  stiucture;  tliis  was  probably  the  ediiico  which  the  author  of  De  Ded
Syrd  considered  to  be  the  temple  of  Venus,  built  by  Kinyras  withiu  a  day's  journey  of  Byblos  in  the
Lebanon.

'  Rcnan  points  out  at  Byblos  the  existence  of  one  of  these  caverns  which  gave  shelter  to  the
hedeshoth  (Mission  de  Pkenicie,  pp.  204,  653).  Many  of  the  caves  met  with  in  the  valley  of  the  Nahr-
Ibrablm  have  doubtless  served  for  the  same  purpose,  although  their  walls  contain  no  marlis  of  the  cult.

'  Kenan,  Mission  de  PhtTnicie,  pp.  284-295,  301,  302.

^  De  Ded  Syria,  §  6,  7  :  Melito  placed  it,  however,  near  Aphaka  (cf.  Eenan,  Meliton  is  Ep.  Sardium
Apolog.  ad  M.  Aurel  Imp.  Fragm.,  in  the  Spicilegium  Solesmense,  vol.  ii.  p.  43),  and,  indeed,  there
must  have  been  as  many  diiferent  traditions  on  the  subject  as  there  were  celebrated  sanctuaries.

*  For  the  date  and  the  ceremonies  peculiar  to  this  festival,  see  the  testimonies  of  ancient  authors
put  together  by  MovEns,  Die  Phonizier,  p.  205,  et  seq.  Tlie  analogy  wbicli  they  exhibit  with  the
fcstiv.ils  of  Osiris  in  the  month  of  Khoiak  (Lohtet,  Les  Fetes  d'Osiris  au  mois  de  Khoiali,  in  the
liecueil,  vol.  iii.  pp.  43-57 ;  vol.  iv.  pp.  21-33),  and  especially  the  rite  of  the  Gardens,  lead  me  to
believe  that  they  were  practically  the  same  at  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  conquest  and  that  of  tlie  Ciesars.

'  Plctauch,  Nicias,  §  S  :  etSwAa  veKpoTs  eKKaiJii(o/j.efois  o/iom ;  cf  Ammianus  Makcellixus,  xix.  1,
§  10:  "lectuli  .  .  .  figmenta  vehentes  homimim  mortuorum  ita  curate  polUncta  ut  et  imagines  essent
corporibus  jam  sepultis,"  where  the  context  shows  that  the  object  in  view  was  to  imitate  the  cere-
monial iiscd  at  the  burying  of  Adonis.

'  Hestchios,  s.v.  'ASdviSos  K7l7roi.  In  Greece  there  arose  in  later  times  a  proverb,  aKapir6Tfpos
'  AS U'PtSos  KTfnwv,  "  more  barren  than  the  gardens  of  Adonis"  (Scidas,  s.v.  'ASiiviSos  ktittoi).

"  Am.  MAnoELUNCs,  xix.  1,  §  10,  is  an  authority  for  the  seven  days'  search.  For  the  Nenise,  see
the  description,  'ASai'iij.aoiS6s,  which  Pollux  {Onomasticon,  bk.  iv.  §  1)  gives  of  them,  and  also  the
passage  in  which  Jeremiah  (xxii.  18,  cf.  xxxiv.  5)  threatens  King  Jehoiakim  that  he  will  not  receive
after  his  death  the  usual  honours ;  cf.  Movers,  Phonizier,  pp.  244-253.


THE  DEATH  AND   RESURRECTION  OF  ADONIS.  17!)

brouglit  it  to  the  feet  of  the  goddess,  washed  it  while  disphxying  its  wound,
anointed  it  with  sweet-smelling  unguents,  wrapped  it  in  a  linen  and  woollen
shroud,  placed  it  on  a  catafalque,  and,  after  expressing  around  tlie  bier  their
feelings  of  desolation,  according  to  the  rites  observed  at  funerals,  placed  it
solemnly  in  tlie  tomb.^  The  close  and  dreary  summer  passes  away.  With
the  first  days  of  September  the  autumnal  rains  begin  to  fall  upon  the  hills,
and  washing  away  the  ochreous  earth  lying  upon  the  slojjes,  descend  in  muddy
torrents  into  the  hollows  of  the  valleys.  The  Adonis  river  begins  to  swell
with  the  ruddy  waters,  which,  on  reaching  the  sea,  do  not  readily  blend  with
it.  The  wind  from  the  offing  drives  the  river  water  back  upon  the  coast,  and
forces  it  to  cling  for  a  long  time  to  the  shore,  where  it  forms  a  kind  of  crimson
fringe.'-*  This  was  the  blood  of  the  hero,  and  the  sight  of  this  precious  stream
stirred  up  anew  the  devotion  of  the  people,  who  donned  once  more  their  weeds
of  mourning  until  the  priests  were  able  to  announce  to  them  that,  by  virtue
of  their  supplications,  Adonis  was  brought  back  from  the  shades  into  new  life.^
Shouts  of  joy  immediately  broke  forth,  and  the  people  who  had  lately  sym-
pathized with  the  mourning  goddess  in  her  tears  and  cries  of  sorrow,  now
joined  with  her  in  expressions  of  mad  and  amorous  delight.  Wives  and  virgins
— all  the  women  who  had  refused  during  the  week  of  mourning  to  make  a
sacrifice  of  their  hair — were  obliged  to  atone  for  this  fault  by  putting  themselves
at  the  disposal  of  the  strangers  whom  the  festival  had  brought  together,  the
reward  of  their  service  becoming  the  property  of  the  sacred  treasury.^

Berytus  shared  with  Byblos  the  glory  of  having  had  El  for  its  founder.^
The  road  which  connects  these  two  cities  makes  a  lengthy  detour  in  its  course
along  the  coast,  having  to  cross  numberless  ravines  and  rocky  summits :  before
reaching  Palai-Byblos,  it  passes  over  a  headland  by  a  series  of  steps  cut  into  the
rock,  forming  a  kind  of  "  ladder  "  similar  to  that  which  is  encountered  lower
down,  between  Acre  and  the  plains  of  Tyre."    The  river  Lykos  runs  like  a  kind

'  Theocritus  has  described  in  his  fifth  Idyll  (The  Syracumns,  v.  78,  et  seq.)  the  laying  out  and
burial  of  Adonis  as  it  was  practised  at  Alexandria  in  Egypt  in  the  III"'  century  before  our  era.

'  De  Deri  Sijru,  §  8.  The  tame  phenomenon  occurs  in  spring.  Mauudrell  {Voyaije,  pp.  57,  5S^
saw  it  on  March  17,  and  Renan  {Mission  de  Phenicic,  p.  283)  in  tlie  first  days  of  February.

'  De  Dm  Syrd,  §  G  ;  cf.  MovEKs,  Die  Phiinizier,  pp.  201,  205.

'  De  Ded  Sijra,  §  G  ;  cf.  for  a  sinular  rite  at  Babylon,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  630,  640.  A
similar  usage  was  found  in  later  times  in  tlie  countries  colonised  by  or  subjected  to  the  influence  of
the  Pliconicians,  especially  in  Cyprus  (Excel,  Kyjiros,  vol.  i.  p.  142,  et  seq.).

'  Stephen  OP  Byzantium,  s.v.  BnpvTis.  Tlie  name  Berytus  was  found  by  Hiucks  in  tlie  Egyptiiin
texts  (An  Attimpt  to  ascirlain  the  Number,  etc.,  of  the  Ilierofibjjihic  Aljihabct,  p.  47)  under  the  form
Birutu,  Beirutu;  it  occurs  frequently  in  the  Tel  el-Aiuarua  tablets  (Bezold-Buuge,  The  Tell  el-
Amarna  Tabids  in  the  ISritiah  Museum,  p.  xlvi.).

«  This  is  tlie  kMixci^  of  Strabo  (XIV.  ii.,  §  1!),  p.  755),  which  Eenan  (Mission  de  Phenicie,  pp.  333,
334)  places  "on  the  flank  of  the  mountain  wliicli  forms  the  nortliern  side  of  the  bay  of  Juni,  and
which  takes  the  form  of  a  staircase  in  a  gorge  of  the  rocks;  "  ho  is  inclined  to  place  Palai-Byblos  at
the  modern  village  of  Sarbah  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  332,  333).  The  name  I'alai-Byblos  contains  probably
a  Phcenician  word   Which  the   Greeks  wrongly  identified  with  iroAcucis  (Movers,  Das  PhBnizitehe


180      SYBIA    AT  THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

of  natural  fosse  along  the  base  of  this  steep  headland.  It  forms  at  the  present
time  a  torrent,  fed  by  the  melting  snows  of  Mount  Sanuiu,  and  is  entirely
unnavigable.  It  was  better  circumstanced  formerly  in  this  respect,  and  even  in
the  early  years  of  the  Eoman  conquest,  sailors  from  Arvad  (Arados)  were  accus-
tomed to  sail  up  it  as  far  as  one  of  the  passes  of  the  lower  Lebanon,  leading  into
Coele-Syria.''  Berytus  was  installed  at  the  base  of  a  great  headland  which  stands
out  boldly  into  the  sea,  and  forms  the  most  striking  promontory  to  be  met
with  in  these  regions  from  Carmel  to  the  vicinity  of  Arvad.  The  port  is
nothing  but  an  open  creek  with  a  petty  roadstead,  but  it  has  the  advantage
of  a  good  supply  of  fresh  water,  which  pours  down  from  the  numerous  springs
to  which  it  is  indebted  for  its  name."  According  to  ancient  legends,  it
was  given  by  El  to  one  of  his  offspring  called  Poseidon^  by  the  Greeks.
Adonis  desired  to  take  possession  of  it,  but  was  frustrated  in  the  attempt,
and  the  maritime  Baal  secured  the  permanence  of  his  rule  by  marrying  one
of  his  sisters — the  Baalat-Beyrut  who  is  represented  as  a  nymph  on  GriECO-
Eoman  coius.^  The  rule  of  the  city  extended  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the
Tamur,  and  an  old  legend  narrates  that  its  patron  fought  in  ancient  times
with  the  deity  of  that  river,  hurling  stones  at  him  to  prevent  his  becoming
master  of  the  land  to  the  north.  The  bar  formed  of  shingle  and  the
dunes  which  contract  the  entrance  were  regarded  as  evidences  of  this  con-
flict.^ Beyond  the  southern  bank  of  the  river,  Sidon  sits  enthroned  as
"  the  firstborn  of  Canaan."  In  spite  of  this  ambitious  title  it  was  at  first
nothing  but  a  poor  fishing  village  founded  by  Bel,  the  Agenor  of  the  Greeks,
on  the  southern  slope  of  a  spit  of  land  which  juts  out  obliquely  towards  the

Alterthum,  vol.  i.  p.  106,  note  101  ;  Renan,  Migsion  de  Fh€nicie,  p.  577 ;  Pietschmann,  GeschiMe
der  FhSnhier,  p.  48).

'  Strabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  6,  p.  755.  Ecuan  {Mission,  etc.,  p.  342  ;  of.  Pietschmaxx,  Ges.  der  ritonlzier,
p.  50)  does  not  accept  the  testimony  of  Strabo,  while  other  historians  regard  it  as  correct  (Kexrick,
Fhccnicia,  pp.  12,  13),  and  modern  geologists  have  pointed  out  on  the  banks  of  this  small  river  traces
of  the  waters  having  once  attained  a  higher  level  than  at  present.  The  Due  de  Luynes  has  shown
that  the  jweseut  name,  Nahr  el-Kelb,  probably  preserves  the  chief  element — Kelb — of  the  ancient
name  which  the  Greeks  rendered  hvKhs,  "  wolf"  {Voyage  d'explor.  aidour  de  la  mer  Morte,  vol.  i.  p.  9,
n.  1);  cf.  p.  9,  note  5,  of  the  present  work.

=  The  name  Beyrnt  has  been  often  derived  from  a  Pheuician  word  signifying  cypress,  and  which
may  have  been  applied  to  the  pine  tree  (Eexan,  Mission,  etc.,  pp.  352,  353).  The  Phoenicians  tliem-
selvcs  derived  it  from  Bir,  "wells;  "  cf.  Stephem  of  Byzaxtiuji,  s.v.  Bripvris,  €K\i)flr)  5ia  to  tiluSpoi''
j37;p  yap  rb  (ppeap  Tzap^  ahrois,

'  PaiLO  BvELirs,  Fragm.  2,  §  25,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  p.  569.

•  The  poet  Nonnus  {Dioiiysiaca,  11.  xli.-xliii.)  has  preserved  a  highly  embellished  account  of  this
rivalry,  where  Adonis  is  called  Dionysos ;  for  the  coins  of  Berytus,  on  whicli  the  nymph  appears,
cf.  Babelok,  Les  Perses  Ach€m€nides,  pi.  xxv..  No.  23,  and  pp.  ISO,  ISO.

'  The  original  name  appears  to  have  been  Tamur,  Tamyr,  from  a  word  signifying  "  palm  "  in  the
Phoenician  language  (Schroder,  Die  FhSnizische  Sprache,  p.  135) ;  it  has  been  rendered  in  Greek
sometimes  by  Ao,uoupas  (PoLTBirs,  V.  Ixviii.  9),  sometimes  by  Tauvpas  (Strabo,  XVI.  ii.,  §  22,  p.  176).
The  myth  of  the  conflict  between  PoscidOn  and  the  god  of  the  river,  a  Baal-Demarous  (PiilLO
Bysi.ivs,  Fragm.  2,  §  22,  in  Mulleu-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  55S),  has  been  explained  by
Kenan  {Mission  de  FMnicie,  p.  515),  who  accepts  the  identification  of  the  river-deity  with  Baal-
Thamar,  already  mentioned  by  Movers  {Die  Phonizier,  pp.  661,  662).


BERTTUS,    SIDON  AND    ITS  NEIGEBOURHOOD.  181

south-west.^     It  grew  from  year  to  year,  spreading  out  over  the  plain,  and
became  at  length  one  of  the  most  prosperous  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  country
—a  "  mother  "  in  Phoenicia.^     The  port,  once  so  celebrated,  is  shut  in  by  three
chains  of  half-sunken  reefs,  which,  running  out  from  the  northern  end  of  the
peninsula,  continue  parallel  to  the  coast  for  some  hundreds  of  yards :  narrow
passages  in  tliese  reefs  afiord  access  to  the  harbour ;  one  small  island,  which
is  always  above  water,  occupies  the  centre  of  this  natural  dyke  of  rocks,  and
furnishes  a  site  for  a  maritime  quarter  opposite  to  the  continental  city.^      The
necropolis  on  the  mainland  extends  to  the  east  and  north,  and  consists  of  an
irregular  series  of  excavations  made  in  alow  line  of  limestone  cliffs  which  must
have  been  lashed  by  the  waves  of  the  Mediterranean  long  prior  to  the  beginning
of  history.     These  tombs  are  crowded  closely  together,  ramifying  into  an  in-
extricable maze,  and  are  separated  from  each  other  by  such  thin  walls  that  one
exi:)ects  every  moment  to  see  them  give  way,  and  bury  the  visitors  in  the
ruin.     Many  date  back  to  a  very  early  period,  while  all  of  them  have  been
re-worked  and  re-appropriated  over   and  over  again.      The  latest  occupiers
were  contemporaries  of  the  Macedonian  kings  or  the  Roman  Caesars.     Space
was  limited  and  costly  in  this  region  of  the  dead :  the  Sidonians  made  the
best   use   they  could    of  the    tombs,  burying  in  them  again  and  again,  as
the  Egyptians  were  accustomed  to  do   in   their  cemeteries   at   Thebes   and
3[emphis.*   The  surrounding  plain  is  watered  by  the  "  pleasant  Bostreuos,"  and
is  covered  with  gardens  which  are  reckoned  to  be  the  most  beautiful  in  all
Syria — at  least  after  those  of  Damascus:    their  praises  were  sung  even  in
ancient  days,  and  they  had  then  earned  for  the  city  the  epithet  of  "  the  flowery
Sidou."'     Here,  also,  an  Astarte  ruled  over  the  destinies  of  the  people,  but  a
chaste  and  immaculate  Astarte,  a  self-restrained  and  warlike  virgin,  sometimes
identified   with   the   moon,   sometimes   with    the    pale   and   frigid   morning

'  Sidon  is  called  "  the  firstborn  of  Canaan  "  in  Gen.  x.  15  ;  the  name  means  a  fishing-place,  as
the  classical  authors  already  knew — "nam  piscem  Phcenices  sklun  appellant"  (Justin,  xviii.  3,2;
cf.  Isidore  op  Seville,  Orighes,  xv.  1,  28,  where  the  passage  from  Justin  is  reproduced  almost
verbally).  Its  name  was  recoguised  in  the  Anastasi  Fapyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xx.  1.  8,  under  the  form
Ziduna,  by  Hincks  (An  Alt'  mpt  to  ascertain  tlie  Number,  etc.,  of  the  Uieroghjpliie  AJpliahet,  p.  45).  It
appears  frequently  in  the  Tel  el-Ainarna  tablets  (Bezold-Budge,  The  Tell  el-Aiuurna  Tahlets  ia  the
Britiih  Mnseum,  p.  xlvii.).

-  In  tlie  coins  of  classic  times  it  is  called  "Sidon,  the  mother — Om — of  Kambe,  Hippo,  Citium,
and  Tyre"  (Babelon,  Le>s  Perms  Achimenides,  pp.  236,  2;j7).

'  Kenan,  Mistion  de  rh^iiicie,  pp.  362,  363 ;  Gdkrin,  GaliUe,  vol.  ii.  pp.  488-506.  The  only
description  of  the  port  which  we  possess  is  tliat  in  the  romance  of  Clitophon  and  Leucippus  by
Achilles  Tatius  ;  Pietsclimaun  (Geseli.  der  PhiJnizier,  pp.  51-58)  has  commented  on  it  at  length,  and
has  endeavoured  to  reproduce  on  a  modern  map  its  diflerent  parts.

*  Excavations  were  made  at  these  cemeteries  some  thirty  years  ago,  and  the  results  described  by
Eenan  (Jflimion  de  Vhinicie,  p.  400,  et  .seq.).

*  DiONYSIOS,  Periefjesis,  1)12,  913:  Koi  StSt^i''  av&(fx6iffaav,  Naio^fv-tji'  ;^apt€i/Tos  e</)'  vSatri  BoTTp-qvoTu
(MCllkh-Didot,  Gcoij.  Graici  Minores,  vol.  ii.  p.  100).  The  BostronoB,  whicli  is  perhaps  to  be  recog-
nised under  the  form  Borinos  in  the  Pcriplus  of  Soylax  (Mii.LKU-UinoT,  ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  cxxxviii.),  is
the  modern  Nahr  ct-Awaly.


182      SYRIA    AT   TEE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

star.^  In  addition  to  this  goddess,  the  inhabitants  worshipped  a  Baal-Sidon,  and
other  divinities  of  milder  character — an  Astarte  Shem-Baal,  wife  of  the  supreme
Baal,  and  Eshmun,  a  god  of  medicine — each  of  whom  had  his  own  particular
temple  either  in  the  town  itself  or  in  some  neighbouring  village  in  the  mountain.*
Baal  delighted  in  travel,  and  was  accustomed  to  be  drawn  in  a  chariot  through  the
valleys  of  Phoenicia  in  order  to  receive  the  prayers  and  oiferings  of  his  devotees.^
The  immodest  Astarte,  excluded,  it  would  seem,  from  the  ofBcial  religion,  had  her
claims  acknowledged  in  the  cult  offered  to  her  by  the  people,  but  she  became
the  subject  of  no  poetic  or  dolorous  legend  like  her  namesake  at  Byblos,  and
there  was  no  attempt  to  disguise  her  innately  coarse  character  by  throwing
over  it  a  garb  of  sentiment.  She  possessed  in  the  suburbs  her  chapels  and
grottoes,  hollowed  out  in  the  hillsides,  where  she  was  served  by  the  usual
crowd  of  Ephehm  and  sacred  courtesans.''  Some  half-dozen  towns  or  fortified
villages,  such  as  Bitziti/'  the  Lesser  Sidon,  and  Sarepta,  were  scattered  along
the  shore,  or  on  the  lowest  slopes  of  the  Lebanon.  Sidonian  territory  reached
its  limit  at  the  Cape  of  Sarejita,  where  the  high-lands  again  meet  the  sea
at  the  boundary  of  one  of  those  basins  into  which  Phcenicia  is  divided.  Passing
beyond  this  cape,  we  come  first  upon  a  Tyrian  outpost,  the  Town  of  Birds ;  ^
then  upon  the  village  of  Nazana '  with  its  river  of  the  same  name ;  beyond
this  upon  a  plain  hemmed  in  by  low  hills,  cultivated  to  their  summits ;  then

'  Astarte  is  represented  in  the  Bible  as  tbo  goddess  of  the  Sidonians  (1  Kings  xi.  5,  !i3;  2  Kings
xxiii.  i;^),  and  she  is  in  fact  the  object  of  the  invocations  addressed  to  the  mistress  Deity  in  the
Sidonian  inscriptions  {Corpus  Inscript.  Semiticarum,  vol.  i.  pp.  21,  22),  the  patroness  of  the  town
(Johannes  Lydus,  Dh  Mensihus,  iv.  44;  Achilles  Tatius,  Leucippe  et  CUtophon,  bk.  i.  §  1).  Kings
and  queens  were  her  priests  and  priestesses  respectively  {Corp.  Ins.  Sem.,  vol.  i.  pp.  13,  20  ;  E.  Kenan,
Le  Sarcophage  cle  Tabnit  roi  de  Sidon,  pp.  2,  3).  For  the  character  of  this  Sidonian  goddess,  see
with  the  necessary  reserves,  Movers,  Die  rhiiuizier,  pp.  (i01-(j07.

"  These  deities  and  tlieir  temples  are  mentioned  in  the  inscription  of  Eshmunazar.  II.  IG-IS,  in
the  Corp.  Ins.  Sem.,  vol.  i.  pp.  13,  20.  As  to  Astarte  Shem-Baal,  see  M.  de  VoGiJK,  Met  d'Arch.
Oricntale,  pp.  54-50,  who  translates  it  "Astarte  Name  of  Baal."

=  He  is  represented  in  the  tail-piece  at  the  foot  of  the  table  of  contents  of  this  chapter,  p.  110  of
the  present  work  (cf.  Babelon,  Les  Perses  Achifin.,  pi.  xxxii.,  Nos.  10  and  15).

*  Renan  has  described  the  grottoes  consecrated  to  the  popular  Astarte  near  El-ZeStun  and
Magdushe',  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sidon  (Mission  de  Ph^nicie,  pp.  517,  51S).

^  Bitziti  is  not  mentioned  except  in  the  Assyrian  texts,  and  has  been  identified  by  Delitzsoh  {Wo
lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  284)  with  the  modern  region  Ain  ez-Zeitun  to  the  south-oast  of  Sidon  (Eenan,
Mission  de  PMnicie,  pp.  516,  517).  It  is  very  probably  the  Elaia  of  Pbilo  of  Byblos  {Fragm.  17,  in
MtJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grrrnc,  vol.  iii.  p.  575),  the  Elais  of  Dionysios  Periegetes  (Muller-Didot,
Geog.  Grieci  Min.,  vol.  ii.  p.  00),  which  Eenan  {Mission,  etc.,  pp.  525,  526)  is  inclined  to  identify  witli
Heldua,  Khan-Khaldi,  by  substituting  Eldis  as  a  correction  (Maspero,  De  Quelques  Locality's  voisines
de  Sidon,  in  the  Hecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  101,  102).  As  for  Little  Sidon,  known  to-day  as
Khurbet-Sidon,  see  Maspero,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  101, 102.  Sarepta  was  recognised  in  the  Egyptian
texts  for  the  first  time  by  Hincks,  An  Attempt  to  ascertain,  etc.,  of  the  Hieroglyphs,  p.  45.

"  The  Phoenician  name  of  Ornithoupolis  is  unknown  fo  us:  the  town  is  often  mentioned  by  the
geographers  of  classic  times,  Scylax  (MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Gcog.  Grmci  Min.,  vol.  i.  p.  78),  Strabo  (XVI.  ii.,
§  24,  p.  757),  Pliny  {H.  Nat.,  v.  17),  but  with  certain  differences,  some  placing  it  to  the  north  and
others  to  the  south  of  Sarepta.  It  was  near  to  the  site  of  Adlun,  the  Adnonum  of  the  Latin
itineraries,  if  it  was  not  actually  the  same  place.

'  Nazana  was  both  the  name  of  the  place  and  the  river,  as  Kasimlyeh  and  Khan  Kasimiyeh,  near
the  same  locality,  are  to-day.  It  is  known  only  from  the  Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  20, 11.  S-2I,  1.  I  ;
cf.  p.  5,  note  G,  of  the  present  work.


TTBE  AXD    THE  LEGEND    OF  ITS   FOUNDATION.  183

on  tombs  and  gardens  in  the  suburbs  of  Autu;i  and,  further  still,  to  a  fleet  of
boats  moored  at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore,  where  a  group  of  reefs  and
islands  furnishes  at  one  and  the  same  time  a  site  for  the  houses  and  temples
of  Tyre,  and  a  protection  from  its  foes.

It  was  already  an  ancient  town  at  the  beginning  of  the  Egyptian  conquest.^
As  in  other  places  of  ancient  date,  the  inhabitants  rejoiced  in  stories  of  the
origin  of  things  in  which  the  city  figured  as  the  most  venerable  in  the  world.^
After  the  period  of  the  creating  gods,  there  followed  imme-
diately, according  to  the  current  legends,  two  or  three  gene-
rations of  minor  deities — heroes  of  light  and  flame — who  had
learned  how  to  subdue  fire  and  turn  it  to  their  needs ;  then
a  race  of  giants,  associated  with  the  giant  peaks  of  Kasios,
Lebanon,  Hermon,  and  Brathy  ;  *  after  which  were  born  two

TUE  AMlilcu.-.lA.N   liOCKS

male  children — twins  :  Samemrum,  the  lord  of  the  supernal  and  olive  tree."
heaven,  and  Usoos,  the  hunter/''  Human  beings  at  this  time  lived  a  savage  life,
wandering  through  the  woods,  and  given  up  to  shameful  vices.  Samemrum  took
up  his  abode  among  them  in  that  region  which  became  in  later  times  the
Tyrian  coast,  and  showed  them  how  to  build  huts,  papyrus,  or  other  reeds  ;  Usoos
in  the  mean  time  pursued  the  avocation  of  a  hunter  of  wild  beasts,  living
upon  their  flesh  and  clothing  himself  with  their  skins.  A  conflict  at  length
broke  out  between  the  two  brothers,  the  inevitable  result  of  rivalry  between
the  ever-wandering  hunter  and  the  husbandman  attached  to  the  soil.     Usoos

'  Aulu  was  identified  by  BrHfjscli  {Geogr.  Insch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  43)  with  Avatha,  which  is  probably
El-Awwalin,  on  the  hill  facing  Tyre  (Renan,  31usiun,  etc.,  pp.  589-.'591 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Notes  siir
(liff^rents  points  de  Grammaire,  in  the  M^l.  d'Arch.  E(jijptienne  el  Assijrienne,  vol.  ii.  p.  293).  Max
MUlIer,  who  reads  the  word  as  Authu,  Ozu,  prefers  the  Uru  or  Ushu  of  the  Assyrian  texts  (^Asimi
und  Europa,  p.  19i),  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  consider  lower  down.

"  In  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  it  appears  under  the  form  Zuru,  Zurri  (Bezold-Bl'dge,  The  Tell
el-Amarna  Tablets  iii  British  Museum,  p.  Ivi.,  n.  2),  and  in  the  Egyptian  texts  with  tlie  transliteration
Znura,  Zauru  (^Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  I,  pi.  21,  1.  1  ;  cf.  Hincks,  An  Attempt,  etc.,  p.  15).  Dionysios
Periegetes  calls  it  wyvyij]  (,v.  911,  in  Muller-Didot,  Geog.  Greeci  Min.,  vol.  ii.  p.  100),  and  Strabo
(XVI.  ii.,  §  22,  p.  75(j)  apxc^'OTdr-n  irijAis  Tvpos.

'  Philo  Byblius,  Frai-jiii.  2,  §  7,  8,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Orxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  50G,  where
all  the  Tyrian  views  as  to  the  origin  of  the  city  are  given.

■"  The  identification  of  the  peak  of  Brathy  is  uncertain.  The  name  has  been  associated  with
Tabor  (Rena>i,  Mim.  sur  I'origine,  etc.,  de  V Histoire  ph^nicienne  qui  parte  le  nom  de  Sanclioniathon,
pp.  2li2,  270,  accepts  the  correction  proposed  by  Kolte  of  Bpaflu  into  At/Spaei) :  since  it  exactly  recalls
tlie  name  of  the  cypress  (Movers,  Die  Thonizier,  p.  57G)  and  of  Berytus,  it  would  be  more  prudent,
perhaps,  to  look  for  the  name  in  that  of  one  of  the  peaks  of  the  Lebanon  near  tlio  latter  town.

^  Some  editions  of  Philo  read  Mij^poC^os  for  the  name  of  the  first  brother,  which  has  led  to  a  com-
parison of  the  name  with  that  of  Lake  Huleh  (Movers,  Die  Fhouizier,  pp.  395,  667).  The  true  reading
is  2a/m)/upoC|Hos  6  Kal  'Tifoi/pai/ios,  which  agrees,  according  to  some,  with  the  shortened  form  of  Balsamem-
rum,  "the  high  lord  of  heaven"  (Schroder,  DieTliOn.  Sprache,iip.  131, 132);  according  to  otiiers,  more
probably  with  Shame-merum,  "  the  high  Uranus"  (Baudissin,  Stud,  zur  Sent.  Ueligionsg.,  vol.  ii.  p.  166,
n.  3;  Ftt.  Lenormant,  Lcs  Grig,  de  I' Hist.,  vol.  i.  p.  .539).  The  name  and  the  legend  of  Usoos,  the
hunter,  have  been  commonly  as.sociated  with  the  history  of  Ksau  (Movers,  Die  Vhunizier,  pp.  396,  397  ;
Uesan, M€moire,  etc.,  de  I'Hist.  I'lienicienne,  pp.  262-206) ;  Fr. Lenormant (/.es Origines,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  539)
has  preferred  to  identify  him  with  the  god  Bisu  of  the  Egyptians ;  cf.  Duwn  of  Civilization,  pp.  84, 85.

"  Drawn  by  Fauchor-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Catiinet  des  medailles;  cf.  Babelon,  Leg
Perees  Aclieminidce,  pi.  xxxvii.,  No.  16.


184      SYRIA    AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

succeeded  in  holding  his  own  till  the  day  when  fire  and  wind  took  the
part  of  his  enemy  against  him.^  The  trees,  shaken  and  made  to  rub  against
each  other  by  the  tempest,  broke  into  flame  from  the  friction,  and  the  forest
was  set  on  fire.  Usoos,  seizing  a  leafy  branch,  despoiled  it  of  its  foliage,  and
placing  it  in  the  water  let  it  drift  out  to  sea,  bearing  him,  the  first  of  his  race,
with  it.  Landing  on  one  of  the  islands,  he  set  up  two  menhirs,  dedicating  them
to  fire  and  wind  that  he  might  thenceforward  gain  their  favour.  He  poured
out  at  their  base  the  blood  of  animals  he  had  slaughtered,  and  after  his
death,  his  companions  continued  to  perform  the  rites  which  he  had  inaugurated.
The  town  which  he  had  begun  to  build  on  the  sea-girt  isle  was  called
Tyre,  the  "  Rock,"  ^  and  the  two  rough  stones  which  he  had  set  up  remained
for  a  long  time  as  a  sort  of  talisman,  bringing  good  luck  to
its  inhabitants.  It  was  asserted  of  old  that  the  island  had
not  always  been  fixed,  but  that  it  rose  and  fell  with  the  waves
like  a  raft.  Two  peaks  looked  down  upon  it — the  "  Ambro-
sian  Eocks  " — between  which  grew  the  olive  tree  of  Astarte,
sheltered  by  a  curtain  of  flame  from  external  danger.  An
eagle   perched   thereon  watched  over  a  viper  coiled  round

THE    GOD    OF    TYBE/  o  i  i

the  trunk  :  the  whole  island  would  cease  to  float  as  soon
as  a  mortal  should  succeed  in  sacrificing  the  bird  in  honour  of  the  gods.
Usoos,  the  Herakles,  destroyer  of  monsters,  taught  the  people  of  the  coast
how  to  build  boats,  and  how  to  manage  them :  he  then  made  for  the
island  and  disembarked :  the  bird  oifered  himself  spontaneously  to  his  knife,
and  as  soon  as  its  blood  had  moistened  the  earth,  Tyre  rooted  itself  fixedly
opposite  the  mainland.*  Coins  of  the  Roman  period  represent  the  chief
elements  in  this  legend  ;  sometimes  the  eagle  and  olive  tree,  sometimes  the
olive  tree  and  the  stelte,  and  sometimes  the  two  stela;  only.^  From  this  time
forward  the  gods  never  ceased  to  reside  on  the  holy  island ;  Astarte  herself  was
born  there,^  and  one  of  the  temples  there  showed  to  the  admiration  of  the
faithful  a  fallen  star — an  aerolite  which  she  had  brought  back  from  one  of  her
journies.'     Baal  was  called  the  Melkarth,^  king  of  the  city,  and  the  Greeks

'  The  text  simply  states  the  material  facts,  tlie  tempest  and  the  fire:  the  general  movement  of  the
narrative  seems  to  prove  that  the  intervention  of  these  elements  is  an  episode  in  the  quarrel  between
the  two  brothers — that  in  which  Usoos  is  forced  to  fly  from  the  region  civilized  by  Samemrum.

'  This  is  the  etymology  given  by  the  learned  of  classic  times:  Sdp,  irfVpa,  ij  Tvplui'  t6\is  (St.
Jekome,  Lexicon  Nominum  Hebraicorum,  s.v.).  The  Greeks  adopted  the  hard  form  of  the  name,
Tupos,  while  the  form  Sara,  Sarra,  more  like  the  original,  was  known  in  the  Old  Latin.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Cabinet  dcs  mAIailles;  cf.  Babelox,  Les
Perses  AcMm^nides,  pi.  xxxv.,  Nos.  9-19.

*  NoNNUS,  Dionysiaca,  1.  xl.,  wliere  the  legend  is  related  at  length.

'^  SeecoinsinBABELON,  Xes Perses  jleZifm^H ides,  pi.  xxvii.  5,9-11,  16,23-27,29;  xxviii,],24,  25,  27.

"  CiCEKO,  De  Naturii  Deorum,  iii.  23,  59.

'  Philo  Btblius,  Fragm.  2,  §  21,  in  MiSller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hitt.  Griec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  569.

*  VleKiKopdos,  6  Kol  'Hpo(fAi?5  (Philo  Btblius,  Fragm.  2,  §  22,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.
Griec,  vol.  iii.  p.  56S) ;  on  Melkarth,  cf.  Movers,  Die  PhOnizier,  pp.  48,  400,  et  seq.


THE   GODS   AND    CEMETERIES    OF    TYRE.


185


TYRE   AND  ITS   SUBURBS  ON  THE  MAINLAND.


afterwards    identified    him    with    their  Herakles.      His    worsliip    was    of    a
severe  and  exacting  character:  a  fire  burned  perpetually  in  his  sanctuary;
his   priests,  like   those  of  the    Egyptians,
had  their  heads   shaved  ;    they  wore  gar-
ments of  spotless  white  linen,  held  pork  in
abomination,   and    refused     permission    to
married   women   to   approach   the   altars.^
Festivals,   similar   to   those   of  Adonis   at
Byblos,  were  held  in   his  honour  twice  a
year:  in  the  summer,  when  the  sun  burnt
up   the   earth    with  his  glowing   heat,  he
offered  himself  as  an  expiatory  victim  to
the  solar  orb,  giving  himself  to  the  flames
in  order  to  obtain  some  mitigation  of  the
severity  of  the  sky  ;  ^  once  the  winter  had
brought  with  it  a  refreshing  coolness,  he
came  back  to  life  again,  and  his  return  was
celebrated  with  great  joy.^    His  temple  stood
in  a  prominent  place  on  the  largest  of  the
islands  furthest  away  from  the  mainland.^   It  served  to  remind  the  people  of  the
remoteness  of  their  origin,  for  the  priests  relegated  its  foundation  almost  to  the
period  of  the  arrival  of  the  Phoenicians  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.^  The
town  had  no  supply  of  fresh  water,  and  there  was  no  submarine  spring  like  that  of
Arvad  to  provide  a  resource  in  time  of  necessity  ;  the  inhabitants  had,  therefore,
to  resort  to  springs  which  were  fortunately  to  be  found  everywhere  on  the  hill-
sides of  the  mainland.   The  waters  of  the  well  of  Eas  el-Ain  had  been  led  down  to
the  shore  and  dammed  up  there,  so  that  boats  could  procure  a  ready  supply  from
this  source  in  time  of  peace :  in  time  of  war  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre  had  to  trust
to  the  cisterns  in  which  they  had  collected  the  rains  that  fell  at  certain  seasons."

'  The  worsliip  of  Melkarth  at  Gades  (Cadiz)  and  the  functions  of  bis  priests  are  described  by  Silius
Italicus  (iii.  21-31)  :  asGados  was  a  Tyrian  colony,  it  has  been  naturally  assumed  that  the  main  features
of  the  religion  of  Tyre  were  reproduced  there,  and  Silius's  accouut  of  the  Melkarth  of  Gades  thus  ajipliis
to  his  namesake  of  the  mother  city  (JIovers,  Die  I'lion.,  p.  401,  et  seq. ;  Kenrick,  I'lucn.,  pp.  322,  323).

'  The  festival  commemorating  his  death  by  fire  was  celebrated  at  Tyre,  where  his  tomb  was  shown
(Clement  oe  Rome,  Eecognitiones,  s.  24),  and  in  the  greater  number  of  the  Tyrian  colonies  (Movers,
Die  rUonizier,  pp.  153-155,  394,  395  ;  Pietsciimann,  Gesch.  iler  I'hunizier,  p.  234,  n.  3).

'  The  festival  of  the  "  Awakening  of  Melkarth,"  to5  'HpoKAe'ous  iytpais,  is  mentioned  by  Mexander,
Frag.  1,  in  MCller-Didot,  Frag.  Hist.  Griec,  vol.  iv.  p.  44t;,  where  the  editor  gives  a  dift'erent  text,  rh
fi'tv  ToD  'H)jaKAe'ous  TrpHrui'  (Troi-qaaro  iv  T(f  TlfpiTlif  ixi\vi,  taken  i'rom  .losErilLS,  Contra  Apioiicm,  i.  18  ;
the  mention  of  the  "  Awakening  "  is  found  in  a  more  complete  and  more  correct  form  furnished  by  the
same  Josophus  elsewhere  (Ant.  Jud.,  viii.  5, 3).    Cf.,  upon  this  subject,  Movers,  Die  I'hiin.,  p]).  383-387).

*  Un  the  site  ascribed  to  this  insular  temple  of  Melkarth,  see  the  Umg  discussion  of  the  subject
by  Renan,  Misnioii  de  Phdaicie,  pp.  551-559.

'  For  an  accouut  of  this  immigration  of  the  Phconicians,  see  pp.  Gl,  G2  of  the  present  work.

'  Abisharri  (.Vbimillu),  ICicg  of  Tyre,  confesses  to  the  Pharaoh  Amenothes  III.  that  in  case  of  a


186      SYRTA    AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

The  strait  separating  the  island  from  the  mainland  was  some  six  or  seven

hundred  yards  in  breadth,'  less  than  that  of  the  Nile  at  several  points  of  its

course  through  Middle  Egypt,  but  it  was  as  effective  as  a  broader  channel  to

stop  the  movement  of  an  army :  a  fleet  alone  would  have  a  chance  of  taking

the  city  by  surprise,  or  of  capturing   it  after  a  lengthened  siege.     Like  the

coast  region  opposite  Arvad,  tlie  shore  whicli  faced  Tyre,  lying  between  the

mouth  of  the  Litany  and  Easel-Ain,  wasan  actual  suburbof  the  city  itself — with

its  gardens,  its  cultivated  fields,  its  cemeteries,  its  villas,  and  its  fortifications.

Here  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  were  accustomed  to  bury  their  dead,  and

hither  they  repaired  for  refreshment  during  the  heat  of  the  summer.     To  the

north  the  little  town  of  Mahalliba,ou  the  southern  bank  of  the  Litany,  and  almost

hidden  from  view  by  a  turn  in  the  hills,  commanded  the  approaches  to  tlie  Bekaa,

and  the  high-road  to  Ccele-Syria.^     To  the  south,  at  Eas  el-Ain,  Old  Tyre

(PalDetyrus)  looked  down   upon  the  route  leading  into  Galilee  by  way  of  the

mountains.^     Eastwards  Autu  commanded  the  landing-places  on  the  shore,  and

served  to  protect  the  reservoirs ;  it  lay  under  the  shadow  of  a  rock,  on  which  was

built,  facing  the  insular  temple  of  Melkarth,  protector  of  mariners,  a  sanctuary

of  almost  equal  antiquity  dedicated  to  his  namesake  of  the  mainland.*      The

latter  divinity  was  probably  the  representative  of  the  legendary  Samemrum,  who

siege  his  town  would  neither  have  water  nor  wood  (Bezold-Budoe,  Tlie  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahlets,  No.
30,  p.  G5,  11.  37-44  ;  No.  28,  p.  Gl,  11.  74-7G  ;  No.  3],  pp.  CG,  67,  II.  18-20,  49-54  ;  No.  29,  pp.  G2,  G3,
11.  63-GG).  Mention  of  vessels  bringing  water  is  made  in  the  Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xxi.  1.  2  ;  of.
Ch.vdas,  Voyage  d'un  Egyptien,  pp.  168,  1G9.  Aqueducts  and  conduits  of  water  are  spoken  of  by
Menander  as  existing  in  the  time  of  Shalmaneser  (Josephus,  Ant.  Jud.,  IX.  xiv.  2) ;  all  modern
historians  agree  in  attributing  their  construction  to  a  very  remote  antiquity  (Movers,  Das  Phunizische
AUerthum,  vol.  i.  pp.  231-240  ;  Kenriok,  Fhcenicia,  p.  384 ;  Kenan,  Mission  de  Plufnicie,  pp.  593,  594  ;
PlETSCUMANN,  Gescliiclite  der  PhSnizier,  p.  70).

'  According  to  the  writers  wlio  were  contemporary  with  Alexander,  the  strait  was  4  stadia  wide
(nearly  h  mile),  or  500  paces  (about  I  mile),  at  the  period  when  the  Blacedoniaus  undertook  the  siege
of  the  town  (Diodorus  Siculus,  xvii  40 ;  Quintos  Curtics,  IV.  ii.  7) ;  the  author  followed  by  Pliny
says  {R.  Nat.,  v.  17)  700  paces,  possibly  over  |  mile  wide.  From  the  observations  of  Poulaiii  deBossay
{Eecherches  sur  Tyr  et  Palgtyr,  p.  7,  et  seq.),  Eenan  thinks  the  space  between  the  island  and  tho
mainland  might  be  nearly  a  mile  in  width,  but  we  should  perhaps  do  well  to  reduce  this  higher  figure
and  adopt  one  agreeing  better  with  the  statements  of  Diodorus  and  Quiutus  Curtius  (^Mission  de
PMnicie,  pp.  527,  528).

'  Blahalliha  is  the  present  Khurbet-Mahallib  (Clermont-Ganneau,  Epigraphie  et  Antiquit^s
s^mitiques  en  IS'Jl,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  vol.  six.,  1892,  p.  1 18 ;  and  Maspero,  De  Quelques  Localitgs
voisines  de  Sidon,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travatix,  vol.  xvii.  p.  101).

'  PaloBtyrus  has  often  been  considered  as  a  Tyro  on  the  maiuhind  of  greater  antiquity  thnn
the  town  of  the  same  name  on  tlio  island  (Movers,  Das  Phonizische  AUerthum,  vol.  i.  pp.  171-177;
Keneick,  Phoenicia,  pp.  342-346)  ;  it  is  now  generally  admitted  that  it  was  merely  an  outpost  (Eenan,
Mission  de  Ph^nicie,  pp.  576,  577 ;  Pietschmann,  Geschichte  der  Phonizier,  pp.  68-70),  which  is
conjeeturally  placed  by  most  scholars  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kas  el-Aiu.

*  For  Autu,  cf.  p.  183  of  tho  present  work.  If  the  name  has  been  preserved,  as  I  believe  it  to  be,
in  that  of  El-Awwatin,  the  town  must  be  that  whose  ruins  we  find  at  the  foot  of  Tell-Mashfik,  and
which  are  often  mistaken  for  those  of  Palastyrus  (Renan,  Mission  de  Phi'nicie,  pp.  57S,  579).  Tlie  temple
on  the  summit  of  the  Tell  was  probably  that  of  Heracles  Aslrochiton  mentioned  by  Nonnus
(^Dionysiaca,  xl.  396),  as  was  conjectured  by  Bertou  (Essais  sur  la  TopograpMe  de  Tyr,  p.  6S),  but  not
accepted  by  Movers  {Das  Phonizische  AUerthum,  vol.  i.  p.  241,  nolo  170) — a  conjecture,  however,  whicli
has  appeared  possible,  and  even  probable,  to  other  scholars  (Eenan,  Mission  de  Phtfnicie,  pp.  582,  683)  ;
this  is  the  temple  which  the  Tyrians  represented  to  Alexander  as  being  older  than  that  of  insular
Tyre  (Justin,  xi.  10 ;  Quinttjs  CnKTics,  iv.  2).


TJiF  noMjrx  OF  Tvnr:  ox  ttje  lfbaxox.


18/


THE   SCULPTruED   ROCKS  OF
HANAWEH."


had  built  his  viUage  on  the  coast,  while  Usoos  had  founded  his  on  the  ocean.
He  was  the  Baalsamim  of  starry  tunic,  lord  of  heaven  and  king  of  the  sun.^
iVs  was  customary,  a  popular  Astarte  was  associated  with  these  deities  of  high
degree,  and  tradition  asserted  that  Melkarth  purchased  her  favour  by  the  gift  of
tlie  first  robe  of  Tyrian  purple  which  was  ever  dyed.  Priestesses  of  the  goddess
had  dwellings  in  all  parts  of  the  plain,  and  in  several  places  tlie  caves  are  still
pointed  out  where  they  entertained  the  devotees  of  the  goddess.^  Eehind  Autu
the  ground  rises  abruptly,  and  along  the  face  of  the  escarpment,  half  hidden  by
trees  and  brushwood,  are  the  remains  of  the  most  important  of  the  Tyrian  bury-
ing-places,  consisting  of  half-tilled-up  pits,  isolated  caves,  and  dark  galleries,
where  whole  families  lie  together  in  their  lust  sleep.  In  some  spots  the  chalky
mass  has  been  literally  honeycombed  by  the  quarrying  gravedigger,  and  regular
lines  of  chambers  follow  one  another  in  the  direction  of  the  strata,  after  the
fashion  of  the  rock-cut  tombs  of  Upper  Egypt.  They  present  a  bare  and  dismal
appearance  botli  within  and  without.  The  entrances  are  narrow  and  arched,
the  ceilings  low,  the  walls  bare  and  colourless,  unrelieved  by  moulding,  picture,
or  inscription.^  At  one  place  only,  near  the  modern  village  of  Hanaweh,  a  few
groups  of  figures  and  coarsely  cut  stelas  are  to  be  found,  indicating,  it  would
seem,  the  burying-place  of  some    chief  of  very  early  times.      These   figures

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  jiliotograpli  by  Lortot;  cf.  La  Syrie  d'aujourd'hiii,  p.  139.

'  NoNNCS,  DionyHaca,  xl.  3G9,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Mdveuh,  Vie  I'Mnizier,  pp.  182-184.

'  For  tlie  legend  reliiting  Ui  llie  loves  of  Melkurth  and  Astarte,  of.  Pollux,  Onomatlicon,  i.  45 ;
NoNNCS,  Dionijuiaca,  x\.  30G ;  the  sacred  caves  of  Vashta,  and  their  characteristic  ropresoutations,  are
described  in  detail  by  Renan,  Miseion  de  I'li^nicie,  pp.  047-G53.

'  Kenan,  Minion  de  Phinicie,  pp.  580-582, 587-592,  insists  on  the  antiquity  of  aome  of  these  tombs.


J  88       STIilA    AT   TEE  BEGINNING    OF   THE   EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

run  in  parallel  lines  along  the  rocky  sides  of  a  wild  ravine.  They  vary
from  2  feet  6  inches  to  3  feet  in  height,  the  bodies  being  represented  by
rectangular  pilasters,  sometimes  merely  rough-hewn,  at  others  grooved  with
curved  lines  to  suggest  the  folds  of  the  Asiatic  garments ;  the  head  is  carved
full  face,  though  the  eyes  are  given  in  profile,  and  the  summary  treatment
of  the  modelling  gives  evidence  of  a  certain  skill.i  Whether  they  are  to  be
regarded  as  the  product  of  a  primitive  Amorite  art  or  of  a  school  of  Phcenician
craftsmen,  we  are  unable  to  determine.  In  the  time  of  their  prosperity  the
Tyrians  certainly  pushed  their  frontier  as  far  as  this  region.  The  wind-swept
but  fertile  country  lying  among  the  ramifications  of  the  lowest  spurs  of
the  Lebanon  bears  to  this  day  innumerable  traces  of  their  indefatigable
industry — remains  of  dwellings,  conduits  and  watercourses,  cisterns,  pits,
millstones  and  vintage-troughs,  are  scattered  over  the  fields,  interspersed  with
oil  and  wine  presses.  The  Phoenicians  took  naturally  to  agriculture,  and
carried  it  to  such  a  high  state  of  perfection  as  to  make  it  an  actual  science,  to
which  the  neighbouring  peoples  of  the  Mediterranean  were  glad  to  accom-
modate their  modes  of  culture  in  later  times."  Among  no  other  people  was
the  art  of  irrigation  so  successfully  practised,  and  from  such  a  narrow  strip  of
territory  as  belonged  to  them  no  other  cultivators  could  have  gathered  such
abundant  harvests  of  wheat  and  barley,  and  such  supplies  of  grapes,  olives,  and
other  fruits.  From  Arvad  to  Tyre,  and  even  beyond  it,  the  littoral  region  and
the  central  parts  of  the  valleys  presented  a  long  ribbon  of  verdure  of  varying
breadth,  where  fields  of  corn  were  blended  with  gardens  and  orchards  and  shady
woods.  The  whole  region  was  independent  and  self-supporting,  the  inhabitants
having  no  need  to  address  themselves  to  their  neighbours  in  the  interior,
or  to  send  their  children  to  seek  their  fortune  in  distant  lands.  To  insure
prosperity,  nothing  was  needed  but  a  slight  exercise  of  labour  and  freedom
from  the  devastating  influence  of  war.

The  position  of  the  country  was  such  as  to  secure  it  from  attack,  and  from
the  conflicts  which  laid  waste  the  rest  of  Syria.  Along  almost  the  entire
eastern  border  of  the  country  the  Lebanon  was  a  great  wall  of  defence  running
parallel  to  the  coast,  strengthened  at  each  extremity  by  the  additional  jjro-
tection  of  the  rivers  Nahr  el-Kebir  and  Litany.  Its  slopes  were  further  defended
by  the  forest,  which,  with  its  lofty  trees  and  brushwood,  added  yet  another
barrier  to  that  afforded  by  rocks  and  snow.     Hunters'  or  shepherds'  paths  led

'  LoRTET,  J.a  Syrie  d'aujoiird'hui,  pp.  138-140,  iu  which  the  author  expresses  his  belief  that  this  is
a  very  ancient  work  of  the  PhoeQicians.

'  Tlieir  taste  for  agriculture,  and  the  comparativo  perfection  of  their  modes  of  culture,  are  proved
by  the  greatness  of  the  remains  still  to  be  observed  :  "  The  Phoenicians  constructed  a  winepress,  a
trough,  to  last  for  ever  "  (Renan,  Mission  de  Phenicie,  pi>.  633-G35 ;  cf  p.  321).  Their  colonists  at
Carthage  carried  with  them  the  same  clever  methods,  and  the  Eomans  borrowed  many  excellent
things  in  the  way  of  agriculture  from  Carthaginian  books,  especially  from  those  of  Mago.


ISOLATION   OF   THE  PUCENIGIANS.  189

here  and  there  in  tortuous  courses  from  one  side  of  the  mountain  to  the  other.
Near  the  middle  of  the  country  two  roads,  practicable  in  all  seasons,  secured  com-
munications between  the  littoral  and  the  plain  of  the  interior.  They  branched
oft'  on  either  side  from  the  central  road  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tubakhi,  south
of  Qodshu,  and  served  the  needs  of  the  wooded  province  of  Magara.^  This
region  was  inhabited  by  pillaging  tribes,  which  the  Egyptians  called  at  one
time  Lamnana,  the  Libanites,^  at  others  Shausu,  using  for  them  the  same  appella-
tion as  that  which  they  bestowed  upon  the  Bedouin  of  the  desert.^  The  roads
through  this  province  ran  under  the  dense  shade  afforded  by  oaks,  cedars,  and
cypresses,  in  an  obscurity  favourable  to  the  habits  of  tiie  wolves  and  hyaenas  which
infested  it,  and  even  of  those  thick-maned  lions  known  to  Asia  at  the  time ;
and  then  proceeding  in  its  course,  crossed  the  ridge  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
snow-peak  called  Shaua,  which  is  probably  the  Sannin  *  of  our  times.  While
one  of  these  roads,  running  north  along  the  lake  of  Yamuneh  and  through  the
gorge  of  Akura,  then  proceeded  along  the  Adonis ''  to  Byblos,  tlie  other  took  a
southern  direction,  and  followed  the  Nahr  el-Kelb  to  the  sea."  Towards  the
mouth  of  the  latter  a  wall  of  rock  opposes  the  progress  of  the  river,  and  leaves
at  length  but  a  narrow  and  precipitous  defile  for  the  passage  of  its  waters :  a
pathway  cut  into  the  cliff  at  a  very  remote  date  leads  almost  perpendicularly  from
the  bottom  of  the  precipice  to  the  summit  of  the  promontory.  Commerce
followed  these  short  and  direct  routes,  but  invading  hosts  very  rarely  took

'  Magarii  is  mentioucd  in  tlie  Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  p.  xix.  1.  2,  and  Chabaa  (Voyage  d'uu
Egyptieii,  pp.  126,  127)  lias  identilicd  it  with  tlio  plain  of  Macra,  wliicli  Strabo  (XVI.  ii.,  §  17,  p.  755)
places  in  Syria,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Eleutheros.  The  same  locality  has  been  associated  by  Chal:iae
{(Eludes  sur  l' Antiquity Ristorique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  216,  note  2)  with  the  Makhar-pit  named  in  a  papyrus
at  Bologna  (Lincke,  Correspondenzcii,  aus  dcr  Zeil  dtr  Baincssiden,  pi.  vii.  1.  9),  and  by  the  same
writer  (.B<(7r<7(/c  r,ur  Keiintniss  dcr  allmgyplischen  Literatur,  pp.  21,  22)  with  the  Magra-put  of  the
lists  of  Thutmo.sis  III.  (Mariette,  Les  Listes  Gibg.  de  Karnuli,  p.  39,  No.  91);  for  argumints  against
this  view,  see  W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  und  Europa,  p.  713,  note  2,  and  p.  391,  note  1.  The  context
shows  that  the  wooded  region  extending  along  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Lebanon,  on  the  level  of
Tell  Nebi-Mindoh  and  Baalbek,  is  meant.  Perhaps  an  echo  of  the  name  is  preserved  in  the  name
Magoras,  whicli  was  that  of  the  river  of  Beyrut  in  Graico-Roman  times.

'  The  name  Lamnana  is  given  in  a  picture  of  the  campaigns  of  Seti  I.  (Champollion,  Man.  dc
V ligyptc,  etc.,  pi.  ccxc,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  87,  88  ;  Eosellini,  Moii.  Storici,  pi.  xlvi.),  where  Wilkinson
was  the  first  to  recognise  the  name  of  Lebanon  (Topog.  of  Thulies  und  General  View  of  Egypt,  p.  192,
note  3).  Brugsch  was  inclined  to  see  in  them  the  Armenians  (Geog.  Insch.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  39),  but
Wilkinson's  identification  now  holds  its  ground  (Max  Mlller,  Asiea  und  Europa,  p.  197,  et  scq.).

^  Anadasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xix.  11.  1—1 ;  cf.  Ciiabas,  Voyage  d'uu  Hgyplkn,  p.  Ill,  ct  seq.

■*  Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xix.  1.  1 ;  cf.  Chaisas,  Voyage  d'un  f'gyptien,  p.  128.  W.  Jla.x  Jliiller
(Asien  taut  Europa,  p.  199,  note  2)  has  rightly  associated  the  Egyptian  form  Shaua  with  the  name
Sauo,  which  serves  to  designate  in  the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-Fileser  III.  (RosT,  Vie  Keil»cUriflU.xla
Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  pp.  20,  21,  78,  79)  one  of  the  peaks  of  the  Lebanon.  From  the  general  import
of  the  Egyptian  context  Shaua  can  liiudly  bo  other  than  the  Sanuiu  of  the  present  day.

'  This  is  the  road  pointed  out  by  Eenau  {Mission  de  Ph^nieie,  pp.  305-309)  as  the  easiest  but
least  known  of  those  which  cross  the  Lebanon  ;  the  remains  of  an  Assyrian  inscription  graven  on  the
rocks  near  Ain  el-Asafir  show  that  it  was  employed  from  a  very  early  date,  and  licnan  thought  that
it  was  used  by  the  armies  which  came  from  the  upper  valley  of  the  Orontes.

°  This  road,  which  runs  along  the  Nahr  el-Kelb,  is  probably  that  followed  by  the  Egyptian  in  tho
Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xix.  1.  6  (cf.  Cuahas,  Voyage  d'un  Egijptien,  p.  130,  et  seq.),  to  pass  from
the  neighbourhood  of  Qodshu  to  Byblos  and  Beyrut  in  tho  valley  of  the  Orontes.


190      SYRIA   AT  TEE  BEGINNING    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

advantage  of  them,  althougli  they  offered  access  into  the  very  heart  of  Phoenicia.
Invaders  would  encounter  here,in  fact,a  little  known  and  broken  country, lending
itself  readily  to  surprises  and  ambuscades ;  and  should  they  reach  the  foot  of  the
Lebanon  range,  they  would  find  themselves  entrapped  in  a  region  of  slippery
defiles,  with  steep  paths  at  intervals  cut  into  the  rock,  and  almost  inaccessible
to  chariots  or  horses,  and  so  narrow  in  places  that  a  handful  of  resolute  men
could  have  held  them  for  a  long  time  against  whole  battalions.  The  enemy
preferred  to  make  for  the  two  natural  breaches  at  the  respective  extremities  of
the  line  of  defence,  and  for  the  two  insular  cities  which  flanked  the  approaches
to  them — Tyre  in  the  case  of  those  coming  from  Egypt,  Arvad  and  Simyra  for
assailants  from  the  Euphrates.  The  Arvadians,  bellicose  by  nature,  would  offer
strong  resistance  to  the  invader,  and  not  permit  themselves  to  be  conquered
without  a  brave  struggle  with  the  enemy,  however  powerful  he  might  be.^
When  the  disproportion  of  the  forces  which  they  could  muster  against  the
enemy  convinced  them  of  the  folly  of  attempting  an  open  conflict,  their
island-home  offered  them  a  refuge  where  they  would  be  safe  from  any  attacks.
Sometimes  the  burning  and  pillaging  of  their  property  on  the  mainland  might
reduce  them  to  throw  themselves  on  the  mercy  of  their  foes,  but  such  sub-
mission did  not  last  long,  and  they  welcomed  the  slightest  occasion  for  regaining
their  liberty.  Conquered  again  and  again  on  account  of  the  smalluess  of
their  numbers,  they  were  never  discouraged  by  their  reverses,  and  Phoenicia
owed  all  its  military  history  for  a  long  period  to  their  j^rowess.  The  Tyrians
were  of  a  more  accommodating  nature,  and  there  is  no  evidence,  at  least
during  the  early  centuries  of  their  existence,  of  the  display  of  those  obstinate
and  blind  transports  of  bravery  by  which  the  Arvadians  were  carried  away.-
Their  foreign  policy  was  reduced  to  a  simple  arithmetical  question,  which  they
discussed  in  the  light  of  their  industrial  or  commercial  interests.  As  soon  as
they  had  learned  from  a  short  experience  that  a  certain  Pharaoh  had  at  his
disposal  armies  against  which  they  could  offer  no  serious  opposition,  they  at

'  Thiitmosis  III.  was  obliged  to  enter  on  a  campaign  against  Arvai!  in  the  year  XXIX.  {Annals,

II.  4-7),  in  the  year  XXX.  (jd.,  11.7-9),  and  probably  twice  in  the  following  ycara.   Under  Amenothes

III.  and  IV.  we  see  that  these  people  took  part  in  all  the  intrigues  directed  against  Egypt  (Bezold-
Bi'DGE,  The  Tell  el-Amania  Tahlels  in  the  Britisli.  Museum,  pp.  lix.,  Ixsiii.,  Ixsiv.) ;  they  were  the
allies  of  the  Khati  against  Ramses  II.  in  the  campaign  of  the  year  V.  (^Toeme  de  Pentaouirit,  cd.  E.  J.
DE  EocGt:,  in  the  lievue  Fgijptologique,  vol.  iii.  p.  157, 1.  6),  and  later  on  we  find  them  involved  in
most  of  the  wars  against  Assyria.

'  No  campaign  against  Tyre  is  mentioned  in  any  of  the  Egyptian  annals :  the  expedition  of
Thutmosis  III.  against  Senzauru  {Inscription  d'Amenemhahi,  1.  20)  was  not  directed  against  "  the
double  Tyre,"  as  Ebers  thought  {Das  Grab, etc., des Feldhauptmanns  Am^nemh^,in  the  Zeitschrift  der
D.  3Iorg.  GeselUchaft,,  vol.  xxxi.  p.  400),  or  against  the  "other  Tyre,"  if  one  takes  without  discussion
Lieblein's  interpretation  of  the  name  {liurla  Yille  de  Tyr,  in  the  Atti  del  IV  Congrcsso,  p.  33),  but
against  a  town  of  Ccele-Syria  mentioned  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  with  the  ortliography  Zinzar
(BEZ0LD-BuDGE,r/ie  Tell el-AmarnaTablets,pii.\x\u,,\-^\iii.), the  Sizara-Larissaof  Grajco-Eoman  times
(Stephen  op  Byzaktium,  s.v.  Zt^apa),  the  Shaizar  of  the  Arab  Chronicles.  On  the  contrary,  the  Tel
el-Amarna  tablets  contain  several  passages  which  manifest  the  fidelity  of  Tyro  and  its  governors  to
the  King  of  Egypt  (Bezold-Budge,  The  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  pp.  Ivi.-lxii.).


THE  PE(ENICIAN  APTITUDE  FOR   NAVIGATION.  191

once  surrendered  to  liiiu,  and  thought  only  of  obtaining  the  greatest  proiit
from  the  vassalage  to  which  they  were  condemned.  The  obligation  to  pay
tribute  did  not  appear  to  them  so  much  in  the  light  of  a  burthen  or  a  sacrifice,
as  a  means  of  purchasing  the  right  to  go  to  and  fro  freely  in  Egypt,  or  in
the  countries  subject  to  its  influence.  The  commerce  acquired  by  these
privileges  recouped  them  more  than  a  hundredfold  for  all  that  their  overlord
demanded  from  them.  The  other  cities  of  the  coast — Sidon,  Berytus,  Byblos  ^
— usually  followed  the  example  of  Tyre,  whether  from  mercenary  motives,  or
from  their  naturally  pacific  disposition,  or  from  a  sense  of  their  impotence ;  and
the  same  intelligent  resignation  with  which,  as  we  know,  they  accepted  the  supre-
macy of  the  great  Egyptian  empire,  was  doubtless  displayed  in  earlier  centuries
in  their  submission  to  the  Babylonians.  Their  records  show  that  they  did  not
accept  this  state  of  things  merely  through  cowardice  or  indolence,  for  they
are  represented  as  ready  to  rebel  and  shake  off  the  yoke  of  their  foreign  master
when  they  found  it  incompatible  with  their  practical  interests.'^  But  their
resort  to  war  was  exceptional ;  they  generally  preferred  to  submit  to  the
powers  that  be,  and  to  accept  from  them  as  if  on  lease  the  strip  of  coast-line  at
the  base  of  the  Lebanon,  which  served  as  a  site  for  their  warehouses  and  dock-
yards. Thus  they  did  not  find  the  yoke  of  the  stranger  irksome — the  sea  open-
ing up  to  them  a  realm  of  freedom  and  independence  which  compensated  tliem
for  the  limitations  of  both  territory  and  liberty  imposed  upon  them  at  home.

The  epoch  which  was  marked  by  their  first  venture  on  the  Mediterranean,  and
the  motives  which  led  to  it,  were  alike  unknown  to  them.  The  gods  had  taught
them  navigation,  and  from  the  beginning  of  things  they  bad  taken  to  the  sea
as  fishermen,  or  as  explorers  in  search  of  new  lands.*^  They  were  not  driven  by
poverty  to  leave  their  continental  abode,  or  inspired  thereby  with  a  zeal  for
distant  cruises.  They  had  at  home  sufficient  corn  and  wine,  oil  and  fruits,  to
meet  all  their  needs,  and  even  to  administer  to  a  life  of  luxury.  And  if  they
lacked  cattle,  the  abundance  of  fish  within  their  reach  compensated  for  the
absence  of  flesh-meat.  Nor  was  it  the  number  of  commodiously  situated  ports
on  their  coast  which  induced  them  to  become  a  seafaring  people,  for  their
harbours  were  badly  protected  for  the  most  part,  and  ofi"ered  no  shelter  when

'  See  lutlers  from  the  princes  of  Berytus  (Bezold-Budoe,  Tlie  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahlcts,  pp.  Iv.,  Ivi.),of
Uybloa  (Id.,  ihid.,  pp.  ,\liv.-lv.),  showing  their  zeal  for  the  interests  of  Pharaoh.  Sidon  was  more  turbu-
lent (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  xlvi.,  xlvii.,  Iviii.-l.xii.),  but  seems  never  (o  have  gone  too  fur  in  itsspirit  of  rel)ellion.
It  is  not  found,  any  more  than  Tyre,  among  the  Egyptian  triumphal  lists  known  up  to  the  present  time.

'  Cf,  in  regard  to  the  Assyro-Chaldrean  epocli,  their  long  resistance  to  the  enterprises  of  Shal-
maneser  IV.,  Sargon,  Seunaclierib,  and  Nebuchadrezzar  II.

'  According  to  one  of  the  cosmogonies  of  Sauchoniathon,  KhusOr,  who  has  been  Ideutiiied  with
llephoDstoe,  was  the  Inventor  of  the  fishing-boat,  and  was  the  first  among  men  and  gods  who  taught
navigation  (PuiLo  Byislius,  Fragm.  2,  §  0,  in  Mullku-Didot,  Fragm.  Jlisl.  Gr,xc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  5G6).
According  to  another  legend,  Melkarth  showed  tlie  Tyrians  how  to  make  a  raft  from  the  branches  of
a  fig  tree  (Nonnus,  Dionys.,  xl.  4'13,  et  seq.),  while  the  construction  of  the  first  sliips  is  elsewhere
ascribed  to  tlie  Crt'(!ri  (I'mi.o  Byulu'.'*,  i'Vai;m.  2, §  11,  in  MiiLLEii-UiDor,  Fiagni.  Iliet.  (Jcac.,  vol.  iii.
p.  5G7).     Cf.  Movers,  Daa  I'hSnizisclte  AUerthum,  Vol.  iii.  pp.  149-152.


192      SYBIA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

the  wind  set  in  from  the  north,  tlie  rugged  shore  presenting  little  resource
against  the  wind  and  waves  in  its  narrow  and  shallow  havens.  It  was  the  nature
of  the  country  itself  which  contributed  more  than  anything  else  to  make  them
mariners.  The  precipitous  mountain  masses  which  separate  one  valley  from
another  rendered  communication  between  them  difficult,  while  they  served  also
as  lurking-places  for  robbers.  Commerce  endeavoured  to  follow,  therefore,  the
sea-route  in  preference  to  the  devious  ways  of  this  highwayman's  region,  and  it
accomplished  its  purpose  the  more  readily  because  the  common  occupation  of
sea-fishing  had  familiarised  the  people  with  every  nook  and  corner  on  the
coast.  The  continual  wash  of  the  surge  had  worn  away  the  bases  of  the  limestone
cliffs,  and  the  superincumbent  masses  tumbling  down  into  the  sea  formed
lines  of  rocks,  hardly  rising  above  the  water-level,^  which  fringed  tlie  head-
lands with  perilous  reefs,  against  which  the  waves  broke  continuously  at
the  slightest  wind.  It  required  some  bravery  to  approach  them,  and  no  little
skill  to  steer  one  of  the  frail  boats,  which  these  people  were  accustomed  to
employ  from  the  earliest  times,  scatheless  amid  the  breakers.  The  coasting  trade
was  attracted  from  Arvad  successively  to  Berytus,  Sidon,  and  Tyre,  and  finally
to  the  other  towns  of  the  coast.^  It  was  in  full  operation,  doubtless,  from
the  VP'  Egyptian  dynasty  onwards,  when  the  Pharaohs  no  longer  hesitated  to
embark  troops  at  the  mouths  of  the  Nile  for  speedy  transmission  to  the  provinces
of  Southern  Syria,  and  it  was  by  this  coasting  route  that  the  tin  and  amber  of  the
north  succeeded  in  reaching  the  interior  of  Egypt.^  The  trade  was  originally,
it  would  seem,  in  the  hands  of  those  mysterious  Kefatiu  of  whom  the  name  only
was  known  in  later  times.  When  the  Phoenicians  established  themselves  at  the
foot  of  the  Lebanon,  they  had  probably  only  to  take  the  place  of  their  pre-
decessors and  to  follow  the  beaten  tracks  which  they  had  already  made.  We
have  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  took  to  a  seafaring  life  soon  after  their
arrival  in  the  country,  and  that  they  adapted  themselves  and  their  civilization
readily  to  tlie  exigencies  of  a  maritime  career.'*  In  their  towns,  as  in  most  sea-
ports, there  was  a  considerable  foreign  element,  both  of  slaves  and  freemen,  but
the  Egyptians  confounded  them  all  under  one  name,  Kefatiu,  whether  they  were
Cypriotes,  Asiatics,  or  Europeans,  or  belonged  to  the  true  Tyrian  and  Sidonian
race.  The  costume  of  the  Kafiti  was  similar  to  that  worn  by  the  people  of  the
interior — the  loin-cloth,  with  or  without  a  long  upper  garment ;  while  in  tiring

•  Eenan,  Mission  de  VMnicie,  pp.  572-574,  where  the  crodiug  effects  of  the  sea,  peculiar  to  the
Phoeuician  coast,  are  described  and  explained.

'  For  the  natural  motives  determining  the  maritime  calling  of  the  populations  dwelling  on  the
Phenician  coast,  see  especially  the  summary  of  Pietsohmans,  Oeach.  der  Plwiiizier,  pp.  26-34.
'  For  an  account  of  the  commerce,  see  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  892-394.

*  Connexion  between  Phoenicia  and  Greece  was  fully  established  at  the  outbreak  of  the
Egyptian  wars  (E.  Mevku,  Gesch.  dee  Alterlhume,  vol.  i.  pp.  234-235 ;  vol.  ii.  p.  129,  et  seq.),  and  we
may  safely  assume  their  existence  in  the  centuries  immediately  preceding  the  second  millennium
before  our  era  (Pietschmann,  Oescli,  tier  Phonizier,  p.  250)  :  for  the  probable  period  of  the  Phoenician
immigration,  see  supra,  p.  G2.


PH(ENICIAN   COMMERCE.


193


the  hair  they  adopted  certain  refinements,  specially  a  series  of  curls  wlucli
the  men  arranged  in  the  form  of  au  aigrette  above  their  foreheads.  This
motley  collection  of  races  was  ruled  over  by
;ui  oligarchy  of  merchants  and  shipowners,
whose  functions  were  liereditary,  and  who
usually  paid  homage  to  a  single  king,  the
representative  of  the  tutelary  god,  and  abso-
lute master  of  the  city.^  The  industries
pursued  in  Phceuicia  were  somewhat  similar
to  those  of  other  parts  of  Syria  ;  the  stuffs,
vases,  and  ornaments  made  at  Tyre  and  Sidou
could  not  be  distinguished  from  those  of
Hamath  or  of  Carchemish.  All  manufactures
bore  the  impress  of  Babylonian  influence,  and
their  implements,  weights,  measures,  and
system  of  exchange  were  the  same  as  those
in  use  among  the  Chaldieans.  The  products
of  the  country  were,  however,  not  sufScient
to  freight  the  fleets  which  sailed  from  Pho>
nicia  every  year  bound  for  all  parts  of  the
known  world,  and  additional  supplies  had  to
be  regularly  obtained  from  neighbouring
peoples,  who  thus  became  used  to  pour  into
Tyre  and  Sidon  the  surplus  of  their  manu-
factures, or  of  the  natural  wealth  of  their
country.  The  Phoenicians  were  also  accustomed  to  send  caravans  into  regions
which  they  could  not  reach  in  their  caracks,  and  to  establish  trading  stations
at  the  fords  of  rivers,  or  in  the  passes  over  mountain  ranges.^  AVe  know
of  the  existence  of  such  emporia  at  Laish  near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,^  at
Thapsacus,^  and  at  Nisibis,"  and  they  must  have  served  the  purpose  of  a  series

'  Tlie  littlo  that  is  known  of  the  organisation  of  tht-  Phoenician  cities  before  the  Greek  period  has
been  set  forth  at  length  by  Movers,  Dn«  FhoiiziUckc  AllcriUum.  vol.  i.  ]>!).  479-5G1,  and  lias  lieen
Bunimari.sed  Ijy  Pietschmann,  Grfchichte  dcr  Vhanizier,  pp.  :237,  'iliS.  Under  tlie  Egyptian  supremacy,
till-  local  princes  did  not  assume  the  royal  title  in  the  dcspatelics  wliicli  they  addressed  to  the  kings
of  Egypt,  but  styled  themselves  governors  of  their  cities.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-tJuilin,  from  the  coloured  sketches  by  Prisse  d'Avennes  in  tlie  Natural
Hist.  Museum;  cf.  CnAMroi.i.iOK.  Mimuments  de  V Kgypte,  etc.,  pis.  exc.,  cxci.  1  ;  Rosellini,  Monu-
menll  Slorici,  pi.  clix.  ."i ;  V[Ki;v,  Le  Tonihmu  ilc.  UMinuiru ,  in  the  M^mnires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aife,
vol.  V.  1)1.  V.  pp.  :s:i,  1)4.

'  Movers,  JJuf  J'huiihifcltc  AUcrlhnni,  vol.  ii,  pp.  128-147,  ^30-271,  has  shown  most  ingeniously
what  was  the  nature  of,  and  the  routes  followed  in,  this  overland  trade  with  the  nations  of  the  Euphrates.

'  Jo$h.  xix.  47  ;  Jiuhjig  xviii.  7,  27-29.     Cf.  Moveiis,  DaK  VUiiniziaeln-  Altcrlhuiii,  vol.  ii.  pp.  15fl  1G2.

'  Movers,  Dag  Phonizisclic  Allerlhum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  104,  105.

°  PiiiLO  BvBi.irs,  Frugm.  S,  in  Mi  i.l.Kii-DinrjT,  Fnignt.  IfUt.  (irxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  ^>1\  :  .f.  Movers,
ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1U2-1(!4.

<)


INE    OF    THE    KAPITI   EBOM    THE    TtJMB    OF
liAKlIMIRi.^


194      Sl'JiTA   AT   THE  BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

of  posts  on  the  great  highways  of  the  world.  The  settlements  of  the  Phoenicians
always  assumed  the  character  of  colonies,  and  however  remote  they  might  be
from  their  fatherland,  the  colonists  never  lost  the  manners  and  customs  of  their
native  country.  They  collected  together  into  their  ohels  or  storehoiises  such
wares  and  commodities  as  they  could  purchase  in  their  new  localities,  and,
transmitting  them  periodically  to  the  coast,  shipped  them  thence  to  all  parts
of  the  world.

Not  only  were  they  acquainted  with  every  part  of  the  Mediterranean,  but
they  had  even  made  voyages  beyond  its  limits.  In  the  absence,  however,  of
any  specific  records  of  their  naval  enterprise,  the  routes  tiiey  followed  must  be
a  subject  of  conjecture.  They  were  accustomed  to  relate  that  the  gods,  after
having  instructed  them  in  the  art  of  navigation,  had  shown  them  the  way  to
the  setting  sun,  and  had  led  them  by  their  example  to  make  voyages  even
beyond  the  mouths  of  the  ocean.^  El  of  Byblos  was  the  first  to  leave  Syria  ;
he  conquered  Greece  and  Egypt,  Sicily  and  Libya,  civilizing  their  inhabitants,
and  laying  the  foundation  of  cities  everywhere.^  The  Sidonian  Astarte,  with
her  head  surmounted  by  the  horns  of  an  ox,  was  the  next  to  begin  her  wanderings
over  the  inhabited  earth.'*  Melkarth  completed  the  task  of  the  gods  by  dis-
covering and  subjugating  those  countries  which  had  escaped  the  notice  of  his
predecessors.  Hundreds  of  local  traditions,  to  be  found  on  all  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean  down  to  Koman  times,  bore  witness  to  the  pervasive  influence  of
the  old  Canaanite  colonisation.  At  Cyprus,  for  instance,  we  find  traces  of  the
cultus  of  Kinyras,^  l^ing  of  Byblos  and  father  of  Adonis ;  ■''  again,  at  Crete,  it  is
the  daughter  of  a  Prince  of  Sidon,  Europa,  who  is  carried  off  by  Zeus  under  the
form  of  a  bull ; ''  it  was  Kadmos,  sent  forth  to  seek  Europa,  who  visited  Cyprus,
Rhodes,  and  the  Cyclades  before  building  Thebes  in  Boeotia  and  dying  in  the
forests  of  Illyria.''     In  short,  wherever  the  Phoenicians  had  obtained  a  footing,

'  The  whole  of  these  traditions  liave  beau  collected  and  examined  at  length,  often  without  needful
criticism,  by  Movers,  Das  PhSnizische  AUertlium,  vol.  ii.  pp.  58-125.

-  The  conquests  and  colonies  of  El-Ki-onos  are  mentioned  by  Pliilo  Byblius  (^Fragm.  2,  §  24,  27,  and
Fragm.  7,  in  Mllleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Uisl.  G'r;eo.,vol.  iii.  pp.  569,571);  for  what  has  been  gathered
from  the  scattered  traces  found  in  Greek  tradition,  cf.,  with  necessary  precaution,  the  work  of  Movebs,
1*08  Phonizische  AUerlhum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  59-64.

'  The  travels  of  Astarte,  together  with  those  of  El-Kronos,  were  mentioned  by  Sanohoniathon
(Philo  Byblics,  Fragm.  2,  §  24,  in  MtLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  p.  5G9) ;  cf.  Movers,.
Das  Phonizische  Allerthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  64-109.

*  Legends  of  a  late  date  collected  and  related  by  Movers,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  109-125.

'  For  the  part  which  Kinyras  jilayed  at  Paphos,  cf.  Engel,  Kypros,  vol.  i.  pp.  203-209,  and  vol.
ii.  pp.  94-136 ;  Movers,  Das  Phonizische  Allerthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226,  227.

"  HticK,  Greta,  vol.  i.  pp.  83-104 ;  Movers,  Das  Phon.  Altcrth.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  77-85.  The  present
tendency  of  bcholavs  is  to  regard  the  legends  of  Europa  and  Kadmos  as  almost  entirely  western  (Ed.
Meyer,  Geschichte  dcs  Allcrthums,  vol.  ii.  pp.  148-153);  without  going  into  the  question,  which  I
am  not  competent  to  deal  with,  one  fact  above  all  others  is  noticeable,  namely,  the  connection
which  the  Greeks  themselves  established  between  the  stories  relating  to  Europa  and  Phoenician
colonisation.

'  Movers,  Deis  PI(Sn.  Allerth.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  85-92,  where  the  testimony  of  ancient  writers  is  brought


PIiaiNICIAN   TRADE.  H)5

their  audacious  activity  made  such  an  indelible  impression  upon  tlie  mind  of
the  native  inhabitants  that  they  never  forgot  those  vigoroiis  thick-set  men
with  pale  faces  and  dark  beards,  and  soft  and  specious  speech,  who  appeared
at  intervals  in  their  large  and  swift  sailing  vessels.  They  made  their  way
cautiously  along  the  coast,  usually  keeping  in  sight  of  land,  making  sail  when
the  wind  was  favourable,  or  taking  to  the  oars  for  days  together  when  occasion
tiemanded  it,  anchoring  at  night  under  the  shelter  of  some  headland,  or  in  bad
weather  hauling  their  vessels  up  the  beach  until  the  morrow.  They  did  not
shrink  when  it  was  necessary  from  trusting  themselves  to  the  open  sea,  direct-
ing their  course  by  the  Pole-star  ;  ^  in  this  manner  they  often  traversed  long
distances  out  of  sight  of  land,  and  they  succeeded  in  making  in  a  short  time
voyages  previously  deemed  long  and  costly.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  they
were  as  much  merchants  as  pirates — indeed,  they  hardly  knew  themselves — and
tlieir  peaceful  or  warlike  attitude  towards  vessels  wliich  they  encountered  on
the  seas,  or  towards  the  people  whose  countries  they  frequented,  was  probably
determined  by  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.'  If  on  arrival  at  a  port  they
felt  themselves  no  match  for  the  natives,  the  instinct  of  the  merchant  pre-
vailed, and  that  of  the  pirate  was  kept  in  the  background.  They  landed
peaceably,  gained  the  good  will  of  the  native  chief  and  his  nobles  by  small
presents,  and  spreading  out  their  wares,  contented  themselves,  if  they  could  do
no  better,  with  the  usual  advantage  obtained  in  an  exchange  of  goods.  They
were  never  in  a  hurry,  and  would  remain  in  one  spot  until  they  had  exhausted
all  the  resources  of  the  country,  while  they  knew  to  a  nicety  iiow  to  display
their  goods  attractively  before  the  expected  customer.  Their  wares  comprised
wea{)ons  and  ornaments  for  men,  axes,  swords,  incised  or  damascened  daggers  with
hilts  of  gold  or  ivory,  bracelets,  necklaces,  amulets  of  all  kinds,  enamelled  vases,
glass-work,  stuils  dyed  purple  or  embroidered  with  gay  colours.  At  times  the
natives,  whose  cupidity  was  excited  by  the  exhibition  of  such  valuables,  would
attempt  to  gain  possession  of  them  either  by  craft  or  by  violence.  They  would
kill   the  men  who  had  landed,  or  attempt  to  surprise  the  vessel  during   the

together  and  construed  with  an  cxagsoration  haliituul  to  the  autlior.  As  in  the  story  of  Europa,  we
must  here  see  in  tlic  person  and  adventures  of  Kadmos  merely  a  type  as  well  as  a  collection  of  legends
of  Hellenic  origin.  Here  again  we  are  foiced  to  recall  tlic  fact  that  the  Greeks  connected  these
traditions  with  memories  of  I'hcouician  colonisation.

'  The  Greeks  for  this  reason  called  it  PliU3iiike,  the  Phoenician  star  (IItgincs,  i4s/ronom.,  ii.,  §  2);
cf.  also  in  Movf.hs,  X^as  I'liunizhche  Altcrlhum,  vol.  iii.  pp.  185,  180,  the  passages  from  ancient  writers
ri^feiring  to  the  use  which  the  Phcciiieians  made  of  the  Pole-star  to  guide  tliem  in  navigation.

'  The  manner  in  which  the  Phoenicians  plied  their  trade  is  strikingly  described  in  the  Odyssey,
XV.  40:!-481,  in  the  part  where  Eumaios  relates  how  he  was  carried  oft"  by  a  Sidonian  vessel  and  sold
118  a  slave  ;  cf.  the  passage  which  mentions  the  ravages  of  the  Greeks  on  the  coast  of  the  Delta,  xiv.
262-20.').  Herodotus  (I.  i.)  recalls  the  rape  of  lo,  daughter  of  Inachos,  by  the  Plioeniciana,  who  carried
lier  and  her  companions  into  Egyjit;  on  the  other  hand,  during  one  of  tlieir  Egyptian  e.'cpeditions
they  had  taken  two  priestesses  from  Thebes,  and  had  transported  one  of  them  to  Dodona,  the  other
iiito  Libya  (II.  liv.,  Ivi.).


19(j       SYlilA   AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

night.  But  more  often  it  was  the  Phoenicians  who  took  advauta"-e  of  the  friend-
liness  or  the  weakness  of  their  hosts.  They  would  turn  treacherously  upon  the
unarmed  crowd  when  absorbed  in  the  interest  of  buying  and  selling ;  robbing
and  killing  the  old  men,  they  would  make  prisoners  of  the  young  and  strong,
the  women  and  children,  carrying  them  off  to  sell  them
in  those  markets  where  slaves  were  known  to  fetch  the
highest  price.  This  was  a  recognised  trade,  but  it
exposed  the  Phccnicians  to  the  danger  of  reprisals,
and  made  them  objects  of  an  undying  hatred.
When  on  these  distant  expeditions  they  were
subject  to  trivial  disasters  which  might  lead  to
serious  consequences.  A  mast  might  break,  an
oar  might  damage  a  portion  of  the  bulwarks,
a  storm  miglit  force  them  to  throw  over-
^  board  part  of  their  cargo  or  their
provisions;  in  such  predicaments  they
]iad  no  means  of  repairing  the  damage,
and,  unable  to  obtain  heljJ  in  any
of  tlie  places  they  might  visit,  their  pros-
pects were  of  a  desperate  character.  They
boon,  therefore,  learned  the  necessity  of
establishing  cities  of  refuge  at  various  points  in  the
countries  with  which  they  traded — stations  where
they  could  go  to  refit  and  revictual  their  vessels,  to
fill  up  the  complement  of  their  crews,  to  take  in
new  freight,  and,  if  necessary,  pass  the  winter  or
wait  for  fair  weather  before  continuing  their  voyage.
For  this  purpose  they  chose  by  preference  islands  lying  within  easy  distance  of
the  mainland,  like  their  native  cities  of  Tyre  and  Arvad,  but  possessing  a  good
harbour  or  roadstead.  If  an  island  were  not  available,  they  selected  a
peninsula  with  a  narrow  isthmus,  or  a  rock  standing  at  the  extremity  of  a
promontory,  which  a  handful  of  men  could  defend  against  any  attack,  and
which  could  be  seen  from  a  considerable  distance  by  their  pilots.  Jfost  of
their  stations  thus  happily  situated  became  at  length  important  towns.  They
were  frequented  by  the  natives  from  the  interior,  who  allied  themselves  with
the  new-comers,  and  furnished  them  not  only  with  objects  of  trade,  but  with
soldiers,  sailors,  and  recruits  for  their  army ;  and  such  was  the  rapid  spread  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  51.  lU-  Merleus;  this  figuro-boad  is  ui  tlie
llerlin  Museum  (Euman,  Ausfiilirlickes  Tcrzeicliniss,  No.  11,404,  p.  232),  and  the  photograph  has  been
reproduced  in  tlie  above  drawing  by  tlie  kind  permission  of  the  curator.


HE.^D    OF   A    GAZELLE

FORMING    THE

FIGCRE-HEAD    OP   AN   EGYPTIAN

GALLEY.'


Tin-:    VESSELS    OF    TllK   PUQiNICIANS.


19;


these  colonies,  that  before  long  the  Mediterranean  was  surrounded  by  an  almost
unbroken  chain  of  PhaMiician  strongholds  and  trading  stations.

All  the  towns  of  the  mother  countrj' — Arvad,  Byblos,  Berytus,  Tyre,  and
Sidon — possessed  vessels  engaged  in  cruising  long  before  the  Egyptian  con-
quest of  Syria.'  We  have  no  direct  information  from  any  existing  monument
to  show  us  what  these  vessels  were  like,  but  we  are  familiar  with  the  construc-
tion of  the  galleys  which  formed  the  fleets  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIII"'


.\N    EGYI'TIAX    TIIADIXU    VESSKI,    lit'    TIIK    FIRST    HALF    (JK    TIIK    XVIu""    DTNASTY.-

dynasty.  The  art  of  shipbuilding  had  made  considerable  progress  since  the
times  of  the  Memphite  kings.'"'  From  the  period  when  Egypt  aspired  to
become  one  of  the  great  powers  of  the  world,  she  doubtless  endeavoured  to
bring  her  naval  force  to  the  same  pitch  of  perfection  as  her  land  forces  could
boast  of,  and  her  fleets  probably  consisted  of  the  best  vessels  which  the  dock-
yards of  that  day  could  turn  out.  Phfrnician  vessels  of  this  period  may  there-
fore be  regarded  with  reason  as  constructed  on  lines  similar  to  those  of  the
Egyptian  ships,  differing  from  them  merely  in  tlie  minor  details  of  the
shape  of  the  hull  and  manner  of  rigging.  The  hull  continued  to  be  built
long  and  narrow,  rising  at  the  stem  and  stern.  The  bow  was  terminated  by  a
sort  of  hook,  to  whicii,  in  time  of   peace,  a    bronze    ornament    was  attached.


'  For  the  existence  of  a  navy  at  Uyblos,  sec  p.  1 72  of  tlie  present  work ;  its  vessels,  together  with
those  of  Simyra,  Herytus,  and  Sidon,  are  mentioned  in  the  Tel  il-ATimrna  tablets  (Bezold-Budhh.
ThnTAlfX-AmamaTahhU,^,,.  13,  pi.  :!0,11.  12  14,  17  20:  No-  IIO,  pU.  U4.  0.5,  11.  CS-OS  ;  No.  2,S,  p.  tJI,
11.  .57-G:i).

'  Drawn  by  IJoudicr,  from  a  photograph  by  lieato.

'  For  tbo  Kgyptian  navy  of  the  Memphite  period,  of.  Masi-ero,  Dami  of  Clnllr.ation,  p.  'S'M;  for
(lie  vcmkli  of  (Jiioen  Halsliopsitu,  see  1!.  G\.\iKU,  Das  Seeii-eiien  iler  nlteii  Jigijpter,  in  Di'MiclIEN,
Itenullale,  vol.  i.  pp.  I   -ll  ;  and  MAsmicj,  Di:  iinrhiurt  Xai'Ljatiiiim.  pp.  II    17.


198       SYBIA    AT   THE  BEQINNINO    OF   TEE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

fashioned  to  represent  the  head  of  a  divinity,  gazelle,  or  bull,  while  in  time  of
war  this  was  superseded  by  a  metal  cut-water  made  fast  to  the  hull  by  several
turns  of  stout  rope,  the  blade  rising  some  couple  of  yards  above  the  level  of  the
deck.^  The  poop  was  ornamented  with  a  projection  firmly  attached  to  the
body  of  the  vessel,  but  curved  inwards  and  terminated  by  an  open  lotus-flower.
An  upper  deck,  surrounded  by  a  wooden  rail,  was  placed  at  the  bow  and  stern
to  serve  as  forecastle  and  quarter-decks  respectively,  and  in  order  to  protect
the  vessel  from  the  danger  of  heavy  seas  the  ship  was  strengthened  by  a
structure  to  which  we  find  nothing  analogous  in  the  shipbuilding  of  classical
times  :  an  enormous  cable  attached  to  the  gammonings  of  the  bow  rose  obliquely
to  a  height  of  about  a  couple  of  yards  above  the  deck,  and,  passing  over  four  small
crutched  masts,  was  made  fast  again  to  the  gammonings  of  the  stern.  The  hull
measured  from  the  blade  of  the  cut-water  to  the  stern-post  some  twenty  to  five
and  twenty  yards,  but  the  lowest  part  of  the  hold  did  not  exceed  five  feet  in
depth.  There  was  no  cabin,  and  the  ballast,  arms,  provisions,  and  spare-rigging
occupied  the  open  hold.^  The  bulwarks  were  raised  to  a  height  of  some  two
feet,  and  the  thwarts  of  the  rowers  ran  up  to  them  on  both  the  port  and  star-
board sides,  leaving  an  open  space  in  the  centre  for  the  long-boat,  bales  of
merchandise,  soldiers,  slaves,  and  additional  passengers.^  A  double  set  of
steering-oars  and  a  single  mast  completed  the  equipment.  The  latter,  which
rose  to  a  height  of  some  twenty-six  feet,  was  placed  amidships,*  and  was  held
in  an  upright  position  by  stays.  The  masthead  was  surmounted  by  two  arrange-
ments which  answered  respectively  to  the  top  ["  gabie "]  and  calcet  of  the
masts  of  a  galley.^  There  were  no  shrouds  on  each  side  from  the  masthead  to
the  rail,  but,  in  place  of  them,  two  stays  ran  respectively  to  the  bow  and
stern.     The  single  square-sail  was  extended  between  two  yards  some  sixty  to

'  To  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  details  of  this  structure,  we  have  only  to  compare  tlie  appearance  of  ships
•with  and  witliout  a  out- water  in  the  scenes  at  Thebes,  representing  the  celebration  of  a  festival  at  the
return  of  the  fleet  (Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pis.  11,  12).

^  M.  Glaser  thinks  that  there  were  cabins  for  the  crew  under  the  deck,  and  he  recognises  in  the
sixteen  oblong  marks  on  the  sides  of  the  vessels  at  Deir  el-Bahari  so  many  dead-lights  (^Das  Seeiceseu
der  alien  JEgi/pter,  p.  16) ;  as  there  could  not  have  been  space  for  so  many  cabins,  I  had  concluded
that  these  were  ports  for  oars  to  be  used  in  time  of  battle  {De  qaelques  Xavigalions  des  Jigypliens,
p.  13,  and  notes  1,  S),  but  on  further  consideration  I  saw  that  they  represented  the  ends  of  the  beams
supporting  the  deck.

'  One  of  the  bas-reliefs  exhibits  a  long-boat  in  the  water  at  the  time  the  fleet  was  at  anchor  at
Puanit  (Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  6).  As  we  do  not  find  any  vessel  towing  one  after  her,  we
naturally  conclude  tliat  the  boat  must  have  been  stowed  on  board.

*  For  the  mode  in  which  the  mast  was  stepped  and  maintained  firmly  in  its  place,  see  Belger,
Dech,  Buderhdnke  und  Mastbefestigung  an  ^gyptischen  Schiffsraodellen,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiii.
pp.  27-32.

'  The  "  gabie  "  was  a  species  of  top  where  a  sailor  was  placed  on  the  look-out.  It  is  the  Kapxi'o''""'
of  the  Greeks,  the  "  calcese  "  of  the  Italians.  The  "  calcet  "  is,  properly  speaking,  a  square  block  of
wood  containing  the  sheaves  on  which  the  halyards  travelled.  The  Egyptian  apparatus  had  no
.sheaves,  and  answers  to  the  "  calcet "  on  the  masts  of  a  galley  only  in  its  serving  the  same  purpose.
Its  details  are  given  on  a  large  scale  by  Dijmichen,  Vie  Flotte  einer  Mgyplischen  KSnigin,  pi.  x.


TEE  PB(EN1CIAN  CREWS.  19 'J

seventy  feet  long,  and  each  made  of  two  pieces  spliced  together  at  the  centre.
The  upper  yard  was  straight,  while  the  lower  curved  upward  at  the  ends.  The
yard  was  lioisted  and  lowered  by  two  halyards,  which  were  made  fust  aft  at  the
feet  of  the  steersmen.  Tlie  yard  was  kept  in  its  place  by  two  lifts  which  came
down  from  the  masthead,  and  were  attached  respectively  about  eight  feet  from
the  end  of  each  yard-arm.  When  the  yard  was  hauled  up  it  was  further  sup-
ported by  six  auxiliary  lifts,  three  being  attached  to  each  yard-arm.  The
loner  yard,  made  fast  to  the  mast  by  a  figure-of-eight  knot,  was  secured  by
sixteen  lifts,  wliich,  like  those  of  the  upper  yard,  worked  through  the  "  calcet."
The  crew  comprised  thirty  rowers,  fifteen  on  each  side,  four  top-men,  two
steersmen,  a  pilot  at  the  bow,  who  signalled  to  the  men  at  the  helm  the  course
to  steer,  a  captain  and  a  governor  of  the  slaves,  who  formed,  together  with  ten
soldiers,  a  total  of  some  fifty  men.^  In  time  of  battle,  as  the  rowers  would  be
exposed  to  the  missiles  of  the  enemy,  the  bulwarks  were  further  heightened
by  a  mantlet,  behind  which  the  oars  could  be  freely  moved,  while  the
bodies  of  the  men  were  fully  protected,  their  heads  alone  being  visible
above  it.  The  soldiers  were  stationed  as  follows :  two  of  them  took  their
places  on  the  forecastle,  a  third  was  perched  on  the  masthead  in  a  sort  of  cage
improvised  on  the  bars  forming  the  top,  while  the  remainder  were  posted  on
the  deck  and  poop,  from  which  positions  and  while  waiting  for  the  order  to
board  they  could  pour  a  continuous  volley  of  arrows  on  the  archers  and  sailors
of  the  enemy .^

The  first  colony  of  which  the  Phtenicians  made  themselves  masters  was  that
island  of  Cyprus  whose  low,  lurid  outline  they  could  see  on  fine  summer
evenings  in  the  glow  of  the  western  sky.^  Some  hundred  and  ten  miles  in
length  and  thirty-six  in  breadth,  it  is  driven  like  a  wedge  into  the  angle  which
Asia  Minor  makes  with  the  Syrian  coast :  it  throws  out  to  the  north-east  a
narrow  strip  of  land,  somewhat  like  an  extended  finger  pointing  to  where  the
two  coasts  meet  at  the  extremity  of  the  gulf  of  Issos.  A  limestone  clifi",  of
almost  uniform  height  throughout,  bounds,  for  half  its  length  at  least,  the
northern  side  of  the  island,  broken  occasionally  by  short  deep  valleys,
which  open  out  into  creeks  deeply  embayed.  A  scattered  population  of
fishermen  exercised  their  calling  in  this  region,  and   small   towns,  of  which

'  I  have  made  this  calcalutiua  from  an  examination  of  the  scenes  in  which  sliips  an;  alternativelv
represented  ae  at  anchor  and  under  weigli  (Makikttk,  Z'tir  el-Bahari,  ytl.  (j);  1  know  of  vessels  of
smaller  size, and  consequently  witli  a  smaller  crew,  but  I  know  of  none  larger  or  more  fully  manned.

'  The  details  are  taken  from  the  only  representation  of  a  naval  battle  which  we  possess  up  to  this
moment,  viz  that  of  whicli  I  shall  have  oceaaiou  to  speak  further  on  in  connection  with  the  reign  of
Kamses  III.  (Champoi.liox,  MouumenU  de  VEtjijple,  etc.,  pi.  ccsxii. ;  Eoseluni,  Monumenti  Storici,
pis.  cxxx.,  c\xxi.).

'  For  the  various  names  of  Cyprus  in  classical  antiquity,  see  Exgki.,  Kypros,  vol.  i.  jip.  U-24.


200      sriaA   AT  TEE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  CONQUEST.

we  possess  only  the  Greek  or  Grecised  names — Karpasia,  Aphrodision,  Kerynia,
Lapethos — led  there  a  slumbering  existence.  Almost  in  the  centre  of  the
island  two  volcanic  peaks,  Troodes  and  Olympos,  face  each  other,  and  rise  to  a
height  of  nearly  7000  feet,  the  range  of  mountains  to  which  they  belong —
that  of  Aous — forming  the  framework  of  the  island.  The  spurs  of  this  range
fall  by  a  gentle  gradient  towards  the  south,  and  spread  out  either  into  stony
slopes  favourable  to  the  culture  of  the  vine,  or  into  great  maritime  flats  fringed
with  brackish  lagoons.  The  valley  which  lies  on  the  northern  side  of  this
chain  runs  from  sea  to  sea  in  an  almost  unbroken  level.  A  scarcely  per-
ceptible watershed  divides  the  valley  into  two  basins  similar  to  those  of  Syria,
the  larger  of  the  two  lying  opposite  to  the  Phoenician  coast.  The  soil  consists
of  black  mould,  as  rich  as  that  of  Egypt,  and  renewed  yearly  by  the  overflowing
of  thePediseos  and  its  affluents.  Thick  forests  occupied  the  interior,  promising
inexhaustible  resources  to  any  naval  jjower.  Even  under  tlie  Roman  emperors
the  Cypriotes  boasted  that  they  could  build  and  lit  out  a  ship  from  the  keel  to
the  masthead  without  looking  to  resources  beyond  those  of  their  own  island.'
The  ash,  pine,  cypress,  and  oak  flourished  on  the  sides  of  the  range  of  Aous,^
while  cedars  grew  there  to  a  greater  height  and  girth  than  even  on  the  Lebanon.''
Wheat,  barley,  olive  trees,  vines,  sweet-smelling  woods  for  burning  on  the  altar,
medicinal  plants  such  as  the  poppy  and  the  ladanum,^  henna  for  staining
with  a  deep  orange  colour  the  lips,  eyelids,  palm,  nails,  and  finger-tips  of
the  women,^  all  found  here  a  congenial  habitat :  while  a  profusion  everywhere
of  sweet-smelling  flowers,  which  saturated  the  air  with  their  penetrating  odours
— spring  violets,  many-coloured  anemones,  the  lily,  hyacinth,  crocus,  nar-
cissus, and  wild  rose — led  the  Greeks  to  bestow  ujjou  the  island  the  designa-
tion of  "  the  balmy  Cyprus."  Mines  also  contributed  their  share  to  the
riches  of  which  the  island  could  boast.  lion  in  small  quantities,  alum,
asbestos,  agate  and  other  precious  stones,  are  still  to  be  found  there,  and
in  ancient  times  the  neighbourhood  of  Tatnassos  yielded  copper  in  such
quantities  that  the  Eomans  were  accustomed  to  designate  this  metal  by  the
name  "  Cyprium,"  and  the  word  passed  from  them  into  all  the  languages  of

'  AiiMiAXUs  Marcellixus,  xiv.  t>,  14,  who  dra«-3  his  iuformation  from  au  older  source.

-  The  enumeratiou  of  the  different  species  of  forest  trees  kuown  to  ancient  authors  is  to  be  found
fully  given  in  Excel,  Kypros,  toI.  i.  pp.  o9,  62,  63.

'  Theophkastcs,  Uitt.  Plant.,  v.  S,  9 ;  on  the  development  to  which  forests  had  attaiued  in  ancient
times,  see  the  evidence  given  by  Eratosthenes  in  Straeo,  XIV.  vi.,  §  5,  p.  6S4.

'  DioscoKiDES,  SUt.  Plant.,  i.  12S  ;  Plixy,  Hist,  ynt.,  xii.27.

'  Henna,  Latrsmiia  iitenn'^,  L.,  is  called  '•  kopher"  in  Hebrew,  Kii-rpos  in  Greek,  and  the  flower
Kuirpis,  like  the  goddess  of  Cyprus;  cf.  Engel,  Kijpros,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-66.  The  plant  was  introduced
into  Egypt  about  the  middle  of  the  second  Theban  empire  (Loket,  La  Florij  Pharaonique,  2iid  edit.,
pp.  SO,  81).  The  ancients  derived  the  name  of  the  island  from  that  of  the  plant  (Stepuex  of
Btzastiusi,  s.c.  Kvirpos;  EcsTATHirs,  Com.  ad  liioity^ium  Periegeteu,  v.  308,  509,  in  Mlller-Didot,
Geograplii  Grxci  Miuon-s,  vol.  ii.  p.  312).


THE  NATUnAL   RESOURCES    OF  CYPRUS.


•201


Europe.'  It  is  uot  easy  to  determine  the  race  to  which  tlie  first  inhabitants  of  the
island  belonged,  if  we  are  not  to  see  in  them  a  branch  of  thelvefatiu,  who  frequented
the  Asiatic  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  from  a  very  remote  period.-  In  the  time
of  Egyptian  supremacy  they  called  their  country  Asi,  and  this  name  inclines  one
to  connect  the  people  with  the  .Egeans.''  An  examination  of  the  objects  found
in  the  most  ancient  tombs  of  the  island  seems  to  confirm  this  opinion.     These


consist,  for  the  most  part,  of  weapons  and  implements  of  stone — knives,  hatchets,
hammers,  and  arrow-heads ;  and  mingled  with  these  rude  objects  a  score  of
dififerent  kinds  of  pottery,  chiefly  hand-made  and  of  coarse  design — pitchers  with
contorted  bowls,  shallow  buckets,  especially  of  the  milk-pail  variety,  provided
witli  spouts  and  with  pairs  of  rudimentary  handles.  The  pottery  is  red  or  black
in  colour,  and  the  ornamentation  of  it  consists  of  incised  geometrical  designs.
Copper  and  bronze,  where  we  find  examples  of  these  metals,  do  not  appear  to
have  been  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  ornaments   or   arrow-heads,  but

'  For  the  coiiper  mining  indii>try  iu  aacieiit  timus,  see  Engel,  Kypros,  vol.  i.  pp.  42-53.

-  Birch  ami  Cuaijas  saw  in  Cyprus  the  Ei,'yptiaii  name  Kafit,  Kafiti,  Memoire  mr  une  Patere
igrjptitnnc  du  Mitefc  du  Louvre,  pp.  2S-2S,  50-5'2.  Birch  thoiiglit  that  the  fir.st  syllable  of  Kinpos
containeil  the  element  "Kef,"  "Kaf,"  from  which  Kafit  is  derived,  and  tliat  the  name  ^(piJKe!  given
to  the  Cypriotes  is  another  form  of  the  same  word  ;  cf.  Bkugsch,  Georj.  Inschr.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  S(j,  87,  who
connects  it  with  the  Hebrew  Kaplitlior.

'  "  Asi,"  •'  .Viii,'  was  at  first  sought  for  on  the  .Vsiatic  continent — at  Is  on  the  Kuplirates  (Birch,
Obt.  on  the  Statistical  Talilet  of  Kaniat;,  pp.  •10,  17),  or  in  Palestine  (Brlm^sch,  Geu(j.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pp.
.">!,  52):  the  discovery  of  the  Canopic  decree  allows  us  to  identify  it  with  Cyprus,  and  this  hns  now
been  generally  done  (Buunscu,  (itsch.  JEgijpteno,  p.  .^01  ;  Ed.  Mevkr,  Oemh.  JEijyptens,  p.  2Hi) ;  \V.  M.\x
JUxi.t;R,  Asien  und  Eurnpa,  pp.  3'M,  337).  The  reading  "  Asobi "  is  still  maintained  by  some.  On  the
possible  connection  of  Asi  and  'Atria,  see  JIaspero,  in  tlie  Itevue  Critique,  1S88,  vol.  ii.  p.  199.  \V.  Ma.K
Miillcr  has  tried  to  show  that  Asi  and  .Vlas'a  are  two  forms  of  the  same  word, and  consequently  that
Alasia  is  also  Cyprus  (D«8  Land  Alnsrhya,  in  tlie  Xeitmhrijt  fiir  .Usijr iologie,  vol.  x.  pj).  '257-'2ti4\


202       STRIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF   THE  EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

usually  ia  making  daggers.  There  is  no  indication  anywhere  of  foreign
influence,  and  yet  Cyprus  had  already  at  this  time  entered  into  relations  with
the  civilized  nations  of  the  continent.'  According  to  Chaldtean  tradition,  it
was  conquered  about  the  year  3800  B.C.  by  Sargon  of  Agade:  '^  without  insist-
ing upon  the  reality  of  this  conquest,  which  in  any  case  must  have  been
ephemeral  in  its  nature,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  island  was  sub-
jected from  an  early  period  to  the  influence  of  the  various  peoples  which  lived
one  after  another  on  the  slopes  of  the  Lebanon.  Popular  legend  attributes  to
King  Kinyras  and  to  the  Giblites  [i.e.  the  people  of  Byblos]  the  establishment
of  the  first  Phoenician  colonies  in  the  southern  region  of  the  island — one  of  them
being  at  Paphos,  where  the  worship  of  xidonis  and  Astarte  continued  to  a  very  late
date.^  The  natives  preserved  their  own  language  and  customs,  had  their  own
chiefs,  and  maintained  their  national  independence,  while  constrained  to  submit  at
the  same  time  to  the  presence  of  Phoenician  colonists  or  merchants  on  the  coast,
and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mines  in  the  mountains.  The  trading  centres
of  these  settlers — Kition,  Amathus,  Solius,  Golgos,  and  Tamassos — were  soon,
however,  converted  into  strongholds,  which  ensured  to  Phoenicia  the  monopoly
of  the  immense  wealth  contained  in  the  island.*

Tyre  and  Sidou  had  no  important  centres  of  industry  on  that  part  of  the
Canaanite  coast  which  extended  to  the  south  of  Carmel,  and  Egypt,  even  in
the  time  of  the  shepherd  kings,  would  not  have  tolerated  the  existence  on  her
territory  of  any  great  emporium  not  subject  to  the  immediate  -supervision  of
her  official  agents.  We  know  that  the  Libyan  cliffs  long  presented  an  obstacle
to  inroads  into  Egyptian  territory,  and  baffled  any  attempts  to  land  to  the  west-
wards of  the  Delta ;  the  Phcenicians  consequently  turned  with  all  the  greater
ardour  to  those  northern  regions  which  for  centuries  bad  furnished  them  with
most  valuable  products — bronze,  tin,  amber,  and  iron,  both  native  and  wrought.
A  little  to  the  north  of  the  Orontes,  where  the  Syrian  border  is  crossed  and  Asia
Minor  begins,  the  coast  turns  due  west  and  runs  in  that  direction  for  a  considerable
distance.  The  Phoenicians  were  accustomed  to  trade  along  this  region,  and
we  may  attribute,  perhaps,  to  them  the  foundation  of  those  obscure  cities —

'  An  examination  into  the  origin  of  the  Cypriotes  formed  part  of  the  original  scheme  of  this  work,
together  with  that  of  the  monuments  of  the  various  races  scattered  along  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  and
the  islands  of  the  JSgean ;  but  I  have  been  obliged  to  curtail  it,  in  order  to  keep  within  the  limits  1
had  prescribed  for  myself,  and  I  have  merely  epitomised,  as  briefly  as  possible,  the  results  of  the
researches  undertaken  in  those  regions  dui  ing  the  last  fewy  ears,  particularly  thoseof  Ohuefalsch-Kichter.

'  Cf  what  is  said  on  the  subject  of  this  conquest  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization.,  p.  598.

^  All  the  legends  relating  to  the  foundation  of  Paphos  have  been  brouglit  togetlier  by  Engel,  Kypros,
vol.  i.  pp.  123, 168-173,  vol.  ii.  p.94, etseq  ,  andhy  MovE&s.DasPhouizischeAUerlhum, \ol.  ii.  pp. 226, 227.

*  The  Phcenician  origin  of  these  towns  is  proved  by  the  passages  from  classical  writers  collected
by  Engel,  Kypros,  vol.  i.  pp.  71,  72,  103-105,  109-111,  121-124  (who  admits  it  only  in  the  case  of
Paphos,  Amathus,  and  Kition),  and  by  Moveks,  Das  Fhonizische  AUerihum,  vol.  ii.  p.  221,  et  seq.).  The
date  of  the  colonisation  is  uncertain,  but  with  the  knowledge  wc  possess  of  the  efficient  vessels  belonging
to  the  various  Phcenician  towns,  it  would  seem  difficult  not  to  allow  that  the  coasts  at  least  of  Cyprus
must  have  been  partially  occupied  at  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  invasions.


THE  PHCENICIANS  i.V    THE  ^GKAN  SEA.  203

Kibyra,  Masura,  Kuskopus,  Sylion,  Mygdali",  aud  Sidyma^ — all  of  which  pre-
served their  apparently  Semitic  names  down  to  the  time  of  the  Roman  epoch.
The  whole  of  the  important  island  of  Rhodes  fell  into  their  power,  and  its
three  ports,  lalyso.'*,  Lindos,  and  Kamiros,  afforded  them  a  well-situated  base
of  operations  for  further  colonisation.'-'  On  leaving  Rhodes,  the  choice  of  two
routes  presented  itself  to  them.  To  the  south-west  they  could  see  the  distant
outline  of  Karpathos,  and  on  the  far  horizon  behind
it  the  summits  of  the  Cretan  chain.  Crete  itself
bars  on  the  south  the  entrance  to  the  ^^^jgean,  and
is  almost  a  little  continent,  self-contained  aud  self-
sufficing.  It  is  made  up  of  fertile  valleys  and
mountains  clothed  with  forests,  and  its  inhabitants
could  employ  themselves   in  mines  and    fisheries,     the  mukex  tronculus  and  the

MDREX    BRAUDARIS.

The  Phcenicians  effected  a  settlement  on  the  coast

at  Itanos,  at  Kairatos,  and  at  Arados,^  and  obtained  possession  of  the  peak  of
Cythera,  where,  it  is  said,  they  raised  a  sanctuary  to  Astarte.*  If,  ou
leaving  Rhodes,  they  had  chosen  to  steer  due  north,  they  would  soon  have
come  into  contact  with  numerous  rocky  islets  scattered  in  the  sea  between
the  continents  of  Asia  and  Europe,  which  would  have  furnished  them  with
as  many  stations,  less  easy  of  attack,  and  more  readily  defended  than
posts  on  the  mainland.  Of  these  the  Giblites  occupied  Melos,  while  the
Sidonians  chose  Oliaros  and  Thera,'  and  we  find  traces  of  them  in  every
island  where  any  natural  product,  such  as  metals,  sulphur,  alum,  fuller's
earth,  emery,  medicinal  plants,  and  shells  for  producing  dyes,  offered  an
attraction.''  Tlie  purple  used  by  the  Tyrians  for  dyeing  is  secreted  by  several
varieties  of  molluscs  common  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean ;  those  most
esteemed  by  the  dyers  were  the  Murex  trunculus  and  the  Murex  Brandaris,
and  solid  masses  made  up  of  the  detritus  of  these  shells  are  found  in  enormous

'  No  diroct  evideuce  exists  to  lead  us  to  attribute  tliefouudatiou  of  these  towns  to  the  Plicenicians,
but  the  Semitic  origin  of  nearly  all  the  names  is  au  uucoutested  fact  (Movers,  Das  Phonizische
Alterthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  24(j,  247).

'  For  the'  cycle  of  legends  which  has  preserved  the  memory  of  the  Phoenician  connection  with
Rhodes,  cf.  MovER-s,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  247-257  ;  Kenrick,  Plucnicia,  pp.  78-81 ;  G.  Rawlinson,  Hist,  of
Phoenicia,  pp.  100, 101 ;  Kd.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  230,  231 ;  vol.ii.  pp.  145,  177.

'  MoVER-s,  Das  Phunizische  Alterthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270-272;  Ken'riuk,  Phosnicia,  pp.  81-84;  Ed.
Meyer,  Gtechickte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  233  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  145,  14(j.

«  Movers,  Das  Phiin.  Alterthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270-272 ;  Kenrkjk,  Phienicia,  pp.  30-97  ;  G.  Rawlinson,
Hilt,  of  J'heenicia,  p.  102  ;   Eo.  Meyer,  Gesch.  dee  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  233  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  145,  140.

'  Movers,  Das  Phiin.  Alterthum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  206-200  ;  Kenriok,  Phwnicia,  pp.  94-90 ;  G.  Rawlujson,
Hist,  of  Thmnicia,  pp.  102-104  ;  Ed.  JIever,  Geech.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  233 ;  vol.  ii.  p.  145.
Thucydides  (I.  viii.)  states  that"  the  Phojuioians  and  the  Carians  had  colonised  the  greater  number
of  the  iilea  of  the  .Egeau,  both  Cycbides  aud  Sporades."

"  Sulphur,  alum,  aud  fuller's  earth  at  Melos  (Dioscorides,  H.  PL,  v.  123,  124,  180;  DioDORUS
SiCLLDS,  V.  11 ;  Pliny,  Xut.  Hist.,  xxxv.  19,  50,  52).  Emery  (.irfiipLs)  is  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of
Tliutmosis  III.  (Lersius,  Denlnn,  iii.  30  a,  1.  15)  under  the  form  asmuri.  Schweiiifurth  has  drawn
attention  to  a  lichen  from  Crete  among  the  plants  collected  at  Deir  cl-Bahari  QUeber  Pflauzenrette  aus
altiiijyiitiichen  Griihern,  in  the  Derichte  der  Deutschen  Botanischen  Geeellechaft,  1884,  p.  371,  No.  45).


204      SYBIA    AT   THE   BEGINNING    OF    THE   EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

quantities  in  the  neighbourhood  of  many  Phoenician  towns.     The  colouring
matter  was  secreted  in  the  head  of  the  shellfish.     To  obtain  it  the  shell  was
broken  by  a  blow  from  a  hammer,  and  the  small  quantity  of  slightly  yellowish
liquid  which  issued  from  the  fracture  was  carefully  collected  and  stirred
about   in   salt   water   for  three   days.     It  was  then  boiled  in  leaden
vessels  and  reduced  by  simmering  over  a  slow  fire  ;  the  remainder  was
strained  through  a  cloth  to  free  it  from  the  particles  of  flesh  still
floating  in  it,  and  the  material  to  be  dyed  was  then  plunged  into  the
liquid.     The  usual  tint  thus  imparted  was  that  of  fresh  blood,  in  some
lights  almost  approaching  to  black;   but  careful  manipulation  could
produce  shades  of  red,  dark  violet,  and  amethyst.^     Phoenician  settle-
ments can  be  traced,  therefore,  by  the  heaps  of  shells  upon  the  shore,
the  Cyclades  and  the  coasts  of  Greece  being  strewn  with  this  refuse.
The  veins  of  gold  in  the  Paugaion  range  in  Macedonia  attracted  them
to  that  region,  while  the  islands  oft'  the  Thraciau  coast  ^  received  also
frequent  visits  from  them,  and  they  carried  their  explorations  even
through  the  tortuous  channel  of  the  Hellespont  into  the  Propontis,
drawn  thitlier,  no  doubt,  by  the  silver  mines  in  the  Bithynian  moun-
tains^ which  were  already  being  worked  by  Asiatic  miners.     Beyond
the  calm  waters  of  the   Propontis,  they  encountered  an  obstiicle  to
their  progress  in  another  narrow  channel,  having  more  the  character  of
a  wide  river  than  of  a  strait ;  it  was  with  difficulty  that  they  could
make  their  way  against  the  violence  of  its  current,  which  either  tended  to  drive
their  vessels  on  shore,  or  to  dash  them  against  the  reefs  which  hampered  the
navigation  of  the  channel.     When,  however,  they  succeeded  in  making  the
passage  safely,  they  found  themselves  upon  a  vast  and  stormy  sea,  whose  wooded
shores  extended  east  and  west  as  far  as  eye  could  reach.     From  the  tribes
who  inhabited  them,  and  who  acted  as  intermediaries,  the  Phasnician  traders
were  able  to  procure  tin,  lead,  ambei-,  Caucasian  gold,  bronze,  and  iron,  all
products  of  the  extreme  north — a  region  which  always  seemed  to  elude  their

'  Kenrick,  Phcenicia,  pp.  237-247.  The  principal  references  to  Tyrian  purple  in  classical  authors
are  those  in  Aristotle  (^Hisf.  Anim.,  v.  13)  and  iu  Pliny  (i/.  N^at.,  ix.  3ti,  37);  the  first  experiments
made  by  Cole  in  England  {Observations  on  the  TurpU;  in  the  Philosophical  Trans,  of  London,  vol.  xv.
p.  1280),  continued  and  extended  in  France  by  Kfaumur  (D&:ourerte  d'une  nou  relle  teinture  de  pourpre,
in  the  M^moires  de  I'Acade'mie  des  Scierices,  1711,  pp.  16S-199)  and  by  Du  Hamel  {Quelques  Experiences
sur  la  liqueur  colorante  que  fournit  la  pourpre,  in  the  Me'moires  de  I'Acad.  des  Sciences,  173G,  pp.  6-S,
49-03),  were  coniirnied  by  Ueshayes  (MoUusques  de  la  MAlilerrange,  in  the  Expedition  scientijique  de
Morte,  vol.  iii.  pp.  189-Ull),  and  more  recently  by  Lacaze-Duthiers  (Me'inoire  sur  la  pourpre,  in  the
Annales  des  Sciences  naturelles,  Zoolvgic,  4th  series,  vol.  xii.  pp.  1-92),  and  have  enabled  us  to  discover
the  various  processes  used  iu  the  preparation  of  the  purple  dye.

-  The  fact  that  they  worked  the  mines  of  Thasos  is  attested  by  Herodotus  (VI.  xlvii.,  II.  xliv.  ;  cf
Pai'sanias,  v.  25,  12) ;  for  their  settlements  in  these  regions,  see  Movers,  Das  Ph>>nizische  Alterthum,
vol.  ii.  pp.  273-286,  and  Ed.  Me-yer,  (leschirhte  dig  Allerthums,  vol.  i.  p.  233;  vol.  ii.  p.  144.

'  Pronektos,  on  the  Gulf  of  Ascania,  was  supposed  to  be  a  Phoenician  colony  (Sthphen  of  Byzan-
tium, s.  v.).

'  Drawn  by  Fauolier-Gudin  ;  cf  Mauiette,  Notice  des  principaux  monuments,  1804,  p.  222.


DAGGER  Of
AHMOSIS.*


rilK   PKOPLKS    OF   TEE   MOEAN.


205


pei'severing  eflbrts  to  discover  it.  We  cannot  determine  the  furthest  limits
reached  by  the  Phoenician  traders,  since  they  were  wont  to  designate  the  distant
countries  and  nations  witli  wliich  they  traded  by  the  vague  appellations  of
"  Isles  of  the  Sea  "  and  "  Peoples  of  the  Sea," '  refusing  to  give  more  accurate
information  either  from  jealousy  or  from  a  desire  to  hide  from  other  nations
the  sources  of  their  wealth.

The  peoples  with  whom  they  traded  were  not  mere  barbarians,  contented
with  worthless  objects  of  barter;-   their  clients  included  the  inhabitants  of


UNE   OF   Tllli    HAGclEHS    IIISCUVEKEI)    AT    MYCENiE,    SHUWING    AN    IMITATION    OF    EGYI'TIAX    DECORATION.'

the  iEgean,  who,  if  inferior  to  the  great  nations  of  the  East,  possessed  an
independent  and  growing  civilization,  traces  of  which  are  still  coming  to  light
from  many  quarters  in  the  shape  of  tombs,  houses,  palaces,  utensils,  ornaments,
representations  of  the  gods,  and  household  and  funerary  furniture, — not  only
ill  the  Cyclades,  but  on  tiie  mainland  of  Asia  Minor  and  of  Greece.  No
inferior  goods  or  tinsel  wares  would  have  satisfied  the  luxurious  princes  who
reigned  in  such  ancient  cities  as  Troy  and  Mycena;,  and  who  wanted  the  best
industrial  products  of  Egypt  and  Syria — costly  stuffs,  rare  furniture,  ornate  and
well-wrought  weapons,  articles  of  jewellery,  vases  of  curious  and  delicate
design — such  objects,  in  fact,  as  would  have  been  found  in  use  among  the  sove-
reigns and  nobles  of  Blemphis  or  of  Babylon.  For  articles  to  offer  in  eschan"-e
they  were  not  limited  to  the  natural  or  roughly  worked  products  of  their  own
country.  Their  craftsmen,  though  less  successful  in  general  technique  than
their  Oriental  contemporaries,  exhibited  considerable  artistic  intelligence  and
an  extraordinary  manual  skill.  Accustomed  at  first  merely  to  copy  the  objects
sold  to  them  by  the  Phojnicians,  they  .soon  developed  a  style  of  their  own ;  the
Myceniean  dagger  in  the  illustration  on  this  page,  though  several  centuries
later  in  date  than  that  of  the  Pharaoh  Ahmosis,  appears  to  be  traceable  to  this
ancient  source  of  inspiration,  although  it  gives  evidence  of  new  elements  in


'  These  are  tlio  uaini's  usi'd  liy  thu  JO^jyptiiUis  of  tlie  XIX"'  and  XX"' dynastiea  (E.  ue  Rouoi;,
Kxiratt  (Vun  M^inoire  8ur  Its  Atlaqtirn  flirigtftg  coJitrc  VJuji/pfc,  pp.  .'>,  11>,  et  soq.).

-  Here  a;^ain  I  have  bud  to  restrict  myself  in  descritjing  llie  developmcut  of  the  j^igean  races,  and
must  refer  tlie  reader  for  a  fnitljcr  knowledge  of  their  civilization  to  the  aecounts  given  in  PEiiiiOT-
Ciiii'iEZ,  Uiti.  tli-  VArt,  vol.  vi.  p.  106,  et  .-icq.,  and  Ed.  Mkykr,  Ges<:li.  (Uk  Altcrtliuim,  vol.  ii.  pp.  .5,')-],S2.

'  Drawn  liy  Faiiehcr-Giidiii,  from  the  facnimili;  in  rEiiiior-Cnii'iEz,  Hist,  de  I'Arl,  vol.  vi.  jil.  xviii.


206       STSIA    AT   TEE   BEGINNING    OF   THE   EGYPTIAN   CONQUEST.

its  method  of  decoration  and  in  its  greater  freedom  of  treatment.  The  inhabitants
of  the  valleys  of  the  Nile  and  of  the  Orontes,  and  probably  also  those  of  the
Euphrates  and  Tigris,  agreed  in  the  high  value  they  set  upon  these  artistic
objects  in  gold,  silver,  and  bronze,  brought  to  them  from  the  further  shores  of
tlie  Mediterranean,  which,  while  reproducing  their  own  designs,  modified  them
to  a  certain  extent;  for  just  as  we  now  imitate  types  of  ornamental  work  in
vogue  among  nations  less  civilized  than  ourselves,  so  the  ^gean  people  set
themselves  the  task  through  their  potters  and  engravers  of  reproducing  exotic
models.  The  Phcenician  traders  who  exported  to  Greece  large  consignments
of  objects  made  under  various  influences  in  their  own  workshops,  or  purchased
in  the  bazaars  of  the  ancient  world,  brought  back  as  a  return  cargo  an
equivalent  number  of  works  of  art,  bought  in  the  towns  of  the  West,  which
eventually  found  their  way  into  the  various  markets  of  Asia  and  Africa.  These
energetic  merchants  were  not  the  first  to  ply  this  profitable  trade  of  maritime
carriers,  for  from  the  time  of  the  Memphite  empire  the  products  of  northern
regions  had  found  their  way,  through  the  intermediation  of  the  Haiiinibu,  as
far  south  as  the  cities  of  the  Delta  and  the  Thebaid.  But  this  commerce
could  not  be  said  to  be  either  regular  or  continuous;  tlie  transmission  was
carried  on  from  one  neighbouring  tribe  to  another,  and  the  Syrian  sailors  were
merely  the  last  in  a  long  chain  of  intermediaries — a  tribal  war,  a  migration,  the
caprice  of  some  chief,  being  sufficient  to  break  the  communication,  and  even
cause  the  suspension  of  transit  for  a  considerable  period.  The  Phoenicians
desired  to  provide  against  such  risks  by  undertaking  themselves  to  fetch  the
much-coveted  objects  from  their  respective  sources,  or,  where  this  was  not
possible,  from  the  ports  nearest  the  place  of  their  manufacture.  Keappear-
ino-  with  eacli  returning  year  in  the  localities  where  they  had  established
emporia,  they  accustomed  the  natives  to  collect  against  their  arrival  sucli
products  as  they  could  profitably  use  in  bartering  with  one  or  other  of  their
many  customers.  They  thus  established,  on  a  fixed  line  of  route,  a  kind  of
maritime  trading  service,  which  placed  all  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  in
direct  communication  with  eacli  other,  and  promoted  the  blending  of  the
youthful  West  with  the  ancient  East.


THE    EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN
DYNASTY.


THUTMOSIS    I.    AND    HIS    ARMY HaTSHOPSITU    AND    THUTMOSIS    III.  :    THE   ORGANISATION    OF

THE   SYRIAN    TROVINCES — AMENuTHES    III.  :     THE    WORSHlrPERS   OF    ATONU.

Thiltmosis  I.'s  ciiiiipaiyii  iu  Syria — Thv  organisafiuii  of  the  Egyptian  army  :  tlie  infantry
of  fhii  line,  the  archers,  the  horses,  and  thr  charioteers — The  classification  of  the  troops  accordiny
to  their  arms — Marching  and  encampnunt  in  the  enemi/s  cowntrg :  battle  array — Chariot-
charges — Tlie  enumeration  and  distribution  of  the  spoil — TJir  rice-royalty  of  Kush  and  the
arloption  of  Egyptian  customs  by  the  Etldopian  tribes.

Tlie  first  successors  of  ThAtmosis  I.  :  Alimasi  and  HatshopsitA,  TlMmosis  II.  —  The  temple
of  Deir  el-Bahari  and  the  buildings  of  Karnak — The  Ladders  of  Incense — Ttie  expedition  to
Pilanit :  bartering  with  the  natives,  the  return  of  the  fleet.

TliAtmosis  III.  :  his  departure  for  Asia,  the  battle  of  Meijlddo  and  tlie  sidjjecfion  of  Soiilherit
Syria — The  year  23  to  tlie  year  28  of  his  reign—  Conquest  of  Lofan/l  and  of  Mitdnni — Tlie
campaign  of  the  33''''  year  of  the  king's  reign  and  the  taking  of  Qodshn  in  the  42'"'  gear — The
tribute  of  the  south — The  triumph-song  of  Anion.

The  constitution  of  the  Egyptian  empire — The  Crown  vassals  and  their  relations  with  the
Pharaoh — The  king's  messengers — The  allied  states — Rogal  presents  and  marriages;  the  status
of  foreigners  in  the  royal  harem — Commerce  with  Asia,  its  resourcea  and  its  rifks ;  protection,
granted  to  the  national  industries,  and  treaties  of  ex'radition.


(      208      )

Amenuthes  II.,  Iiis  caiujxdijiin  in  Si/ria  iiiid  Nithi((  —  Thiilmosis  IV.  ;  Jih  iJrcain  under  tlie
.iliniluir  of  ihf  SpJiin.i-  and  his  marricige — Anienofliex  III.  and  Ills  pnirr/til  reign — The  f/reat
huilding  toorks — TJie  temples  of  Nubia  :  Soleb  and  his  sanctuary  built  h\j  AmenCithes  III.,  Gelel
Barked,  Elephantine — The  beautifning  of  Thebes :  the  temple  of  MAt,  the  temples  of  Amon  at
Lnxor  and  at  Karnak,  the  tomb  of  Amenothes  III.,  the  chapel  and  the  colossi  of  Memiwii.

Till'  increasiiiii  importance  i if  Anion  and  his  priests:  preference  sJiomi  hi/  Amenxdhes  III.
for  the  Heliopolitan  ijods,  his  marriage  with  Tii — The  influence  of  Tii  over  Amenothes  IV.  :  the
decadence  of  Amon  and  of  Thebes,  Atonil  and  Khilitniatonil — Change  of  physiognomy  in
Khilniaton,  his  character,  his  government,  Jiis  relations  with  Asia :  the  tombs  of  Tel  el-Amarna
tmd  the  art  of  the  period — T/Uanlliamon,  At:  the  return  of  the  Pliaraohs  to  Tliebes  and  the
close  of  the  XVIII"  diinash/.


IdttMlA


TUE    TEMPLE    OF    LrXOR  IX   ITS   PRESENT   CONDITION,    SEEN    FUOM    THE    LEFT   BANK    OF   THE    NILE.'


CHAPTER     III.

THE     EIGHTEENTH     THEBAN      DYNASTY.

Thfitmosis   I.   aud  his  army — HatsliopsitCi   and    Tbiltiiioeis  III.  :    the  orgauiaation  of   tho  Syrian
proviuces — AmenOthes  III.:  the  royal  worshippers  of  AtonQ.

rj^IIE  account  of  the  first  expedition  undertaken  by  Tliiitmosis
in  Asia,  a  region  at  that  time  new  to  tlie  Egyptians,
would  be  interesting  if  we  could  iay  our  hands  upon  it.  We
should  perhaps  find  in  the  midst  of  oificial  documents,  or
among  the  short  phrases  of  funerary  biographies,  some  indica-
tion of  the  impression  which  the  country  produced  upon  its
conquerors.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  merchants  or
adventurers,  no  one  from  Thebes  to  Memphis  had
any  other  idea  of  Asia  than  that  which  could  be
gathered  from  the  scattered  notices  of  it  in  the
semi-historical  romances  of  the  preceding  age.
The  actual  siglit  of  the  country  must  have  been
a  revelation ;  everything  appearing  new  and  para-
doxical to  men  of  whom  the  majority  had  never  left
their  fatherland,  except  on  some  warlike  expedition  into  Ethiopia  or  on  some
rapid  raid  along  tlie  coasts  of  the  Eed  Sea.  Instead  of  their  own  narrow
valley,  extending  between  its  two  mountain  ranges,  and  fertilised  by  the
periodical  overflowing  of  the  Nile  which  recurred  regularly  almost  to  a  day,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Ooleuischeft'.  Tho  vignette,  by  Faucher-Gudin,
reprcsenta  tho  fine  btatue  of  Amenuthes  II.  in  red  granite,  which  came  from  Thebes,  aud  is  now  iu
tho  Turin  Museum ;  cf.  Okoubti,  Catalogo  illustrato  del  Mvnumenti  lujizi,  vol.  i.  p.  59,  u.  3.


210  THE  EIGHTEENTH   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.

they  bad  before  them  wide  irregular  plains,  owing  their  fertility  not  to
inundations,  but  to  occasional  rains  or  tlie  influence  of  insignificant  streams ;
hills  of  varying  heights  covered  with  vines  and  other  products  of  cultivation  ;
mountains  of  different  altitudes  irregularly  distributed,  clothed  with  forests,
furrowed  with  torrents,  their  summits  often  crowned  with  snow  even  in  the
hottest  period  of  summer:  and  in  this  region  of  nature,  where  everything
was  strange  to  them,  they  found  nations  differing  widely  from  each  other  in
appearance  and  customs,  towns  with  crenellated  walls  perched  upon  heights
diiBcult  of  access ;  and  finally,  a  civilization  far  excelling  that  which  they
encountered  anywhere  in  Africa  outside  their  own  boundaries.

Thutmosis  succeeded  in  reaching  on  his  first  expedition  a  limit  which  none
of  his  successors  was  able  to  surpass,  and  the  road  taken  by  him  in  this
campaign^ — from  Gaza  to  Megiddo,  from  Megiddo  to  Qodshu,  from  Qodshu
to  Carchemish — was  that  which  was  followed  henceforward  by  the  Egyptian
troops  in  all  their  expeditions  to  the  Euphrates.  Of  the  diflSculties  which  he
encountered  on  his  way  we  have  no  information.  On  arriving  at  Naharaim,
however,  we  know  that  he  came  into  contact  with  the  army  of  the  enemy,  which
was  under  the  command  of  a  single  general — perhaps  the  King  of  Mitanui
himself,  or  one  of  the  lieutenants  of  the  Cosssean  King  of  Babylon— who  had
collected  together  most  of  the  petty  princes  of  the  northern  country  to  resist  the
advance  of  the  intruder.^  The  contest  was  hotly  fought  out  on  both  sides,  but
victory  at  length  remained  with  the  invaders,  and  innumerable  prisoners  fell
into  their  hands.  The  veteran  Ahmosi,  son  of  Abina,  who  was  serving  in  his
last  campaign,  and  his  cousin,  Ahmosi  Pannekhabit,  distinguished  themselves
according  to  their  wont.  The  former,  having  seized  upon  a  chariot,  brought  it,
with  the  three  soldiers  who  occupied  it,  to  the  Pharaoh,  and  received  once  more
"  the  collar  of  gold ; "  '^  the  latter  killed  twenty-one  of  the  enemy,  carrying  off
their  hands  as  trophies,  captured  a  chariot,  took  one  prisoner,  and  obtained  as
reward  a  valuable  collection  of  jewellery,  consisting  of  collars,  bracelets,  sculp-
tured lions,  choice  vases,  and  costly  weapons.^  A  stele,  erected  on  the  banks  of
the  Euphrates  not  far  from  the  scene  of  the  battle,  marked  the  spot  which  the
conqueror  wished  to  be  recognised  henceforth  as  the  frontier  of  his  empire.''
He  re-entered  Thebes  with  immense  booty,  by  which  gods  as  well  as  men
profited,  for  he  consecrated  a  part  of  it  to  the  embellishment  of  the  temple  of
Amon,  and  the  sight  of  the  spoil  undoubtedly  removed  the  lingering  prejudices

•  Cf.,  however,  what  is  said  of  the  wealjness  of  the  Cossffian  kings  in  pp.  118-128  of  the  present
volume ;  this  prince  of  Naharaim  was  probably  one  of  the  kings  of  Mitanui.

'  Inscription  of  Ahmasi-si-AUna,  11.  36-39;  cf.  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  12;  Chabas,  Les  Fasteurs  en
£gypte,  p.  22;  BBrcscH,  Geschichte  JEgijptens,  pp.  231,  235,  271.

'  Lepsius,  Ausicahl  der  u'ichtigsten  Urlunden,  vol.  siv.  A.  11.  S,  9,  B.  11.  9,  10 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Notes
siir  quelqnes  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'Bistoire,  in  the  Zuiisclirift,  1883,  p.  78, 11.  9-11.

'  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III.,  11.  17,  IS  ;  cf.  E.  de  Eodge,  Notice  de  qttelquesfrcujments  de  V Inscription,
de  Karnali,  pp.  17,  18,  24-26,  where  the  fact  was  noticed  for  the  first  time.


TEE   CAMPAIGN   OF   TUUTMOSIS   I.    IN  SYRIA.  211

which  the  people  had  cherished  ugaiust  expeditions  beyond  the  isthmus.
Thutmosis  was  held  up  by  his  subjects  to  the  praise  of  posterity  as  having  come
into  actual  contact  with  that  country  and  its  people,  which  had  hitherto  been
known  to  the  Egyptians  merely  through  the  more  or  less  veracious  tales  of  exiles
and  travellers.  The  aspect  of  the  great  river  of  the  Naharaim,  which  could
be  compared  with  the  Nile  for  the  volume  of  its  waters,  excited  their  admiration.
They  were,  however,  puzzled  by  the  fact  that  it  flowed  from  north  to  south,
and  even  were  accustomed  to  joke  at  the  necessity  of  reversing  the  terms
employed  in  Egypt  to  express  going  up  or  down  the  river.^  This  first  Syrian
campaign  became  the  model  for  most  of  those  subsequently  undertaken  by
the  Pharaohs.  It  took  the  form  of  a  bold  advance  of  troops,  directed  from  Zalu
towards  the  north-east,  in  a  diagonal  line  through  the  country,  who  routed  on  the
way  any  armies  which  might  be  opposed  to  them,  carrying  by  assault  such  towns
as  were  easy  of  capture,  while  passing  by  others  which  seemed  strongly  defended
— pillaging,  burning,  and  slaying  on  every  side.  There  was  no  suspension  of  hos-
tilities, no  going  into  winter  quarters,  but  a  triumphant  return  of  the  expedition
at  the  end  of  four  or  five  months,  with  the  probability  of  having  to  begin  fresh
operations  in  the  following  year  should  the  vanquished  break  out  into  revolt.^

The  troops  employed  in  these  campaigns  were  superior  to  any  others  hitherto
put  into  the  field.  The  Egyptian  army,  inured  to  war  by  its  long  struggle  with
the  Shejjherd-kings,  and  kept  in  training  since  the  reign  of  Ahmosis  by  having
to  repulse  the  perpetual  incursions  of  the  Ethiopian  or  Libyan  barbarians,
had  no  diflBculty  in  overcoming  the  Syrians ;  not  that  the  latter  were  wanting
in  courage  or  discipline,  but  owing  to  their  limited  supply  of  recruits,  and  the
political  disintegration  of  the  country,  they  could  not  readily  place  under  arms
such  enormous  numbers  as  those  of  the  Egyptians.  Egyptian  military  organi-
sation had  remained  practically  unchanged  since  early  times :  the  army  had
always  consisted,  firstly,  of  the  militia  who  held  fiefs,  and  were  under  the  obli-
gation of  personal  service  either  to  the  prince  of  the  nome  or  to  the  sovereign ;  ^

'  A  [mssagc;  from  the  inscription  of  Tombos  (Lei'sius,  Denlnii.,  iii.  5  a,  11.  13,  14)  thus  describes
the  Euphrates :  mi  pijl  qodnu  lihudodi  m  hhoniti.  Now,  liUvdu  means  to  go  north,  and  hhonit,  to  go
touth,  so  that  the  literal  translation  of  the  phruse  would  call  the  Euphrates,  "  The  river  whore  lie  who
goet  north  sails  as  if  he  wvre  going  south,"  that  is  to  sa}-,  whore  the  contrary  term  to  that  used  on  the
Nile  must  be  employed  in  speaking  of  going  up  or  down  the  river.  The  solution  of  this  little  problem
was  first  given  by  E.  de  Rouge  (_£lude  des  Monuments  dii  Massif  de  Karnak,  in  the  Mdanges
d'Archfulotjie  i-'gyptienne  et  Astyrienne,  vol.  i.  p.  -11,  n.  4;  cf.  Pieul,  Petites  Etudes  Egyplvlogiques,
p.  26,  n.  5S),  from  whom  it  was  borrowed  by  Brugsch  {Gvschichte  JEgi/ptens,  p.  2ti5  ;  Die  JEgyptische
Viilkertufel,  in  the  Ahhaudlungeu  of  the  Berlin  Congress,  A/rikanische  Section,  pp.  33,34;  ani  Die
JEgi/ptologie,  pp.  2(J0,  2G1),  and  from  Brugsch  has  been  passed  on  to  other  Egyptologists.

'  From  the  account  of  the  campaigns  of  Ameiiuthes  II.,  I  thought  we  might  conclude  that  this
I'harauh  wintered  in  Syria  at  least  once  (Uistoire  Ancieiino  dcs  peuples  de  VUrient,  1875,  p.  207;  cf.
I.lEULEiN,  Sur  u»  nouvel  argument  chronohnjique  tir€  dcs  rd'cils  date's  des  guerres  phitraoniques  en  Si/rie,
in  the  Uecueilde  Travaux,  vol.  i.  p.  101);  but  the  text  does  not  admit  of  this  interpretation,  and  we
must,  therefore,  for  the  present  give  up  the  idea  that  the  Tharaohs  ever  spent  more  than  a  few  months
of  the  year  on  hostile  territory  ( W.  Max  lltxLEit,  Asitn  und  Europa,  p.  2U5,  n.  4).

•  At  that  time,  the  active  part  of  this  contingent  which  served  in  the  infantry  wont  by  the  name


212  TEE  EIGnTEESTII    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

secondly,  of  a  permanent  force/  which  was  divided  into  two  corps,  dis-
tributed respectively  between  the  Said  and  the  Delta.  Those  companies
which  were  quartered  on  the  frontier,  or  about  the  king  either  at  Thebes  or
at  one  of  the  royal  residences,  were  bound  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to
muster  for  a  campaign  at  any  given  moment.^  The  number  of  natives  liable
to  be  levied  when  occasion  required,  by  "  generations,"  ^  or  as  we  should  say  by
classes,  may  have  amounted  to  over  a  hundred  thousand  men,*  but  they  were
never  all  called  out,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  tlie  army  on  active  service  ever
contained  more  than  thirty  thousand  men  at  a  time,  and  probably  on  ordinary
occasions  not  much  more  than  ten  or  fifteen  thousand.^  The  infantry  was,  as
we  should  expect,  composed  of  troops  of  the  line  and  light  troops.  The  former
wore  either  short  wigs  arranged  in  rows  of  curls,  or  a  kind  of  padded  cap  by
way  of  a  helmet,  thick  enough  to  deaden  blows ;  the  breast  and  shoulders  were
undefended,  but  a  short  loin-cloth  was  wrapped  round  the  hips,  and  the  stomach
and  upper  part  of  the  thighs  were  protected  by  a  sort  of  triangular  apron,
sometimes  scalloped  at  the  sides,  and  composed  of  leather  thongs  attached  to
a  belt.  A  buckler  of  moderate  dimensions  had  been  substituted  for  the
gigantic  shield  of  the  earlier  Theban  period ; ''  it  was  rounded  at  the  top  and

of  i'au,  or,  as  a  collective,  a-uitu  (Maspeko,  Notes  au  jour  Je  jour,  §  3,  in  the  Proceedings,  1890-91,
vol.  xiii.  p.  303 ;  Bkcgsch,  Die  .Egyptologie,  p.  233  ;  W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  uud  Europa,  p.  270,  n.  2).

'  BouKiAXT,  A  Tliehes,  iu  the  Secueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  44, 1.  23 ;  W.  Max  Muller,  Erklarung
des  grossen  Dehrets  des  Konigs  Har-m-liebe,  in  the  Zeilsclui/t,  18SS,  pp.  S2-S4.

-  On  the  organisation  of  military  service  in  Egypt,  see  Maspero,  Daa-it  of  Civilization,  pp.  SOS-
SOS,  452,  453.  Kecruitiug  is  represented  in  several  Theban  tombs  (Virey,  Tombeaux  de  Pehsukker,
in  the  Mi'nioires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  v.  pp.  294, 29,") ;  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et
de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  clvii.  1-3,  5,  6,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  4S4-4S7,  831 ;  Bouriant,  Le  Tombeau  d'Hartnhabi,  in
the  M€moires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  v.  pp.  419-422.)

^  Zamda.  On  the  meaning  of  this  word,  cf.  Maspero,  iJludes  de  Mythologie  et  d'Arohgblogie
Fgyptiennes,  vol.  i.  p.  56,  n.  2.  The  soldiers  taken  from  these  classes  are  represented  at  Deir  el-
Bahari,  as  hastening  armed  to  meet  the  troops  returning  from  the  Puanit  (Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,
pis.  11,  12).

'  The  only  numbers  which  vre  know  are  those  given  by  Herodotus  for  the  Saite  period  (II.  clxvi.).
which  are  evidently  exaggerated  (Wiedemaxn,  HerodoVs  zweites  Bucli,  p.  577).  Coming  down  to
modern  times,  we  see  that  Mehemet-Ali,  from  1S30  to  1840,  had  nearly  120,000  men  in  Syria,  Egypt,
and  the  Sudan  ;  and  in  1841,  at  the  time  when  the  treaties  imposed  upon  him  the  ill-kept  obligation
of  reducing  his  army  to  18,000  men,  it  still  contained  81,000.  We  shall  probably  not  be  far  wrong
in  estimating  the  total  force  which  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  lords  of  the  whole  valley
of  the  Nile,  and  of  part  of  Asia,  had  at  their  disposal  at  120,000  or  130,000  men ;  these,  however,
were  never  all  called  out  at  once.

'  We  have  no  direct  information  respecting  the  armies  acting  in  Syria  ;  we  only  know  that,  at  the
battle  of  Qodshii,  Ramses  II.  had  against  him  2500  chariots  containing  three  men  each,  making  7500
charioteers,  besides  a  troop  estimated  at  the  Ramesseum  at  SOOO  men,  at  Luxor  at  9000  (Goetsse,
Texles  historiques  d' Ipsamboul,  in  the  Secueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viii.  p.  138),  so  that  the  Syrian  army
probably  contained  about  20,000  men.  It  would  seem  that  the  Egyptian  army  was  less  numerous,
and  I  estimate  it  with  great  hesitation  at  about  15,000  or  18,000  men:  it  was  considered  a  powerful
army,  while  that  of  the  Hittites  was  regarded  as  an  innumerable  host.  A  passage  in  the  Anastasi
Papyrus,  No.  1,  pis.  xiv.  1.  1, — svi.  1.  5,  tells  us  the  composition  of  a  corps  led  by  Ramses  II.  against
the  tribes  in  the  vicinity  of  Qoceir  and  tlie  Eahanii  valley  ;  it  consisted  of  5000  men,  of  whom  020  were
Shardana,  1(300  Qahak,  70  Mashauasha,  and  SSO  Negroes  (Chabas,  Voyage  d'un  Egyptien,  pp.  49-72).

*  For  an  illustration  of  this  shield,  taken  from  the  tombs  of  Siiit,'see  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civiliza-
tion, p.  457.


THE  NEW   ORGANISATION   OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY.


213


ofteu  furnished  with  a  solid  metal  boss,  which  the  experienced  soldiers  always
endeavoured  to  present  to  the  enemy's  lances  and  javelin<.  Their  weapons
consisted  of  pikes  about  five  feet  long,  with  broad  bronze  or  copper  points,  occa-
sionally of  flails,  axes,  daggers,  short  curved  swords,  and  spears ;  the  trumpeters
were  armed  with  daggers  only,  and

the  officeis  did  not  as  a  lule  en-

i*  t
cumber    themselves    with    eithei

bucklei  01    pike,  but  boie  an   axe


A    TLATOON    (troop)    OF    EfiTPIlAN    SPEAKMEN    AT    DEIK   BL-BAHAEI.'

and  dagger,  and  occasionally  a  bow.'^  The  light  infantry  was  composed  chiefly  of
bowmen — indidiu — the  celebrated  archers  of  Egypt,  whose  long  bows  and  arrows,
used  with  deadly  skill,  speedily  became  renowned  throughout  the  East ;  ^  the

'  Drawu  by  Fuucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograijh  taken  liy  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,
its  Plan,  its  Founders,  and  its  first  Explorers.     Introduclonj  Memoir,  pi.  viii.

-  Besides  the  soldiers  pictured  above,  we  possess  hardly  any  military  illustrations  from  the  earlier
reigns  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  excepting  the  troops  represented  in  the  pictures  of  the  fetes  celebrated
on  the  return  of  the  fleet  from  the  Puanit,  under  Hatshopsitii  (DOmicuen,  Die  Flotte  eincr  .JUgi/ptischen
KSnigin,  pis.  v.,  vi.,  vii.,  viii.,  x.,  xiii. ;  Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pis.  i,  11,  12,  lo);  we  meet  with
some  of  them  again  on  the  monuments  of  AmemJtlies  IV.  (Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  92)  and  of  Harmhabi
(ChaiiI'OLLIOX,  Monuments  de  I'Egijpteet  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cxii. ;  ^osELhiNl,  Moniimenli  Storiei,  p\.  xliv.
ter ;  Lepsius,  Denhn.,  iii.  121  h;  and  for  details,  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Castoms,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.
p.  186,  etseq. ;  Ehmax,  JSgyijten  und  .Eijyptiselies  Leben,  pp.  7H-723).

'  These  pidalii  are  mentioned  in  the  Tol  el-Amarna  despatches  as  forming  the  principal  part  of
the  troops  which  garrisoned  those  Asiatic  towns,  wliich  were  subject  to  the  Egyptians  or  allied  to  them
(Wiedemann,  Delattbe,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.xv.
1802-9:5,  pp.  317,  318  ;  Erman,  iu  Zim.iiehn'.s  Die  Keilsehriftbriefe  aus  Jerusalem,  in  tlio  Zeitschri/l  fiir
Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  p.  250,  n.  7 ;  W.  JIax  Mi'lleii,  Zu,  dm  Keilschriflbriefen  ans  Jerusalem,  in  the
ZtiUchriJl  Jiir  Assijriologie,  vol.  vii.  jip.  C4,  G5).  The  idea  that  these  archers  were  foreign  njercenaries
might  seem  natural  when  their  collective  name  was  read  shamirili,  and  compared  with  the  Coptic


214  THE  EIGHTEENTH    TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

quiver,  of  the  use  of  wliich  their  ancestors  were  ignorant,  had  been  borrowed
from  the  Asiatics,  probably  from  the  HyksOs,  and  was  carried  hanging  at  the  side
or  slung  over  the  shoulder.^  Both  spearmen  and  archers  were  for  the  most  part
pure-bred  Egyptians,  and  were  divided  into  regiments  of  unequal  strength,
each  of  which  usually  bore  the  name  of  some  god — as,  for  example,  the  regiment
of  Ka  or  of  Phtah,  of  Amon  or  of  Sutkhu  ^ — in  which  the  feudal  contingents,
each  commanded  by  its  lord  or  his  lieutenants,  fought  side  by  side  with  the
king's  soldiers  furnished  from  the  royal  domains.  The  effective  force  of  the
army  was  made  up  by  auxiliaries  taken  from  the  tribes  of  the  Sahara  and  from
the  negroes  of  the  Upper  Nile.^  These  auxiliaries  were  but  sparingly  em-
ployed in  early  times,  but  their  numbers  were  increased  as  wars  became  more
frequent  and  necessitated  more  troops  to  carry  them  on.  The  tribes  from  which
they  were  drawn  supplied  the  Pharaohs  with  an  inexhaustible  reserve ;  they
were  courageous,  active,  indefatigable,  and  inured  to  hardships,  and  if  it  had
not  been  for  their  turbulent  nature,  which  incited  them  to  continual  internal
dissensions,  they  might  readily  have  shaken  off  the  yoke  of  the  Egyptians.
Incorporated  into  the  Egyptian  army,  and  placed  under  the  instruction  of
picked  ofScers,  who  subjected  them  to  rigorous  discipline,  and. accustomed  them
to  the  evolutions  of  regular  troops,  they  were  transformed  from  disorganised
hordes  into  tried  and  invincible  battalions.*

The  old  army,  which  had  conquered  Nubia  in  the  days  of  the  Papis  and
the  Usirtasens,  had  consisted  of  these  three  varieties  of  foot-soldiers  only,  but

shemmo,  -which  signifies  foreigner  (BnUGSOH,  Biclionnaire  nigroglyphigue,  pp.  1391,  1392,  and  Die
JEgyptohgie,  pp.  240-243);  but  it  is  no  longer  admissible  since  the  true  reading  of  the  word  is
known — pidtti — and  the  pictures  at  Deir  cI-Bahari,  in  wliich  the  archers  are  represented,  show  that
they,  as  well  as  the  heavy  infentry,  belonged  to  the  old  Egj-ptian  race.

•  The  questions  relating  to  the  Introduction  of  the  quiver  are  discussed  in  Maspero,  Notes  aujour
Ujour,  §  IS,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1891-92,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  1S4-187.

2  On  the  division  of  the  Egyptian  armies  into  battalions  and  regiments,  of.  Wilkinson,  Manners
and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  19.'^,  et  seq. ;  Er.m.\n,  .Sgypten,  pp.  71G,  717.  The  army  of  Ramses  II.
at  the  battle  of  Qodshii  comprised  four  corps,  which  bore  the  names  of  Amon,  Kii,  Phtah,  and  Siitkhii.
Other  lesser  corps,  designated  by  the  name  of  sa,  sau,  the  (pv\ai  or  tribes,  were  named  the  Tribe  of
Pharaoh,  the  Tribe  of  the  Beauty  of  the  Solar  disk  (Mariette,  Catalogue  ggn^ral  des  monuments  d'Abydos,
pp.  38o,  3S6,  Nos.  1062,  10G3 ;  pp.  388,  889,  No.  1070 ;  p.  391,  No.  1076) :  these,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,
must  have  been  troops  raised  on  the  royal  domains  by  a  system  of  local  recruiting,  who  were  united
by  certain  common  privileges  and  duties  which  constituted  them  an  hereditary  militia,  whence  they
were  called  tribes.  These  military  tribes  are  probably  what  the  author  of  the  treatise  De  Iside  (§  72,
Pakthey's  edit.,  pp.  126, 127)  calls  the  yffn,  those  races  into  which  the  army  of  Osiris  was  divided,
and  who  each  bore  as  a  standard  some  divine  emblem,  the  worship  of  which  was  common  to  all  who
composed  the  army ;  cf.  Brugsch,  Die  JUgyptologie,  pp.  235,  23lj.

^  These  Ethiopian  recruits  are  occasionally  represented  in  the  Theban  tombs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,
among  others  in  the  tomb  of  Pahsftkhir  (Viret,  Le  Tombeau  de  Pehsuhher,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission
Fran^aise  du  Caire,  vol.  v.  pp.  294,  295).

*  The  armies  of  Hatshopsitfi  already  included  Libyan  auxiliaries,  some  of  which  are  represented
at  Delr  el-Bahari  (Dumichen,  Die  Flotte  einer  JUgyptischen  EHiiigin,  pis.  vi.,  xi. ;  Mariette,  Deir
el-Bahari,  pi.  12)  ;  others  of  Asiatic  origin  are  found  under  Amenuthes  r\''.  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  92),
but  they  are  not  represented  on  the  monuments  among  tlie  regular  troops  until  the  reign  of  Kamses  II.,
when  the  Shardana  appear  for  the  first  time  among  the  king's  body-guard  (E.  de  Eouge,  Extrait  d'un
Memoire  sur  les  attaques  des  peuples  de  la  mer,  pp.  23-25).


THE   nORSE  AND    THE    WAR- CHARIOT.


215


since  the  invasion  of  the  Shephertls,  a  new  element  had  been  incorporated  into
the  modern  army  in  the  shape  of  the  chariotry,  which  answered  to  some  extent
to  the  cavalry  of  our  day  as  regards  their  tactical  employment  and  efficacy.^
Tlie  horse,  when  once  introduced  into  Egypt,  soon  became  fairly  adapted  to  its
environment."  It  retained  both  its  height  and  size,  keeping  the  convex  fore-
head— which  gave  the  head  a  slightly  curved  profile — the  slender  neck,  the


A    PLATOON    OP   EGYPTIAN    ARCHERS    AT    llEIK    EL-BAHARI.=


narrow  hind-quarters,  the  lean  and  sinewy  legs,  and  the  long  flowing  tail  which
had  characterised  it  in  its  native  country.  The  climate,  however,  was
enervating,  and  constant  care  had  to  be  taken,  by  the  introduction  of  new
blood  from  Syria,  to  prevent  the  breed  from  deteriorating.^  The  Pharaohs
kept  studs  of  horses  in  the  principal  cities  of  the  Nile  valley,  and  the  great
feudal  lords,  following  their  example,  vied  with  each  other  in  the  possession  of
numerous  breeding  stables.  The  office  of  superintendent  to  these  establish-
ments, which  was  at  the  disposal  of  the  Master  of  the  Horse,  became  in  later

'  The  part  played  by  chariots  in  the  Egyptian  armies  was  first  studied  by  Eosellini,  Monumenti
Civili,  vol.  iii.  pp.  232-271 ;  afterwards  by  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  222-
241;  and  finally  by  Textor  de  Eavisi,  Etudes  sur  les  Chars  de  guerre  ^fjyptiens,  in  the  Congres
provincial  des  Orientalistes  Fran^ais,  tenu  a  Saint-6tienne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  439-472.

^  The  characteristics  of  the  Egyptian  horse  have  been  described  by  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Des
Chevaux  chiz  les  Anciens  Fgyptiens  (in  Perron,  Le  Nd^g'ri,  traduit  de  I'Arabe  d'Ahu-Behr-ibn-Bedr,
vol.  i.  pp.  128-135) ;  by  Sansom,  Trails  de  Zooteclmie,  pp.  48-50 ;  and  by  Pietrement,  Les  Cheraux  dans
lee  temps  pr^historiques  et  histnriques,  pp.  485-488.  On  the  date  of  the  introduction  of  the  horse  into
Egypt,  cf.  p.  51  of  tho  present  work.

"  Drawn  by  Fauchur-Gudin,  from  a  photograph ;  cf.  Dumichen,  Die  Flolte  einer  JEgijptischen
KSnujin,  pis.  viii.,  x.,  and  Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  11.

'  The  numbers  of  horses  brought  from  Syria  either  as  spoils  of  war  or  as  tribute  paid  by  the
vanrjuiehed  are  frequently  recorded  in  the  Annals  of  TliiUmosis  III.  (32  mares  are  mentioned  in  1.  5,
188  in  1.  8,  2G  iu  1.  0,  260  in  1.  22,  180  in  1.  40),  and  tho  number  would  be  far  larger  were  the  inscrip-
tion not  mutilated.  Besides  the  usual  species,  powerful  stallions  were  imported  from  Northern  Syria,
which  were  known  by  the  Semitic  name  of  Abiri,  the  strong  (^Anastasi  Papyrus  IV.,  pi.  xvii.  11.  8,  9  ;
cf.  Recueil  cU  'Iranaiix,  vol.  ii.  p.  146,  n.  3  ;  Bondi,  Dem  nehriiisch-ph/iniziselien  Sprachzwige  augehHrige
LehmcCrter  in  Ilieroglyphischen  und  Uieratischen  Texlen,  pp.  24-27).  In  the  tombs  of  the  XVIII'"
dynasty,  the  arrival  of  Syrian  horses  in  Egypt  is  sometimes  represented  (Boubiant,  Le  Tomheau
d'Harmhahi,  pi.  iv.,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  v.  p.  422).


216


THE  EIGETEENTn   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


times  one  of  the  most  important  State  appointments.'  The  first  chariots  intro-
duced into  Egypt  were,  like  the  horses,  of  foreign  origin,^  but  when  built  by
Egyptian  workmen  they  soon  become  more  elegant,  if  not  stronger,  than  their
models.  Lightness  was  tlie  quality  chiefly  aimed  at ;  and  at  length  the  weight
was  so  reduced  that  it  was  possible  for  a  man  to  carry  his  chariot  on  his  shoulders


THli    KGVPTIAX    CHAUIOT    PKESERVED    IN   THE   FLORENCE    MUSEUM.'

without  fatigue.  The  materials  for  them  were  on  this  account  limited  to  oak
or  ash  and  leather ;  metal,  whether  gold  or  silver,  iron  or  bronze,  being  used  but
sparingly,  and  then  only  for  purposes  of  ornamentation.  The  wheels  usually  had
six,  but  sometimes  eight  spokes,  or  occasionally  only  four.  The  axle  consisted
of  a  single  stout  pole  of  acacia.  The  framework  of  the  chariot  was  composed
of  two  pieces  of  wood  mortised  together  so  as  to  form  a  semicircle  or  half-


'  On  ihe  Masters  of  the  Horse — Mirsusimutu — and  on  the  place  which  they  occupied  in  the  EamessiJ
liierarohy,  of.  Maspero,  £ludes  t^gypiiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  y'J-41,  and  Brcgsoh,  Die  JEgyptoIogie,  pp.  "210,
238.  In  the  story  of  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  Ethiopian  Pionkhi,  studs  are  indicated  at
Hermopolis  (11.  01-6G),  at  Athribis  (11.  lO'.i,  110),  in  the  towns  to  the  east  and  in  the  centre  of  the
Delta  (11. 111-119), and  at  Sais  (1.  i;>8).  Diodorus  Siculus(i.  15)  relates  that,  in  his  time,  the  founda-
tions of  100  stables,  each  capable  of  containing  tiOO  horses,  were  still  to  be  seen  on  the  western  bank
of  the  river  between  Memphis  and  Thebes.  On  the  management  of  the a}tu,alnt,oc  stables, of.  Virey,
£lude  sur  un  parcliemin  rap  parte' dc  Thebes,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  480-400,
where  too  wide  a  sense  is  attributed  to  the  word  itself.

'  This  fact  is  proved  by  the  very  form  of  the  names  marhahiti,  which  is  the  Hebrew  marhabulh,
and  agalati,  which  is  the  Hebrew  agalah.  For  everything  relating  to  this  subject,  cf.  Chabas,  £tude
sur  r Antiquity' historique,  '2nd  edit.,  pp.  421-457,  and  Bondi,  Dem  HehrdiseU-phonizischen  Spraehzweige
angehSrige  Lehnivorter  in  Hieroghjphischen  und  Hieralischen  Texten,  pp.  38,  44-57,  110).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  taken  by  Petrie  (cf.  Eosellixi,  Monumenti  Civili,
pi.  cxxii.  1) ;  the  original  is  at  present  in  the  Florence  Museum  (Migi.iarisi,  Indication  succinate  des
■monuments  Egypliens  au  Musie  de  Florence,  1850,  pp.  94, 05,  No.  2678).  Kosellini  considered  this  chariot
to  be  of  Scythian  origin  (^Mojiumenti  Cirili,  vol.  iii.  pp.  263-2G9),  and  his  opinion  is  still  sometimes
accepted  ;  it  is,  however,  an  Egyptian  chariot,  but  constructed  for  funerary  use,  to  be  placed  in  a  tomb,
and  its  destination  explains  the  excessive  lightness  of  its  construction,  and  the  imperfections  of  its  build.


THE   CHARIOTEER.


217


ellipse,  and  closed  by  a  straight  bar ;  to  this  frame  was  fixed  a  floor  of  sycomore
wood  or  of  plaited  leather  thongs.  The  sides  of  the  chariot  were  formed  of
upright  panels,  solid  in  front  and  open  at  the  sides,  each  provided  with  a
hand-rail.      The  pole,   which  was  of  a  single  piece  of  wood,  was  bent  into


an  elbow  at  about  one-fifth  of  its  length
from  the  end,  which  was  inserted  into
i^  the  centre  of  the  axletree.  On  the
gigantic  T  thus  formed  was  fixed  the
body  of  the  chariot,  the  hinder  part  resting  on  the  axle,  and  the  front  attached
to  the  bent  part  of  the  pole,  while  the  whole  was  firmly  bound  together  with
double  leather  thongs.  A  yoke  of  hornbeam,  shaped  like  a  bow,  to  which  the
horses  were  harnessed,  was  fastened  to  the  other  extremity  of  the  pole.'-^  The
Asiatics  placed  three  men  in  a  chariot,  but  the  Egyptians  only  two;  the
warrior — sinni — whose  business  it  was  to  fight,  and  the  shield-bearer — qazana
— who  protected  his  companion  with  a  buckler  during  the  engagement.^  A
complete  set  of  weapons  was  carried  in  the  chariot — lances,  javelins,  and
daggers,  curved  spear,  club,  and  battle-axe — while  two  bow-cases  as  well  as  two

'  Dranu  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  ;  cf.  Champolmon,  Monuments  de  VEgijpte  el  de
la  Nuhie,  pi.  Ixiv. ;  Eoselliki,  Monumeuti  Stvrici,  pis.  liv.  1,  Ixvii.  The  picture  is  of  the  time  of
Eamses  II.,  and  comes  from  the  temple  of  Beit-Wally  in  Nuhia.

'  The  names  of  the  difierent  parts  of  the  Egyptian  chariot  are  enumerated  in  the  texts  ])reserved  in
the  Anattasi  Papyrus  No.  !,  pi.  xviii.  1.  3,  et  seq.,  the  Anaiitasi  Papyrus  IV.,  pi.  xvi.  1.  7,  et  seq.,  and  tlie
Kliller  Papyrus,  pis.  i.  1. 1,  ii.  1.  2,  published  by  Wiedemann,  Eieratische  Texte  aus  den  Muscen  zu  Berlin
und  Paris,  pis.  x.,  xi.  The  most  curious  of  these  has  bceu  interpreted  by  Euman,  Uymne  sur  Ic  char  du
roi,  in  tlio  Coiujres  de  St.-Etienne,  vol.  ii.  jip.  ■130—138,  and  llicrat.  Ostraha,  in  Zeitschrift,  1880,  pji.  94, 9.3.

'  The  part  played  by  the  qazana,  as  well  as  his  Semitic  origin,  was  discovered  by  E.  i>e  Kougk,
Xolice  de  quelques  textcs  hie'roglyphitiues  T^cemmcut  publics  ]iar  M.  Greene,  p.  2G  ;  that  of  the  siiini  by
Masi'ERo,  Etudes  Eijypliennes,  vol.  ii.  p.  41,  whence  it  has  passed  to  Bbugscu,  Die  JEgyptolugie,  pp.
U15,  237.     The  former  is  the  r/i'/oxus  or  eefia/tuir,  the  latter  the  7r<c()aiSaT7)s  of  the  Homeric  poems.


218  TEE  EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

large  quivers  were  hung  at  the  sides.  The  chariot  itself  was  very  liable  to
upset,  the  slightest  cause  being  snfHcient  to  overturn  it.  Even  when  moving
at  a  slow  pace,  the  least  inequality  of  the  ground  shook  it  terribly,  and  when
driven  at  full  speed  it  was  only  by  a  miracle  of  skill  that  the  occupants  could
maintain  their  equilibrium.  At  such  times  the  charioteer  would  stand  astride
of  the  front  panels,  keeping  his  right  foot  only  inside  the  vehicle,  and  planting
the  other  firmly  on  the  pole,  so  as  to  lessen  the  jolting,  and  to  secure  a  wider
base  on  which  to  balance  himself.^  To  carry  all  this  into  practice  long  educa-
tion was  necessary,  for  which  there  were  special  schools  of  instruction,  and
those  who  were  destined  to  enter  the  army  were  sent  to  these  schools  when  little
more  than  children.  To  each  man,  as  soon  as  he  had  thoroughly  mastered  all
the  difiBculties  of  the  profession,  a  regulation  chariot  and  pair  of  horses  were
granted,  for  which  he  was  responsible  to  the  Pharaoh  or  to  his  genei'als,  and  he
miffht  then  return  to  his  home  until  the  next  call  to  arms.^  The  warrior  took
precedence  of  the  shield-bearer,  and  both  were  considered  superior  to  the  foot-
soldier  ;  the  chariotry,  in  fact,  like  the  cavalry  of  the  present  day,  was  the
aristocratic  branch  of  the  army,  in  which  the  royal  princes,  together  with  the
nobles  and  their  sons,  enlisted.'*  No  Egyptian  ever  willingly  trusted  himself
to  the  back  of  a  horse,  and  it  was  only  in  the  thick  of  a  battle,  when  his  chariot
was  broken,  and  there  seemed  no  other  way  of  escaping  from  the  melee,  that  a
warrior  would  venture  to  mount  one  of  his  steeds.*  There  appear,  however,  to
have  been  here  and  there  a  few  horsemen,  who  acted  as  couriers  or  aides-de-
camp; they  used  neither  saddle-cloth  nor  stirrups,  but  were  provided  with
reins  with  which  to  guide  their  animals,  and  their  seat  on  horseback  was  even
less  secure  than  the  footing  of  the  driver  in  his  chariot.^

The  infantry  was  divided  into  platoons  of  six  to  ten  men  each,  commanded
by  an  officer  and  marshalled  round  an  ensign,  which    represented   either   a

'  Cf.  the  representations  of  the  king  fighting  in  Champollios,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la
Nuhie,  pi.  Ixiv.,  and  in  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  liv.  1,  Isvii.,  one  of  which  is  reproduced  on
p.  217  of  the  present  -work.  It  was  a  posture  frequently  adopted  in  the  mele'e,  when  the  king  was
about  to  strike  the  enemy  on  either  hand  with  the  javelin,  club,  or  spear  ;  when  he  drew  the  bow
he  would  stand  with  both  feet  on  the  floor  of  the  chariot.

'  Anastasi  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  vl.  11.  2-10 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Du,  Genre  ipistolaire  chez  les  Anciens
£gyptiens,  pp.  42,  43;  Erman,  ^gijpten  und  JEgyptisckes  Leben,  pp.  721,  722.  ;

=  On  this  precedence  of  theoflScersof  the  chariots  over  those  of  the  infantry,  cf.  the  treatise  on  the
hierarchy  published  and  commented  on  by  Maspeko,  £tudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  40,  41 ;  the  king's
sons,  as  for  example  those  of  Eamses  II.  and  Eamses  III.,  often  acted  as  shield-bearers  to  their  father.

*  In  the  great  inscription  in  which  Bliuephtah  relates  his  victory  over  the  peoples  of  the  sea,  Chabas
thought  he  discovered  the  mention  of  oficers  tcho  were  on  the  king's  horses,  and  who  set  off  ia  pursuit
of  the  vanquished  {Etudes  surl'Antiqiiit^kistorique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  197,  433,  n.  2);  but,  on  the  contrary ,
the  text  says  that  it  was  charioteers,  sinj!4«,  not  riders,  who  did  this  (Mabiette,  Karnak,  pi.  53, 1.  38) .

'  There  is  a  figure  of  a  horseman  on  an  incised  bronze  axe  in  the  British  Museum  (Wilkinson.
Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  278),  and  several  others  are  represented  in  battle  pictures,
as  in  Champollios,  Monuments  de  V£gypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  xiii.;  or  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Cieili,
pi.  cxx.,  vol.  iii.  p.  240,  et  seq.;  and  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  xlvi.  2,  Ivii.,  Ixsxvii.,  xcv.,  cviii.,cx.,cxx.,
where  there  are  as  many  Egyptians  as  Asiatics.  On  this  subject,  cf.  Chaeas,  Etudes  sur  VAnliquite
historique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  430-437,  and  Brugsch,  Die  ^gyptologie,  p.  237.


TEE  HANKING   AND    ARMAMENT   OF   THE    TROOPS.


21»


sacred  animal,  au  emblem  of  the  king  or  of  his  double,  or  a  divine  figure
placed  upon  the  top  of  a  pike ;  ^  this  constituted  an  object  of  worship  to  the
group  of  soldiers  to  whom  it  belonged.  We  are  unable  to  ascertain  how  many
of  these  platoons,  either  of  infantry  or  of  chariotry,  went  to  form  a  company  or
a  battalion,  or  by  what  ensigns  the  diiferent  grades  were  distinguished  from
each  other,  or  what  was  their  relative  order  of  rank.     Bodies  of  men,  to  the


AN    EGYPTIAN    LEAENINa    TO   RIDE,    FltOM    A    UAS-RELIEF    IN   THE    BOLOGNA    MUSEUM. -

number  of  forty  or  fifty,  are  sometimes  represented  on  the  monuments,  but  this
may  be  merely  by  chance,  or  because  the  drauglitsman  did  not  take  the  trouble
to  give  the  proper  number  accurately.  The  inferior  ofBcers  were  equipped  very
much  like  the  soldiers,  with  the  exception  of  the  buckler,  which  they  do  not
appear  to  have  carried,  and  certainly  did  not  when  on  the  march ;  the  superior
officers  might  be  known  by  their  umbrella  or  flabellum,  a  distinction  which  gave
them  the  right  of  approaching  the  king's  person.^  The  military  exercises  to  which
all  these  troops  were  accustomed  probably  differed  but  little  from  those  which
were  in  vogue  with  the  armies  of  the  Ancient  Empire ;  ^   they  consisted  in

'  Either  Plutarch,  or  whoever  wrote  the  treatise  De  hide  (§  72,  Partiiey's  edit.,  p.  12G),  assures  us
that  the  companies  and  regiments  of  the  Egyptian  army  were  analogous  to  tlie  rd^eis  and  the  \6xin
of  the  Greeks.  On  the  standards,  cf.  Diodorus  Siculus,  i.  SG ;  Plutarch,  De  Iside  et  Oeiride,  §  72,
Parthey's  edit.,  pp.  12G,  127;  and  the  examples  collected  by  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd
edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  195-197.

■  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Flinders  Petrie.

•  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  196,  197,  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to
observe  this  fact.  The  umbrella-bearer,  zai-sirit,  was  inferior  in  rank  to  the  flabellum-bearer,  whose
place  was  on  the  king's  right  hand,  zai-khuU  hi-inami-f  (cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  £gypliennes,  vol.  ii.
p.  41,  and  Brugsch,  Die  JEgyptologie,  pp.  2:!G,  2:!7.

*  See  the  representation  of  some  of  these  exercises  in  Maspero,  Daien  of  Civilization,  pp.  452,  45:!.


220


THE  EIGHTEENTH  THEBAN  DYNASTY.


wrestling,  boxing,  jumping,  running  either  singly  or  in  line  at  regular  distances
from  each  other,  manual  exercises,  fencing,  and  shooting  at  a  target;  the  war-
dance  had  ceased  to  be  in  use  among  the  Egyjitian  regiments  as  a  military
exercise,  but  it  was  practised  by  the  Ethiopian  and  Libyan  auxiliaries.  At  the
beginning  of  each  campaign,  the  men  destined  to  serve  in  it  were  called  out
by  the  military  scribes,  who  supplied  them  with  arms  from  the  royal  arsenals.

Then  followed  the  distri-
bution of  rations.  The
soldiers,  each  carrying  a
small  linen  bag,  came
up  in  squads  before  the
commissariat  ofiScers,  and
each  received  his  own
allowance.^  Once  in  the
enemy's  country  the  army
advanced  in  close  order,
the  infantry  in  columns  of
four,  the  officers  in  rear,
and  the  chariots  either  on
the  right  or  left  flank,  or
in  the  intervals  between
divisions.^  Skirmishers  thrown  out  to  the  front  cleared  the  line  of  march,  while
detached  parties,  pushing  right  and  left,  collected  supplies  of  cattle,  grain,  or
drinking-water  from  the  fields  and  unprotected  villages.*    The  main  body  was


THE   WAR-UAXCE   OF    TUE    TIJIIHU    AT   DEIR  EL-BAHAKI."


'  We  see  the  distribution  of  arms  made  by  the  scribes  and  other  officials  of  the  royal  arsenals
represented  in  the  pictures  at  5Iedinet-Abu  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgijpie  et  de  la  Nubie,
pi.  ccxviii.,  aud  vol.  i.  p.  3GS;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  csxv.,  and  vol.  v.  pp.  19-'23).  The
calling  out  of  the  classes  was  represented  in  the  Egyptian  tombs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  (ViiiEY,  Le
Toiubtau  d^An^iiemab  et  le  tomheau  de  Pelisul;her,  in  tlie  Me'moires  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  v.
pp.  221,  228-231,  2SS,  289),  as  well  as  the  distribution  of  supplies.  Questions  relating  to  the  army  of
the  Theban  dynasties  have  been  fully  treated  by  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Civili,  vol.  iii.  pp.  217-232.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph ;  cf.  Dvmichen,  Die  Ilotte  finer  J^gyptischen
Konigin,  pis.  vi.,  xi.,  and  JIariette,  Deir  el-Baliari,  pi.  12.

=  The  marches  of  the  army  of  Ramses  II.  are  represented  in  Champollion,  Monuments,  pi.  xxxiii. ;
Rosellini,  Monu.  Star.,  pis.  Ixxxvii.,  xcvi.,  xcvii.,  cvii. ;  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  155;  MapvIEtte.
Itine'raire  de  la  Haute-Eijtjpte,  vol.  i.  pi.  32.  Those  of  the  army  of  Ramses  III.  were  first  reproduced
in  the  Description  de  V  Egypte,  Ant.  vol.  ii.  pi.  10,  and  subsequently  by  Chajipolliox,  iUoHu?Hen<»,
pis.  ccvii.,  ccxvii.,  ccxix.,  ctxxi. ;  Rosellini,  Momt.  Stor..  pis.  csxvi.,  cxxix.,  cxxx.,  cxxxvii.  The
inarch  in  columns  of  four  of  the  archers  and  hciivy  infantry  is  illustrated  by  the  discovery,  made  at
Meir,  of  the  two  bands  of  soldiers  who  are  represented  on  p.  223  of  the  present  volume.  They  are  of
the  time  of  the  first  Theban  empire,  as  is  shown  by  the  archers  being  without  quivers ;  but,  with  the
exception  of  this  detail,  their  equipment  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  infantry  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.
The  statuette  of  one  of  tlieir  commanding  officers  is  said  to  be  in  London,  in  the  hands  of  Captain
Myers.

*  See  the  scenes  represented  around  Dapilr,  in  which  the  troops  of  Ramses  II.  are  pillaging  the
•country  (Rosellini,  Monu.  Stor.,  pi.  xcviii.;  LEPsirs,  Denl:m.,  iii.  166;  Makiette,  Itin^raire  de  la
Haute- Egijpte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  59),  aud  also  those  in  which  the  Shaiisil  with  their  flocks  are  fleeing  from  the


MAIiCEES  AND   ENCAMPMENTS   IN  HOSTILE    TERRITORT.


221


followed  by  the  baggage  train  ;  it  comprised  not  only  supplies  and  stores,  but
cooking-utensils,  coverings,  and  the  entire  paraphernalia  of  the  carpenters'  and
blacksmiths'  shops  necessary  for  repairing  bows,  lances,  daggers,  and  chariot-
poles,  the  whole  being  piled  up  in  four-wheeled  carts  drawn  by  asses  or  oxen.
The  army  was  accompanied  by  a  swarm  of  non-combatants,  scribes,  soothsayers.


VjV-'£;^'-;';^;i>j:^'


^rsrc


^%*C^  > .,  '


>Mi


A    COLtMN    OF   TROOPS    ON    THE    MARCH,  CHARIOTS    AND   INFANTRT.'

priests,  heralds,  musicians,  servants,  and  women  of  loose  life,  who  were  a  serious
cause  of  embarrassment  to  the  generals,  and  a  source  of  perpetual  danger  to
military  discipline.^  At  nightfall  they  halted  in  a  village,  or  more  frequently
bivouacked  in  an  entrenched  camp,  marked  out  to  suit  the  circumstances  of  the
case.^  This  entrenchment  was  always  rectangular,  its  length  being  twice  as  great
as  its  width,  and  was  surrounded  by  a  ditch,  the  earth  from  which,  being  banked
up  on  the  inside,  formed  a  rampart  from  five  to  six  feet  in  height ;  the  exterior

king  in  person  (CnAiiroLi.ioN,  Monuments,  ])I.  xii. ;  Eosellini,  31onu.  Stor.,  pi.  Ixxx.);  in  the  same
way,  at  Medinet-Abu,  tlie  troops  of  Ramses  III.  are  pillaging  the  country  near  a  besieged  town
(Champollion'.  Monuments,  pi.  ccxxviii.).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Voymje  de  la
Uault-Kijij-pte,  vol.  i.  pi.  51.  The  bas-relief,  which  ia  in  the  temjjlo  of  Eamscs  II.  at  Abydos,  represents
the  march  of  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Egyptian  army  at  the  battle  of  Qodshii.

=  The  whole  of  this  description  is  talien  from  the  pictures  of  camp-life  in  the  time  of  Ramses  II.,
at  Luxor  and  the  Ramesseum  (Champollion,  Monuments,  pis.  xvii.  his,  xxix.,  xxx);  some  of  them
are  reproduced  on  pp.  222,  221  of  the  present  volume.

'  ThCitmosis  III.  camped  successively  in  the  town  of  Gaza,  in  tlie  villages  of  Yurza  and  Yulima,
and  in  the  plain  near  Megiddo  (Maspeiio,  Uifcit  dc  la  camimgne  contre  Mageddo  sous  ThoiUmos  Ill.y
in  the  Itecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  00,  51,  55).l


222


TEE  EIGETEENTH   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.


of  this  was  then  entirely  faced  with  shields,  square  below,  but  circular  in  shape
at  the  top.  The  entrance  to  the  camp  was  by  a  single  gate  in  one  of  the  longer
sides,  and  a  plank  served  as  a  bridge  across  the  trench,  close  to  which  two
detachments  mounted  guard,  armed  with  clubs  and  naked  swords.  The  royal
quarters  were  situated  at  one  end  of  the  camp.  Here,  within  an  enclosure,
rose  an  immense  tent,  where  the  Pharaoh  found  all  the  luxury  to  which  he


i.,.^..pmi^


IB^'  L^W^%  J..^


4-


'      1;  t    ,


ISiOUi


AN   EGYPTIAN  FORTIFIED  CAMP,   FORCED   BY   THE   ENEMY.'

was  accustomed  in  his  palaces,  even  to  a  portable  chapel,  in  which  each  morning
he  could  pour  out  water  and  burn  incense  to  his  father,  Amon-Ea  of  Thebes.
The  princes  of  the  blood  who  formed  his  escort,  his  shield-bearers  and  his
generals,  were  crowded  together  hard  by,  and  beyond,  in  closely  packed  lines,
were  the  horses  and  chariots,  the  draught  bullocks,  tlie  workshops  and  the  stores.
The  soldiers,  accustomed  from  childhood  to  live  in  the  open  air,  erected  no  tents  or
huts  of  boughs  for  themselves  in  these  temporary  encampments,  but  bivouacked
in  the  open,  and  the  sculptures  on  the  fafades  of  the  Theban  pylons  give  us  a
minute  picture  of  the  way  in  which  they  employed  themselves  when  off  duty.


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pLotograph  taken  by  Beato  in  1895.  It  represents  the  camp  of
Kamses  II.  before  Qodshd  :  the  upper  angle  of  the  enclosure  and  part  of  the  surrounding  wall  have
been  destroyed  by  the  Khati,  whose  chariots  are  pouring  in  at  the  breach.  In  the  centre  is  the  royal
tent,  surrounded  by  scenes  of  military  life.  This  picture  has  been  sculptured  partly  over  an  earlier
one  representing  one  of  the  episodes  of  the  battle  ;  the  latter  had  been  covered  with  stucco,  on  which
the  new  subject  was  executed.  Part  of  the  stucco  has  fallen  away,  and  the  king  in  his  cliariot,  with
a  few  other  iigures,  has  reappeared,  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  later  picture.


224


THE  EiaiiTEENTIl    TIIEDAN  DYNASTY.


Here  one  man,  while  cleaning  his  armour,  superintends  the  cooking.  Another,
similarly  engaged,  drinks  from  a  skin  of  wine  held  up  by  a  slave.  A  third
has  taken  his  chariot  to  pieces,  and  is  replacing  some  portion  the  worse  for
wear.  Some  are  sharpening  their  daggers  or  lances ;  others  mend  their
loin-cloths  or  sandals,  or  exchange  blows  with  fists  and  sticks.  The  baggage,
linen,  arms,  and  provisions  are  piled  in  disorder  on  the  ground ;  horses,  oxen,
and  asses  are  eating  or  chewing  the  cud  at  their  ease ;  while  here  and  there


W^v^2lWnW^{W^W(^


SCIOSKS    TKOM    MILIIAKV    LIFE    IN    AN    ECVI'TIAN    lAMT.'

a  donkey,  relieved  of  his  burden,  rolls  himself  on  the  ground  and  brays  with
delight.3

The  success  of  the  Egyptians  in  battle  was  due  more  to  the  courage  and
hardihood  of  the  men  than  to  the  strategical  skill  of  their  commanders.  We
find  no  trace  of  manoeuvres,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  understand  the  word,
either  in  their  histories  or  on  their  bas-reliefs,  but  they  joined  battle  boldly
with  the  enemy,  and  the  result  was  decided  by  a  more  or  less  bloody  conflict."
The  heavy  infantry  was  placed  in  the  centre,  the  chariots  were  massed  on  the
flanks,  while  light  troops  thrown  out  to  the  front  began  the  action  by  letting  fly


'  Drawn  by  FaucUer-Giuliu,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato ;  cf.  Ciiampolliox,  Monuments,  pis.  xxix.,
XXX. ;  RosKLLiNi,  Motiu.  Slor.,  pis.  Ixxxvii.,  xcviii.-c,  cvi.,  evil.;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  151,  155.  The
original  is  in  the  Kamesseum.

'  We  are  speaking  of  the  camp  of  Thatmosis  IH,  near  Alttna,   the  day  before  the  battle   of
Megiddo,  and  the  words  put  into  the  mouths  of  the  soldiers   to   mark  their  vigilance  are  the  same
as  those  which  wo  find  in  the  Ramesseum  and  at  Luxor,  written  above  the  guards  of  the  camp
where.  Bamses  TI.  is  reposing  (Maspero,  Ili'cit  de  la  campagne  contre  Mageddo,  in  tbo  Eeciteil  de
TroMux,  vol.  ii.  p.  141).

^  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  217.


THE   CHARIOT  IN  BATTLE.


225


volleys  of  arrows  and  stones,  which  through  tlie  skill  of  the  bowmen  and  slingers
did  deadly  execution ;  then  the  pikemen  laid  their  spears  in  rest,  and  pressing
straight  forward,  threw  their  whole  weight  against  tlie  opposing  troops.  At  tlie
same  moment  the  charioteers  set  oft"  at  a  gentle  trot,  and  gradually  quickened
tlieir  pace    till   they  dashed  at  full  speed  upon   tlie  foe,  amid  the  confused


ENCOUNTER  BETWEEN   EGYPTIAN   AND   ASIATIC  CHARIOTS.'

rumbling  of  wheels  and  the  sharp  clash  of  metal.  The  Egyptians,  ac-
customed by  long  drilling  to  the  performance  of  such  evolutions,  executed
these  charges  as  methodically  as  though  they  were  still  on  their  parade-ground
at  Thebes  ;  if  the  disposition  of  the  ground  were  at  all  favourable,  not  a  single
chariot  would  break  the  lino,  and  the  columns  would  sweep  across  the  field

'  Drawn  by  Kaiicber-Gudin,  from  a  drawing  by  Ciiampollion,  Monuments  de  V6<jijpte  et  de  la
Nubie,  pi.  xxvi. ;  Kosellini,  Monumenli  Storici,  pi.  ciii.  This  represents  a  charge  of  the  Egyptian
chariots  against  those  of  the  Ilittitea  at  the  battle  of  QoasliCi.


226  THE  EIGETEENTE    THEBAN   DYNASTY.

without  swerving  or  falling  into  disorder.     The  charioteer  had  the  reins  tied
round  his  body,  and  could,  by  throwing  his  weight  either  to  the  right  or  the
left,  or  by  slackening  or  increasing  the  pressure  through  a  backward  or  forward
motion,  turn,  pull  up,  or  start  his  horses  by  a  simple  movement  of  the  loins  :  he
went  into  battle  with  bent  bow,  the  string  drawn  back  to  his  ear,  the  arrow
levelled  ready  to  let  fly,  while  the  shield-bearer,  clinging  to  the  body  of  the
chariot  with  one  hand,  held  out  his  buckler  with  the  other  to  shelter  his  com-
rade.    It  would  seem  that  the  Syrians  were  less  skilful :  their  bows  did  not
carry  so  far  as  those  of  their  adversaries,  and  consequently  they  came  within  ■
the  enemy's  range  some  moments  before  it  was  possible  for  them  to  return  the
volley  with  effect.      Their  horses  would  be  thrown  down,  their  drivers  would
fall  wounded,  and  the  disabled  chariots  would  check  the  approach  of  those
following  and  overturn  them,  so  that  by  the  time  the  main  body  came  up  with
the  enemy  the  slaughter  would  have  been  serious  enough  to  render  victory
hopeless.     Nevertheless,  more  than  one  charge  would  be  necessary  finally  to
overturn  or  scatter  the  Syrian  chariots,  which,  once  accomplished,  the  Egyptian
charioteer  would  turn  against  the  foot-soldiers,  and,  breaking  up  their  ranks,
would  tread  them  down  under  the  feet  of  his  horses.^     Nor  did  the  Pharaoh  spare
himself  in  the  fight ;    his  splendid  dress,  the  urseus  on  his  forehead,  and  the
nodding  plumes  of  his  horses  made  him  a  mark  for  the  blows  of  the  enemy,  and
he  would  often  find  himself  in  positions  of  serious  danger.     In  a  few  hours,  as  a  -
rule,  the  conflict  would  come  to  an  end.     Once  the  enemy  showed  signs  of  giving
way,  the  Egyptian  chariots  dashed  upon  them  precipitously,  and  turned  the
retreat  into  a  rout :  the  pursuit  was,  however,  never  a  long  one  ;  ^  some  fortress
was  always  to  be  found  close  at  hand  where  the  remnant  of  the  defeated  host
could  take  refuge.^     The  victors,  moreover,  would  be  too  eager  to  secure  the
booty,  and  to  strip  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  to  allow  time  for  following  up  the  foe.
The  prisoners  were  driven  along  in  platoons,  their  arms  bound  in  strange  and  con-
torted attitudes,*  each  under  the  charge  of  his  captor ;  then  came  the  chariots,
arms,  slaves,  and  provisions  collected  on  the  battle-field  or  in  the  camp,  then  other

'  The  whole  of  the  above  description  is  based  on  incidents  from  the  various  pictures  of  battles
which  appear  on  the  monuments  of  Ramses  II.  (Champollkin,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nahie,
pi.  xvii.  his,  xxxiv. ;  Rosellini,  Monmnenti Slorici,  pis.  Ixxvii.-cx. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  154,  155)  and
of  Ramses  III.  (CHA>iPOLLio>f,  Monuvients,  etc.,  pis.  coxx.-ccxx.  bis,  ccxxviii. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti
Storici,  pis.  cxxvii.,  cxxviii.,  cxxxvi.).

^  A  good  instance  of  this,  under  Minephtah,  will  be  found  in  Mariette,  Karnali,  pi.  .')3, 1.  3S.

^  After  the  battle  of  Jlegiddo,  the  remnants  of  the  Syrian  army  took  refuge  in  the  city,  where
Thutmosis  III.  besieged  them  (Maspebo,  B^cit  de  la  campagne  coulre  Mageddo,  in  the  Hecueil  de
Tramux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  142,  143);  sijuilarly  under  Ramses  II.  the  Hittite  princes  took  refuge  in  Qodshii
after  their  defeat  (Lepsius,  Deulin.,  iii.  104).

■■  Cf.arrivalof  prisoners  after  the  battle  of  Qodshu(CHAMrOLLiuN,il/onM)nen(»!,etc.,  pi.  XX.;  Rosellini,
Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  Ixxxvii.,  xciii.,  xciv.),  and  after  the  victories  of  Ramses  III.  (Champollion,
Monuments,  etc.,  pis.  ccvi.,  ccvii.,  ccxxiv. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  cxsxi.,  cxxxii.,  cx.xxv.).
Thutmosis  III.  reproaches  his  soldiers  with  having  loitered  in  quest  of  booty,  thus  allowing  the  leaders
of  the  enemy  to  escape  (Maspero,  Ei'cit  dc  la  campagne  centre  Mageddo,  in  the  Hecueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  ii.  pp.  142,  143).


5  f=


g   5
§    2


>5      O

•<      =

2  -a


g  o


228  THE  EIGETEENTII   THEBAN  VYNASTT.

trophies  of  a  kind  unknown  in  modern  warfare.  When  an  Egyptian  killed  or
mortally  wounded  any  one,  he  cut  off,  not  the  head,  but  tlie  right  hand  or  the
phallus,  and  brouglit  it  to  the  royal  scribes.  These  made  an  accurate  inventory
of  everything,  and  even  Pharaoh  did  not  disdain  to  be  present  at  the  registration.'
The  booty  did  not  belong  to  the  persons  who  obtained  it,  but  was  thrown  into  a
common  stock  wliich  was  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  sovereign  :  one  part  he
reserved  for  the  gods,  especially  for  his  father  Amon  of  Thebes,  who  had  given
hiui  the  victory ;  another  part  he  kept  for  iiimself,  and  the  remainder  was  dis-
tributed among  his  army.  Each  man  received  a  reward  in  proportion  to  his
rank  and  services,  such  as  male  or  female  slave?,  bracelets,  necklaces,  arms,  vases,
or  a  certain  measured  weight  of  gold,  known  as  the  "gold  of  bravery."^  A
similar  sharing  of  the  spoil  took  place  after  every  successful  engagement :  from
Pharaoh  to  the  meanest  camp-follower,  every  man  who  had  contributed  to  the
success  of  a  campaign  returned  home  richer  than  he  had  set  out,  and  the  profits
which  he  derived  from  a  war  were  a  liberal  compensation  for  the  expenses
in  which  it  had  involved  him.

The  results  of  the  first  expedition  of  Thiitmosis  I.  were  of  a  decisive  cha-
racter ;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  he  never  again,  it  would  seem,  found  it  necessary
during  the  remainder  of  his  life  to  pass  the  i.sthmus.  Xorthern  Syria,  it  is  true,
did  not  remain  long  under  tribute,  if  indeed  it  paid  any  at  all  after  the  depar-
ture of  the  Egyptians,  but  the  southern  part  of  the  country,  feeling  itself  in  the
grip  of  tlie  new  master,  accepted  its  defeat :  Gaza  became  the  head-quarters  of
a  garrison  which  secured  the  door  of  Asia  for  future  invasion,^  and  Pharaoh,
freed  from  anxiety  in  this  quarter,  gave  his  whole  time  to  the  consolidation  of
his  power  in  Ethiopia.  The  river  and  desert  tribes  of  this  region  soon  forgot
the  severe  lesson  which  he  had  given  them :  as  soon  as  the  last  Egyptian
soldier  had  left  their  territory  they  rebelled  once  more,  and  began  a  fresh  series
of  inroads  which  had  to  be  repressed  anew  year  after  year.  Thutmosis  I.  had
several  times  to  drive  them  back  in  the  years  II.  and  III.,*  but  was  able  to  make

'  The  bringing  in  auJ  registration  of  hands  are  mentioned  in  the  Description  de  l'£gypte,  Aut..
vol.  it.  pi.  12,  tlieu  in  Champoli.ion',  Mimumenis  de  r£ii!/ple  el  de  la  Xuhie,  pis.  xis.,  ccxxiv.,  and  in
RosELLlsi,  Monui/ietdi  Storici,  pla.  xciv.,  cxxxii.,  ccxxv. ;  that  of  the  phalli,  in  Champollion,  Munii-
ments,  etc..  pi.  cxxiv.,  and  in  1! oseli.ini,  Munumeidi  Slorici,  pl.cxxxT.  Wo  lind  frequent  references  to
hands  brought  in  by  the  soldiers  in  the  biographies  of  the  two  Ahmosi  at  El-Kab,  and  of  Anienem-
habi ;  the  numbers  of  the  phalli  are  given  in  the  inscriptions  of  Miuephtah  (Makiettic,  Kurnak,  pi.
54,  1.  50,  et  scq.)  and  of  Ramses  III.  (^Rosellini,  Mumuiienti  Slorici,  pi.  cxxxv.).

-  Cf.  the  biography  of  the  two  Ahmosi  at  El-Kab  on  pp.  S6-S8,  90, 91, 100, 106  of  the  present  worl;.

'  This  fact  is  nowhere  explicitly  stated  on  the  monuments:  we  may  infer  it,  however,  from  the
way  in  which  Tlmtmosis  III.  tells  how  he  reached  Gaza  without  opposition  at  the  beginning  of  his
first  camp.iign,  and  celebrated  the  anniversary  of  his  coronation  there  (Maspeko,  E^cit  dela  cnmpagne
coidre  Magcddo,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.  ii.  pp.  49,  oO).  On  the  other  liand,  we  learn  from  details  in  the
lists  (^llAiiiETTE,  Karnali,  pis.  IS,  19)  tliat  the  mountains  and  plains  beyond  Gaza,  were  in  a  state  of
open  rebellion.

*  Inscription  of  the  year  I  [.,  engraved  on  the  rocks  of  the  Tangnr  cataract,  published  in  the  Graphic,
January  10,  1SS5,  p.  43,  interpreted  by  Birch,  Hieroglyphic  Inscription  near  the  Cataract  of  Tangur,  in


SEORCtANISATION    of  E'rillOPIA.  229

short  work  of  tlieir  rebellions.  An  inscription  at  Toinbos  on  the  Nile,  in  the
very  midst  of  tlio  disturbed  districts,  told  them  in  brave  words  what  he  was,
and  what  he  had  done  since  he  had  come  to  the  throne.  Wherever  he  had
gone,  weapon  in  liaud,  "  seeking  a  warrior,  he  had  found  none  to  withstand
him;  he  had  penetrated  to  valleys  which  were  unknown  to  his  ancestors,  the
inhabitants  of  which  had  never  beheld  the  wearers  of  the  double  diadem."  *
All  this  would  have  produced  but  little  effect  had  he  not  backed  up  his  words
by  deeds,  and  taken  decisive  measures  to  restrain  the  insolence  of  the  barbarians.
Tombos  lies  opposite  to  Hannek,  at  the  entrance  to  that  series  of  rapids  known
as  the  Third  Cataract.  The  course  of  the  Nile  is  here  barred  by  a  formidable
dyke  of  granite,  through  which  it  has  hollowed  out  six  winding  channels  of
varying  widths,  dotted  here  and  there  with  huge  polished  boulders  and  verdant
islets.  When  the  inundation  is  at  its  height,  the  roclcs  are  covered  and  the
rapids  disappear,  with  the  exception  of  the  lowest,  which  is  named  Lokoli,
where  faint  eddies  mark  the  place  of  the  more  dangerous  reefs ;  and  were  it
not  that  the  fall  here  is  rather  more  pronounced  and  the  current  somewhat
stronger,  few  would  suspect  the  existence  of  a  cataract  at  tiie  spot.  As  the
waters  go  down,  however,  the  channels  gradually  reappear.  When  the  river  is
at  its  lowest,  the  three  westernmost  channels  dry  up  almost  completely,  leaving
nothing  but  a  series  of  shallow  pools ;  tliose  on  the  east  still  maintain  their
flow,  but  only  one  of  them,  that  between  the  islands  of  Toiubos  and  Abadiu,'
remains  navigable.  Here  Thutmosis  built,  under  invocation  of  the  gods  of
Heliopolis,  one  of  tiiose  brickwork  citadels,  with  its  rectangular  keep,  which  set  at
nought  all  the  efforts  and  all  the  military  science  of  the  Ethiopians :  attached
to  it  was  a  harbour,  where  each  vessel  on  its  way  downstream  put  in  for  the
purpose  of  hiring  a  pilot.^  The  monarchs  of  the  Xll"'  and  XIII""  dynasties
had  raised  fortifications  at  the  approaches  to  Wady  Haifa,  and  their  engineers
skilfully  chose  tlie  sites  so  as  completely  to  protect  from  the  ravages  of  the

the  Proceedirtgs  of  the  Soo.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1884-85,  vol.  vii.  p.  121.  It  is  undoubtedly  an  inscription
of  Thutmosis  I.  dated  in  his  second  )ear.  This  same  expedition  is  referred  to  in  the  inscription  at
Tombos,  published  by  Lupsius,  DenJim.,u\.  pi.  5  a,  translated  by  Piehl,  Petites  Etudes  E^yptoloijiquei,
pp.  1-28.  Inscriptions  of  the  year  III.,  at  Sehel  and  at  .'VssuaD,  have  been  published  by  WiLiionR,
Canalizing  the  Cataract,  in  the  llectieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  p.  202,  and  by  J.  de  Morgan,  De  la
Frnntiire  de  Nuhie  a  Kom-Omhos,  p.  41,  No.  18.5,  and  p.  85,  Nos.  13,  111.

'  I.EPSics,  Denkm.,  iii.  5  a,  11.  11-lH;  cf.  Piehl,  Petites  Etudes  Egi/ptulogiques,  p.  4.

'  GoTTBERO,  Des  Cataractes  du  Nil,  pp.  24-28,  and  pi.  i.;  Chelc,  Le  A'il,  le  Soudan,  l' h'gijpte,
pp.  49-54.

'  The  foundation  of  this  fortress  is  indicated  in  an  emphatic  manner  in  11.  10,  11  of  the  Tombos
inscriptioQ  :  "The  masters  of  the  Great  Custlo  (the  gods  of  Heliopolis)  have  made  a  fortress  for  the
soldiers  of  the  kin;,',  which  the  nine  peoples  of  Nubia  eomblned  could  not  carry  by  storm,  for,  like  a
young  panther  before  a  bull  which  lowers  its  head,  the  bouls  of  his  Majesty  have  blinded  them  with
fear  "  (cf.  I'iehl,  I'elitcs  Etudes  hi^roglijyhiques,  pp.  li,  4,  24,  2.t).  Quarries  of  considerable  size,  where
Cailliuud  imiigined  he  could  distinguish  an  overturui'd  colossus,  show  the  importance  which  the  estab-
lishment had  attained  in  ancient  times  (C.\ii,i.i.\ru,  Voyage  ti  M^roff,  vol.  iv.  [ip.  233-235)  ;  the  ruius  of
the  town  cover  a  fairly  large  area  near  the  modern  village  of  Kermau  (Lepsius,  Briefe  aus  JEgyi)ten
nnd  JEth  iojiien,  pp.  253,  254).


230  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

Nubian  pirates  that  part  of  the  Nile  which  lay  between  Wady  Haifa  and  Philse.
Henceforward  the  garrison  at  Tombos  was  able  to  defend  the  mighty  curve
described  by  the  river  through  the  desert  of  Mahas,  together  with  the  island  of
Argo,  and  the  confines  of  Dongola.  The  distance  between  Thebes  and  this
southern  frontier  was  a  long  one,  and  communication  was  slow  during  the  winter
months,  when  the  subsidence  of  the  waters  had  rendered  the  task  of  navigation
difficult  for  the  Egyptian  ships.  The  king  was  obliged,  besides,  to  concentrate
his  attention  mainly  on  Asiatic  aftairs,  and  was  no  longer  able  to  watch  the
movements  of  the  African  races  with  the  same  vigilance  as  his  predecessors
had  exercised  before  Egyptian  armies  had  made  their  way  as  far  as  the  banks
of  the  Euphrates.  Thutmosis  placed  the  control  of  the  countries  south  of
Assuan  in  the  hands  of  a  viceroy,  who,  invested  with  the  august  title  of  "  Royal
Son  of  Kush,"  must  have  been  regarded  as  having  the  blood  of  Ea  himself
running  in  his  veius.^  Sura,  the  first  of  these  viceroys  whose  name  has
reached  us,  was  in  office  at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  of  the  year  III.^
He  belonged,  it  would  seem,  to  a  Theban  family,  and  for  several  centuries
afterwards  his  successors  are  mentioned  among  the  nobles  who  were  in  the  habit
of  attending  the  court.  Their  powers  were  considerable  :  they  commanded
armies,  built  or  restored  temples,  administered  justice,  and  received  the  homage
of  loyal  sheikhs  or  the  submission  of  rebellious  ones.^  The  period  for  which
they  were  appointed  was  not  fixed  by  law,  and  they  held  office  simply  at  the
king's  pleasure.^  During  the  XIX"'  dynasty  it  was  usual  to  confer  this  oflSce,
the  highest  in  the  state,  on  a  son  of  the  sovereign,  preferably  the  heir-apparent.
Occasionally  his  appointment  was  purely  formal,  and  he  continued  in  attendance
on  his  father,  while  a  trusty  substitute  ruled  in  his  place :  often,  however,  he
took  the  government  on  himself,  and  in  the  regions  of  the  Uijper  Nile  served
an  apprenticeship  to  the  art  of  ruling.  This  district  was  in  a  perpetual  state
of  war — a  war  without  danger,  but  full  of  trickery  and  surprises :  here  he
prepared  himself  for  the  larger  arena  of  the  Syrian  campaigns,  learning  the  arts

'  The  meaning  of  this  title  was  at  first  misunderstood.  Champollion  (Lettres  denies  d'Egypte,
2nd  edit.,  p.  160)  and  Roiellini  (Monmnenti  Slorici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  259,  2G0)  took  it  literally,  iiud
tliought  it  rt'terred  to  Ethiopian  princes,  who  were  vassals  or  enemies  of  Egypt.  Birch  persists  in
regarding  them  a.s  Ethiopians  driven  out  by  their  subjects,  restored  by  the  Pharaolis  as  viceroys,
while  admitting  that  they  may  have  belonged  to  the  solar  family  (Arindale-Boxomi-Birch,  Gallerij
of  AntiquUie.s  selected  from  the  British  Museum,  pp.  91,  95,  110).

2  He  is  mentioned  in  the  Sehel  inscription  as  -'the  royal  son  Sura"  (Wilbour,  Canalizing  the
Cataract,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  p.  202).  Nahi,  who  had  been  regarded  as  the  first
holder  of  the  office  (Birch,  Upon  a  Historical  Tablet  of  Bamses  II.,  p.  20  ;  Brcgsch,  Geogr.  Ins.,  vol.  i.
p.  53,  and  Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  2G5),  and  who  was  still  in  office  under  Thiitmosis  III.,  had  been
appointed  by  Thutmosis  I.  (Lepsics,  Denhm.,  iii.  47  c,  1.  6),  but  after  Sura.

'  Under  Thutmosis  III.,  tlie  viceroy  Nahi  restored  the  temple  at  Semneh  (Lepsics,  Denhm.,  iii.
47  a,  c,  56  a) ;  under  Tutankhamen,  the  viceroy  Hui  received  tribute  from  the  Ethiopian  princes,
and  presented  them  to  the  sovereign  (Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  117,  US).

'  Cf.  the  list  of  these  princes  under  Eamses  IV.,  in  Wiedemann,  MSgyptisclie  Geschichte,
pp.  16S,  469.


THE  PRINCES    OF  KVSn.


•231


of  genoraltihip  more  perfectly  tbun  was  possible  in  tiie  manoeuvres  of  the
parade-groimd.  Moreover,  the  appointment  was  dictated  by  religious  as  well
as  by  political  considerations.  The  presumptive  heir  to  the  throne  was  to  his
father  what  Horus  had  been  to  Osiris — his  lawful  successor,  or,  if  need  be,  his
avenger,  should  some  act  of  treason  impose  on  him  the  duty  of  vengeance  :  and
was  it  not  in  Ethiopia  that  ilorus  had  gained  his  tirst  victories  over  Typhon  ?


A    CITY   OF    MODERN    NCBIA — THE   ANCIENT    DONGOLA.'


To  begin  like  Horus,  and  flesh  his  maiden  steel  on  tlie  descendants  of  the
accomplices  of  Sit,  was,  in  the  case  of  the  future  sovereign,  equivalent  to  affirm-
ing from  the  outset  the  reality  of  his  divine  extraction.^

As  at  the  commencement  of  the  Tlieban  dynasties,  it  was  the  river  valley
only  in  these  regions  of  the  Upper  Nile  which  belonged  to  the  Pharaohs.
From  this  time  onward  it  gave  support  to  an  Egyptian  population  as  far
as  the  juncture  of  tlie  two  Niles:  it  was  a  second  Egypt,  but  a  poorer  one,
whose  cities  presented  the  same  impoverished  appearance  as  that  which  we
find  to-day  in  the  towns  of  Nubia.  The  tribes  scattered  right  and  left  in  the
desert,  or  distributed  beyond  the  confluence  of  the  two  Niles  among  the  plains
of  Sennar,  were  descended  from  the  old  indigenous  races,  and  paid  valuable
tribute  every  year  in  precious  metals,  ivory,  timber,  or  the  natural  products  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  ii  pliotogiaijli  by  Insin^er,  taken  in  1881.

^  E.  de  Rouge  was  the  first  to  point  out  {Extrait  d'un.  Manusr.rit  EgypHcn  en  giiritiire  hii^ralique,
p.  H,  in  tlic  iJeiMc  ArchMoyique,  Ist  series,  vol.  ix,,  1852)  that  in  tlie  Orbiney  Fapijrus  the  title  of
"  Prince  of  Kiish  "  was  assigned  to  the  heir-presumptive  to  the  throne.


232


THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


their  districts,  under  penalty  of  armed  invasion.^  Among  these  races  were  still
to  be  found  descendants  of  the  Mazaiu  and  Uauaiu,  who  in  days  gone  by  had
opposed  the  advance  of  the  victorious  Egyptians  :  the  name  of  the  Uauaiu  was,
indeed,  used  as  a  generic  term  to  distinguish  all  those  tribes  which  frequented


ARRIVAL   OF    AN    ETHIOPIAN    QUEEN    BRINGING    TRIBVTE   TO   THE   VICEROY    OF   KISH.=

the  mountains  between  the  Nile  and  the  Eed  Sea,^  but  the  wave  of  conquest
had  passed  far  beyond  the  boundaries  reached  in  early  campaigns,  and  had
brought  the  Egyptians  into  contact  with  nations,  with  whom  they  had
been  in  only  indirect  commercial  relations  in  former  times.  Some  of  these
were  light-coloured  men  of  a  tyjje  similar  to  that  of  the  modera  Abyssiuiaiis
or  Gallas  :  they  had  the  same  haughty  and  imperious  carriage,  the  same  well-
developed  and  powerful  frames,  and  the  same  love  of  fighting.     Most  of  the

'  The  tribate  nf  the  Gaubatiu,  or  people  of  the  south,  and  that  of  Kiish  and  of  the  'Crauaifi,  is
mentinncil  repeatedly  in  the  Armales  de  Thutnwsis  III.,1\.  15-17  for  the  year  XXXI.,  11.  27-29  for  the
year  XXXIII.,  and  11.  35-37  for  the  year  XXXIV.  The  regularity  with  which  this  item  recurs,  uu-
accompauied  by  any  mention  of  war,  following  after  each  Syrian  campaign,  shows  that  it  was  an
habitual  operation  which  was  registered  as  an  understood  thing.  True,  the  inscription  does  not  give
the  item  for  every  year,  but  then  it  only  dealt  with  Ethiopian  aft'airs  in  so  far  as  they  were  subsidiary
to  events  in  Asia ;  the  payment  was  none  the  less  an  annual  one,  the  amount  varying  in  accordance
with  local  agreement.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Iiisinger;  cf.  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  118.

'  The  Annals  of  J'hiitmosis  III.  mention  the  tribute  of  I'lianlt  for  the  peoples  of  the  coast,  the
tribute  of  Uauait  for  the  peoples  of  tlie  mountain  between  the  Nile  and  the  sea,  the  tribute  of  Kiish
for  the  peoples  of  the  south,  or  Ganbatiu  (cf.  for  this  term  Brugsoh,  Diet.  Hi^roglijpliique,  pp.  1513,
1514,  and  Vie  altdgyptisclte  Viilkertafel,  at  the  Berlin  Congress,  A/rikaiiische  SelUion,  pp.  37,  45).


THE  ADOPTION   OF  EGYPTIAN   CUSTOMS  BY    THE  ETHIOPIANS.      233


I


1


H

TYPICAL   GALLA  WOMAN.


reinaininrj  tribes  were  of  black  blood,  and
such  of  them  as  we  see  depicted  on
tlio  mouuments  resemble  closely  the
negroes  inhabiting  Central  Africa
at  the  present  day.  They  have
the  same  elongated  skull,  the
low  prominent  forehead,  hollow
temples,  short  flattened  nose,  (
thick  lips,  broad  shoulders,  and
salient  breast,  the  latter  con-
trasting sharply  with  the  un-
developed appearance  of  the
lower  part  of  the  body,  which
terminates  in  thin  legs  almost
devoid  of  calves.  Egyptian  civi-
lization had  already  penetrated  among
these  tribes,  and,  as  far  as  dress  and
demeanour  were  concerned,  their  chiefs
differed  in  no  way  from  the  great  lords  who  formed  the  escort  of  the  Pliaraoh.^
We  see  these  provincial  dignitaries  represented  in  the  white  robe  and
petticoat  of  starched,  pleated,  and  gauffered  linen ;  an  innate  taste  for
bright  colours,  even  in  those  early  times,  being  betrayed  by  the  red  or
yellow  scarf  in  which  they  wrapped  themselves,  passing  it  over  one  shoulder
and  round  the  waist,  whence  the  ends  depended  and  formed  a  kind  of
apron.  A  panther's  skin  covered  the  back,  and  one  or  two  ostrich-feathers
waved  from  the  top  of  tlie  head  or  were  fastened  on  one  side  to  the  fillet
confining  the  hair,  which  was  arranged  in  short  curls  and  locks,  stiffened
with  gum  and  matted  with  grease,  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of  cap  or  grotesque
aureole  round  the  skull.  The  men  delighted  to  load  themselves  with  rings,
bracelets,  earrings,  and  necklaces,  while  from  their  arms,  necks,  and  belts
liung  long  strings  of  glass  beads,  whicli  jingled  witli  every  movement  of  the
wearer.^  They  seem  to  have  frequently  chosen  a  woman  as  their  ruler,  and
her  dress  appears  to  have  closely  resembled  that  of  tlie  Egyptian  ladies.  She
appeared  before  her  sulgects  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  oxen,  and  protected  from
the  sun  by  an  umbrella  edged  with  fringe.'^     The  common  people  went  about

'  Cf.,  in  addition  to  tho  Ethiopian  races  represented  in  tlio  woodcut  on  p.  232,  the  types  of  tributary
ni-^'ro  peoples  shown,  for  instance,  on  the  Tlieban  tombs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  and  on  those  of
Kaklimiri  (Viuky,  Le  Tomheau  di:  Uehhmara,  pi.  vi.,  in  the  Me'iiiulres  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  V.
pp.  31-3G),  of  .\manizohu  (Vikky,  Tumhr.au  d'Am-n-t'eli,  in  the  AUmoires,  vol.  v.  pp.  317,  IMS),  and  of
Ilarmhabi  (liouuiANT,  Tumhtau  d'Uarmhahi,  in  the  Me'iuoircs.  vol.  v.  pp.  422,  12:),  and  pi.  iv.).

=  Cf ,  in  regard  to  these  strings  of  glass  beads,  the  cut  published  by  Bouriant,  in  Le  Tomheau
d' JIarmhahi,  in  tho  M^moiree,  vol.  v.  pi.  iv.

'  Cf.  the  queen  represented  In  the  cut  on  p.  232;  later  cm,  when  tlic  African  clement  overcamo


234  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THE  BAN  DYNASTY.

nearly  naked,  having  merely  a  loin-ulotli  of  some  woven  stuff  or  au  animal's
skin  thrown  round  tlieii-  hips.  Their  heads  were  either  shaven,  or  adorned  with
tufts  of  hair  stiffened  with  gum.^  The  children  of  both  sexes  wore  no  clothes
until  the  age  of  puberty ;  the  women  wrapped  themselves  in  a  rude  garment
or  in  a  covering  of  linen,  and  carried  their  children  on  the  hip  or  in  a  basket
of  esparto  grass  on  the  back,  supj^orted  by  a  leather  band  which  passed  across
the  forehead.^  One  characteristic  of  all  these  tribes  was  their  love  of  singing
and  dancing,  and  their  use  of  the  drum  and  cymbals ;  they  were  active  and
industrious,  and  carefully  cultivated  the  rich  soil  of  the  plain,  devoting  them-
selves to  the  raising  of  cattle,  particularly  of  oxen,  whose  horns  they  were
accustomed  to  train  fantastically  into  the  shapes  of  lyres,  bows,  and  spirals,  with
bifurcations  at  the  ends,  or  with  small  human  figures  as  terminations.  As  in  the
case  of  other  negro  tribes,  they  plied  the  blacksmith's  and  also  the  goldsmith's
trade,  working  up  both  gold  and  silver  into  ring.«,  chains,  and  quaintly  shaped
vases,  some  specimens  of  their  art  being  little  else  than  toys,  similar  in  design
to  those  which  delighted  the  Byzantine  Ccesars  of  later  date.  A  wall-painting
remains  of  a  gold  epergne,  which  represents  men  and  monkeys  engaged  in
gathering  the  fruit  of  a  group  of  dom-palms.  Two  individuals  lead  each  a  tame
giraffe  by  the  halter,  others  kneeling  on  the  rim  raise  their  hands  to  implore
mercy  from  an  unseen  enemy,  while  negro  prisoners,  grovelling  on  their  stomachs,
painfully  attempt  to  raise  their  head  and  shoulders  from  the  ground.  This,
doubtless,  represents  a  scene  from  the  everyday  life  of  the  people  of  the  Upper
Nile,  and  gives  a  faitliful  picture  of  what  took  place  among  many  of  its  tribes
during  a  rapid  inroad  of  some  viceroy  of  Kush  or  a  raid  by  his  lieutenants.^

The  resources  which  Thiitmosis  I.  was  able  to  draw  regularly  from  these
southern  regions,  in  addition  to  the  wealth  collected  during  his  Syrian  cam-
paign, enabled  him  to  give  a  great  impulse  to  building  work.  The  tutelary  deity
of  his  capital — Amon-Ka — who  had  ensured  him  the  victory  in  all  his  battles,
had  a  prior  claim  on  the  bulk  of  the  spoil ;  he  received  it  as  a  matter  of  course,
and  his  temple  at  Thebes  was  thereby  considerably  enlarged ;  *  we  are  not,
however,  able  to  estimate  exactly  what  proportion  fell  to  other  cities,  such  as

the  Egyptian,  the  Ethiopian  empire  was  governed  by  a  succession  of  queens,  the  Candaoes  of  classical
liistorians  (Wiedemann,  L'Ethiopie  au  temps  de  Tihere,  p.  10).

'  BoviRlANT,  he  Tnmheau  d'Harmhabi,  pi.  iv. ;  ScHEiL,  Tombeau  de  Mai,  iu  the  Mi'moires  de  la
Mission  Franraise,  vol.  v.  p.  ool,  where  ditl'erent  examples  of  this  mode  of  dressing  the  hair  are  shown.

'  See  the  processions  of  negro  trihut:iries  or  captives  in  Chamtolliox,  Monumeids  de  I'Egypte  et  de
la  Nubie,  pis.  xvi.  and  xvi.  fcj's,  xxxv.,  lxx..clviii„  clxxvi.  3;  Vibey,  Le  Tombeau  de  Sehhnard,^}!.  yiii.,
and  lioCRiANT,  Le  Tombeau  d'Harmhabi,  pi.  iv.  {Mi'moires  de  la  Mission  Franraise,  vol.  v.).

'  Cf.  the  cut  on  p.  235.  Some  of  these  objects,  mounted  iu  gold  or  silver,  and  dating  from  the  time
of  Eamses  II.,  are  to  be  seen  represented  at  Beit  el-Wally  (Champolliox,  Monuments,  pis.  Ixviii..  Ixix. ;
RosELLlsi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxxiii. ;  Lei'SH's,  Denkm.,  iii.  1 17).

■•  As  to  the  part  taken  by  Thiitmosis  I.  in  the  construction  of  the  temple  of  Karnak,  of.  E.  de
Rouge,  Ftude  des  monuments  du  Massif  de  Karnak,  in  the  M^anges  d'Arche'ologie  igyptienne  et
attyrienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  41-48,  and  Mabiette,  Karnak  Etude  topographique  et  arck€ologique,  pp.  27-30,  37.


THE  SUCCESSORS    OF   THI'TMOSIS   I. — AHMASI.


235


Kumrneh/  Elophautitie,-  Abydos,"  and  Memphis/  where  a  few  scattered  blocks
of  stone  still  bear  the  name  of  the  king.  Troubles  broke  out  in  Lower  Egypt,
but  they  were  speedily  subdued  by  Thutmosis,  and  he  was  able  to  end  his


^iW^^'


^'  MSA  ^%.  ^V


GOLD    EPERGXE    KEPKESENTING    SCENES    FROM    ETHIOPIAN    EIFE.^


days  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  profound  peace,  undisturbed  by  any  care  save  that
of  ensuring  a  regular  succession  to  his  throne,  and  of  restraining  the  ambitions
of  those  who  looked  to  become  possessed  of  his  lieritage.''  His  position  was,
indeed,  a  curious  one  ;  although  de  facto  absolute  in  power,  his  children  by  Queen
Ahmasi  took  precedence  of  him,  for  by  her  mother's  descent  she  had  a  better
right  to  the  crown  than  her  husband,'  and  legally  the  king  should  have  retired
in  favour  of  his  sons  as  soon  as  they  were  old  enough  to  reigu.  The  eldest  of
them,  Uazmosu,  died  early.*'     The  second,  Amenmosu,  lived  at  least  to  attain

'  Lepsiis,  Denhiu.,  iii.  ."lO  a,  where  Thutmosis  11.  substitutes  liis  own  cartouches  for  those  of  his
father.  The  seconil  of  the  two  small  grottoes  at  Ibrim,  describeil  by  Champolliox,  Letlres  ecrites
il'Kgijple,  2011  edit.,  p.  129,  and  Monuments  de  VEgyiite  et  de  la  Nuhi'e,  vol.  i.  pp.  S3,  St,  was  erroneously
attributed  to  Thiitmosis  I.  :  it  ia  really  the  work  of  Thiitmosis  III.,  named  Maukhopirkeri,  a  variant
of  his  cartouche  prenomen.

'  AViEDKMANN,  JErfijpHsche  Geschichte,  p.  326,  found  his  name  there  cut  in  a  block  of  brown  freestone.

'  A  stele  at  Abydos  (Mariette,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pi.  31)  speaks  of  the  building  operations  carried  on
by  Thutmosi-i  I.  in  that  town  (E.  and  J.  de  Roogk,  hiscripliona  hii!ro(jhjphiques,  pis.  xix.-xxii.) ;
Brugsch  (Veierdaa  Verhmn  anx  achworen,  in  the  Zeilschrifl,  18G8,  p.  77,  and  Geschichte  ^^gi/iitcns,  pp.
377-3S2)  and  Mariette  {Catalogue  Ggne'ral,  No.  104S,  p.  37(1)  erroneously  attribute  it  to  Thiitmosis  IIT.

*  GiiiiiAiT,  Ingciiption  ingdiie  dungnede  Thotmi's I.,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travnux,  vol.  vi.  p.  142.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-tiudin,  fiom  a  painting  on  the  tomb  of  Hiii  (Lepsics,  Denlin.,  iii.  118).

"  The  expressions  from  whicli  we  gather  that  his  reigu  was  disturbed  by  outbreaks  of  internal
rebellion  (Ltpsns,  JJenhu.,  iii.  IS,  11.  8,  9;  cf.  E.  de  llocGii,  Etude  des  Monuments  ile  Karnak,  m  the
Melanges  d'Arch^uluyie,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  47)  seem  to  refer  to  a  period  sulisequent  to  the  Syrian  expedition,
and  prior  to  his  alliance  with  the  Princess  Ilatshopsitii.

'  Cf.  what  has  already  been  said  in  regard  to  this  nueen  and  her  rights  on  ji.  104  of  the  present  work.

'  Uazmosu  is  represented  on  the  tomb  of  Pahiri  at  Kl-Kab  (IJiiampoli.ion.  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.
•151,  053  ;  Lepsius,  Ihnhm.,  iii.  10  h,  11  // ;  E.  and  J.  de  Kouuii,  Inscriptions hie'roglyiiliiques,  pi.  cclxix. ;
Tylou-Ghipfith,  Thf  Tomb  of  Fnheri.  pis.  iv.,  vii.,  x.),  where  Mr.  tiriffitli  (pj).  G.  7)  imagines  he  can
trace  two  distinct  Uazniostl ;  for  the  |)re6ent,  I  am  of  opinion  that  there  was  but  one,  llie  sou  of
Tliiitniosis  I.  (JIaspeuo.  Les  Momles  royales  de  Di'ir  el-Bahitii,  in  the  M^nwires  de  hi  Mission  Fronfaise,
vol.  i.  pp.  U30-'J32).     His  funerary  chapel  was  discovered  at  Thebes  by  (iuiiiJAVjT,  Le  Muee'e  Jigyptien,


236


THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


adolescence ;  he  was  allowed  to  share  the  crown  with  his  father  from  the  fouith
year  of  the  latter's  reign,  and  he  also  held  a  military  command  in  the  Delta.^
but  before  long  he  also  died,  and  Thntmosis  I.  was  left  with  only  one  son— a

Thutmosis  like  himself — to
succeed  him.  The  mother
of  this  prince  was  a  certain
IMutnofrit,-  half-sister  to  the
king  on  his  father's  side,
who  enjoyed  such  a  high
rank  in  the  royal  family  that
her  husband  allowed  her  to
be  portrayed  in  royal  dress  ;
her  pedigree  on  the  mother's
side,  however,  was  not  so
distinguished,  and  precluded
her  son  from  being  recog-
nised as  heir-apparent,  hence
the  occupation  of  the  "  seat
of  Horus  "  reverted  once
more  to  a  woman,  Hatshop-  ■
situ,  the  eldest  daughter  of
Ahmasi.  Hatshopsitu  her-
self was  not,  however,  of
purely  divine  descent.  Her
maternal  ancestor,  Sonisonbu,
had  not  been  a  scion  of  the
royal  house,  and  this  flaw  in  her  pedigree  threatened  to  mar,  in  her  case,  the
sanctity  of  the  solar  blood.  According  to  Egyptian  belief,  this  defect  of
birth  could  only  be  remedied  by  a  miracle,*  and  the  ancestral  god,  becoming

pis.  ii.,  vii..  cf.  Maspero,  in  the  Bevue  Critique,  189U,  vol.  ii.  p.  iUK  ft  seq. ;  it  is  in  a  very  bad  .state
of  preservation.

'  Amenniosii  is  represented  at  El-Kab,  by  tlie  side  of  his  brotlier  Uazmosu  (Cu.\mpolliox,  Monu-
menU  de  Vigypte  el  de  la  Nubie.  vol.  i.  p.  653 ;'  Lepsius,  Denkm..  iii.  1 U  :  E.  and  J.  de  Rovge,  Inscrip-
tions lii^rogbjphiques,  pi.  cccxix. ;  TYLOu-GKiFfiTH.  Tlie  Tomh  of  Paheri.  pi.  X.).  Also  on  a  fragment
where  we  find  him,  iu  the  fourth  year  of  his  father's  rei^n,  honoured  with  a  cartoaehe  at  Memphis,
and  consequently  associated  with  his  father  in  tlie  royal  power  ;  cf.  GriSbait,  Inscription  ingdile  du
rigne  de  Tholme's  I.,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux.  vol.  vi.  p.  142,  and  Maspero.  Les  Monties  roijales  de
Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  631,  632.

2  Mutnofrit  was  supposed  by  Mariette  {Karnal:  pi.  3S  b  4,  and  Text,  pp.  oil,  69)  to  have  been  a
daughter  of  TImtmosis  II. ;  the  statue  reproduced  on  p.  237  has  shown  us  that  she  was  wife  of  That-
mosrs  I.  and  mother  of  Thutmosis  II.  (Piehl,  Yaria.  in  the  Zeitschri/I.  1SS7,  p.  125;  Maspero.  Les
Momies  roijales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  Memoires  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  633,  634).

2  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Xaville  {Ike  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari.  pi.  xi.).

*  Cf.  as  to  this  theory  what  has  been  said  in  Maspero,  Daicn  ofCirilization,  pp.  2."iS,  259,  and  on
pp.  77,  7S  of  the  present"  work.    A  similar  instance  of  divine  substitution  is  known  to  us  in  the  case  of


PORTRAIT    OF   THE   QUEEN    .\HMASI.'


QUEEN  BaTSBOFSITLT  J.


!37


incarnate  in  the  earthly  lather  at  the  moment  of  conception,  had  to  condescend

to  infuse  fresh  virtue  into  his  race  in  this  manner.     The  inscriptions  with  which

Hatshopsitii  decorated   her  chapel   relate  how,  on   that  fateful  night.  Anion

descended  upon  Ahmasi  in  a  flood  of  per-
fume and  light.     The  queen  received  him

favourably,  and  the  divine  spouse  on  leaving

her  announced  to  her  the  approaching  birth

of  a   (laughter,   in    wliom    his    valour   and

strengtli   should   be   manifested  once  more

here  below.     The  sequel  of  tlie  story  is  dis-
played  in   a  series  of   pictures  before  our

eyes.    The  protecting  divinities  who  preside

over  tlie  bii  th  of  children  conduct  the  queen

to  her  couch,  and  the  sorrowful  resignation

depicted   on   her   face,   together    with   the

languid  grace  of  her  whole  figure,  display  in

this  portrait  of  her  a  finished  work  of  art.

T'he  child  enters  the  world  amid  shouts  of

joy,  and  the  propitious  genii  who  nourish
both  her  and  her  double  constitute  them-
selves her  nurses.  At  the  appointed  time,
her  earthly  father  summons  the  great  nobles
to  a  solemn  festival,  and  presents  to
them  his  daughter,  who  is  to  reign  with
him  over  Egypt  and  the  world.^  From
henceforth  IIatshop.situ  adoj^ts  every
possible  device  to  conceal  her  real  sex.
She  changes  the  termination  of  her  name,  and  calls  herself  Hatshopsiii,  the  chief
of  the  nobles,  in  lieu  of  Hatshopsitii,  the  chief  of  the  favourites.^  She  becomes
the  King  Makeri,  and  on  the  occasion  of  all  public  ceremonies  she  appears  in
male  costume.      We  see   her  represented   on  the   Theban   monuments  with

two  other  sovereigns,  viz.  Amenothes  III.,  wlio.se  father,  Tliutnaosis  IV.,  was  boru  under  conditions
analogous  to  those  attending  tiie  birth  of  Thutmosis  I. ;  anil  Ptolemy  Cicsariun,  whose  lather,  .Julius
Caisar.  was  not  of  Egyptian  blood.

'  These  sculptures  were  brought  to  light  by  Xaville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Baliari,  lutrodiictonj
Metnoir,  p.  1.").  The  association  of  Ilatshoiisitii  with  her  father  on  the  throne,  first  suggested  by  E.  do
Kouge  (Ktitdedcsmvnumente  de  Karnak,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arcli^oloijie,  etc.,  pp.  46-48),  has  now  been
placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  inscrii^tious  discovered  and  commented  on  by  Naville  in  1S95  (Troi's
JmcrliiliiiHs  de  la  lieiiie  Ihilshepeou,  in  the  liecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  .'cviii.  pp.  91-99).

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Guiiin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey  ;  cf.  GiiiiUAUT,  Le  Musge
Kijyiilkii,  pi.  .\.  The  statue  of  Mdtnofrit  is  now  in  the  GIzeh  Museum  (Vihky,  Notice  det  principaux
Monuintntg,  pp.  7(J,  77,  No.  231).

'  Navili.k,  Trail)  Intcripiions  de  la  Iteine  Eatthepsou,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.
pp.  92-94,  where  this  important  detail  is  very  conclusively  demonstrated.


QUEEN  MtJTNOFRlT    IN   THE   GIZEH   MUSEUJI.^


■238


THE  EIOHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


uncovered  shoulders,  devoid  of  breasts,  wearing  tlie  short  loin-cloth  and  the

kefiieh,  while  the  diadem  rests
on  her  closely  cut  hair,  and
the  false  beard  depends  from
her  chin.  SJie  retained,  how-
ever, the  feminine  pronoun  in
speaking  of  herself,  and  also
an  epitliet,  inserted  in  her
L-artouche,  whicii  declared
her  to  be  the  betrothed  of
Amon  —  Jahmhnit  Amaiinii}
Her  father  united  her  while
still  yoimg  to  her  brother
TIn'itmosis,  who  appears  to
have  been  her  junior,  and
this  fact  doubtless  explains
the  very  subordinate  part
\\hich  he  plays  beside  the
queen.  When  Thvitiuosis  I.
died,  Egyptian  etiquette  de-
manded that  a  man  sliould
be  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and  this  youth  succeeded  his  father  in  office:  but
Hatshopsitu,  while  relinquishing  the  semblauce  of  power  and  the  externals  of
pomp  to  her  husband,^  kept  the  direction  of  the  state  entirely  in  her  own  hands.

'  Cf.  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  Introductory  Memoir,  p.  l.i.  et  seq.  \Vc  know  how
greatly  puzzled  the  early  Egyptologists  were  by  this  manner  of  ilepictiug  the  queen,  and  how  Cham-
pollion,  in  striving  to  explain  the  monuments  of  the  period,  was  driven  to  suggest  the  existence  of  a
regent,  Ameneuthes,  the  male  counterpart  and  husband  of  Hatsliopsilii  (Champollion,  Lettres  fcrites
d'&iypte,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  293-29S),  whose  name  he  read  Amense.  This  hypothesis,  adopted  by  Eosellini
(^Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  i.  pp.  220-230,  and  vol.  iii.  pt.  I,  p.  129,  et  seq.)  with  some  slight  modifications.
was  rejected  by  Birch.  This  latter  writer  pointed  out  Ihe  identity  of  the  two  personages  separated  by
Champollion,  and  proved  them  to  be  one  and  the  same  queen,  tlie  Amenses  of  Manetho  ;  he  called  her
Amiin-num-he  (Akcndale-Boxomi-Birch,  Gallery  of  Antiquities  selected  from  the  British  iJnsetim,  ■pp.
77-79),  but  he  made  her  out  to  be  a  sister  of  Ameuothes  I.,  associated  on  the  ihrone  with  her  brothers
Thutmosis  I.  and  Thiitmosis  II.,  and  regent  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Thutmosis  III.  Hincks
tried  to  show  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  Thutmosis  I.,  the  wife  of  Thutmosis  II.  and  the  sister  of
Thutmosis  III.  (On  the  Years  and  Cycles  used  by  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Dublin
Academy,  vol.  xviii.  pt.  2,  p.  192,  et  seq.,  and  On  the  Defacement  of  Divine  and  Royal  Names,  pp.  3-5 ;
cf.  BiKCH,  On  the  Obelisk  on  the  .itmeidan  at  Cotistantinople,  p.  4)  ;  it  is  only  quite  recently  that  her
true  descent  and  place  in  the  family  tree  has  been  recognised.  She  was,  not  the  sister,  but  the  aunt
of  Thutmosis  III.  (Maspeko,  Notes  au  jour  lejour.  §  Itj,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,
1892,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  170-182).  The  queen,  called  by  Birch  Amitu-num-het,  the  latter  part  of  her
name  being  dropped  and  the  royal  prenomen  being  joined  to  her  own  name,  was  subsequently  styled
Ha-asu  or  Hatasu.  and  this  form  is  still  adopted  by  some  writers ;  the  true  reading  is  Hatsliopsitii  or
Hatsbepsitu,  then  Hatshopsiu  or  Hatshepsiii,  as  Xaville  lias  pointed  out.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Xaville,  in  Tlie  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.
siii. ;  cf.  the  statue  in  the  Berlin  Museum  (EiiM.iX,  Ausfiihrliches  Verzeichniss,  p.  28,  No.  2306).

"  It  is  evident,  from  the  expressions  employed  by  Thutmosis  I.  in  associating  his  daughter  with
himself  on  the  throne,  that  she  was  unmarried  at  the  time,  and  Naville  thinks  that  she  married  her


QDEEN  BATSHOrsm-   IN   MALE   COSTl  ME."


THrTMOSTS  II.


239


BUST   OP    QDEEN    UATSHOPSItC


The  portraits  of  her  which  liave  beeu  preserved
represent  lier  as  having  refined  features,  with
a  proud  ami  energetic  expression.  The  oval
of  the  face  is  elongated,  the  cheeks  a  little
hollow,  and  tlie  eyes  deep  set  under  the
arch  of  the  brow,  while  the  lips  are  thiu
and  tightly  closed.  She  governed  with
so  firm  a  hand  that  neither  Egypt  nor
its  foreign  vassals  dared  to  make  any
serious  attempt  to  witlidraw  themselves
from  her  authority.  One  raid,  in  which
several  prisoners  were  taken,  punished  a
rising  of  the  Sharisfi  in  Central  Syria,'
while  the  usual  expeditions  maintained
order  among  the  peoples  of  Ethiopia,
and  quenched  any  attempt  which  they
might  make  to  revolt.  When  iu  the
second  year  of  his  reign  the  news  was
brought  to  Thntmosis  II.  that  the  in-
habitants of  the  Upper  Nile  had  ceased  to
observe  the  conditions  which  his  father  had  imposed  upon  them,  he  "  became
furious  as  a  panther,"  and  assembling  his  troops  set  out  for  war  without
further  delay.  The  presence  of  the  king  with  the  army  filled  the  rebels  with
dismay,  and  a  campaign  of  a  few  weeks  put  an  end  to  their  attempt  at  rebelling.^
The  earlier  kings  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  had  chosen  for  tlieir  last  resting-

brother  Tliiitrao.sis  II.  after  tlie  death  other  father  {Tlie  Temple  oflJeir  el-Bahari,  Intrnductory  Memoir,
p.  l(j,  and  Troia  InscripUonf,  iu  the  Eecueil,  vol,  xviii.  p.  102).  It  appears  to  me  more  probable  that
Thutmosis  I.  married  her  to  her  bmtlier  after  she  had  been  raised  to  the  throne,  with  a  view  to
avoiding  complications  which  mi^lit  have  arisen  in  the  royal  family  after  his  own  death.  The
inaeriptiou  at  Siiutt-er-Ragel  (Eisenloiih,  An  Historical  Monument,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.
of  liibl.  Areh.,  18hill-81,  p.  101 ;  Flindeks  Petrie,  A  Season  in  Kgypt,  1887,  pi.  xv..  No.  476,  and  p.  15),
which  hue  furnished  Mariette  with  the  hypothesis  that  Thiitmosis  I.  and  Thutmosis  II.  reigned
simultaneously  (Diir  el-Bahari,  Text,  p.  o7),  proves  that  the  person  mentioned  in  it,  a  certain  I'enaiti,
tlourisheil  uuder  both  these  Pharaohs,  but  by  no  means  shows  that  these  two  reigned  together;  he
exercised  the  functions  wliicli  he  held  by  their  authority  during  their  successive  reigns.

'  Infcriplion  d'Ahmosi  I'annehhahit,  iu  Lupsius,  Auswald  der  trichtigsten  Vrlmnden,  pi.  xiv.  A,
II.  0,  10 ;  Maspeho,  I\'ote>  mr  diffiSrenlti  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'llistoire,  §  xliv.,  in  the  Zeiischrifl,
1883,  pp.  77,  78,  where  we  shoulil  read  the  first  name  of  Thutmosis  II.  instead  of  that  of  Thutmosis  I.
inserted  by  a  printer's  error.

'  Urawii  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  do  Jlertens.  Tliis  was  the  head  of  one  of
the  sphinxes  which  formed  an  avenue  at  Deir  el-Uahari ;  it  was  brought  over  by  Lepsius  and  is  now
in  the  Berlin  Museum  (cf.  Kilman,  Adsfiihrliches  Verzeichniss,  p.  79,  Xo.  2S0I,  and  p.  8o,  No.  2279).
The  fragment  lias  undergone  extensive  rcstor.itioD,  but  this  has  been  done  with  the  help  of  fragments
of  other  statues,  in  which  the  details  here  lost  were  in  a  good  state  of  presiTvalion.

•  St(de  of  the  second  year  nf  Thiiluiosis  11.,  on  the  rocks  at  Assuan,  Lei'sil'S,  ])enl:in.,  iii.  10  a;
.1.  de  Moucan,  Catalogue  (hs  Monuments  et  Inscriptions,  vol,  i.  pp.  3,4,  It  was  probably  from  this
expedition  that  the  Pharaoh  brought  back  the  list  of  African  names  published  by  Naville,  Trois
Intcriplioni  de  la  reine  Udtshepti,  in  the  Uecucil  de  Tramux,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  .si-92.


240


THE  EIGHTEENTH  THEBAN  DYNASTY.


place  a  spot  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Nile  at  Thebes,  where  tlie  cultivated  land
joined  the  desert,  close  to  the  pyramids  built  by  their  predecessors.^  Probably,
after  the  burial  of  Amenothes,  the  space  was  fully  occupied,  for  Thutmosis  I.
had  to  seek  his  buryiug-ground  some  way  up  the  ravine,  the  mouth  of  which
was  blocked  by  their  monuments.  The  Libyan  chain  here  forms  a  kind  of
amphitheatre  of  vertical  cliff;),  which  descend  to  within  some  ninety  feet  of  the


THE    AMPHITHEATRE    AT    DEIU    EL-BAHARI,    AS   IT    APPEAEED   BEFORE    NAVILLE's    EXCAVATIONS.^


valley,  where  a  sloping  mass  of  detritus  connects  them  by  a  gentle  declivity
with  the  plain.  The  great  lords  and  the  queens  in  the  times  of  the  Antufs  and
the  Usirtasens  had  taken  possession  of  this  spot,  but  their  chapels  were  by  this
period  iu  ruins,  and  their  tombs  almost  all  lay  buried  under  the  waves  of  sand
which  the  wind  from  the  desert  drives  perpetually  over  the  summit  of  the  cliffs.*
This  site  was  seized  on  by  the  architects  of  Thutmosis,  who  laid  there  the
foundations  of  a  building  which  was  destined  to  be  unique  in  the  world.  Its
ground  plan  consisted  of  an  avenue  of  sphinxes,  starting  from  the  plain  and
running  between  the  tombs  till  it  reached  a  large  courtyard,  terminated  on  the
west  by  a  colonnade,  which  was  supported  by  a  double  row  of  pillars.     Above

'  Cf.  what  is  said  with  regard  to  the  necropolis  where  the  Pharaohs  of  previous  dynasties  were
'buried,  in  Maspebo,  Dawn  of  Cu-ilizaiion,  pp.  4G0,  461,  52S-530,  and  p.  76  of  the  present  worlv.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Boy,  talien  in  1SS4,  from  tlie  edge  of  the
plateau  overlooking  tlie  valley,  on  the  path  leading  to  tlie  Tombs  of  the  Kings.

'  We  still  find  there,  for  instance,  the  tombs  of  Queens  Xofriil  and  Tumu  (Maspero,  Les  Inscriptions
ties  Pyramidesde  Saqqarah,p.2J,  u.  1,  and  Notes  sur  difi'ients  points  de  Gnimmaire  et  d'Histoire,
■§  xciii.,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  188S,  p.  77).


THE   TEMPLE   OF  DEIE   EL-BAEABI.


241


THE   NOUTHERN    COLONNADE
OK    HATSHOPSITU    AT   DEIR    EL-BiHARI.'


■^'Sfi'^i^


and  beyond  this  was  the  vast  middle
j)latform,*  connected  with  the  upper
court  by  the  central  causeway  which  ran
through  it  from  end  to  end ;  this  middle  platform,  like  that  below  it,  was
terminated  on  the  west  by  a  double  colonnade,  through  which  access  was  gained
to  two  chapels  hollowed  out  of  the  mountain-side,  while  on  the  north  it  was
bordered  w  ith  excellent  effect  by  a  line  of  proto-Doric  columns  ranged  against
the  face  of  the  cliff.  This  northern  colonnade  was  never  completed,  but  the
existing  part  is  of  as  exquisite  proportions  as  anything  that  Greek  art  has  ever
X^rodueed.  At  length  we  reach  the  upper  platform,  a  nearly  square  courtyard,
cutting  on  one  side  into  the  mountain  slope,  the  opposite  side  being  enclosed
by  a  wall  pierced  by  a  single  door,  while  to  right  and  left  ran  two  lines  of
buildings  destined  for  purposes  connected  with  the  daily  worship  of  the
temple.  The  sanctuary  was  cut  out  of  the  solid  I'ock,  but  the  walls  were
faced  with  white  limestone ;  some  of  the  chambers  are  vaulted,  and  all  of
them  decorated  with  bas-reliefs  of  exquisite  workmanship,  perhaps  the  finest
examples  of  this   period.'^      Thutmosis   I.   scarcely    did    more   than   lay  the


'  Drawn  by  liouditr,  Injin  a  photograph  supplied  by  Naville.

-  A  aketch  of  the  history  of  the  temple  was  furnished  in  part  by  Mariette  (Dei)-  el-Bahari,  Docu-
mentt  topographiques,historique8  et  ethnugraphiques  recueillis  dans  ce  tempU pendant  lea/ouilles,  Texte,
1877,  pp.  1-11,  35-10),  and  fully  by  Naville  (T/te  Te^nple  of  Veir  el-Bahari,  Us  Plan,  Us  Founders,
and  Us  first  Explorers,  1891,  pp.  1-12, 1'J,  20),  who  completely  cleared  the  ruins  for  the  Egypt  Explora-
tion Fund,  in  the  years  1892-UG.  Mariette,  struck  by  the  strange  appearance  of  the  edifice,  thought
that  it  betrayed  a  foreign  influence,  and  supposed  that  Queen  HatshopsStii  had  constructed  it  on  the
model  of  some  buildings  seen  by  her  officers  in  the  land  of  Puanit  (DetV  el-Bahari,  pp.  10,  11).  It  is,
however,  a  purely  Egyptian  structure  of  the  Eemi-Speos  kind.

•  The  Kiiglish  nomenclature  employed  in  describing  this  temple  is  that  used  in  the  Quide  to  Deir
elUakari,  published  by  tlie  Egypt  Exploration  Fund.— Tit.


242  THE  EIQHTEENTH  TEEBAN  DYNASTY.

.^  foundations    of   this    magnificent    building,   but

..-  '  ""-.  his    mummy    was    buried    in    it    with   great

pom]),  to  remain  there  until  a  period  of  dis-
turbance and  general  insecurity  obliged
those   in  charge   of  the   necropolis   to
remove  the  body,  together  with  those
of  his  family,  to  some  securer  hiding-
place.^     The  king   was   already
advanced  in  age  at  the  time  of
his  death,  being  over  fifty  years
old,  to  judge  by  the  incisor  teeth,
which    are   worn   and    corroded
by  the  impurities  of  which  the
Egyptian  bread  was   full.     The
body,    though    small  and   ema-
ciated,   shows    evidence   of    un-
usual   muscular    strength ;    the
liead  is  bald,  the  features  are  refined,
and  the  mouth  still  bears  an  expres-
sion characteristic  of  shrewdness  and
cunning.^      Thutmosis   II.   carried   on
the  works  begun  by  his  father,  but  did
not  long  survive  him.^     The  mask  on
liis  coffin  represents  him  with  a  smiling  and  amiable  countenance,  and  with
the  fine  pathetic  eyes  which  show  his  descent  from  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XII'"

'  Both  E.  de  Koiige  (Etude  des  Mon.  du  Massif  de  Karnali, in  tlie  Melanges  d'ArcUologie  Egyptienne,
vol.  i.  pp.  4S,  49)  and  Mariette  (Deir  el-Bnhari,  p.  35)  were  opposed  to  the  view  that  the  temple  was
founded  by  Tliiitmosis  I,  and  NaviUe  agrees  with  them  (The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  16,  17).
Judgin--  from  the  many  new  texts  discovered  by  Naville,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Thiitmosis  I.
began  the  structure,  but  from  plans,  it  would  appear,  which  had  not  been  so  fully  developed  as  they
afterwards  became.  From  indications  to  be  found  here  and  there  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  Ramesside
period,  I  am  not,  moreover,  inclined  to  regard  Deir  el-Bahari  as  the  funerary  chapel  of  tombs  which
were  situated  in  some  unknown  place  elsewhere  (M.«.biette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  2,  3;  Naville,  The
Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  6-8),  but  I  believe  that  it  included  the  burial-places  of  Thiltmosis  I.,
Thfitmosis  II.,  Queen  Hatshopsitu,  and  of  numerous  representatives  of  their  family ;  indeed,  it  is
probable  that  Thiltmosis  III.  and  his  children  found  here  also  their  last  resting-place.

«  The  coffin  of  Thutmosis  I.  was  usurped  by  the  priest-king  Pinozmu  I.,  son  of  PiOnkhi  (Maspeko,
Les  Mamies  royales,  in  the  M^m.  de  la  Mission  Frauraise,  vol.  i.  p.  545),  and  the  mummy  was  lost.  I
tancy  I  have  discovered  it  in  mummy  No.  52S3,  of  which  the  head  presents  a  striking  resemblance  to
those  of  TImtmosis  II.  and  III.  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  581,  582),  a  fact  which  may  be  established  by  com-
paring the  illustration  given  above  with  those  on  pages  243  and  290.

'  The  latest  year  up  to  tlie  present  known  of  this  king  is  the  11'"',  found  upmi  the  Aswan  stele
(Lepsics,  Denhm.,  iii.  16  a).  Erman  {^gijpten,  p.  71),  followed  by  Ed.  Meyer  {Geschichte  Mgyptens,
pp.  232, 238),  thinks  that  Hatshopsjlii  could  not  have  been  free  from  complicity  in  the  premature  death
of  Thfltmosis  II. :  but  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  from  the  marks  of  disease  found  on  the  skin  of  his
mummy,  that  the  queen  was  innocent  of  the  crime  here  ascribed  to  her  (cf.  'Wiedemaxx,  ^gyptische
Geschichte,  Supplement,  p.  38).

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey  in  1S81 ;  cf.  Maspebo,  Les
Momies  royales,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Frauraise,  vol.  i.  pp.  581,  582.


BEAD   OF   THE    5IUMMY    OF    THUTMOSIS


THE  BUILDINGS    OF  KARNAK.


243


HEAD   OF    THE    MUMMY    OP
TUUTM0SI3    II.'


tlynasty.   His  statues  bear  the  same  expression,  whicli
indeed  is  that  of  the  mummy  itself.    He  resembles
Thutmosis  I.,  but  his  features  are  not  so  marked,
and  are  characterised  by  greater  gentleness.   He
had  scarcely  reached  tlie  age  of  thirty  when
he  fell  a  victim   to  a  disease  of   which   the
process  of  embalming   could  not   remove
the  traces.   The  skin  is  scabrous  in  patches,
and  covered  witli  scars,  while  the  upper
part  of  the  skull  is  bald ;  the  body  is  thin
and  somewhat  shrunken,  and  appears  to
have  lacked  vigour  and  muscular  power.'
By   his   marriage  with   his   sister,  Thut-
mosis left  daughters  only,^  but  he  had  one
son,  also  a  Thutmosis,  by  a  woman  of  low  birtii,
perhaps  merely  a  slave,  whose  name  was   Isis.'
Hatshopsitu  proclaimed  this  child  her  successor,  foi
his  youth  and  humble  parentage  could  not  excite  her
jealousy.     She  betrothed  him  to  her  one  surviving

daughter,  Hatshopsitu  II.,*  and  having  thus  settled  the  succession  in  the  male
line,  she  continued  to  rule  alone  in  the  name  of  her  nephew  who  was  still
a  minor,  as  she  had  done  formerly  in  the  case  of  her  half-brother.

Her  reign  was  a  prosperous  one,  but  whether  the  flourishing  condition  of
things  was  owing  to  the  ability  of  her  political  administration  or  to  her  fortunate
choice  of  ministers,  we  are  unable  to  tell.  She  pressed  forward  the  work  of
building  with  great  activity,  under  the  direction  of  her  architect  Sanmut,"  not
only  at  Deir  el-Baliari,  but  at  Karnak,  and  indeed  everywiiere  in  Thebes.     The

'  Maspeuo,  Xe«  Momks  royales,  in  the  liUm.  de  la  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  p|).  5J")-547,  where  a  complete
descriptiou  of  the  body  is  given  from  its  examiuation  by  Dr.  Fouquet.

'  Two  daughters  of  Queen  Halahopsitu  I.  are  known,  of  whom  one,  Nof  iriiii,  died  young  (Cuam-
POLLio.N,  Mon.  de  I'Fgijple  at  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  exciv.  1-3  ;  Lepsil's,  Denkni.,  iii.  20  o,  25  i,  25  bi»  n,  </),
and  HiitshnpsltCi  II.  Matitri,  who  was  married  to  her  half-brother  on  her  father's  side,  Thiitmosis
III.,  who  was  thus  her  cousin  as  well  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  25  bis  q,  :>8  a,  6).  AmenSthes  II.  was
offspring  of  this  marriage.

'  The  name  of  the  mother  of  Thutmosis  III.  was  revealed  to  us  on  the  wrappings  found  with  the
mummy  of  this  king  in  tho  hiding-place  of  Deir  el-Bahari  (Maspero,  Les  Momies  royalas,  in  the  HUm.
de  la  Mistioii  Fran^aUi',  vol.  i.  pp.  547,  548);  the  absence  of  princely  titles,  while  it  shows  tho  humble
extraction  of  the  lady  Isis,  explains  at  the  same  time  the  somewhat  obscure  relations  between
HitshopBilu  and  her  nephew  (Maspeuci,  NuU-i  sur  diff^reuts  points  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeit-
nchrifl,  18.52.  pp.  i;i2,  l:i:i;  cf.  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  p.  14).

'  Champoluo.n.  Moil,  de  I'Ejypte,  etc.,  pi.  c.xcv.  3.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  in  the  poesuSbion  of  Kmil  ]!rugscli-Buy,  taken  iu  1880.

"  This  is  tho  iiidivi.lual  represented  i;n  p.  215;  besides  his  statue  in  the  Berlin  Museum  (Ekman,
Aut/iihrlicUea  Verzeichiiiss,  p.  80,  No.  2200),  an  inscription  exists  cut  on  the  rocks  at  Aswilu,  which
ascribes  to  him  the  erection  of  two  obelisks,  probably  those  at  Karnak  (Lepsius,  Denltm.,  iii.  25  bis  q
J.  DE  MoiKiAN',  Calaloijite  de»  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  41,  No.  181  bis).    A  second  statue  of  him  was  found
ID  1890  by  Miss  Benson  in  the  temple  of  Milt  at  Karnak.


244


THE  EIGHTEENTE   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.


plans  of  the  building  bad  been  arranged  under  Tliutmosis  I.,  and  their
execution  had  been  carried  out  so  quickly,  that  in  many  cases  the  queen
had  merely  to  see  to  the  sculptural  ornamentation  on  the  all  but  com-
pleted walls.  This  work,  however,  afforded  her  sufficient  excuse,  according
to  Egyptian  custom,  to  attribute  the  whole  structure  to  herself,  and  the
opinion  she  had  of  her  own  powers  is  exhibited  with  great  naiveness
in  her  inscriptions.  She  loves  to  pose  as  premeditating
her  actions  long  beforehand,  and  as  never  venturing  on
tiie  smallest  undertaking  without  reference  to  her  divine
father.  "  This  is  what  I  teach  to  mortals  who  shall  live
in  centuries  to  come,  and  whose  hearts  shall  inquire
concerning  the  monument  which  I  have  raised  to  my
father,  speaking  and  exclaiming  as  they  contemplate  it :
as  for  me,  when  I  sat  in  the  palace  and  thought  upon
him  who  created  me,  my  heart  prompted  me  to  raise  to
him  two  obelisks  of  electrum,  whose  apices  should  pierce
the  firmaments,  before  the  noble  gateway  which  is  be-
tween the  two  great  pylons  of  the  King  Thutmosis  I.
And  my  heart  led  me  to  address  these  words  to  those
who  shall  see  my  monuments  in  after-years  and  who  shall
speak  of  my  great  deeds :  Beware  of  saying,  '  I  know  not,
I  know  not  why  it  was  resolved  to  carve  this  mountain
wholly  of  gold ! '  These  two  obelisks.  My  Majesty  has
made  them  of  electrum  for  my  father  Amon,  that  my
name  may  remain  and  live  on  in  this  temple  for  ever
and  ever ;  for  this  single  block  of  granite  has  been  cut,
without  let  or  obstacle,  at  the  desire  of  BIy  Majesty,
between  the  first  of  the  second  month  of  Pirit  of  the  V"
year,  and  the  30th  of  the  fourth  month  of  Shomii  of  the  Yl*  year,  which
makes  seven  months  from  the  day  when  they  began  to  quarry  it."  ^  One  of  these
two  monoliths  is  still  standing  among  the  ruins  of  Karnak,  and  the  grace  of  its
outline,  the  finish  of  its  hieroglyphics,  and  the  beauty  of  the  figures  which
cover  it,  amply  justify  the  pride  which  the  queen  and  her  brother  felt  in  con-
templating it.  The  tops  of  the  pyramids  were  gilt,  so  that  "they  could  be  seen
from  both  banks  of  the  river,"  and  "  their  brilliancy  lit  up  the  two  lands  of

'  Drawn  by  Fauelier-Gudiii,  from  a  photograph  in  tlie  possession  of  E.  Brugsch-Bey,  taken
in  18S1.

'  Peisse  d'Atenxes,  Monuments  Egypiiens,  pi.  xviii.,  West,  11.  5-8,  North,  11.  1,  2,  6-8;  Lepsius,
Denhm.,  iii.  24  w,  11.  5-S,  and  n,  11.  1,  2,  G-S;  cf.  Lepage-Eekouf,  in  the  Becords  of  the  Past,  1st
series,  vol.  xii.  pp.  13:>-135.  These  two  obelisks  were  cut  iu  the  quarry  under  the  superintendence
of  Sanmflt,  as  we  are  informed  by  the  votive  monuments  put  up  by  this  individual  at  Asw^n  (Lepsius,
Denkm.,  iii.  25  lis  ij ;  J.  de  Morgan,  Catalogue  des  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  41,  No.  ISl  his).


THE    Ci'FFlX    fl
THUTMOSIS   I.'


THE  LAND    OF  INCENSE.


245


Egypt : "  needles8  to  say  these  metal  apices  have  long  disappeared.^  Later
on,  in  the  VIP"  or  VIII'"  year  of  the  queen's  reign,  Anion  enjoined  a  work
which  was  more  difficult  to  carry  out.^  On  a  day
when  Hatshopsitu  had  gone  to  the  temple  to
oflfer  prayers,  "her  supplications  arose  up
before  the  throne  of  the  Lord  of  Karnak,
and  a  command  was  heard  in  the  sanc-
tuary, a  behest  of  the  god  himself,  that
the  ways  which  lead  to  Puanit  should  be  ex-
plored, and  that  the  roads  to  the  '  Ladders
of  Incense '  should  be  trodden."  ^  The
aromatic  gums  required  for  the  temple
service  had  hitherto  reached  the  Theban
priests  solely  by  means  of  foreign  inter-
mediaries; so  that  in  the  slow  transport
across  Africa  they  lost  much  of  their
freshness,  besides  being  defiled  by  pass-
ing through  impure  hands.  In  addition
to  these  drawbacks,  the  merchants  con-
founded under  the  one  term  "Aniti"  sub-
stances which  differed  considerably  both
in  value  and  character,  several  of  them,
indeed,  scarcely  coming  under  the  cate-
gory of  perfumes,  and  hence  beiug  un-
acceptable to  the  gods.     One  kind,  however,  found  favour  with  them  above  all

'  Prisse  d'Atennes,  Monuments  Sgypiiens,  Soutb,  11.  6,  7 ;  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  24  s,  II.  6,  7.

'  The  date  of  this  espeditiou  depends  upon  an  inscription,  incompletely  reproduced  by  Dujuchen,
Die  Flotte  einer  JEgyptischen  Konifjin,  pi.  xviii.  a  ?>,  and  p.  19  ;  and  iu  its  entirety  by  Naville,  Trois
Inscr! ijtiona  rle  la  reine  Satshepsou,  in  the  Secueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  103-106,  which  records
that  in  the  year  IX.  the  incense  trees  brought  from  Puault  had  been  recently  planted.  The  voyage
lasted  probably  from  the  year  VII.  to  the  year  VIII.  The  illustrations  of  the  voyage  discovered  by
Mariette  in  1858  were  first  published  by  DiJMloaEH,  Die  Flotte  einer  JSgypiischen  Konigin,  folio,  1868,
and  in  Historische  Inschri/ten,  vol.  ii.  pis.  viii.-xxii.,  and  later  by  Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  Docu-
ment) topographiques,  etc.,  in  folio,  Text  in  quarto,  1877.  Diimichen  and  Mariette,  iu  the  texts  to
their  respective  collections  of  plates,  examined  them,  and  Chabas  bestowed  special  considerations  on
ihem,  Etudea  sur  V Antiquite  hiatorique,  ■2nd  edit.,  pp.  I.'jl-I72.  They  were  afterwards  studied  by
Bboosch,  Geschichte  .-Egyptens,  pp.  281-288  ;  Maspebo,  De  quelques  Navigations  des  ligyptiens  sur  les
cStes  de  la  Mer  Krythrie,  pp.  9-2.5 ;  Lieblein,  Eandd  und  Schiff/ahrt  auf  dem  Rothem  Meere  in  alien
Zeiten,  pp.  23-37 ;  Kkall,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  alien  Egyptens,  IV.  Das  Land  Punt  (in  tlie
Silzungshurichte  of  the  Academy  of  Vienna,  1890,  vol.  cxxi.) ;  by  Guimji,  Die  Pharaonen  in  Ostafrika,
pp.  1-1-46,  131-160 ;  and  lastly  by  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  21-25.

'  DiMioHEN,  Uistorische  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xx.  11.  2,  etc. ;  Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  10,
11.  4-6.  The  word  "  Ladders  "  is  tlie  translation  of  the  Egyptian  word  "  Khatifl,"  employed  in  the
text  to  designate  the  country  laid  out  in  terraces  where  the  incense  trees  grow;  cf.,  with  a  dift'erent
meaning,  the  "  ladders  "  (EchuUes)  of  the  eastern  Mediterranean.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Mertens :  the  original  is  iu  the  Berlin
Museum,  whither  Lepsius  brought  it ;  cf.  Euman,  Aus/Uhrliches  Verzeichniss,  p.  86,  Xo.  2206.  SanmClt
is  squatting  and  holding  between  hia  arms  and  knees  the  young  king  Thutmosis  III.,  whose  head
with  the  youthful  side  lock  appears  from  under  his  chin.


THE  statue  of  sanmut.''


246


TEE  EIOETEENTE  TEEBAN  DTNASTT.


others,  being  that  which  still  abounds  in  Somali-land  at  the  present  day — a  gum

secreted  by  the  incense  sycamore.'  It
was  accounted  a  pious  work  to  send
and  obtain  it  direct  from  the  locality
in  which  it  grew,  and  if  possible  to
procure  the  plants  themselves  for  ac-
climatisation in  the  Nile  valley.  But
the  relations  maintained  in  former
times  with  the  peojile  of  these  aro-
matic regions  had  been  suspended  for
centuries.  "None  now  climbed  the
'  Ladders  of  Incense,'  none  of  the
Egyptians ;  they  knew  of  them  from
hearsay,  from  the  stories  of  people  of
ancient  times,  for  these
products  were  brought  to
the  kings  of  the  Delta,
thy  fathers,  to  one  or
other  of  them,  from  the
times  of  thy  ancestors
the  kings  of  the  Said  who
lived  of  yore."  ^  All  that
could  be  recalled  of  this
country  was  summed  up
in  the  facts,  that  it  lay
to  tiie  south  or  to  the
extreme  east,  that  from
thence  many  of  tlie
gods  had  come  into
Egypt,  while  from  out  of  it  the  sun  rose  anew  every  morning.*  Amon,  in  his
omniscience,  took  upon  himself  to  describe  it  and  give  an  exact  account  of  its
position.  "  The  '  Ladders  of  Incense '  is  a  secret  province  of  Tonutir,  it  is  in
truth  a  place  of  delight.     I  created  it,  and  I  thereto  lead  Thy  Majesty,  together

>  From  tho  form  of  the  trees  depicted  on  the  monument  (of.  p.  253  of  the  present  volume,  -where
some  are  represented),  jt  is  certain  that  the  Egyptians  went  to  P&anit  in  search  o{  the  Boswellia
Thurifera  Cakt.  (Loket,  La  Flore  Fharaonique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  96) ;  but  they  brought  back  with  them
other  products  also,  which  they  confounded  together  under  the  name  "  incense.'

=  DuuiCHEN,  Hist,  liisch:,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xx.  11.  10-12  ;  Mariette,  Velr  el-Bahari,  pi.  10, 11.  10-12.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

'  See  pp.  84,  85  of  the  Daion  of  Civilizalion  concerning  the  Egyptian  gods  who  came  from  Puauit,
and  pp.  396-398,  433,  434,  494-498  for  the  relations  between  Piianit  a;id  Egypt,  both  under  the
Memphite,  and  during  the  first  Theban  empiici.


HATSHOrSlTU  S   OliELISK    AT    KABXAK.'


THE  EXPEDITION  TO   PUANIT.  iM?

vitli  3Iut,  iJathor,  Urrit,  the  Lady  of  Puanit,  Uiiit-hikau,  the  magician  aud
regent  of  the  gods,  that  the  aromatic  gum  may  be  gathered  at  will,  that  the
vessels  may  be  laden  joyfully  with  living  incense  trees  and  with  all  the  products
of  this  earth." '  Hatshopsitu  chose  out  five  well-built  galleys,  and  manned  them
with  picked  crews.  She  caused  them  to  be  laden  with  such  merchandise  as  would
be  most  attractive  to  the  barbarians,  and  placing  the  vessels  under  the  command
.of  a  royal  envoy,  she  sent  them  forth  on  the  Ked  Sea  in  quest  of  the  incense.^

We  are  not  acquainted  with  the  name  of  the  port  from  which  the  fleet  set
sail,  nor  do  we  know  the  number  of  weeks  it  took  to  reach  the  land  of  Puanit,
neither  is  there  any  record  of  the  incidents  which  befell  it  by  the  way.
It  sailed  past  the  places  frequented  by  the  mariners  of  the  XII"'  dynasty —
Suakin,  Massowah,  and  the  islands  of  the  Eed  Sea ;  it  touched  at  the  country
of  the  Ilim  which  lay  to  the  west  of  the  Bab  el-Mandeb,  went  safely  through  the
Straits,  and  landed  at  last  in  the  Land  of  Perfumes  on  the  Somali  coast.^  There,
between  the  bay  of  Zeilah  and  Ras  Hafun,  stretched  the  Barbaric  region,
frequented  in  later  times  by  the  merchants  of  Myos  Hormos  and  of  Berenice.
The  first  stations  which  the  latter  encountered  beyond  Cape  Direh — Avalis,
Malao,  Mundos,  and  Mosylon — were  merely  open  roadsteads  offering  no  secure
shelter ;  *  but  beyond  Mosylon,  the  classical  navigators  reported  the  existence
of  several  wadys,  the  last  of  which,  the  Elephant  Eiver,  lying  between
Eas  el-Fil  and  Cape  Guardafui,  appears  to  have  been  large  enough  not  only  to

'  DCmioues,  Hist.  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xx.  11.  13-15;  Makiette,  DctVeZ-Ba7ian,  pi.  10,  11.  13-15.
An  enumeratioD  of  the  divinities  of  Puanit  is  found  as  early  as  the  Memoirs  of  Siui.hU,  11.  209,  210;
cf.  Maspero,  Le  Papyrus  de  Berlin,  No.  I.,  iu  the  Melanges  d'Arch^ologie  iJgyptienne,  vol.  iii.  p.  160.

'  It  was  for  some  time  believed  that  the  five  vessels  portrayed  were  merely  representative  of  a
more  numerous  fleet  (Beugsch,  Geseh.  Sgypfens,  p.  281) ;  the  proof  that  they  formed  the  entire  squadron
i.s  given  in  Maspero,  De  qudques  Navigations  des  Egijptiens,  p.  11,  No.  1.

•  That  part  of  Puanit  where  the  Egyptians  landed  was  at  first  located  in  Arabia  by  Brugsch
(Geogr.  Insch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  14,  and  iii.  pp.  63,  (H),  then  transferred  to  Somali-land  by  Mariette  (Les  Listes
g€og.  des  Pijlones  de  Karnak,  pp.  00-GG,  and  Delr  el-Bahari,  pp.  26-35),  whose  opinion  was  accepted  by
most  Egyptologists  (Brugsou,  Gesch.  ^ggplens,  pp.  2S1,  282;  Maspero,  De  quelqnes  Navigations  des
Pijyptiens,  pp.  5,  6).  Diimichen,  basing  his  hypothesis  on  a  passage  where  Pilanit  is  mentioned  as
"being  on  both  sides  of  the  sea"  (Mauiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  5,  2nd  reg.),  desired  to  apply  the
name  to  the  Arabian  as  well  as  to  the  African  coast,  to  Yemen  aud  Hadhramaut  as  well  as  to  Somali-
land  (Gesch.  des  Alien  -^gyptens,  pp.  119-122)  ;  this  suggestion  was  adopted  by  Lieblein  (Handel  uud
Schif/ahrt,  etc.,  p.  52,  et  seq.),  and  subsequently  by  Ed.  Meyer,  who  believed  that  its  inhabitants
were  the  ancestors  of  the  Saba;ans  {Gisch.  des  Alten  Mgyptens,  p.  231).  Since  then  Krall  has
endeavoured  to  shorten  the  distance  between  this  country  and  Egypt,  and  he  places  the  Piianit  of
Hatshopsitu  betweeu  Suakiu  and  Mas.sowah  {Siudien  zur  Gesch.  des  Alten  Mjyp.,IV.  Das  Land  Punt.
pp.  21,  22).  This  was,  indeed,  the  part  of  the  country  known  under  the  XII"'  dynasty  (cf.  Dawn  of
Civilization,  pp.  495,  49C)  at  the  time  when  it  was  believed  that  the  Nile  emptied  itself  thereabouts  into
the  Red  Sea,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Island  of  the  Serpent  King  (Maspero,  Notes  sur  quehiaes  points
de  Gratnmaire  et  d'Uist,  §  v.,  iu  the  Eec.  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  76-78),  but  I  hold,  with  Mariette,
that  the  I'liauit  where  the  Egyptians  of  Hatsliopsitft's  time  landed  is  the  preseut  Somali-land— a  view
which  is  also  shar.^d  by  Naville  {The  Temple  of  Iklr  el-Bahari,  pp.  21,  22,  and  Egypt  Expl.  Fund,
Archxological  Jleport,  1894-95,  p.  34),  but  which  Brugsch,  in  the  latter  years  of  his  life,  abandoned
(ScHWEiNFURTii,  Vher  seine  lieise  nach  dem  glOcldichen  Arabia,  p.  5,  et  seq.,  from  the  Wrhatull.  der
GetellfUr  Krdhunde  zu  Berlin,  1889,  No.  7).

*  For  the  roadsteads  of  Malao,  Mundos,  aud  Mosylon,  cf.  the  information  furnished  in  the  Periplus
of  the  Erythrajaii  Sea,  §§  8,  9,  10,  in  Mili.er-Didot,  Geo^jraphi  Grxci  Minores,  vol.  i.  pp.  264,  265.


248


THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


afford  anchorage  to  several  vessels  of  light  draught,  but  to  permit  of  their  perform-
ing easily  any  evolutions  required.  During  the  Eoman  period,  it  was  there,  and
there  only,  that  the  best  kind  of  incense  could  be  obtained,  and  it  was  probably  at
this  point  also  that  the  Egyptians  of  Hatshopsitu's  time  landed.  Tiie  Egyptian
vessels  sailed  up  the  river  till  they  reached  a  place  beyond  the  influence  of  the  tide,

and  then  dropped  anchor  in
front  of  a  village  scattered  along
a  bank  fringed  with  sycamores
and  palms.^  The  huts  of  the  in-
habitants were  of  circular  shape,
each  being  surmounted  with  a
conical  roof;  some  of  them  were
made  of  closely  plaited  osiers,
and  there  was  no  opening  in  any
of  tht'm  save  the  door.  They
were  built  u^on  piles,  as  a  pro-
tection from  the  rise  of  the  river
and  from  wild  animals,  and
access  to  them  was  gained  by
means  of  moveable  ladders.
Oxen  chewing  the  cud  rested
beneath  them.  The  natives
belonged  to  a  light-coloured
race,  and  the  portraits  we  possess  of  them  resemble  the  Egyptian  type  in  every
particular.  They  were  tall  and  thin,  and  of  a  colour  which  varied  between
brick-red  and  the  darkest  brown.  Their  beards  were  pointed,  and  the  hair  was
cut  short  in  some  instances,  while  in  others  it  was  arranged  in  close  rows  of
curls  or  in  small  plaits.  The  costume  of  the  men  consisted  of  a  loin-cloth  only,
while  the  dress  of  the  women  was  a  yellow  garment  without  sleeves,  drawn  in
at  the  waist  and  falling  halfway  below  the  knee.

The  royal  envoy  landed  under  an  escort  of  eight  soldiers  and  an  officer,  but,
to  prove  his  pacific  intentions,  he  spread  out  upon  a  low  table  a  variety  of

'  I  have  shown,  from  a  careful  esaminatiou  of  the  bas-reliefs,  that  the  Egyptians  must  have
landed,  not  on  the  coast  itself,  as  was  at  first  believed  (Dumichen,  Die  Flutte  einer  ^gyptischen
ESnigin,  pp.  17,  18;  Chabas,  Etude$  sur  VAntiq.  historique,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  152,  170;  Makiette,
Deir  el-Bahari,  Te.\t,  p.  14;  Bkigsch,  Gesch.  ■3<:riyi).,  p.  2S1,  et  soq.),  but  in  the  estuary  of  a  river
(De  quelques  Namgations  des  £gyptie)ts,  pp.  20, 21 ),  and  this  observation  has  been  accepted  as  decisive
by  most  Egyptologists  (Krall,  Studien  zur  Geschichte,  etc.,  IV.  Das  Land  Puiil,  p.  17;  Naville,
The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  p.  22) ;  besides  this,  newly  discovered  fragments  show  the  preseuce  of
a  hippopotamus  (Naville,  Egypt  Expl.  Fund,  Archaiol.  Report,  1894-95,  p.  34).  Since  then  I  have
sought  to  identify  tlie  landing-place  of  the  Egyptians  with  the  most  important  of  the  creeks  men-
tioned by  the  Grseco-Koman  merchants  as  accessible  for  their  vessels  (_Periplus  of  the  Erythraean  Sea,
§  10,  in  MuLLEH-DiDOT,  Geographi  Grxci  Minores,  vol.  i.  pp.  265,  266),  viz.  thsit  which  they  called
the  Elephant  Eiver,  near  to  the  present  Kas  el-Fil.

''  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Gayet ;  cf.  Petrik,  Racial  Types,  No.  105.


AN  inhabitant   OF  THE  LAND  OF   PDANIt.-


J


EXCHANGE   OF  PRESENTS    WITH   THE  NATIVES   OF  PUANIT.      249

presents,  consisting  of  five  bracelets,  two  gold  necklaces,  a  dagger  with  strap
and  sheath  complete,  a  battle-axe,  and  eleven  strings  of  glass  beads.  The
inhabitants,  dazzled  by  the  display  of  so  many  valuable  objects,  ran  to  meet
the  new-comers,  headed  by  their  sheikh,  and  expressed  a  natural  astonishment
at  the  sight  of  the  strangers.  "How  is  it,"  they  exclaimed,  "that  you  have
reached  this  country  hitherto  unknown  to  men  ?  Have  you  come  down  by  way
of  the  sky,  or  have  you  sailed  on  the  waters  of  the


A    VU,LAGE   ON   THE   BANK   OF   THE    RlVEli,    WITH    LADDERS   OF    INCENSE.'

Tonutir  Sea  ?  You  have  followed  the  path  of  the  sun,  for  as  for  the  king  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  it  is  not  possible  to  elude  him,  and  we  live,  yea,  we  ourselves,  by
the  breath  which  he  gives  us."  ^  The  name  of  their  chief  was  Parihu,  who  was
distinguished  from  his  subjects  by  the  boomerang  which  he  carried,  and  also
by  his  dagger  and  necklace  of  beads ;  his  right  leg,  moreover,  appears  to  have
been  covered  with  a  kind  of  sheath  composed  of  rings  of  some  yellow  metal,
probably  gold.^  He  was  accompanied  by  his  wife  Ati,  riding  on  au  ass,  from  wiiich
she  alighted  in  order  to  gain  a  closer  view  of  the  strangers.  She  was  endowed
with  a  type  of  beauty  much  admired  by  the  people  of  Central  Africa,  being  so
inordinately  fivt  that  the  shape  of  her  body  was  scarcely  recognisable  under  the
rolls  of  flesh  which  hung  down  from  it.  Her  daughter,  who  appeared  to  be  still
young,  gave  promise  of  one  day  rivalling,  if  not  exceeding,  her  mother  in  size.*

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph ;  cf.  Dumiohen,  Die  Flollt  einer  JEgyptischen
Kiinigin,  pi.  xv.,  and  Mauiette,  Deir  tl-Bahari,  pi.  5.  As  to  the  houses,  cf.  the  fragments  recently
discovered  by  Naville,  Egypt  Expl.  Fund,  Arch.  Report,  1891-95.

'  DCmiciien',  Uistorische  Inselirijten,  vol.  ii.  pis.  viii.,  x. ;  Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  5.

'  Mariette  compares  this  kind  of  armour  to  the  "  dangabor  "  of  the  Congo  tribes  {Deir  el-Buliari,
p.  29),  but  the  "  dangabor  "  is  worn  on  the  arm.  Livingstone  saw  a  woman,  the  sister  of  Sebituaneh,
the  highe.it  lady  of  the  Sesketeh,  who  wore  on  each  leg  eighteen  rings  of  solid  brass  as  thick  as  the
linger,  and  three  rings  of  copper  above  the  knee.  The  weight  of  these  shining  rings  imiJoded  her
walking,  and  produced  sores  on  her  ankles  ;  but  it  was  the  fashion,  and  the  inconvenience  became
nothing.  As  to  the  pain,  it  wns  relieved  by  a  bit  of  rag  applied  to  the  lower  rings  {Exploration  of
the  Zambesi,  ji.  202  of  llie  Freneli  translation).

'  These  are  two  instances  of  abnormal  fat  production — the  earliest  with  which  we  are  acquainted
(CiiAiiAS,  Ftudes  sur  VAntiquite  hislorique,  p.  154 ;  Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  p.  30).  Several
similar  instances  are  cited  by  Speke,  The  Sources  of  the  Nile,  p.  183,  and  in  Sghweineurth,  Tlie
Heart  of  Africa,  p.  282.


250


THE  EIQETEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


After  an  exchange  of  compliments,  the  more  serious  business  of  the  expedition
was  introduced.  The  Egyptians  pitched  a  tent,  in  which  they  placed  the  objects
of  barter  with  which  they  were  provided,  and  to  prevent  these  from  being  too

great  a  temptation  to  the


natives,  they  surrounded
the  tent  with  a  line  of
troops.  The  main  con-
ditions of  the  exchange
were  arranged  at  a  ban-
quet, in  which  they  spread
before  the  barbarians  a
sumptuous  display  of
Egyptian  delicacies,  con-
sisting of  bread,  beer,
wine,  meat,  and  carefully
prepared  and  flavoured
vegetables.^  Payment  for
every  object  \\as  to  be
madeattheactual  moment
of  purchase.  For  several  days  there  was  a  constant  stream  of  people,  and  asses
groaned  beneath  their  burdens.  The  Egyptian  purchases  comprised  the  most
varied  objects:  ivory  tusks,  gold,  ebony,  cassia,  myrrh,  cynocephali  and  green
monkeys,  greyhounds,  leopard  skins,  large  oxen,  slaves,  and  last,  but  not  least,
thirty-one  incense  trees,  with  their  roots  surrounded  by  a  ball  of  earth  and  placed
in  large  baskets.  The  lading  of  the  ships  was  a  long  and  tedious  affair.  All
available  space  being  at  length  exhausted,  and  as  much  cargo  placed  on
board  as  was  compatible  with  the  navigation  of  the  vessel,  the  squadron
set  sail  and  with  all  speed  took  its  way  northwards.^

The  Egyptians  touched  ^t  several  places  on  the  coast  on  their  return  journey,
making  friendly  alliances  with  the  iuliabitants;  the  Ilim  added  a  quota  to  their
freight,  for  which  room  was  with  difficulty  found  on  board, — it  consisted  not
only  of  the  inevitable  gold,  ivory,  and  skins,  but  also  of  live  leopards  and  a
giraffe,  together  with  plants  and  fruits  unknown  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.*


rniscE  paeihC  and  the  piuncess  of  pDanit.'


'  Dt'MiCHEN,  Hint.  Inscliriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  x. ;  Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  5.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a.  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey ;  cf.  Makiette,  Deir  el-
Bahari,  pi.  43,  aud  Voyage  de  la  IIaute-£gypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  62.

'  DuMiCHEN,  Die  Flolte,  etc.,  pis.  ii.,  xv.,  and  Hist.  Inscliriften,  vol.  ii.  pis.  viii.-x.,  xiv.,  xv. ;
Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pis.  5,  6.

*  As  to  the  country  of  the  Ilim,  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Dims,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viil.  p.  84 ;
and  G.  Tomkins,  Bemarlis  on  Mr.  Flinders  PHrie's  Collection  of  Ethnographic  Types  from  the  Monu-
ments of  Egypt,  p.  214.  Liebleiii  thought  that  their  country  was  explored,  not  by  the  .sailors  who
voyaged  to  Puanit,  but  by  a  different  body  who  proceeded  by  land  (^Die  Jiischriften  des  Ttmjyels  von


THE  RETURN   OF   THE  FLEET   TO   EGYPT.


251


The  fleet  at  length  made  its  reappearance  in  Egyptian  ports,  having  on  board
the  chiefs  of  several  tribes  on  whose  coasts  the  sailors  had  landed,  and  "  bring-
ing back  so  much  that  the  like  had  never  been  brought  of  the  products  of
Piiaint  to  other  kings,  by  the  supreme  favour  of  the  venerable  god,  Amon  Ea,
lord  of  Karuiik." '     The  chiefs  mentioned  were  probably  young  men  of  superior


THE    ESIBAHIiATION    OP   THE  INCENSE    SYCAMOBES    OS    BOARD    THE    EGYPTIAN    FLEET."


family,  who  had  been  confided  to  the  ofQcer  in  command  of  the  squadron  by
local  sheikhs,  as  pledges  to  the  Pharaoh  of  good  mil  or  as  commercial  hostages.
National  vanity,  no  doubt,  prompted  the  Egyptians  to  regard  them  as  vassals
coming  to  do  homage,  and  their  gifts  as  tributes  denoting  subjection.  The
Queen  inaugurated  a  solemn  festival  in  honour  of  the  explorers.  The  Theban
militia  was  ordered  out  to  meet  them,  the  royal  flotilla  escorting  them  as  far  as
the  temple  landing-place,  where  a  procession  was  formed  to  carry  the  spoil  to
the  feet  of  the  god.  The  good  Theban  folk,  assembled  to  witness  their  arrival,
beheld  the  marcli  past  of  the  native  hostages,  the  incense  sycamores,  the
precious  gum  itself,  the  wild  animals,  the  giraffe,  and  the  oxen,  whose  numbers
were  doubtless  increased  a  hundredfold  in  the  accounts  given  to  posterity  with
the  usual  official  exaggeration."     The  trees  were  planted  at  Deir  el-Bahari,

llir-el-Bahri,  in  tho  Zeitschrift,  1885,  pp.  127-132),  and  this  view  was  accepted  by  Ed.  Meyer
(Geechichte  des  Allen  Jlgyplens,  pp.  236,  237).  Tlie  completed  text  proves  tbut  there  was  but  a
single  expedition,  and  that  tlie  explorers  of  Pilanit  visited  the  Ilim  al.-iO.  The  chiefs  and  their
tributes  are  represented  in  Dlmiijhen,  Hist.  Insohiiften,  vol.  ii.  pis.  xiv.,  xvii,,  as  well os  in  Mahiette,
JJeir  elliahari,  jils.  tj,  7.  The  giratfe  which  they  gave  docs  not  appear  in  the  cargo  of  the
vessels  at  Puanit ;  the  visit  must,  therefore,  have  been  paid  on  the  return  voyage,  and  the  girafle  was
probably  represented  on  the  destroyed  part  of  the  walla  where  Navillo  found  the  image  of  this
animal  wandering  at  liberty  among  the  woods  {Eijijpl  Expl.  Fund,  Arch.  Ei'porl,  189-1-95,  p.  3.")).

'  Mauiette,  Deir  el-Iiuh<tri,  pi.  (j,  second  panel,  11.  3,  4.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Beuto ;  cf.  DCmichen,  Die  Flolle,  etc.,  pi.  ii.,  and
Makiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  G.

'  The  representation  of  tlie  scene  is  reproduced  in  part  by  Lepsids,  Denhn.,  iii.  17  a,  and  com-
pletely by  DiJMiciiEN,  JJit  Flolle,  etc.,  pis.  iv.-viii.,  x.-xiv.,and  Hist.  Jnschri/len,  pis.  xvii.,  xxi.,  xxii.,
as  well  as  in  Mauiette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pis.  7,  'J,  11,  12,  and  15.


252  TEE  EIQETEENTE   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.

where  a  sacred  garden  was  prepared  for  them,  square  trenches  being  cut  in  the
rock  and  filled  with  earth,  in  which  the  sycamore,  by  frequent  watering,  came  to
flourish  well.^  The  great  heaps  of  fresh  resin  were  next  the  objects  of  special
attention.  Hatshopsitu  "  gave  a  bushel  made  of  electrum  to  gauge  the  mass
of  gum,  it  being  the  first  time  that  they  had  tlie  joy  of  measuring  the  per-
fumes for  Amon,  lord  of  Karnak,  master  of  heaven,  and  of  presenting  to
him  the  wonderful  products  of  Puanit.  Thot,  the  lord  of  Hermopolis,  noted
the  quantities  in  writing ;  Safkhitabui  verified  the  list.  Her  Majesty  herself
prepared  from  it,  with  her  own  hands,  a  perfumed  unguent  for  her  limbs ;
she  gave  forth  the  smell  of  the  divine  dew,  her  perfume  reached  even  to
Puanit,  her  skin  became  like  wrought  gold,"  and  her  countenance  shone
like  the  stars  in  the  great  festival  hall,  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  earth."*
Hatshopsitu  commanded  the  history  of  the  expedition  to  be  carved  on  the  wall
of  the  colonnades  which  lay  on  the  west  side  of  the  middle  platform  of  her
funerary  chapel :  we  there  see  the  little  fleet  with  sails  spread,  winging  its  way
to  the  unknown  country,  its  safe  arrival  at  its  destination,  the  meeting  with
the  natives,  the  animated  palavering,  the  consent  to  exchange  freely  accorded ;
and  thanks  to  the  minuteness  with  which  the  smallest  details  have  been
portrayed,  we  can  as  it  were  witness,  as  if  on  the  spot,  all  the  phases  of  life
on  board  ship,  not  only  on  Egyptian  vessels,  but,  as  we  may  infer,  those  of  other
Oriental  nations  generally.  For  we  may  be  tolerably  sure  that  when  the  Phoeni-
cians ventured  into  the  distant  parts  of  the  Mediterranean,  it  was  after  a
similar  fashion  that  they  managed  and  armed  their  vessels.  Although  the
natural  features  of  the  Asiatic  or  Greek  coast  on  which  they  effected  a  landing
differed  widely  from  those  of  Piianit,the  Phoenician  navigators  were  themselves
provided  with  similar  objects  of  exchange,  and  in  their  commercial  dealings
witli  the  natives  the  methods  of  procedure  of  the  European  traders  were
doubtless  similar  to  those  of  the  Egyptians  with  the  barbarians  of  the  Bed
Sea.*

Hatshopsitii  reigned  for  at  least  eight  years  after  this  memorable  expedition
and  traces  of  her  further  activity  are  to  be  observed  in  every  part  of  the  Nile
valley.     She  even  turned  her  attention  to  the  Delta,  and  began  the  task  of

•  NavUle  found  these  trenches  still  filled  with  vegetable  mould,  and  in  several  of  them  roots,
which  gave  every  indication  of  the  purpose  to  which  the  trenches  were  applied  (^Egypt  Expl.  Fund,
Arch.  Report,  1894-95,  pp.  36,  37).  A  scene  represents  seven  of  tlie  incense  sycamores  still  growing
in  their  pots,  and  oilered  by  the  queen  to  tlie  Majesty  "  of  this  god  Amonra  of  Karnak ''  (Dumichen,
Hist.  Irttchriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xviii.,  where  the  draughtsman  has  by  mistake  drawn  only  five  trees;
cf.  Makiette,  Deir  el-Baliari,  pi.  8).  The  picture  on  the  next  page  shows  others  planted  in  the
ground,  in  the  temple  of  Deir  el-Bahart,  and  sufficiently  grown  to  shelter  from  the  sun  the  oxen
brought  from  Puanit.

-  In  order  to  understand  the  full  force  of  the  imagery  here  employed,  one  must  remember  that  the
Egyptian  artists  painted  the  flesh  of  women  as  light  yellow ;  see  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  47.

'  DiJMicHEN,  Hist.  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xviii. ;  Makiette,  Deir  el-Balmri,  pis.  7,  8.

'  For  remarks  on  the  commerce  of  the  Phoenicians,  see  pp.  194-197  of  the  present  work.


EATSHOPSITU'S    WORKS  IN   THE  DELTA.


253


reorganising  this  part  of  her  kingdom,  which  had  been  much  neglected  by  her
predecessors.  The  wars  between  the  Theban  princes  and  the  lords  of  Avaris
had  lasted  over  a  century,  and  during  that  time  no  one  had  had  either  sufficient
initiative  or  leisure  to  superintend  the  public  works,  which  were  more  needed


SOME    OF  THE    INCENSE   TREES    BROUGHT    FKOM    PUANIT   TO    DEIU    EL-BAHAIU.'

here  than  in  any  other  part  of  Egypt.  The  canals  were  silted  up  with  mud,
the  marshes  and  the  desert  had  encroaclied  on  tlie  cultivated  lands,  the  towns
had  become  impoverished,  and  there  were  some  provinces  whose  population
consisted  solely  of  shepherds  and  bandits.  Hatshopsitu  desired  to  remedy  these
evils,  if  only  for  tlie  purpose  of  providing  a  practicable  road  for  her  armies
marching  to  Zalu  en  route  for  Syria.^  She  also  turned  her  attention  to
the  mines  of  Sinai,  which  had  not  been  worked  by  the  Egyptian  kings
since  the  end  of  the  XII'"  dynasty.  In  the  year  XVI.  an  officer  of  the  queen's
household  was  despatched  to  the  Wady  Magharah,  the  site  of  the  ancient  works,
with  orders  to  inspect  tlie  valleys,  examine  the  veins,  and  restore  there  tlie

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  froiu  a  pliotograpli  by  Beato ;  of.  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-
Baluiri,  Inlruductory  Memoir,  pi.  ix.

'  This  follows  from  the  great  inscriptioa  at  Stabl-Antar  (Golenisohefi',  Notice  sur  un  texte
hifmjlypldque  du  Stabl-Anhtr,  11.  35-159,  iu  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2,  3,  and  vol.  v.  p.  20),
which  is  commonly  interpreted  as  proving  tliat  the  Shepherd-kiugs  still  held  sway  in  Kgypt  iu  the  reigii
of  Ttidtraosis  HI.,  and  that  they  were  driven  out  by  him  and  his  aunt  (Navii.i.k,  The  Temple  of  Veir
el-Bahari,  p.  2(J).  It  Bcenis  to  me  that  the  queen  is  simply  boasting  that  she  had  repaired  the  mouu-
menta  wliich  had  been  injured  by  the  Shepherds  during  the  time  they  sojourned  in  Egypt,  in  the
land  of  Avaris.  Up  to  the  present  time  no  trace  of  tlieso  rest(_>rations  has  been  found  on  the  situs.
The  expedition  to  I'iianlt  being  mentioneil  in  lines  13,  14,  they  must  bo  of  later  date  than  the  year
IX.  of  Hatshopsitu  and  Thiitmosis  III.


254  THE  EIGHTEENTH   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.

temple  of  the  goddess  Hathor;  having  accomplished  his  missiou,  he  returned,
bringing  with  him  a  consignment  of  those  blue  and  green  stones  which  were
so  highly  esteemed  by  the  Egyptians.'

Meanwhile,  Thutmosis  III.  was  approaching  manhood,  and  his  aunt,  the
queen,  instead  of  abdicating  in  his  favour,  associated  him  with  herself  more
frequently  in  the  external  acts  of  government.^  She  was  forced  to  yield  him
precedence  in  those  religious  ceremonies  which  could  be  performed  by  a  man
only,  such  as  the  dedication  of  one  of  the  city  gates  of  Ombos,  and  the  foundation
and  marking  out  of  a  temple  at  Medinet-Habu  ;  ^  but  for  the  most  part  she  obliged
him  to  remain  in  the  background  and  take  a  secondary  place  beside  her.  We
are  unable  to  determine  the  precise  moment  when  this  dual  sovereignty  came
to  an  end.  It  was  still  existent  in  the  XVI'"  year  of  the  reign,  but  it  had
ceased  before  the  XXII"''  year.*  Death  alone  could  take  the  sceptre  from  the
hands  that  held  it,  and  Thutmosis  had  to  curb  his  impatience  for  many  a  long
day  before  becoming  the  real  master  of  Egypt.'^  He  was  about  twenty-five  years
of  age  when  this  event  took  place,  and  he  immediately  revenged  himself  for
the  long  repression  he  had  undergone,  by  endeavouring  to  destroy  the  very
remembrance  of  her  whom  he  regarded  as  a  usurper.  Every  portrait  of  her
that  he  could  deface  without  exposing  himself  to  being  accused  of  sacrilege  was
cut  away,  and  he  substituted  for  her  name  either  that  of  Thutmosis  I.  or  of
Thutmosis  11.^  A  complete  political  change  was  effected  both  at  home  and
abroad  from  the  first  day  of  his  accession  to  power.  Hatshopsitu  had  been
averse  to  war.  During  the  whole  of  her  reign  there  had  not  been  a  single  cam-
paign undertaken  beyond  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  and  by  the  end  of  her  life  she
had  lost  nearly  all  that  her  father  had  gained  in  Syria ;  the  people  of  Kharu  had

'  Stele  of  the  year  XVI.,  in  the  Wady  Maghaiah  (Laborde,  Voyage  de  VAralie  Petr^e,  pi.  8.
No.  1 ;  LoTTiN  DE  Laval,  La  Peninsule  Arahique,  pi.  iv. ;  LEPsros,  Denhn.,  ili.  23,  No.  3).  For
notice  of  the  temple  of  Hathor  here,  see  Dawn  of  Cinlization,  pp.  47i-^7(5.

'  The  account  of  the  youth  of  Thutmosis  III.,  such  as  Brugsch  made  it  out  to  be  from  an  inscrip-
tion of  this  king  (Mariettb,  Karnalc,  pi.  16, 11.  47-49),  the  e.xile  of  the  royal  child  at  Bato,  hie  long
sojourn  in  the  marshes,  his  triumphal  return  (Geschichte  JEgyptem,  pp.  288,  289,  365),  must  all  be
rejected.  Brugsch  accepted  as  actual  history  a  poetical  passage  where  the  king  identifies  liimself
with  Horus,  son  of  lais,  and  goes  so  far  as  to  attribute  to  himself  the  adventures  of  the  god  (Maspero,
in  the  Revue  Critique,  1880,  vol.  i.  p.  107,  n.  1,  and  JVofes  sur  diff^rents  points  de  Grammaire,  §  xxviii.,
in  the  Zeilschrift,  1882,  p.  133  ;  Naville,  The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  p.  27).

'  Dedication  of  the  gate  of  Ombos  by  Thutmosis  III.  and  by  his  queen,  in  Champolliok,  Mon.  de
I'Egypte,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  231,  232,  and  in  Rosellini,  Momimenti  del  Culto,  pi.  xxviii.  and  pp.  196-198 ;
scenes  in  the  dedication  of  the  little  temple  of  Medinet-Habu,  in  Champollion,  Mon.  de  VEgypte,  etc.,
pi.  cxcv.,  and  in  Lepsids,  Denlctn.,  iii.  38  a,  b.

*  Stele  from  Sinai,  engraved  in  the  XVI"'  year  of  her  joint  reign  with  Tliiitmosis  III.  (Laborde,
Voijage  de  VArahie  Fetrie,  pi.  8,  No.  1 ;  Lottin  de  Laval,  Voyage  dans  la  P£ninsule  Arahique,  pi.  iv. ;
Lepsics,  Denlim.,  iii.  28,  No.  2).  The  earliest  monument  in  which  Thutmosis  III.  appears  as  sole
sovereign  is  the  year  XXI.  (Lepsics,  Denlim.,  iii.  30  o,  1.  20).

>  Erman  (^gypten  und  .Xgyptisches  Lehen,  p.  72)  and  Ed.  Meyer  (Gesclnchte  dee  Alten  ^gyptens,
p.  238)  were  inclined  to  think,  without  pressing  the  conjecture,  that  she  was  deposed  by  Thiltmosis.

«  Naville  (The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  Introd.  Memoir,  p.  28)  thinks  that  we  ought  not  to
attribute  the  mutilation  of  Hatshopsitu's  monuments  to  ThOtmosis  IIL  only,  for  Amenothes  III.  must
take  his  responsibility  for  a  good  share  in  this  work,  as  well  as  Amenothes  IV.


THE  DEPARTURE   OF  THUTMOSIS   III.   FOR   ASIA.


255


shaken  off  the  yoke,^  probably  at  the  instigation  of  the  king  of  the  Amorites,-
and  nothing  remained  to  Egypt  of  the  Asiatic  province  but  Gaza,  Sharuhana,^


ThCTMOSIS    III.,    FROM    HIS    .STATUE    IN    THK    TURIN    MUSEUM.'

and  the  neighbouring   villages.     The  young  king  set  out  with  his  army  in
the  latter  days  of  the  year  XXI 1.      He  reached  Gaza  on  the   3rd   of  the

'  E.  deKouge'C'''"''"^  ihe  Monuments  du  Massif  de  KariLuh,  in  the  Melanges  iVArchiulogie  h'gijptienne,
vol.  i.  p.  50)  thought  that  he  had  discovered,  in  a  slightly  damaged  inscription  bearing  upon  the
PQanit  expedition  (Du.miciien,  Histurische  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  H :  Mariette,  Deir  el-Bahari,  pi.  G),
the  mention  of  a  tribute  paid  by  the  Lotanii  (cf.  Bkugsch,  Ges-hichte  Jh'fiijptens,  p.  289 ;  Wiedemann,
AUgijptische  Geschichte,  p.  334).  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  cited  but  the  mention  of  the  usual
annual  dues  paid  by  the  chiefs  of  Puanit  and  of  the  Ilim  (Lieblein,  Schifffahrt  und  Handel,  p.  30;
Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Altai  JEgijptens,  p.  232,  n.  4).

'  This  id  at  least  what  may  be  inferred  from  the  account  of  the  campaign,  where  the  Prince  of
Qodshb,  a  town  of  the  Amaflru  (Amorites),  figures  at  the  head  of  the  coalition  formed  against
TbiitrijoHls  HI.  (Masi'eru,  Le  liicit  de  la  Campagne  coidre  Mageddo,  in  the  Itecueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  ii.  pp.  51,  52).

'  This  is  the  conclusion  to  be  adojited  from  the  beginning  of  the  inscription  of  Thutmosis  III,
"Now,  during  the  duration  of  tliese  same  years,  the  country  of  the  Lotunii  was  in  discord  until  other
times  succeeded  them,  when  the  people  who  were  in  the  town  of  Shariihana,  from  the  town  of  Yiirza
to  the  most  distant  regions  of  tlie  earth,  succeeded  in  making  a  revolt  against  his  Majesty  "  (Maspero,
lUcit  de  la  campaijne,  etc.,  in  the  lieraeil  de  Trauaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  40,  50).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Ciudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Petrie :  cf.  Orcurti,  Calalogn  illuslrato  dei
MouumtiUi  Eyizi,  vol.  i.  p.  .58,  No.  2.


256  THE  EIGETEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

mouth  of  Pakhons,  in  time  to  keep  the  anniversary  of  his  coronation  in  that
town,  and  to  inaugurate  the  24th  year  of  his  reign  by  festivals  in  honour
of  his  father  Amon.^  They  lasted  the  usual  length  of  time,  and  all  the
departments  of  State  took  part  in  them,  but  it  was  not  a  propitious  moment
for  lengthy  ceremonies.  The  king  left  Gaza  the  following  day,  the  5th  of
Pakhons ;  he  marched  but  slowly  at  first,  following  the  usual  caravan  route,  and
despatching  troops  right  and  left  to  levy  contributions  on  the  cities  of  the  Plain
— Migdol,  Yapu  (Jaffa),  Lotanu,  Ono — and  those  within  reach  on  the  mountain
spurs,  or  situated  within  the  easily  accessible  wadys,  such  as  Sauka  (Socho),
Hadid,  and  Harilu.^  On  the  16th  day  he  had  not  proceeded  farther  than  Yahmu,
where  he  received  information  which  caused  him  to  push  quickly  forward.  The
lord  of  Qodshu  had  formed  an  alliance  with  the  Syrian  princes  on  the  borders
of  Naharaim,  and  had  extorted  from  them  promises  of  help ;  he  had  already
gone  so  far  as  to  summon  contingents  from  the  Upper  Orontes,  the  Litany,
and  tlie  Upper  Jordan,  and  was  concentrating  them  at  Megiddo,  where  he
proposed  to  stop  the  way  of  the  invading  army.  Thutmosis  called  together  his
principal  officers,  and  having  imparted  the  news  to  them,  took  counsel  with  them
as  to  a  plan  of  attack.  Three  alternative  routes  were  open  to  him.  The  most
direct  approached  the  enemy's  position  on  the  front,  crossing  Mount  Carmel  by
the  saddle  now  known  as  the  Umm  el-Fahm  ;  but  the  great  drawback  attached  to
this  route  was  its  being  so  restricted  that  the  troops  would  be  forced  to  advance
in  too  thin  a  file ;  and  the  head  of  the  column  would  reach  the  plain  and  come
into  actual  conflict  with  the  enemy  while  the  rear-guard  would  only  be  entering
the  defiles  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aluua.  The  second  route  bore  a  little  to
the  east,  crossing  the  mountains  beyond  Dutina  and  reaching  the  plain  near
Taanach  ;  but  it  offered  the  same  disadvantages  as  the  other.  The  third  road
ran  north  of  Zafiti,  to  meet  the  great  highway  which  cuts  the  hill-district  of
Nablus,  skirting  the  foot  of  Tabor  near  Jenin,  a  little  to  the  north  of  Megiddo.
It  was  not  so  direct  as  the  other  two,  but  it  was  easier  for  troops,  and  the  king's

'  The  account  of  this  campaign  has  been  preaeiveJ  to  us  on  a  wall  adjoining  the  granite  sanctuary
at  Karnak,  aud  the  fragments  of  it  were  examined  by  Ohajipollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte,  etc.,
Tol.  ii.  pp.  154-158,  and  afterwards  published  in  their  entirety  by  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  31  b,  32.  It  had
been  drawn  up  by  one  of  the  officialsof  Thutmosis  HI,  the  scribe  Zanniiui  (cf.  Wiedemann,  Geschichte
(ler  achtzehnten  JE<jyptisclien  Dijuastie,  p.  42 ;  Maspero,  Rapport  aur  une  mission  en  Italie,  in  the
Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  iv.  p.  130) :  it  was  completely  translated  by  Bikch,  The  Annals  of  Thotmes
the  Third,  as  derived  from,  the  Rieroglyphieal  Inscriptions,  1S53,  pp.  3-15;  by  Osbdrn,  27ie  Monu-
mental History  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  233-252 ;  by  Bkugsch,  Geschichte  Mgyptens,  pp.  295-305 ;  and  by
Maspeko,  Le  Ee'cit  de  la  campagne  contre  Mageddo  sous  Thoutmos  III.,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  ii.  pp.  48-5(5,  139-150 ;  critically  examined  by  E.  de  Eouge,  Notices  de  quelques  fragments  de
V Inscription  de  Karnah,  pp.  27,  28,  and  Etude  snr  divers  Monuments  du  regne  de  Thoutmes  III.,
pp.  36-40;  afterwards  by  Wiedemann,  Geschichte  der  achtzehnten  .^gyptischen  Dynasiie,pp.  44-^9, and
Jigyptische  Geschichte,  pp.  346-349.

'  Maspero,  Sur  les  noms  de  la  liste  de  Thoutmos  III  qu'on  pent  rapporter  a  la  Jud£e,  pp.  21,  22.


THE  BATTLE   OF  MEGIDDO.  257

generals  advised  that  it  sliould  be  followed.  The  king  was  so  incensed  that  he
was  tempted  to  attribute  their  prudence  to  cowardice.  "  By  my  life !  by  the
love  that  Eu  hath  for  me,  by  the  favour  that  I  enjoy  from  my  master  Amon,  by
the  perpetual  youth  of  my  nostril  in  life  and  power,  IMy  Majesty  will  go  by  the
way  of  Aluua,  and  let  him  that  will  go  by  the  roads  of  which  ye  have  spoken,
and  let  him  that  will  follow  My  Majesty.  What  will  be  said  among  tlie
vile  enemies  detested  of  Ra :  '  Doth  not  His  Majesty  go  by  another  way  '?
For  fear  of  us  he  gives  us  a  wide  berth,'  they  will  cry."  The  king's  coun-
sellors did  not  insist  furtiier.  "  May  thy  father  Amou  of  Thebes  protect
thee ! "  they  exclaimed  ;  "  as  for  us,  we  will  follow  Thy  Majesty  whither-
soever thou  goest,  as  it  befitteth  a  servant  to  follow  his  master."  The  word
of  command  was  given  to  the  men  ;  Thutmosis  himself  led  the  vanguard,
and  the  whole  army,  horsemen  and  foot-soldiers,  followed  in  single  file,
wending  their  way  tlirough  the  tliickets  which  covered  the  southern  slopes
of  Jtount  Garmel.'

They  pitched  their  camp  on  the  evening  of  the  19th  near  Aluna,  and  on
the  morning  of  the  20th  they  entered  the  wild  defiles  through  which  it  was
necessary  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  the  enemy.  The  king  had  taken  pre-
cautionary measures  against  any  possible  attempt  of  the  natives  to  cut  the  main
column  during  this  crossing  of  the  mountains.  His  position  might  at  any
moment  have  become  a  critical  one,  had  the  allies  taken  advantage  of  it  and
attacked  each  battalion  as  it  issued  on  to  the  plain  before  it  could  re-form.  But
the  Prince  of  Qodsln'i,  either  from  ignorance  of  his  adversary's  movements,  or
confident  of  victory  in  the  open,  declined  to  take  the  initiative.  Towards  one
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  Egyptians  found  themselves  once  more  united  on
the  further  side  of  the  range,  close  to  a  torrent  called  the  Qina,  a  little  to  the
south  of  Megiddo.  When  the  camp  was  pitched,  Thutmosis  announced  his
intention  of  engnging  the  enemy  on  the  morrow.  A  council  of  war  was  held  to
decide  on  the  position  that  each  corps  should  occupy,  after  which  the  officers
returned  to  their  men  to  see  that  a  liberal  supply  of  rations  was  served  out,  and  to
organise  nn  efficient  system  of  patrols.    They  passed  round  the  camp  to  the  cry  :

'  Tlif:  ptjsition  nf  the  towns  mciitiomJ  an;]  of  tlie  three  roads  has  been  ditciisfed  by  E.  de  Itouge
(Kliidf  aur  divers  monuments  de  Thoulmis  III.,  pp.  37-39),  also  by  F.  do  Saulcy  {I.ettre  a  M,  Chalias
»i(r  fiuehiuet  points  de  la  GCorjraphie  antique  de  la  Syrie,  etc.,  in  the  Nglanejes  d' Arch^ohgie  ligyjitienne,
vol.  i.  pp.  120-127),  who  fixed  tlie  position  of  Yahiuu  at  EI-Kheimeli,  and  sliowed  that  tlie  Egyptiim
army  must  have  passed  througli  tiie  defiles  of  Umm  el-Fahm.  C'onder  disagreed  with  this  opinioii  in
certain  respects,  and  idenlitied  .'\luua,  Aruna,  til  first  with  Arrabeh,  and  afterwards  with  .\rnineli ;
he  llionght  that  Tl.utmoBis  came  out  upon  Megiddo  from  the  south-east,  and  he  jdaced  Megiddo  at
Mcjeddah,  near  liiisan  {PaleHtiie  he/ore  Joshua,  in  the  Quarterly  Nntements,  187<l,  pp.  90,  IH,  and
Megiddo,  ibid.,  1S77,  pp.  13  20),  while  Tomkins  placed  .Aruna  in  the  Wady  cl-Arriiin  (The  luirnal;
Tritmle-Lisls  of  Tholmes  III,  in  the  Proeeediiigs  liihl.  Arch.  Soc,  1877,  vol.  ix.  pp.  102  KM,  and
Traniarlione,  vol.  ix.  pp.  2GI,  202).  W.  Max  Miillcr  seems  to  place  Yiilimii  too  much  to  the  north,  in
the  neighljonrhoed  of  .Ictt  {Asien  nnd  Europa,  pp.  l.')7  -100).

S


258  THE  KIGHTEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

"  Keep  a  good  heart :  courage  !     Watch  well,  watch  well !     Keep  alive  in  the
camp !  "     The  king  refused  to  retire  to  rest  until  he  had  been  assured  that  "  the
country  was  quiet,  and  also  the  host,  both  to  south  and  north."     By  dawn  the
next  day  the  whole  army  was  in  motion.     It  was  formed  into  a  single  line,
the  right  wing  protected  by  the  torrent,  the  left  extended  into  the  plain,  stretch-
ing beyond  Megiddo  towards  the  north-west.   Thutmosis  and  his  guards  occupied
the  centre,  standing  "armed  in  his  chariot  of  electrum  like  unto  Horus  bran-
dishing his  pike,  and  like  Montii  the  Theban  god."     The  Syrians,  who  had  not
expected  such  an  early  attack,  were  seized  with  panic,  and  fled  in  the  direction
of  the  town,  leaving  their  horses  and  chariots  on  tlie  field ;  but  the  citizens,
fearing  lest  in  the  confusion  the  Egyptians  should  effect  an  entrance  with
the  fugitives,  had  closed  their  gates  and  refused  to  open  them.     Some  of  the
townspeople,  however,  let  down  ropes  to  the  leaders  of  the  allied  party,  and  drew
them  up  to  the  top  of  the  ramparts  :  "  and  would  to  heaven  that  the  soldiers  of
His  Majesty  had  not  so  far  forgotten  themselves  as  to  gather  up  the  spoil  left
by  the  vile  enemy !     They  would  then  have  entered  Megiddo  forthwith ;  for
while  the  men  of  the  garrison  were  drawing  up  the  Lord  of  Qodshii  and  their
own  prince,  the  fear  of  His  Majesty  was  upon  their  limbs,  and  their  hands  failed
them  by  leason  of  the  carnage  which  the  royal  urseus  carried  into  their  ranks."
The  victorious  soldiery  were  dispersed  over  the  fields,  gathering  together  the
gilded  and  silvered  chariots  of  the  Syrian  chiefs,  collecting  the  scattered  weajjons
and  the  hands  of  the  slain,  and  securing  the  prisoners;  then  rallying  about  the
king,  they  greeted  him  with  acclamations  and  filed  past  to  deliver  up  the  spoil.
He  reproached  them  for  having  allowed  themselves  to  be  drawn  away  from  the
heat  of  pursuit.      "  Had  you  carried  Megiddo,  it  would  have  been  a  favour
granted  to  me  by  Ea  my  father  this  day  ;  for  all  the  kings  of  the  country  being
shut  up  within  it,  it  would  have  been  as  the  taking  of  a  thousand  towns  to  have
seized  Megiddo."     The  Egyptians  had  made  little  progress  in  the  art  of  be-
sieging a  stronghold  since  the  times  of  the  XII'"  dynasty.     When  scaling  failed,
they  had  no  other  resource  than  a  blockade,  and  even  the  most  stubborn  of  the
Pharaohs  would  naturally  shrink  from  the  tedium  of  such  an  undertaking.
Thutmosis,  however,  was  not  inclined  to  lose  the  opportunity  of  closing  the
campaign  by  a  decisive  blow,  and  began  the  investment  of  the  town  according
to  the  prescribed  modes.     His  men  were  placed  under  canvas,  and  working
under  the  protection  of  immense  shields,  supported  on  posts,  they  made  a  ditch
around  the  walls,  strengthening  it  with  a  palisade.     The  king  constructed
also  on  the  east  side  a  fort  which  he  called  "  Manakhpirri-holds-the-Asiatics."
Famine  soon  told  on  tlie  demoralised  citizens,  and  their  surrender  brought
about  the  submission  of  the  entire  country.     Most  of  the  countries  situated
between  the  .Tordan  and  the  sea — Shuneni,  Cana,  Kinnereth,  Hazor,  Ecdippa


TUK   Sl'BJECTION   OF  SOUTHERN   SYIiU.


259


T.aish,  Merom,  aud  Acre — besides  the  cities  of  the  Haurilu — Hamath,  Blagato,
AshtaiVith,  Ono-repha,  and  even  Damascus  itself — recognised  the  suzerainty
of  Egypt,  and  their  lords  came  in  to  the  camp  to  do  homage.^  The  Syrian
losses  did  not  amount  to  more  than  83  killed  and  400  prisoners,  showing  how


.vniAN  i:nca.mP-Mi:nt  i'.kimke  a  iiesiegeip  town.


ea-!ily  they  had  been  routed ;  but  they  had  abandoned  considerable  supplies,
all  of  whicli  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  Some  724  chariots,
2U41  mares,  200  suits  of  armour,  502  bows,  the  tent  of  the  Prince  of  Qodshu
with  its  poles  of  cypress  inlaid  with  gold,  besides  oxen,  cows,  goats,  and  more
than  20,000  sheep,  were  among  the  spoil.  Before  quitting  the  plain  of  Es-
liraelon,  the  king  caused  an  official  survey  of  it  to  be  made,  and  had  the
harvest  reaped.  It  yielded  20!S,U00  busliels  of  wheat,  not  taking  into  account
what  had  been  looted  or  damaged  by  the  marauding  soldiery.  The  return
homewards  of  the  Egyptians  must  have  resembled  the  exodus  of  some
emigrating  tribe  rather  than  the  progress  of  a  regular  army.^

Thutmosis  caused  a  long  list  of  the  vanquished  to  be  engraved  on  the
walls  of  the  temple  which  ho  was  building  at  Karnak,  thus  affording  the
good  people  of  Thebes  an  opportunity  for  the  first  time  of  reading  on  the
monuments  the  titles  of  the  king's  Syrian  subjects  written  in  hieroglyphics.
One  hundred  and  nineteen  names  follow  each  other  in  unbroken  succession,
some  of  fhoni  represent  in;.'-  mere  villages,  while  others  denoted  powerful  nations  ;

'  Tlie  names  of  these  towns  are  iuacriboil  nn  the  lists  of  Karnak  published  by  MAitiinrE,  Kanid!:.
pis.  17-20;  cf.,  for  their  iilentification,  Maspeuh,  Siir  Us  niimis  ile  hi  lisle  ile  ThniUmos  Ill.qu'on
pent  nttrilmer  U  la  Guiilff,  Toiiikins,  Uecorile  of  tin:  I'iikI,  new  series,  vol,  v.,  and  W.  Max  MOllkk,  Aaien
iiml  Kuropa,  pp.  161,  102,  191-196.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Iteatu  fif  the  rcpn'Sentation  ,of  tlie  sicKC  of  Papfir
under  Ramsee  II.

'  Mabpero,  Le  recil  ile  la  rciinparjne  ile  Tfioulmon  lU.,  in  tlie  Iteriieil,  vol.  ii.  |)]i.  ■IS-.'iG,  ira]."!!!.


260


TUE  EianTEENTH   TffEBAN  DYNASTY.


the  catalogue,  however,  was  not  to  end  even  here.  Having  once  set  out  on  a
career  of  conquest,  the  Pharaoh  had  no  inclination  to  lay  aside  his  arms.  From
the  XXIIP''  year  of  his  reign  to  that  of  his  death,  we  have  a  record  of
twelve  military  expeditions,  all  of  which  he  led  in  person.  Southern  Syria  was
conquered  at  the  outset — the  whole  of  Kharu  as  far  as  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,
and  the  Amorite  power  was  broken  at  one  blow.  The  three  succeeding
campaigns  consolidated  the  rule  of  Egypt  in  the  country  of  the  Negeb,  which
lay  to  the  south-west  of  the  Dead  Sea,  in  Phoenicia,  which  prudently  resigned
itself  to  its  fate,  and  in  that  part  of  Lotanii  occupying  the  northern  part  of  the


MIME    OF    THE    PLANTS    AND    ANIMALS    BROrCHT    BACK    FROM    I'DaNIT.'

basin  of  the  Orontes.^  None  of  these  expeditions  appear  to  have  been  marked
by  any  successes  comparable  to  the  victory  at  Megiddo,  for  the  coalition  of
the  Syrian  chiefs  did  not  survive  the  blow  which  they  then  sustained ;  but
Qodshu  long  remained  the  centre  of  resistance,  and  the  successive  defeats  which
its  inhabitants  suffered  never  disarmed  for  more  than  a  short  interval  the  hatred
which  they  felt  for  the  Egyptian.  During  these  years  of  glorious  activity
considerable  tribute  poured  in  to  both  Memphis  and  Thebes ;  not  only  ingots
of  gold  and  silver,  bars  and  blocks  of  copper  and  lead,  blocks  of  lapis-lazuli
and  valuable  vases,  but  horses,  oxen,  sheep,  goats,  and  useful  animals  of  every
kind,  in  addition  to  all  of  which  we  find,  as  in  Hatshopsitii's  reign,  the  mention
of  rare  plants  and  shrubs  brought  back  from  countries  traversed  by  the  armies
in  their  various  expeditions.  The  Theban  priests  and  savants  exhibited  much
interest  in  such  curiosities,  and  their  royal  pupil  gave  orders  to  his  generals
to  collect  for  their  benefit  all  that  appeared  either  rare   or   novel.      Tiiey

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Guiiin,  from  a  pliotograpb  ;  cf.  Martette,  Karnal;  pi.  31.

'  Wc  know  of  tbese  three  campaigns  from  tbe  indirect  testimony  of  the  AnnaU,  which  end  in
the  year  XXIX.  with  the  mention  of  the  fifth  campaign  (Lepsius,  Aaswalil  der  vichtigsieit  Urhunden,
pi.  xii.  1.  1).  Tlie  only  dated  one  is  referred  to  the  year  XXV.  (Mariette,  iTarna/.-,  pi.  31),  and  we
know  of  tliat  of  the  Negeb  only  by  the  Inscription  of  Avienemlwhi,  II.  3-5  :  the  campaign  began  ip  tlie
Negeb  of  Judah,  but  the  king  carried  it  to  Naharaim  the  same  year.


YJEAIiS   XX III.    TO   XXV HI.  OF   THUTMOSIS   III.  261

endeavoured  to  acclimatise  the  species  or  the  varieties  likely  to  be  useful,  and
in  order  to  preserve  a  record  of  these  experiments,  they  caused  a  representation
of  the  strange  plants  or  animals  to  be  drawn  on  the  walls  of  one  of  the  chapels
which  they  were  then  building  to  one  of  their  gods.  These  pictures  may  still  be
seen  there  in  intenninable  lines,  portraying  the  specimens  brouglit  from  the
Upper  Lotiinu  in  the  XXV""  year  of  Thutmosis,  and  we  are  able  to  distinguish,


.^^


im^w


rr  f


'^^^;r


a^'-  .-•.


rr


/


U— *^W*a.


I'AliT    UF    TUE    TRllMrUAL    LISTS   OF    TUUTMOSIS    III.    ON    ONE    OF    THE    I'VLONS    OE    TUE    TEMPLE

AT   KARNAK.'

side  by  side  with  many  plants  peculiar  to  the  regions  of  tlie  Euphrates,  others
having  their  habitat  in  the  mountains  and  valleys  of  tropical  Africa.^

This  return  to  an  aggressive  policy  on  the  part  of  the  Egyptians,  after  the
weakness  they  had  exhibited  during  the  later  period  of  Hatshopsitu's  regency,
seriously  disconcerted  the  Asiatic  sovereigns.  They  had  vainly  flattered  them-
selves that  the  invasion  of  Thutmosis  I.  was  merely  the  caprice  of  an  adventurous
prince,  and  they  hoped  that  when  his  love  of  enterprise  had  expended  itself,
i'^gypt  would  permanently  withdraw  within  her  traditional  boundaries,  and  that
the  relations  of  Elam  with  Babylon,  Carchemish  with  Qod.shu,  and  the  barbarians
of  the  Persiiin  Gulf  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  Iranian  table-land  would  resume

'  Drawu  by  B'auclier-Gudin,  froLi  a  photograpli  liy  Emit  Brugsoh-Uey.

'  Mauiettk,  Kaniuli,  pb.  28-31:  some  oftlic  figures  have  not  been  reproduccJ  liy  Marirtte,  iiiiil
they  arc  still  awaiting  iiiililiciaion.  i  either  tlie  plants  nor  tiio  animals  have  been  seriously  studied  ;
wo  have  no  certnin  knowledge  as  to  w.iich  species  lielong  to  Asi'i  and  wliieh  to  Africii.


'^62  THE  EIGHTEEN TE   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

their  former  course.  This  vain  delusion  was  dispelled  by  the  advent  of  a  new
Thutmosis,  who  showed  clearly  by  his  actions  that  he  intended  to  establish  and
maintain  the  sovereignty  of  Egypt  over  the  western  dependencies,  at  least,  of
the  ancient  Clialdiean  empire,  that  is  to  say,  over  the  countries  which  bordered
the  middle  course  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.  The
audacity  of  his  marches,  the  valour  of  his  men,  the  facility  with  which  in
a  few  hours  he  had  crushed  the  assembled  forces  of  half  Syria,  left  no  room
to  doubt  tlnxt  he  was  possessed  of  personal  qualities  and  material  resources
sufficient  to  carry  out  projects  of  the  most  ambitious  character.  Babylon,
enfeebled  by  the  perpetual  dissensions  of  its  Cosssean  princes,  was  no  longer  in
a  position  to  contest  with  him  the  little  authority  she  still  retained  over  the
peoples  of  Naharaim  or  of  Ccele-Syria ;  protected  by  the  distance  which
separated  her  from  the  Nile  valley,  she  preserved  a  sullen  neutrality,  while
Assyria  hastened  to  form  a  peaceful  alliance  with  the  invading  power.  Again
and  again  its  kings  sent  to  Thutmosis  presents  in  proportion  to  their  resources,
and  the  Pharaoh  naturally  treated  their  advances  as  undeniable  proofs  of  their
voluntary  vassalage.  Each  time  that  he  received  from  them  a  gift  of  metal
or  lapis-lazuli,  he  proudly  recorded  their  tribute  in  the  annals  of  his  reign ;
and  if,  in  exchange,  he  sent  them  some  Egyptian  product,  it  was  in  smaller
quantities,  as  might  be  expected  from  a  lord  to  his  vassal.^  Sometimes  there
would  accompany  the  convoy,  surrounded  by  an  escort  of  slaves  and  women,
some  princess,  whom  the  king  would  place  in  his  harem  or  graciously  pass  on
to  one  of  his  children  ;  but  when,  on  the  other  hand,  an  even  distant  relative
of  the  Pharaoh  was  asked  in  marriage  for  some  king  on  the  banks  of  the
Tigris  or  Euphrates,  the  request  was  met  with  a  disdainful  negative:  the
daughters  of  the  Sun  were  of  too  noble  a  race  to  stoop  to  such  alliances,  and
they  would  count  it  a  humiliation  to  be  sent  in  marriage  to  a  foreign
court.'-^

Free  transit  on  the  main  road  which  ran  diagonally  through  Kharu  was
ensured  by  fortresses  constructed  at  strategic  points,'  and  from  this  time
forward  Thutmosis  was   able   to  bring  the  whole  force  of  his   army  to  bear

'  The  "  tribute  of  Assiir  "  is  mentioned  in  tliis  way  under  the  years  XXIII.  and  XXIV.  (Lepsius,
Denlcm.,  iii.  o2, 11.  32,  36).  The  presents  sent  by  the  Pharaoh  in  return  are  not  mentioned  in  any
Egyptian  text,  but  there  is  frequent  refeience  to  them  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  (Bezold-Budge,
The  Tell  el-Amania  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  pp.  xxx.-xxxii.).  It  may  be  mentioned  liere
that  the  name  of  Nineveh  does  not  occur  on  the  Egyptian  monuments,  but  only  that  of  the
town  Nii,  in  whicli  Champolliou  {Grammaire  ^gyptieime,  p.  150)  wrongly  recognised  the  later
capital  of  Assyria.

'  On  the  subject  of  these  complaints  of  King  Kallimmasin  of  Babylon  to  Amenothes  III.,  see
Bezold-Budge,  The  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  pp.  xxviii.,  xxix.  •  Tiele,  Western  Asia  according  to  the
more  recent  Discoveries,  pp.  12-14.

'  The  castle,  for  instance,  near  Megiddo,  previously  refer  ed  to,  which,  after  having  contributed
to  the  siege  of  the  town,  probably  served  to  keep  it  in  subjertion ;  see  p.  25S  of  the  present  work.


THE   CONQUEST   OF   UPPER   LOTANU.


263


upon  both  Ccele-Syria  and  Naliaiaim.^  He  encamped,  in  the  year  XXVII.,
on  the  table-land  separating  the  Afrin  and  the  Orontes  from  the  Euphrates,
and  from  that  centre  devastated  the  district  of  Uanit,^  which  lay  to  the  west


SOME    OF    THE    OBJECTS    CARRIED    IN    TlilUUTE    Tu    THE   SYRIANS.'

of  Aleppo  ;  then  crossing  "  the  water  of  Naharaim  "  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Carchemish,  he  penetrated  into  the  heart  of  Mitanni.*  The  following  year
he  reappeared  in  the  same  region.  Tunipa,  which  had  made  an  obstinate
resistance,  was  taken,  together  with  its  king,  and  329  of  his  nobles  were  forced

'  The  (iccounis  of  the  caiupaigns  of  Thatmosis  III.  have  been  preserved  iu  the  Annals  iu  a  very
iiuililated  condition,  tlie  fragments  of  which,  discovered  at  difl'erent  .times,  were  published  by
Yoi'NG,  llieroijhjpliio,  pis.  xli.,  xlii. ;  Lepsitj.?,  Auswahl  der  wichligsten  Vrlcunden,  pi.  xii.,  and  Denlim.,
iii.  30  a,  31  a  ;  by  Mariette,  Lellre  a  M.  le  vicomte  de  Rouge  sur  le  rgMltal  des  fouillea  enterprises  par
ordre  du  roi  d'Egypte,  pp.  17,  21,  and  Karnak,  pi.  13.  They  were  translated  by  limcH,  Observations
on  the  Statistical  Tablet  of  Kama!;,  and  The  Annals  of  Thotmes  III.,  iu  the  Records  of  the  Fast,  Ist
series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2i)-28 ;  by  Osburn,  The  Monumental  Hist,  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  254-288;  by  E.  de
UOCGE,  Notice  de  quelques fragments  de  V Inscript ion  de  Kurnah  contenant  les  Annales  de  Thotiii'-S  III. ;
and  by  Brcgsch,  Gcschichle  .3Sgyptens,  pp.  294-326.  The  information  they  give  has  been  completed
in  part  by  the  Inscription  of  Amenemhahi,  discovered,  trauslate<l,  and  published  by  Ebers,  Thaten
und  Zeit  Thotmes  III ,  nach  einer  Inschrift  im  Grab  des  Amen-em-heb  zu  Abd  El-Quruah,  iu  the  Zeit-
tchrift,  1873,  pp.  3-9 ;  Das  Grab  und  die  Biographic  des  Feldhauptmanns  Amen-em-heb,  in  the
Zeitschrift  der  J).  Mnrgenl.  Geeellschaft,  vol.  XXX.  pp.  391-416,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  439,  et  seq. ;  by  Chabas,
Milangrs  f.'gyptologigues,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  279-306  (cf.  Comptei  rendus  de  I' Academic  des  Inscrip-
tions et  Belles- Leltres,  1873,  pp.  155,  et  seq.);  by  Bincu,  Inscription  of  Amen-em-heb.  in  the  Records
of  the  Past,  Ist  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  57-64;  and  lastly,  by  Brigscii,  Oesch.  JEgyptens,  pp.  ;)35-338.
The  Annals  are  nothing  but  extracts  from  an  official  account,  made  for  Amon  and  his  priests.

'  The  province  of  the  Tree  tianii ;  cf.  with  this  designation  the  epithet  "  Shad  Eiini,"  "  moun-
tain of  the  cedar  tree,"  which  the  Assyrians  bestowed  on  the  Araanus  (Fk.  Delitzsoh,  Wo  lag  da$
Paradiei?  pp.  101,  103\

'  Drawn  by  Eaucher-Gudin,  after  CHAMroLLiON,  Mon.  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  pi.  cxci.  his,  and  vol.  i.
p.  843  ;  cf.  ItosELLi.Ni,  Monumenti  Civili,  pi.  Ivii.,  cf.  Ixii.

'  Inscription  of  Amenemhahi,  11.  6-9,  where  perhaps  two  campaigns  are  to  be  distinguished.


264  THE  EIGHTEENTH   TEE  LAN  DYNASTY.

to  yield  tliemselves  prisoners.  Tliutmosis  "  with  a  joyous  heart "  was  carry-
ing them  away  captive,  when  it  occurred  to  him  that  the  district  of  Zahi,
which  lay  away  for  the  most  part  from  the  great  military  high-roads,  was
a  tempting  prey  teeming  with  spoil.  The  barns  were  stored  with  wheat
and  barley,  the  cellars  were  filled  with  wine,  the  harvest  was  not  yet  gathered
in,  and  the  trees  bent  under  the  weight  of  their  fruit.  Having  pillaged  Sen-
zaiiru  on  the  Orontes,^  he  made  his  way  to  the  westwards  through  the  ravine
formed  by  the  Nahr  el-Kebir,  and  descended  suddenly  on  the  territory  of
Arvad.  The  towns  once  more  escaped  pillage,  but  Thutmosis  destroyed  the
harvests,  plundered  the  orchards,  carried  off  the  cattle,  and  pitilessly  wasted
the  whole  of  the  maritime  plain.  There  was  such  abundance  within  the
camp  that  the  men  were  continually  gettiug  drunk,  and  spent  their  time
in  anointing  themselves  with  oil,  which  they  could  do  only  in  Egypt  at
the  most  solemn  festivals.^  They  returned  to  Syria  in  the  year  XXX.,  and
their  good  fortune  again  favoured  them.  The  stubborn  Qodshit  was  harshly
dealt  with ;  Simyra  and  Arvad,  which  hitherto  had  held  their  own,  now
opened  their  gates  to  him ;  the  lords  of  Upper  Lotanu  poured  in  their  con-
tributions without  delay,  and  gave  up  their  sous  and  brothers  as  hostages.^  In
the  year  XXXI.,  the  city  of  Auamut  in  Tikbisa,  ou  the  shores  of  Lake  Nisrana,
yielded  in  its  turn  ;  ^  on  the  3rd  of  Pakhons,  the  anniversary  of  his  corona-
tion, the  Lotanu  renewed  their  homage  to  him  in  person.  The  return  of
the  expedition  was  a  sort  of  triumphal  procession.  At  every  halting-place
the  troops  found  quarters  and  provisions  prepared  for  them,  bread  and  cakes,
perfumes,  oil,  wine,  and  honey  being  provided  in  such  quantities  that  they  were
.  obliged  ou  their  departure  to  leave  the  greater  part  behind  them.  The  scribes
took  advantage  of  this  peaceful  state  of  affairs  to  draw  up  minute  accounts
of  the  products  of  Lotanu — corn,  barley,  millet,  fruits,  and  various  kinds
of  oil — prompted  doubtless  by  the  desire  to  arrive  at  a  i\iirly  just  apportion-
ment of  the  tribute.  Indeed,  the  results  of  the  expeditiou  ^^  ere  considered
so  satisfactory  that  they  were  recorded  on  a  special  monument  dedicated  in  the
palace  at  Thebes.^     The  names  of  the  towns  and  peoples  might  change  with

'  Suuzaiuii  was  thought  by  Ebeks,  Thaten  tmd  Zeit  Thotmes  III.,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t,  ISTo,  p.  1,  lu
be  "  the  double  Tyre."  Brugsch  considered  it  to  be  Tyre  itself  {Vcr  Twj  der  Tlironhesteigmuj  den
dritten  TUutmes,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1874,  pp.  144, 145 ;  of.  W.  Max  Mi  ller,  Asien  und  Eiiropa,  p.  ISJ,
uote  3).  It  is,  I  believe,  the  Sizara  of  classical  writers,  the  Shaizar  of  the  Arabs,  and  is  mentioned
in  one  of  the  Tel  el-Am;irua  tablets  in  connection  with  Xii.

^  The  account  of  this  campaign  is  taken  from  the  AnimU  of  Thutmosis  HI.,  11.  1-7,  except  the
mention  of  Sinzauru,  which  occurs  only  in  the  Inscription  of  Amenemhahi,  11.  11-13.

'  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III,  11.  7-9;  Inscription  of  Amenemliahi,  11.  13-1(3.  For  the  meaning  of
the  geographical  term  Arvad,  see  p.  171,  note  3,  of  the  present  volume.

*  The  site  of  the  Tikhisa  country  is  imperfectly  defined  (Brugsch,  Geogr.  Insch.,  vol.  i.  p.  56;
IL  pp.  45,  4U  ;  W.  BIax  Ml'ller,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  258,  259).  Nisrana  was  seemingly  applied  to
the  marshy  lake  into  which  the  Kowclk  flows,  and  it  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the  name  Kin-uesiin
(Kan-nishraya  iu  Neibauer,  6A>g.  da  Tuhiiud,  p.  30).  In  this  case  Tikhiea  would  be  the  country
near  the  lake ;  the  district  of  the  Grseco-Roman  Chalkis  is  situated  on  the  right  of  the  military  road.

'  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III,  11,  y-15  ;  cf.  the  Inscription  of  Amenemhahi,  11.  15-21.


THE   CAMPAIGN   OF   THE   TEAR   XXXIII.  265

every  war,  but  the  spoils  suft'ereil  uo  diminiitiou.  In  the  year  XXXIII.,
the  kicdoins  situated  to  the  west  of  tlie  Euphrates  were  so  far  pacified  that
Thutmosis  was  able  without  risk  to  carry  his  arms  into  Blesopotamia.  He
entered  the  country  by  the  forJs  of  Carchemish,  near  to  the  spot  where  his
grandfather,  Thutmosis  I.,  had  erected  his  stele  half  a  century  previously.
He  placed  another  beside  this,  and  a  third  to  the  eastward  to  mark  the
point  to  which  he  had  extended  the  frontier  of  his  empire.  Tiie  Mitanni,
who  exercised  a  sort  of  hegemony  over  the  whole  of  Naharaim,  were  this
time  the  objects  of  his  attack.  Thirty-two  of  their  towns  fell  one  after
another,  their  kings  were  taken  captive  and  the  walls  of  their  cities  were
razed,  without  any  serious  resistance.  The  battalions  of  the  enemy  were
dispersed  at  the  first  shock,  and  Pharaoh  "  pursued  them  for  the  space  of
u  mile,  without  one  of  them  daring  to  look  behind  him,  for  they  thought
only  of  escape,  and  fled  before  him  like  a  flock  of  goats."  Thutmosis  pushed
forward  as  far  certainly  as  the  Balikh,  and  perhaps  on  to  the  Khabur  or
even  to  the  Hermus ;  and  as  he  approached  the  frontier,  the  king  of  Singar,  a
vas>al  of  Assyria,  sent  him  presents  of  lapis-lazuli.  When  this  prince  had
retired,  another  chief,  the  lord  of  the  Great  Khati,  whose  territory  had  not
even  been  threatened  by  the  invaders,  deemed  it  prudent  to  follow  the
example  of  the  petty  princes  of  the  plain  of  the  Euphrates,  and  despatched
envoys  to  the  Pharaoh  bearing  presents  of  no  great  value,  but  testifying  to
his  desire  to  live  on  good  terms  with  Egypt.  Still  further  on,  the  inhabitants
of  ^'ii  begged  the  king's  accejitance  of  a  troop  of  slaves  and  two  hundred  and
sixty  mares ;  he  remained  among  them  long  enough  to  erect  a  stele  com-
memorating his  triumph,  and  to  indulge  in  one  of  those  extensive  hunts  which
were  the  delight  of  Oriental  monarchs.  The  country  abounded  in  elephants.
The  soldiers  were  emjiloyed  as  beaters,  and  the  king  and  his  court  succeeded
in  killing  one  hundred  and  twenty  head  of  big  game,  whose  tusks  were  added
to  the  spoils.  These  numbers  indicate  how  the  extinction  of  such  animals  in
these  parts  was  brought  about.  Beyond  these  regions,  again,  the  sheikhs  of
the  Lamnaniu  came  to  meet  the  Pharaoh.  They  were  a  poor  peojile,  and
had  but  little  to  offer,  but  among  their  gifts  were  some  birds  of  a  species
unknown  to  the  Egyptians,  and  two  geese,  with  which,  however.  His  Majesty
deigned  to  be  satisfied. ^

'  Tlie  campaign  of  the  year  XXXIII.  is  mentioned  iu  tlie  Aimalsnf  Tliulmosia  III.,  11. 17-27  ;  the
reference  to  the  elephaut-liunt  occurs  only  iu  the  Insciiptiun  of  Aiiinnemhabi,  11.  22,  2o;  an  allusion
to  the  defeat  of  the  kings  of  llitanui  is  found  iu  a  mutilated  luscriptiou  from  the  tomb  of  Manakhpir-
risonbii  (Virey,  Le  Tombmu  de  Itaimmkhepfrsenli,  iu  tlie  Md'm.  ile  la  Miss,  franf.,  vol.  v.  p.  205).  It
was  probably  on  his  return  from  this  campaign  that  Thutmosis  caused  the  great  list  to  bo  engraved
which,  while  it  ineludcB  a  certain  number  of  names  assigned  to  places  beyond  the  Euphrates  (Tom-
kins,  On  Ike  Topo(j.  of  N.  Syria,  in  Trans.  Bdjl.  Arch.  Sec.,  vol.  is.  pp.  227-254  ;  W.  M.  Mlxleu,  Aaieti
und  Kuropa,  pp.  281-292),  ought  neccBsarily  to  contain  the  citicsof  tlieMitanni(MAitiETTE,  Karii.ak,^\a.
20,  21).    As  to  the  site  of  Nii  and  of  tlie  Lamnauiu-Labuttua.see  p.  142,  note  (J,  and  p.  189  of  this  vol.


266  THE  EIOHTEENTH   THE  BAN  DYNASTY.

In  tlie  year  XXXIV.  the  Egyptians  reappeared  in  Zalii.  The  people
of  Anaugasa  having  revolted,  two  of  their  towns  Avere  taken,  a  third  sur-
rendered, while  the  chiefs  of  the  Lolanii  hastened  to  meet  their  lord  with
their  usual  tribute.  Advantage  was  taken  of  the  encampment  being  at  the
foot  of  the  Lebanon  to  procure  wood  for  building  purposes,  such  as  beams
and  planks,  masts  and  yards  for  vessels,  which  were  all  shipped  by  the
Kefatiu  at  Byblos  for  exportation  to  the  Delta.^  This  expedition  was,  indeed,
little  more  than  a  military  march  through  the  country.  It  would  appear  that
the  Syrians  soon  accustomed  themselves  to  the  presence  of  the  Egyptians  in  ■
their  midst,  and  their  obedience  henceforward  could  be  fairly  relied  on.  We
are  unable  to  ascertain  what  were  the  circumstances  or  the  intrigues  which,
in  the  year  XXXV.,  led  to  a  sudden  outbreak  among  the  tribes  settled  on
the  Euphrates  and  the  Orontes.  The  King  of  Mitanni  rallied  round  him  the
princes  of  Naharaim,  and  awaited  the  attack  of  the  Egyptians  near  Aruna.
Thutmosis  displayed  great  personal  courage,  and  the  victory  was  at  once
decisive.  We  find  mention  of  only  ten  prisoners,  one  hundred  and  eighty
mares,  and  sixty  chariots  in  the  lists  of  the  spoil.^  Anaugasa  again  revolted,
and  was  subdued  afresh  in  the  year  XXXVIII. ;  the  Shausu  rebelled  in
the  year  XXXIX.,  and  the  Lotanu  or  some  of  the  tribes  connected  with  them
two  years  later.^  The  campaign  of  the  year  XLII.  proved  more  serious.
Troubles  had  arisen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arvad.  Thutmosis,  instead
of  following  the  usual  caravan  route,  marched  along  the  coast-road  by  way
of  Phoenicia.  He  destroyed  Arka  in  the  Lebanon  and  the  surrounding
strongholds,  which  were  the  haunts  of  robbers  who  lurked  in  the  mountains ;
then  turning  to  the  north-east,  he  took  Tunipa  and  extorted  tlie  usual  tribute
from  the  inhabitants  of  Naharaim.  (Ja  the  other  hand,  the  Prince  of  Qodshu,
trusting  to  the  strength  of  his  walled  city,  refused  to  do  homage  to  the
Pharaoh,  and  a  deadly  struggle  took  place  under  the  ramparts,  in  which  eacli
side  availed  themselves  of  all  the  artifices  which  the  strategic  warfare  of  the
times  allowed.  On  a  day  when  the  assailants  and  besieged  were  about  to
come  to  close  quarters,  the  Amorites  let  loose  a  mare  among  the  chariotry
of  Thutmosis.  The  Egyptian  horses  threatened  to  become  unmanageable,  and
had  begun  to  break  through  the  ranks,  wlien  Amenemhabi,  an  officer  of  the
guard,  leaped  to  the  ground,  and,  running  up  to  the  creature,  disembowelled
it  with  a  thrust  of  his  sword ;  this  done,  he  cut  otl'  its  tail  and  presented  it
to  the  king.  The  besieged  were  eventually  obliged  to  shut  themselves
within  their  newly  built  walls,  hoping  by  this  means  to  tire  out  the  patience
of  their   assailants ;    but   a   picked   body   of  men,   led   by   the    same   brave

'  Annals  of  Th&imosu  III.,  11.  2'J-35  ;  on  the  boats  of  Byblos,  see  pp.  172, 197  of  the  present  work,
■  Annals  of  Tliutmosis  III.,  II.  37-41.

'  Annals  of  Tlnltmosis  III.,  11.  43-63  ;  the  fragments  of  this  part  of  the  inscription  are  so  few,  tbut
it  is  hardly  possible  to  do  more  than  give  a  general  view  of  the  progress  of  the  narrative.


THE    TRIBUTES    OF  ETHIOPIA.  267

Amenemhabi  who  had  killed  the  mare,  succeeded  in  iiiakiug  a  breach  and
forcing  an  entrance  into  the  town.i  Even  the  numerous  successful  campaigns
we  have  mentioned,  form  but  a  part,  though  indeed  an  important  part,  of  the
wars  undertaken  by  Thutmosis  to  "fix  his  frontiers  iu  the  ends  of  the  earth."
Scarcely  a  year  elapsed  without  the  viceroy  of  Etliiopia  having  a  conflict
with  one  or  other  of  the  tribes  of  the  Upper  Nile  ;  ^  little  merit  as  he  might
gain  in  triumphing  over  such  foes,  the  spoil  taken  from  them  formed  a  con-
siderable adjunct  to  the  treasure  collected  in  Syria,  while  the  tributes  from
the  people  of  Kush  and  the  Uauaiu  were  paid  with  as  great  regularity  as  the
taxes  levied  on  the  Egyptians  tliemselves.  It  comprised  gold  both  from  the
mines  and  from  the  rivers,  feathers,  oxen  witli  curiously  trained  horns,  giraffes,
lions,  leopards,  and  slaves  of  all  ages.  The  distant  regions  explored  by
Hatshopsitu  continued  to  pay  a  tribute  at  intervals.  A  fleet  went  to  Puanit
to  fetch  large  cargoes  of  incense,^  and  from  time  to  time  some  Ilim  chief
would  feel  himself  honoured  by  having  one  of  his  daughters  accepted  as  an
inmate  of  the  harem  of  the  great  king.*  After  the  year  XLII.  we  have
no  further  records  of  the  reign,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  its
closing  years  were  less  eventful  or  less  prosperous  than  the  earlier.  Thutmosis
III.,  when  conscious  of  failing  powers,  may  have  delegated  the  direction  of
his  armies  to  his  sons  or  to  his  generals,  hut  it  is  also  quite  possible  that  he
kept  the  supreme  command  in  his  own  hands  to  the  end  of  his  days.  Even
when  old  age  approached  and  threatened  to  abate  his  vigour,  he  was  upheld
by  the  belief  that  his  father  Amon  was  ever  at  hand  to  guide  him  with  his
counsel  and  assist  him  in  battle.  "  I  give  to  thee,  declared  the  god,^  the
rebels  that  they  may  fall  beneath  thy  sandals,  that  thou  mayest  crush  the
rebellious,  for  I  grant  to  thee  by  decree  the  earth  in  its  length  and  breadth.

'  Annuh  of  Thulmotie  III.,  11.  G4-72 ;  these  Hues  are  almost  as  luiicli  mutilated  as  the  accuuut  ul'
the  preceding  campaigns.  The  siege  of  (Jodshii,  and  the  military  exploits  which  rendered  it  famous,
are  known  to  us  only  at  present  from  the  Inscrip.  of  Amencmluihi,  11.  25-32  ;  for  Amenemliabi's  exploit
in  regard  to  the  mare,  see  Borciiakdt,  Zu  Amen-em-heh,  11.  25-27,  iu  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxi.  pp.  02,  U;J.

'  Tlie  tribute  was  divided,  as  I  have  already  said  (see  p.  232,  n.  2,  of  the  present  work),  into  tliat  of
Kiishand  thatof  tiaiuiit.  They  arc  both  given  for  the  year  XXXI.  (^n'/a/si/  Tlmtmmis  III.W.  15,  16),
lor  the  years  XXXI1I.(11.27,  28),  XXXIV.  (11.  35,  StJ),  as  well  as  for  the  years  XXXVI.,  XXXVUI,,
XXXIX.,  and  XLI.

'  Expedition  to  the  land  of  Piiauit  in  the  year  XXXIII.  {Annuh  of  Thutmosis  III.,  1.  27)  aud  iu
the  year  XXXVIII.  (11.  8,  'J  of  the  fragment  publi.'ihed  in  Lepbius,  Denlan.,  iii.  31  a).

*  Annals  of  Thulmosis  III.,  1.  35,  in  the  year  XXXIV.:  the  passage  is  mutilated,  and  Brugsch
thought  that  a  son,  and  not  a  daughter,  of  the  Prince  of  the  Ilim  was  mentioned  (Ges.  Ai[itjjilens,  \i.  317).

'  The  stele  coutaining  this  text  was  discovered  by  Mariette,  and  it  was  reproduced  iu  the  Album
pholngraphique  du  Mutfy  de  Iloulaq,  pi.  32,  and  in  Karnak,  pi.  ii.  The  text  was  translated  ami
annotated  by  liincu.  On  a  UHoriaal  Tablet  of  the  Iteiijn  of  Thothmes  III.  (extracted  from  Arclueolorjiu,
vol.  xxxviii.  p.  373,  et  scq. ;  ef.  Tablet  uf  Thcithmes  III,  in  the  Records  of  the  Fast,  1st  series,  vol.  ii.
pp.  29-34),  afterwards  by  E.  dk  Rol'ge,  J-Uude  sur  divers  monuments  du  riyne  de  Toutmes  III.,  pp.  5-
31;  by  MasPeuo,  Du  Genre  lipistolairr,  pp.  SS-SU,  and  Guide  du  Visiteiir,  pp.  72-84;  by  Bhluscii,
Gesch.  Jigyptens,  pp.  352-350;  by  Wiedemann,  (lesch.  der  achtzehnlen  JKijyiitisi-hen  Dijnastie,  pp.
74-7(>  :  some  interesling  corrections  have  been  made  in  these  translations  by  PiEiii,,  Notes  de
Philoloyie  Jigi/ptitnne,  in  the  V roaeediwjs  of  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1892-'J3,  vol.  xv.  pp.  25a-2tj4.


268  THE  EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

The  tribes  ol"  the  West  and  those  of  the  East  are  under  the  place  of  thy
countenance,  and  when  thou  goest  up  into  all  the  strange  lands  with  a  joyous
heart,  there  is  none  who  will  withstand  Thy  Majesty,  for  I  am  thy  guide  when
tliou  treadest  them  underfoot.  Thou  hast  crossed  the  water  of  the  great  curve
of  Naharaim  ^  in  thy  strength  and  in  thy  power,  and  I  have  commanded  thee
to  let  them  hear  thy  roaring  which  shall  enter  their  dens,  I  have  deprived
their  nostrils  of  the  breath  of  life,  I  have  granted  to  thee  that  thy  deeds  shall
sink  into  their  hearts,  that  my  ura'us  which  is  upon  thy  head'-*  may  burn  them,
that  it  may  bring  prisoners  in  long  files  from  the  peoples  of  Qodi,  that  it  may
consume  with  its  flame  those  who  are  in  the  marshes,^  that  it  may  cut  oft'  the
heads  of  the  Asiatics  without  one  of  them  being  able  to  escape  from  its  clutch.
I  grant  to  thee  that  thy  conquests  may  embrace  all  lands,  that  the  urteus
which  shines  upon  my  forehead  may  be  thy  vassal,  so  that  in  all  the  compass
of  the  heaven  there  may  not  be  one  to  rise  against  thee,  but  that  the  people
may  come  bearing  their  tribute  on  their  backs  and  bending  before  Thy  IMajesty
according  to  my  behest ;  I  ordain  that  all  aggressors  arising  in  thy  time  shall
fail  before  thee,  their  heart  burning  within  them,  their  limbs  trembling!

"I. — I  am  come  that  I  may  grant  unto  thee  to  crush  the  great  ones  of  Zahi,
I  throw  them  under  thy  feet  across  their  mountains, — I  grant  to  thee  that
they  shall  see  Thy  Majesty  as  a  lord  of  shining  splendour  when  thou  shinest
before  them  in  my  likeness  !

"  II. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  those  of  the  country
of  Asia,  to  break  the  heads  of  the  people  of  Lotanu, — I  grant  thee  that  they
may  see  Thy  Majesty,  clothed  in  thy  panoply,  when  thou  seizest  thy  arms,  in
thy  war-chariot.

"III. — 1  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  land  of  the
East,  and  invade  those  who  dwell  in  the  provinces  of  Tonutir, — I  grant  that
they  may  see  Thy  Majesty  as  the  comet  which  rains  down  the  heat  of  its
flame  and  sheds  its  dew.

"  IV. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  land  of  tlie
West,  so  that  Kafiti  and  Cyprus  shall  be  in  fear  of  thee, — I  grant  that  they
may  see  Thy  Majesty  like  the  young  bull,  stout  of  heart,  armed  with  horns
which  none  may  resist.

"  V. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  those  who  are  in
their  marshes,  so  that  the  countries  of  Mitanni  may  tremble  for  fear  of  thee, —

'  The  Euphrates,  in  the  great  curve  described  by  it  across  Naharaim,  after  issuing  from  the  mountains
of  Cilicia.     For  the  impression  made  upon  the  Egyptians  by  this  river,  see  p.  21 1  of  the  present  work.

''  On  tlje  nature  and  fire-breathing  char^icter  of  tlie  urseus  which  decorated  the  forehead  of  the
kings,  see  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  2(j6.

'  The  meaning  is  doubtful.  The  word  signifies  pools,  marshes,  the  provinces  situated  beyond
Egyptian  territory,  and  consequently  tlie  distant  parts  of  the  world — those  which  are  nearest  the
ocean  which  encircles  the  earth,  and  which  was  considered  as  fed  by  the  stagnant  waters  of  the
celestial  Nile,  just  as  the  extremities  of  Egypt  were  watered  by  those  of  the  terrestrial  Nile.  Cf.
W.  Max  Mulleb,  Asicn  und  Europe,  pp.  281-283.


"3


270  THE  EIOnTEENTTl    TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

I  grant  that  they  may  see  Thy  Majesty  like  the  crocodile,  lord  of  terrors,  in
the  midst  of  the  water,  which  none  can  approach.

"  VI. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  those  who  are
in  the  isles,  so  that  the  people  who  live  in  the  midst  of  the  Very-Green  may
be  reached  by  thy  roaring, — I  grant  that  they  may  see  Thy  Majesty  like  an
avenger  who  stands  on  the  back  of  his  victim.

"  VII. — I  am  come,  to  grant  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  Tihonu,  so  that  the
isles  of  the  Utanatiu  may  be  in  the  power  of  thy  souls, — I  grant  that  they
may  see  Thy  Majesty  like  a  spell-weaving  lion,  and  that  thou  mayest  make
corpses  of  tliem  in  the  midst  of  their  own  valleys.^

"  VIII. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  ends  of  the
earth,  so  that  the  circle  which  surrounds  the  ocean  may  be  grasped  in  thy
fist, — I  grant  that  they  may  see  Thy  Majesty  as  the  sparrow-hawk,  lord  of
the  wing,  who  sees  at  a  glance  all  that  he  desires.

"IX. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  peoples  who  are
in  their  "diiars,"  so  that  tliou  mayest  bring  the  Hiru-shcxitii  into  captivity,^ —
I  grant  that  they  may  see  Thy  Majesty  like  the  jackal  of  the  south,  lord  of
swiftness,  the  runner  who  prowls  through  the  two  lands.

"  X. — I  am  come,  to  grant  thee  that  thou  mayest  crush  the  nomads,  so  that
the  Nubians  as  far  as  the  land  of  Pidit  are  in  thy  grasp,— I  grant  that  they
may  see  Tliy  Majesty  like  unto  thy  two  brothers  Honis  and  Sit,  whose  arms  I
have  joined  in  order  to  establish  thy  power."

The  poem  became  celebrated.  When  Seti  I.,  two  centuries  later,  com-
manded the  Poet  Laureates  of  his  court  to  celebrate  his  victories  in  verse,  the
latter,  despairing  of  producing  anything  better,  borrowed  the  finest  strophes
from  this  hymn  to  Thutmosis  III.,  merely  changing  the  name  of  the  hero.^
The  composition,  unlike  so  many  other  triumphal  inscriptions,  is  not  a  mere
piece  of  ofBcial  rhetoric,  in  which  the  poverty  of  the  subject  is  concealed  by  a
multitude  of  common-places  whether  historical  or  mythological.  Egypt  indeed
ruled  the  world,  either  directly  or  through  her  vassals,  and  from  the  mountains
of  Abyssinia  to  those  of  Cilicia  her  armies  held  the  nations  in  awe  witii  the
threat  of  the  Pharaoh.

'  For  the  translatiou  of  the  last  clause  of  the  phrase,  see  Piehl,  Farm,  §  xxvi.,  in  the  Zcltschrifl,
1880,  p.  19.  The  name  of  the  people  aBsociated  with  the  Tihonu  was  read  at  first  T.inau,  and  identified
with  the  Danai  of  the  Greeks  (E.  pe  Kouge,  J^tude  sur  divers  monuments  du  regiw  de  Thouimes  III.,
p.  29).  Chabas  was  inclined  to  read  tjtena  (Etudes  surl'Autiq.  Historique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  181, 182),  and
Brugsch,  trthent  (Gesch.  JEgyptens,  p.  1155),  more  correctly  Utanutiu,  Utanati,  the  people  of  Uatanit.
The  juxtaposition  of  this  name  with  that  of  the  Libyans  compels  us  to  look  towards  the  west  for  the  site
of  this  people  :  may  we  assign  to  them  the  Ionian  Islands,  or  even  those  in  tlie  western  Mediterranean.?

-  With  regard  to  the  Hirushaitu  and  their  "duars,"  see  Dawn  of  Civilizalion,  pp.  ;l50-353.

'  The  text  of  Seti  I.  was  published  in  Champollion,  Mon.  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  96 ;  cf.
Maspero,  Du  Genre  Ejnstolaire  ckez  les  Anciens  Egyjitiens,  p.  90,  note  1.  Wiedemann,  Geseh.  der
achtzehnten  .3igyptisflien  Dynastie,  p.  74,  note  3,  has  pointed  out  in  DiiuiCHEN,  Hutorische  Inschri/ten,
vol.  i.  pis.  xi.,  xii.,  1.  18,  some  expressions  which  recall  those  of  our  text.


THE   ORGANISATION   OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  EMPIRE.  271

The  couqueior,  as  a  rule,  did  not  retain  any  part  of  their  territory.  He
L'ontiued  himself  to  the  appropriation  of  the  revenue  of  certain  domains  for  the
benefit  of  his  gods.'  Amon  of  Karnak  thus  became  possessor  of  seven  Syrian
towns  which  he  owed  to  the  generosity  of  the  victorious  Pharaohs.'-^  Certain
cities,  like  Tuuipa,  even  begged  for  statues  of  Thutmosis  for  which  they  built  a
temple  and  instituted  a  cultus.  Amon  and  his  fellow-gods  too  were  adored
there,  side  by  side  with  the  sovereign  the  inhabitants  had  chosen  to  represent
them  here  below.''  These  rites  were  at  once  a  sign  of  servitude,  and  a  proof  of
gratitude  for  services  rendered,  or  privileges  which  had  been  confirmed.  The
princes  of  neighbouring  regions  repaired  annually  to  these  temples  to  renew
their  oaths  of  allegiance,  and  to  bring  their  tributes  "  before  the  face  of  the
king."^  Taking  everytliing  into  account,  the  condition  of  the  Pharaoh's
subjects  might  have  been  a  pleasant  one,  had  they  been  able  to  accept  their
lot  without  any  mental  reservation.  They  retained  their  own  laws,  their
dynasties,  aud  their  frontiers,  and  paid  a  tax  only  in  proportion  to  their  resources,
while  the  hostages  given  were  answerable  for  their  obedience.  These  hostages
were  as  a  rule  taken  by  Thutmosis  from  among  the  sons  or  the  brothers  of  the
enemy's  cliief.  They  were  carried  to  Thebes,  where  a  suitable  establishment
was  assigned  to  them,''  the  younger  members  receiving  an  education  whiclr
practically  made  them  Egyptians.  As  soon  as  a  vacancy  occurred  in  tiie
succession  either  in  Syria  or  in  Ethiopia,  the  Pharaoh  would  choose  from
among  the  members  of  the  family  whom  he  held  in  reserve,  that  prince  on
whose  loyalty  he  could  best  count,  aud  placed  him  upon  the  throne.*'     The

'  The  seven  towns  which  Amon  possessed  in  Syria  are  mentioned,  in  the  time  of  Eiimses  III.,  in
the  list  of  the  domains  and  revenues  of  the  god  (IVic  Gri/at  Harris  Paiiyrus,  Bmon,  pi.  68  a,  1.  1).

'  In  the  year  XXIII.,  on  his  return  from  ids  first  campaign,  Thutmosis  III.  provided  offerings,
guaranteed  from  tlie  three  towns  Anaiigasa,  luiiamii,  and  Hurnikarii,  for  his  father  Amoiira  (Lepsius,
Denl;m.,  iii.  ilO,  II.  8-10;  BBur.scii,  Jlecueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pi.  xlii.  11.  8-10).
I-  '  The  statues  of  Thutmosis  III.  and  of  the  gods  of  Egypt  erected  at  Tunipa  are  mentioned  in  a
letter  from  the  inhabitauts  of  tliat  town  to  Ameuothes  III.  (Bezuld-Budge,  The  Tell  el-Aiitarna
Tablets,  No.  41,  pp.  Ixx.,  Ixxi. ;  Halevy,  Notes  G^ogniphiques,  §  1,  in  the  Itevue  S^mitique,  vol.  i.
pp.  :i79-;iS2,  aud  Cvrrespundimce  d'Am^nuphis  III.  et  d' Am^nophis  IV.,  ihtd.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  15,  111;
Delattre,  Lellres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1892-9;!,  vol.  xv.
pp.  16-2U).  Later,  Ramses  II.,  speaking  of  the  two  towns  in  the  country  of  the  Khilti  in  which
were  two  statues  of  His  Majesty,  mentions  Tunipa  as  one  of  them  (Brugscu,  liecueil  de  Monumenls,
vol.  ii.  pi.  liv.  2,  and  Geschichte  JEgijpteiis,  p.  5H).

*  This  is  the  expression  used,  in  tlie  time  of  Ramses  III.,  in  the  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  i}i..
11.  l-.T;  cf.  Brugsoh,  Gesch.  JEgyptcns,  pp.  tjOS,  GO'J,  and  W.  Max  MI'ller,  Asien  uiid  Europa,  p.  271.

'  The  various  titles  of  tlie  lists  of  Thutmosis  III.  at  Thel)es  show  us  "the  children  of  the
Syrian  chiefs  conducted  as  jjrisoners"  into  the  town  of  Si'lhanu  (Mahiette,  Kariiak,  pi.  17),  whicli  is
elsewhere  mentioned  as  the  depot,  the  prison  of  the  temple  of  Anion  {Id.,  pi.  19).  W.  i\lax  Miiller
was  t'C  first  to  remark  the  historical  value  of  this  indication  {Asien  und  Europa,  p.  208),  but  without
sufficiently  insisting  on  it ;  the  name  indicates,  perhaps,  as  ho  says,  a  great  prison,  but  a  prison  like
those  where  the  princes  of  the  family  of  the  Ottoman  snltaus  were  confined  by  tlic  nigriing  monarch
—a  palace  usually  provided  with  all  the  comforts  of  Oriental  life.

"  Annuls  of  'I'hulmosis  III..  I.  8.  .\mong  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  there  is  a  letter  of  a  petty
Syrian  king,  Adadnirari,  whose  father  was  enthroned  after  a  fashion  in  Nilkhassi  by  Thutmosis  III.
( WiscKLKU-AiiEL,  I)i:r  Tliiiutiifcl/uH(l  vim  el-Amarna,  No.  ;!0,  p.  :17;  Winckler,  Verzeichniss,  etc.,  in
the  Zeiltchri/I,  pp.  M,  ."ili,  where  the  prince  in  question  is  wrongly  given  as  a  son  of  Thutmosis  III.


272  THE   EIOnTEENTU   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

method  of  procedure  was  not  always  successful,  since  these  princes,  whom  one
would  have  supposed  from  their  training  to  have  been  the  least  likely  to  have
asserted  themselves  against  the  man  to  whom  they  owed  their  elevation,  often
gave  more  trouble  than  others.  The  sense  of  the  supreme  power  of  Egypt,
wliich  had  been  inculcated  in  them  during  their  exile,  seemed  to  be
weakened  after  their  return  to  their  native  country,  and  to  give  place  to
a  sense  of  their  own  importance.  Tlieir  hearts  misgave  them  as  the  time
approached  for  them  to  send  their  own  children  as  pledges  to  their  suzerain,
and  also  when  called  upon  to  transfer  a  considerable  part  of  their  revenue  to
his  treasury.  They  found,  moreover,  among  their  own  cities  and  kinsfolk,
those  Avho  were  adverse  to  the  foreign  yoke,  and  secretly  urged  their  country-
men to  revolt,  or  else  competitors  for  the  throne  who  took  advantage  of  the
popular  discontent  to  pose  as  champions  of  national  independence,  and  it  was
difficult  for  the  vassal  prince  to  counteract  the  intrigues  of  these  adversaries
without  openly  declaring  himself  hostile  to  his  foreign  master.^  A  time  quickly
came  when  a  vestige  of  fear  alone  constrained  them  to  conceal  their  wish  for
liberty ;  the  most  trivial  incident  then  sufficed  to  give  them  the  necessary
encouragement,  and  decided  them  to  throw  off  the  mask, — a  repulse  or  the
report  of  a  repulse  suffered  by  the  Egyptians,  the  news  of  a  popular  rising  in
some  neighbouring  state,  the  passing  visit  of  a  Chaldsean  emissary  who  left
behind  him  the  hope  of  support  and  perhaps  of  subsidies  from  Babylon,  and
the  unexpected  arrival  of  a  troop  of  mercenaries  whose  services  might  be  hired
for  the  occasion.'^  A  rising  of  this  sort  usually  brought  about  the  most  disas-
trous results.  The  native  prince  or  the  town  itself  could  keep  back  the  tribute
and  own  allegiance  to  no  one  during  the  few  months  required  to  convince
Pharaoh  of  their  defection  and  to  allow  him  to  prepare  the  necessary  means  of

BoscAWEX,  Some  Letters  to  Amenophis  III.,  in  the  Babylonian  Oriental  Record,  vol.  v.  pp.  175-177;
Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  30,  31).  Cf.  the  letter
of  labitiri  (BEZOLD-Brr>GE,  The  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  57,  pp.  Ixxvii. ,  Ixxviii.,  and  Delattise,
Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  503-505),  wheie  this  in  lividual
recalls  the  fact  that  he  had  passed  his  infancy  in  Egypt.

'  Thus,  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence,  Zimrida,  governor  of  Sidou,  gives  information  to
Amenuthes  III.  on  the  intrigues  which  the  notables  of  tlie  town  were  concocting  against  Egyptian
authority  (Winckler-Abei.,  Der  TItonta/elfund  I'oti  el-Amarna,  No.  90,  p.  93 ;  cf.  Delattre,  Lettres
de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  tlie  Proceedings  of  Bibl.  Aich.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  317,  318);  cf.
certain  letters  of  Azirii  (AVinckler-Abel,  op.  cit..  No.  3b",  p.  43).  Ribaddii  relates  in  one  of  those
despatches  that  the  notables  of  Byblos  and  the  women  of  his  harem  were  urging  hiiu  to  revolt
(Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  16,  pp.  xlix.,  1.)  :  later,  a  letter  of  Amfuiirfi  to  the  Kino-  of
Egypt  infoims  us  that  Ribaddii  had  been  driven  from  Byblos  by  his  own  brother  (Bezold-Budge,
Tell  el-Amarna  Toilets,  No.  27,  p.  Ivi.  ;  cf.  Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings
Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  367,  368).

-  Burnabiiriash,  Kingof  Babylon,  speaks  of  Syrian  agents  who  had  come  to  ask  for  supi  ort  from  his
father,  Kurigalzu,and  adds  that  the  latter  had  counselled  submission  (Bezold-Bidge,  Tell  el-Auiamn
Tablets,  No.  3,  pp.  xxxi.,  xxxii. ;  cf.  Zimmern,  Brief e  am  dem  Funde  von  el-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift  filr
Assyriologie,  vol.  v.  pp.  152,  153,  and  Delattre,  Lettres,  eic.,m  the  Proceedings,  1S90-91,  vol.  xiii.  p.
541).  In  one  of  the  letters  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  Azirfl  defends  himself  for  having  received
an  emissary  of  tlie  Kingof  the  Khati(BEZOLD-BrDGE,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahlets,  No.  35,  p.  73,  II.  47-50).


THE   CONDITION    OF   THE    VASSAL    STATES.


273


vengeance  ;  the  advent  of  the  Egyptians  foHowecl,  and  the  work  of  repression
was  systematically  set  in  hand.  They  destroyed  the  harvests,  whether  green
or  ready  for  the  sickle,  they  cnt  down  the  palms  and  olive  trees,  they  tore  up
the  vines,  seized  on  the  flocks,  dismantled  the  strongholds,  and  took  the
inliabitants  prisoners.^  The  rebellious  prince  had  to  deliver  up  his  silver  and
gold,  the  contents  of  his  palace,  even  his  children,^  and  when  he  had  finally


A   8TBIAN    TOWN    AND   ITS  OUTSKIRTS    AFTER    AN    EGYPTIAN    AR5IY    HAD    PASSED    THKOnCH   IT.'

obtained  peace  by  means  of  endless  sacrifices,  he  found  himself  a  vassal  as
before,  but  with  an  empty  treasury,  a  wasted  country,  and  a  decimated
people.  In  spite  of  all  this,  some  headstrong  native  princes  never  re-
linquished the  hope-  of  freedom,  and  no  sooner  had  they  made  good  the
breaches  in  their  walls  as  far  as  they  were  able,  than  tliey  entered  once
more  on  this  unequal  contest,  though  at  the  risk  of  bringing  irreparable
disaster  on  their  country.  The  majority  of  them,  after  one  such  struggle,
resigned  themselves  to  the  inevitable,  and  fulfilled  their  feudal  obligations
regularly.     Tliey  paid  their  fixed  contribution,  furnished  rations  and  stores

'  Cf.  the  raiding,  for  instance,  of  tlio  regions  of  Arvad  and  of  the  Zahi  by  Tliutmosis  III.,  described
in  the  Annah,  11.  4,  .") ;  see  also  what  is  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  263,  204  of  the  present  work.
We  arc  still  in  posse.-sion  of  the  threats  which  the  messenger  Khani  made  against  the  rebellious  chief
iif  a  province  of  the  Zahi— possibly  Aziru  (Winckler-Ahel,  Der  Thontafel/und  voii  El-Ainarna,  No.  92,
pi.  95  a,  redo,  II.  30-32  ;  cf.  Delattre,  Azirou,  in  Proc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1S90-91,  vol.  xiii.  p.  225).

*  Sec,  in  the  accounts  of  the  campaigns  of  Thiitmosis,  the  record  of  the  spoils,  as  well  as  the  men-
tion of  the  children  of  the  chiefs  brought  as  prisoners  into  Egypt  (Annals,  1.  S).

'  Drawn  by  Bouilior,  from  a  photograi)h  by  Gayut.  It  is  a  bas-relief  of  the  tinio  of  Ramses  II.
at  Luxor,  whicli  was  Ijiought  to  light  in  the  excavations  of  1880.


274  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

to  the  army  when  passing  through  their  territory,  and  informed  the  ministers
at  Thebes  of  any  intrigues  among  their  neighbours.^  Years  elapsed  before  they
could  so  far  forget  the  failure  of  their  first  attempt  to  regain  independence,
as  to  venture  to  make  a  second,  and  expose  themselves  to  fresh  reverses.

The  administration  of  so  vast  an  empire  entailed  but  a  small  expenditure
on  the  Egyptians,  and  required  the  offices  of  merely  a  few  functionaries.^  The
garrisons  which  they  kept  up  in  foreign  provinces  lived  on  the  country,  and
were  composed  mainly  of  light  troops,  archers,  a  certain  proportion  of  heavy
infantry,  and  a  few  minor  detachments  of  chariotry  dispersed  among  the
principal  fortresses.^  The  officers  in  command  had  orders  to  interfere  as  little
as  possible  in  local  affairs,  and  to  leave  the  natives  to  dispute  or  even  to  fight
among  themselves  unhindered,  so  long  as  their  quarrels  did  not  threaten  the
security  of  the  Pharaoh.*  It  was  never  part  of  the  policy  of  Egypt  to  insist
on  her  foreign  subjects  keeping  an  unbroken  peace  among  themselves.  If,
theoretically,  she  did  not  recognise  the  right  of  private  warfare,  she  at  all
events  tolerated  its  practice.  It  mattered  little  to  her  whether  some  particular
province  passed  out  of  the  possession  of  a  certain  Kibaddu  into  that  of  a  certain
x\.ziru,  or  vice  versa,  so  long  as  both  Eibaddu  and  Aziru  remained  her  faithful
slaves.^  She  never  sought. to  repress  their  incessant  quarrelling  until  such  time
as  it  threatened  to  take  the  form  of  an  insurrection  against  her  own  power.
Then  alone  did  she  throw  off  her  neutrality  ;  taking  the  side  of  one  or  other  of

>  Wo  find  in  the  Annals,  11.  12-14,  23,  24,  34,  iu  addition  to  the  enumeration  of  the  tributes,  the
mention  of  the  foraging  arrangements  which  the  chiefs  were  compelled  to  make  for  the  army  on  its
passage  ;  of.  the  letter  of  Akizzi  in  Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  36, 11.  10-15,  and
BosoA-vfEN,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.  p.  34.  We
find  amoug  the  tablets  letters  from  Aziru  denouncing  the  intrigues  of  the  Khatl  (Winckler-Abel,
Der  Thontafel/und,  Nos.  31-3S,  pis.  3S-45;  cf.  Delattbe,  Azirou,  iu  tlie  Proceedings,  1S90-91,  vol.
xiii.  p.  215,  et  seij.);  letters  also  of  Eibaddu  pointing  out  the  misdeeds  of  Abdashirti  (Winckler-
Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund,  No.  72,  pi.  76,  iuid  Bezold-Bddge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  12,  pp.
xliv.,  xlv. ;  cf.  Delattke,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  345,
346,  349-352),  and  other  communications  of  the  same  nature,  which  demonstrate  the  supervision
exercised  by  the  petty  Syrian  princes  over  each  other.  •

=  Under  Thutmosis  III.  we  have  among  others  "  Mir,"  or  "  Nasi  situ  mihatitii,"  "  governors  of
the  northern  countries,"  the  Thutii  who  became  afterwards  a  hero  of  romance  (Devekia,  CEuvres,
vol.  i.  p.  35,  et  seq.);  cf.  p.  277  of  the  present  work.  The  individuals  who  bore  this  title  held  a
middle  rank  in  the  Egyptian  hierarchy  (BIaspero,  Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  9,  49).  On  the
administration  of  the  Syrian  provinces,  see  W.  Max  Mijller,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  273-275.

^  The  archers— p/(Ja(iu,  piddti,  piddle— and  the  chariotry  quartered  in  Syria  are  often  mentioued
in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence.  Steindorff  has  recoguised  the  term  udH,  auitu,  meauing
infantry  (see  p.  213,  note  4,  of  the  present  volume),  in  tlie  word  ueii,  uiu,  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets
(ZiMMERN,  Die  Keilschri/tbriefe  aus  Jerusalem,  in  the  Zeitschri/tfiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  254,  n.  4).

*  A  half  at  least  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence  treats  of  provincial  wars  between  the  kings  of
tovras  and  countries  subject  to  Egypt — ^wars  of  Abdashirti  and  his  son  Aziru  against  the  cities  of  the
Phoonieian  coast  (Delattre,  Azirou,  in  the  Proceedings,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  215-234,  and  Lettres  de
Tell  el-Amarna,  ibid.,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  345-373,  501-520),  wars  of  Abdlkhiba,  or  Abdi-Tabba,
King  of  Jerusalem,  against  the  chiefs  of  the  neighbouriug  cities  (Zimmern,  Die  Keilschri/tbriefe  aus
Jerusuiem,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  245-263,  and  Palestina  urn  der  Jahr  141JO
vor  Christi  nacli  neuen  Quellen,  iu  the  Zeitschrift  des  Paldstina-Verehu,  vol.  xiii.  p.  142,  et  seq.).

=  See  iu  Bezold-Bddge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,No.  13,  pp.  xlvi.,xlvii.,  30,  31,  the  letter  iu  which
Kibaddu  deuounecs  Aziru  as  a  rebel,  whilst  Aziru  elsewhere  professes  his  fidelity.


THE   RELATIONS    OF   PHARAOH    WITH  HIS    VASSALS.  275

the  dissentients,  she  would  grant  him,  as  a  pledge  of  help,  ten,  twenty,  thirty,
or  even  more  archers.'  No  doubt  the  discipline  and  personal  courage  of  these
veterans  exercised  a  certain  influence  on  the  turn  of  events,  but  they  were  after
all  a  mere  handful  of  men,  and  their  individual  action  in  the  combat  would
scarcely  ever  have  been  sufficient  to  decide  the  result ;  the  actual  importance
of  their  support,  in  spite  of  their  numerical  inferiority,  lay  in  the  moral  weight
they  brought  to  the  side  on  which  they  fought,  since  they  represented  the
wliole  army  of  the  Pharaoh  which  lay  behind  them,  and  their  presence  in  a
camp  always  ensured  final  success.  The  vanquished  party  had  the  right  of
appeal  to  the  sovereign,  through  whom  he  might  obtain  a  mitigation  of
the  lot  which  his  successful  adversary  had  prepared  for  him ;  it  was  to  the
interest  of  Egypt  to  keep  the  balance  of  power  as  evenly  as  possible  between
the  various  states  which  looked  to  her,  and  when  she  prevented  one  or  other  of
the  princes  from  completely  crushing  his  rivals,  she  was  minimising  the  danger
whicli  might  soon  arise  from  the  vassal  whom  she  liad  allowed  to  extend  his
territory  at  the  expense  of  others.

Tliese  relations  gave  rise  to  a  perpetual  exchange  of  letters  and  petitions
between  the  court  of  Thebes  and  the  northern  and  southern  provinces,  in  which
all  the  petty  kings  of  Africa  and  Asia,  of  whatever  colour  or  race,  set  forth,
either  openly  or  covertly,  their  ambitions  and  their  fears,  imploring  a  favour
or  beggiug  for  a  subsidy,  revealing  the  real  or  suspected  intrigues  of  their
fellow-chiefs,  and  while  loudly  proclaiming  their  own  loyalty,  denounciug
the  perfidy  and  the  secret  projects  of  their  neighbours.  As  the  Ethiopian
peoples  did  not,  apparently,  possess  an  alphabet  of  their  own,  half  of  the
correspondence  which  concerned  them  was  carried  on  in  Egyptian,  and  written
on  papyrus.  In  Syria,  however,  where  Babylonian  civilization  maintained  itself
iu  spite  of  its  conquest  by  Thutmosis,  cuneiform  writing  was  still  employed,
and  tablets  of  dried  clay.^  It  had,  therefore,  been  found  necessary  to  establish
in  the  Pharaoh's  palace  a  department  for  this  service,  iu  which  the  scribes
should  be  competent  to  decipher  the  Chaldsean  character.  Dictionaries  and
easy  mythological  texts  had  been  procured  for  their  instruction,  by  means  of

'  Abimilki  (Abisharri)  deuiauds  ou  uue  occasion  from  tha  King  of  Egypt  ten  muu  to  defend  Tyre
(EtzoLU-BcuGE,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  30,  recto,  11.  U-lti,  p.  Hi),  on  auotlier  occasion  twenty
(Iu.,  ibid..  No.  2S,  recto,  11.  17,  18,  p.  50);  the  town  of  Giila  requisitioned  thirty  or  forty  to  guard  it
(111.,  ibid..  No.  15,  Demo,  11.  30-32,  p.  93;  cf.  HALiivY,  Correspoiulaitce  d'Ameiiophes  III.,  etc.,  iu  the
Uecue  ii(fmitique,  vol.  ii.  p.  20).  Delattre  tbiuks  tliat  these  are  rhetorical  exprebsions  answering  to  a
general  word,  just  as  if  we  should  say  "  a  handful  of  uieu  "  (Lelires  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  iu  the  Pro-
ceedings, 1892-93,  vol.  XV.  p.  508);  th(^  dill'erence  of  value  iu  the  figures  is  to  me  a  proof  of  their
reality.

'  A  discovery  made  by  the  fellahin,  iu  1887,  atTel  el-Amarua,  iu  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  Khiiniatou
(I'etuie,  Tell  el-Aiuarna,  pp.  23,  21),  brought  to  light  a  portiuu  of  the  correspoudouco  between  Asiatic
Miouarchs,  whether  vafesals  or  indepeudeutof  Egypt,  with  the  officers  of  AmeuOthes  111.  and  IV.,  and
with  these  Pharaohs  themselves.  The  bibliography  of  the  principal  publications  called  forth  by  the
discovery  is  to  be  found  in  Bezolu-Budgi;,  Tell  vl-Amnnia  Tablets,  pp.  Ixxxvii.-xcii.


276  THE  EIOHTEENTB    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

wliich  tliey  had  learned  tlie  meaiiiug  of  words  and  the  construction  of  sentences.'
Having  once  mastered  the  mechanism  of  the  syllabary,  they  set  to  work  to
translate  the  despatches,  marking  on  the  back  of  each  the  date  and  the  place
from  whence  it  came,  and  if  necessary  making  a  draft  of  the  reply .^  In  these
the  Pharaoh  does  not  appear,  as  a  rule,  to  have  insisted  on  tlie  endless  titles
which  we  find  so  lavishly  used  in  his  inscriptions,  but  the  shortened  protocol
employed  shows  that  the  theory  of  his  divinity  was  as  fully  acknowledged  by
strangers  as  it  was  by  his  own  subjects.  They  greet  him  as  their  sun,  the  god
before  whom  they  prostrate  themselves  seven  times  seven,  while  they  are  his
slaves,  his  dogs,  and  the  dust  beneath  his  feet.^  The  runners  to  whom  these  docu-
ments were  entrusted,  and  who  delivered  them  with  their  own  hand,  were  not,  as
a  rule,  persons  of  any  consideration  ;  but  for  missions  of  grave  importance  "  the
king's  messengers  "  were  employed,  whose  functions  in  time  became  extended  to
a  remarkable  degree.  Those  who  were  restricted  to  a  limited  sphere  of  activity
were  called  "the  king's  messengers  for  the  regions  of  the  soutli,"or  "the  king's
messengers  for  the  regions  of  the  north,"  according  to  their  proficiency  in  the
idiom  and  customs  of  Africa  or  of  Asia.  Others  were  deemed  capable  of  under-
taking missions  wherever  they  might  be  required,  and  were,  therefore,  designated
by  the  bold  title  of  "  the  king's  messengers  for  all  lauds."  ^  In  this  case
extended  powers  were  conferred  upon  them,  and  they  were  permitted  to
cut  short  the  disputes  between  two  cities  in  some  province  they  had  to
inspect,  to  excuse  from  tribute,  to  receive  presents  and  hostages,  and  even
princesses  destined  for  the  harem  of  the  Pharaoh,  and  also  to  grant  the  support
of  troops  to  such  as  could  give  adequate  reason  for  seeking  it.®  Their  tasks
were  always  of  a  delicate  and  not  infrequently  of  a  perilous  nature,  and
constantly  exposed  them  to  the  danger  of  being  robbed  by  highwaymen  or

'  Delattee,  La  Trouvaille  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  lC-18 ;  cf.  Boscawen,  Syllabaries  frum  Tel  el-
Amarna,  in  Babyl.  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.  p.  120,  and  Sayce  in  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  34-36.

^  Several  of  these  registrations  are  still  to  be  read  on  the  baclis  of  the  tablets  at  Berlin,  London,
and  Gizeh  (Erman-Winckler,  Verzeichniss  der  aus  dem  Funde  Iterruhrenden  Thontafdn,  in  Zeitschri/t,
1889,  vol.  xxvii.  pp.  62-64,  and  Winokler-Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund  von  El-Amarna,  pis.  5  h,  11,  19;
SCHEIL,  Tablettes  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  M^m.  de  la  Mission  Franraise  du  Caire,  vol.  vi.  pp.  297-312).

^  The  protocols  of  the  letters  of  Abdashirti  may  be  taken  as  an  example  CWinokler-Abel,  Der
Thontafelfund,  No.  97,  p.  99),  or  those  of  Abimilki  (Bezold-Bodge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  30,  p.  Ixi.)
to  Pharaoh  (Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  Froc.  Bibl.  Ajch.  Soc.,  1892-93,  vol. xv.  pp.501,
502,  505-508);  sometimes  there  is  a  development  of  the  protocol  which  assumes  panegyrical  features
similar  to  those  met  with  in  Egypt  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  29,  p.  62, 11. 4-15).

*  As  to  the  fiscal  functions  of  the  messengers,  see  Maspero,  Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  39  ;
their  political  functions  were  brought  to  light  in  the  Tel  el-.\marna  correspondence.

'  Tlie  Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence  shows  the  messengers  in  the  time  of  Amenothes  III.  and  IV.
us  receiving  tribute  (Letter  from  Azirii,  in  Bezold-Bcdge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  35,  p.  73,  11.
54-56),  as  bringing  an  army  to  the  succour  of  a  chief  in  difficulties  (Id.,  ibid..  No.  28,  p.  60, 11.  38-
47),  as  threatening  witli  the  anger  of  the  Pharaoh  tlie  princes  of  doubtful  loyalty  (Winokler-
Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund,  etc.,  p.  95  o,  b),  as  giving  to  a  faithful  vassal  compliments  and  honours
from  his  suzerain  (Letter  of  Abimilki,  in  Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  29,  pp.  62,  03),
as  charged  with  the  conveyance  of  a  gift  of  slaves  (AVinckler-Aeel,  Der  Thontafelfund,  p.  36,  verso,
II.  6,  7),  or  of  escorting  a  princess  to  the  harem  of  the  Pharaoli  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  18  a,  recto,  11.  8-27).


J


THE  ROYAL   MESSENGERS,    TIIUTil.  277

maltreated  by  some  insubordinate  vassal,  at  times  even  running  the  risk  of
mutilation  or  assassination  by  the  way.^  They  were  obliged  to  brave  the
dangers  of  the  forests  of  Lebanon  and  of  the  Taurus,  the  solitudes  of
Mesopotamia,  the  marshes  of  Chaldaja,  the  voyages  to  Puanit  and  Asia  Minor.
Some  took  their  way  towards  Assyria  and  Babylon,  while  otiiers  embarked  at
Tyre  or  Sidon  for  the  islands  of  tlie  ^gean  Archipelago.^  The  endurance  of
all  these  officers,  whether  governors  or  messengers,  their  courage,  their  tact,  the
ready  wit  they  were  obliged  to  summon  to  help  them  out  of  the  difficulties  into
wiiich  their  calling  frequently  brought  them,  all  tended  to  enlist  the  public
sympathy  in  their  favour.^  Many  of  them  achieved  a  reputation,  and  were
made  the  heroes  of  popular  romance.  More  than  three  centuries  after  it  was
still  related  how  one  of  them,  by  name  Thutii,  had  reduced  and  humbled  Jaffa,
whose  chief  had  refused  to  come  to  terms.  Tluitii  set  about  his  task  by
feigning  to  throw  off  his  allegiance  to  Thutmosis  III.,  and  withdrew  from  the
Egyptian  service,  having  first  stolen  the  great  magic  wand  of  his  lord  ;  he  then
invited  the  rebellious  chief  into  his  camp,  imder  pretence  of  showing  him  this
formidable  talisman,  and  killed  him  after  they  had  drunk  together.  The  cunning
envoy  then  packed  five  hundred  of  his  soldiers  into  jars,  and  caused  them  to  be
carried  on  the  backs  of  asses  before  the  gates  of  the  town,  where  he  made  the
herald  of  the  murdered  prince  proclaim  that  the  Egyptians  had  been  defeated,
and  that  the  pack  train  which  accompanied  him  contained  the  spoil,  among
which  was  Thutii  himself  The  officer  in  charge  of  the  city  gate  was  deceived
by  this  harangue,  the  asses  were  admitted  within  the  walls,  where  the  soldiers
quitted  their  jars,  massacred  the  garrison,  and  made  themselves  masters  of  the
town.  The  tale  is,  in  the  main,  the  story  of  Ali  Baba  and  the  forty  thieves.*
The  frontier  was  continually  shifting,  and  Thutmosis  III.,  like  Thiitmosis  I.,

'  A  lettBf  of  Ribaddu,  iu  the  time  of  Ameuothes  III.,  repreaents  a  royal  messenger  as  blockaded
in  Byblos  by  the  rebels  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  13,  pp.  30,  31,  11.  31-43).

'  We  hear  from  the  tablela  of  several  messengers  to  Babylon,  and  the  Mitanni,  Kasi  (Winckleb-
Abel,  Ver  Tlwutafel/und,  p.  1,  11.  16,  17),  Mani  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  18  u,  b;  Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-
Amarna  Tablets,  pp.  18-21),  Khamassi  (Winckleu-Abel,  Der  Thoiitafel/uiid,  p.  20,  recto,  1.  37).
The  royal  messenger  Thutii,  who  governed  the  countries  of  the  north,  speaks  of  having  satisfied  the
heart  of  the  king  iu  "  the  isles  wliich  are  iu  the  midst  of  tlio  sea  "  (Bikcu-Chae.\s,  Mimoire  sur  une
I'dtcre  &jyptienne  dii  Musee  du  Louvre,  pp.  4,  18,  et  seq.).  This  was  not,  as  some  think,  a  case  of
hyperbole  (\V.  JIax  Mi^LLER,  Asitn  and  Europa,  p.  3Gi),  note  1),  for  the  messengers  could  embark  on
I'lufcuician  vessels ;  tljey  had  a  less  distance  to  cover  in  order  to  reach  the  JSgeau  thau  the  royal
messenger  of  (iueen  Hatshopsitii  had  before  arriving  at  the  country  of  the  Somalis  and  the  "  Ladders
of  Iiiceuso  "  (see  p.  246,  et  seq.,  of  the  present  work).

'  The  hero  of  the  Anaslasi  I'apijrus,  No.  1,  with  whom  (Jhabas  made  us  acquainted  in  his  Voyage
d'un  Lgyplien,  is  probably  a  typo  of  the  "  messenger  "  of  the  time  of  Ramses  II. ;  in  any  case,  his
itinerary  and  adventures  aro  natural  to  a  "royal  messenger"  compelled  to  traverse  Syria  alone.

'  The  story  of  Thiitii  was  discovered  and  published  by  Goodwin,  Translation  of  a  Fragment  of  an
Jlistorkul  Narrative  relating  to  the  Reign  of  Tkotmee  III.,  in  the  Transactions  of  tlie  Bibl.  Arcli.
8oc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  348,  et  seq.,  afterwards  translated  and  annotated  by  Masi'euo,  JCtndes  Egyidiennes,  vol.  i.
pp.  4U-72;  of.  Les  Contes  pupulaires  de  VEgyple  antique,  'Iwi  edit.,  pp.  147-160,  and  Prof.  F.  Petkie,
Egyptian  Tales,  2ud  series,  pp.  1-12.  The  resemblance  to  Ali  Baba  and  the  forty  thieves  was  pointed
out  by  BiRcii,  Egypt  from  the  Earlier  Times,  pp.  203,  204.


278  TEE  ETOHTEENTII    TJIEBAN   DYNASTY.

vainly  endeavoured  to  give  it  a  fixed  character  by  erecting  stelae  along
the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  at  those  points  where  he  contended  it  had
run  formerly.^  While  Kharu  and  Phoenicia  were  completely  in  the  hands
of  the  conqueror,  his  suzerainty  became  more  uncertain  as  it  extended
northwards  in  the  direction  of  the  Taurus.  Beyond  Qodshu,  it  could
only  be  maintained  by  means  of  constant  supervision,  and  in  Naharaim  its
duration  was  coextensive  with  the  sojourn  of  the  conqueror  in  the  locality
during  his  campaign,  for  it  vanished  of  itself  as  soon  as  he  had  set  out  on  his
return  to  Africa.  It  will  be  thus  seen  that,  on  the  continent  of  Asia,  Egypt
possessed  a  nucleus  of  territories,  so  far  securely  under  her  rule  that  they  might
be  actually  reckoned  as  provinces ;  beyond  this  immediate  domain  there  was  a
zone  of  waning  influence,  whose  area  varied  with  each  reign,  and  even  under
one  king  depended  largely  on  the  activity  which  he  personally  displayed.  This
was  always  the  case  when  the  rulers  of  Egypt  attempted  to  carry  their
supremacy  beyond  the  isthmus ;  whether  under  the  Ptolemies  or  the  native
kings,  the  distance  to  which  her  influence  extended  was  always  practically  the
same,  and  the  teaching  of  history  enables  us  to  note  its  limits  on  the  map  with
relative  accuracy.^  The  coast  towns,  which  were  in  maritime  communication
with  the  ports  of  the  Delta,  submitted  to  the  Egyptian  yoke  more  readily  than
those  of  the  interior.  But  this  submission  could  not  be  reckoned  on  beyond
Berytus,  on  the  banks  of  the  Lykos,  though  occasionally  it  stretched  a  little
further  north  as  far  as  Byblos  and  Arvad  ;  even  then  it  did  not  extend  inland,
and  the  curve  marking  its  limits  traverses  Ccele-Syria  from  north-west  to
south-east,  terminating  at  Mount  Hermon.  Damascus,  securely  entrenched
behind  Anti-Lebanon,  almost  always  lay  outside  this  limit.  The  rulers  of
Egypt  generally  succeeded  without  much  difficulty  in  keeping  possession  of  the
countries  lying  to  the  south  of  this  line  ;  it  demanded  merely  a  slight  effort,
and  this  could  be  furnished  for  several  centuries  without  encroaching  seriously
on  the  resources  of  the  country,  or  endangering  its  prosperity.  When,  however,
some  province  ventured  to  break  away  from  the  control  of  Egypt,  the  whole
mechanism  of  the  government  was  put  into  operation  to  provide  soldiers  and
the  necessary  means  for  an  expedition.  Each  stage  of  the  advance  beyond
the  frontier  demanded  a  greater  expenditure  of  energy,  which,  with  prolonged
distances,  would  naturally  become  exhausted.     The  expedition  would  scarcely

'  See  the  mention  of  these  stelse  at  pp.  210,  265  of  the  preseut  work.  None  of  those  which  were
erected  iu  Naharaim  exist  now,  but  we  still  have  some  otliers  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nahr  el-Kulb,
which  were  put  up  in  the  time  of  Ramses  II.  (Lepsids,  Venkm.,  iii.  197).

'  The  development  of  the  Egyptian  navy  enabled  the  Ptolemies  to  exercise  authority  over  the
coasts  of  Asia  Minor  and  of  Thrace,  but  this  extensiou  of  their  power  beyond  the  indicated  limits
only  hastened  the  exhaustion  of  their  empire  (Droysen,  GeschiclUe  der  Epigonen,  2nd  edit.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  lGl-163).  This  instance,  like  that  of  Mehemet  Ali,  thus  confirms  the  position  taken  up
iu  the  text.


TEE  SUBJECTS  AND   ALLIES    OF  EGYPT.  279

have  reached  the  Taurus  or  the  Euphrates,  before  the  force  of  circumstances
would  bring  about  its  recall  homewards,  leaving  but  a  sliglit  lioud  of  vassalage
between  the  recently  subdued  countries  and  the  conqueror,  which  would  speedily
be  cast  off  or  give  place  to  relations  dictated  by  interest  or  courtesy.  Thdt-
mosis  III.  had  to  submit  to  this  sort  of  necessary  law  ;  a  further  extension  of  ter-
ritory had  hardly  been  gained  when  his  dominion  began  to  shrink  within  the
frontiers  that  appeared  to  have  been  prescribed  by  nature  for  an  empire  like  that
of  Egypt.  Kharii  and  Phoenicia  proper  paid  him  their  tithes  with  due  regularity;
the  cities  of  the  Amurru  and  of  Zahi,  of  Damascus,  Qodshu,  Hamath,  and  even  of
Tunipa,  lying  on  the  outskirts  of  these  two  subject  nations,  formed  an  ill-defined
borderland,  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  disturbance  by  the  secret  intrigues
or  open  rebellions  of  the  native  princes.  The  kings  of  Alasia,  Naharaim,  and
Mitanni  preserved  their  independence  in  spite  of  repeated  reverses,  and  they
treated  with  the  conqueror  on  equal  terms.^  The  tone  of  their  letters  to  the
Pharaoh,  the  polite  formulas  with  which  they  addressed  him,  the  special
protocol  which  the  Egyptian  ministry  had  drawn  up  for  their  reply,  all  differ
widely  from  those  which  we  see  in  the  despatches  coming  from  commanders
of  garrisons  or  actual  vassals.  In  the  former  it  is  no  longer  a  slave  or  a
feudatory  addressing  his  master  and  awaiting  his  orders,  but  equals  holding
courteous  communication  with  each  other,  the  brother  of  Alasia  or  of  Mitanni
with  his  brother  of  Egypt.  They  inform  him  of  their  good  health,  and  then,
before  entering  on  business,  they  express  their  good  wishes  for  himself,  his
wives,  his  sous,  the  lords  of  his  court,  his  brave  soldiers,  and  for  his  horses.
They  were  careful  never  to  forget  that  with  a  single  word  their  correspondent
could  let  loose  upon  them  a  whirlwind  of  chariots  and  archers  without  number,
but  the  respect  they  felt  for  his  formidable  power  never  degenerated  into  a
fear  which  would  humiliate  them  before  him  with  their  faces  in  the  dust.

This  interchange  of  diplomatic  compliments  was  called  for  by  a  variety
of  exigencies,  such  as  incidents  arising  on  the  frontier,  secret  intrigues,  personal
alliances,  and  questions  of  general  politics.  The  kings  of  Mesopotamia  and  of
Northern  Syria,  even  those  of  Assyria  and  Chaldsea,  who  were  preserved  by
distance  from  the  dangers  of  a  direct  invasion,  were  in  constant  fear  of  an
unexpected  war,  and  heartily  desired  the  downfall  of  Egypt ;  they  endeavoured
meanwhile  to  occupy  the  Pharaoh  so  fully  at  home  that  he  had  no  leisure  to
attack  them.  Even  if  they  did  not  venture  to  give  open  encouragement  to
the  disposition  in  his  subjects  to  revolt,  they  at  least  experienced  no  scruple
in  hiring  emissaries  who  secretly  fanned  the  flame  of  discontent.    The  Pharaoh,

'  Tlio  difference  of  tune  between  the  letters  of  these  kings  and  thoae  of  the  other  princes,  as
well  as  the  consequences  arising  from  it,  has  been  clearly  defined  by  Delattke,  La  Carrespmidance
Aaiatique  d'Amenopkii  III.  et  iV Am^nophiK  II'.,  in  the  Revue  des  Question)  Huloriques,  vol.  liv.
pp.  35-i-:^(;i.


280  THE  EIQHTEENTH   TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

aroused  to  indignatiou  by  such  j)lotting,  reminded  them  of  their  former  oaths
and  treaties.  The  king  in  question  would  thereupon  deny  everything,  would
speak  of  his  tried  friendship,  and  recall  the  fact  that  he  had  refused  to  help
a  rebel  against  his  beloved  brother.^  These  protestations  of  innocence  were
usually  accompanied  by  presents,  and  produced  a  twofold  effect.  They  soothed
the  anger  of  the  offended  party,  and  suggested  not  only  a  courteous  answer,
but  the  sending  of  still  more  valuable  gifts.  Oriental  etiquette,  even  in  those
early  times,  demanded  that  the  present  of  a  less  ricli  or  powerful  friend  should
place  the  recipient  under  the  obligation  of  sending  back  a  gift  of  still  greater
worth.  Every  one,  therefore,  whether  great  or  little,  was  obliged  to  regulate
his  liberality  according  to  the  estimation  in  which  he  held  himself,  or  to  the
opinion  which  others  formed  of  him,  and  a  personage  of  such  opulence  as  the
King  of  Egypt  was  constrained  by  the  laws  of  common  civility  to  display  an
almost  boundless  generosity  :  was  he  not  free  to  work  the  mines  of  the  Divine
Land  or  the  diggings  of  the  Upper  Nile ;  and  as  for  gold,  "  was  it  not  as  the
dust  of  his  country  "  ?  -  He  would  have  desired  nothing  better  than  to  exhibit
such  liberality,  had  not  the  repeated  calls  on  his  purse  at  last  constrained
him  to  parsimony;  he  would  have  been  ruined,  and  Egypt  with  him,  had  he
given  all  that  was  expected  of  him.^  Except  in  a  few  extraordinary  cases,
the  gifts  sent  never  realised  the  expectations  of  the  recipients;  for  instance,
when  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  of  precious  metal  were  looked  for,  the  amount
despatched  would  be  merely  two  or  three.  The  indignation  of  these  dis-
appointed beggars  and  their  recriminations  were  then  most  amusing :  "  From
the  time  when  my  father  and  thine  entered  into  friendly  relations,  they  loaded
each  other  with  presents,  and  never  waited  to  be  asked  to  exchange  amenities ;  ^
and  now  my  brother  sends  me  two  minas  of  gold  as  a  gift !  Send  me  abundance
of  gold,  as  much  as  thy  father  sent,  and  even,  for  so  it  must  be,  more  than

'  See  the  letter  of  Amenothes  III.  to  Kallimmasin  of  Babylon,  where  the  King  of  Egypt  complains
of  the  inimical  designs  which  the  Babylonian  messengers  hail  planned  against  liim,  and  of  the
intrigues  they  had  concocted  on  tlieir  return  to  their  own  country  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna
Tablets,  No.  1,  verso,  pp.  2,  3,  1.  66,  et  setj. ;  cf.  Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceed-
ings, 1802-93,  vol.  XV.  pp.  27,  2S) ;  see  also  the  letter  from  Burnaburiash  to  Amenothes  IV.,  in  which
he  defends  himself  from  the  accusation  of  having  plotted  against  the  King  of  Egypt  at  any  time,  and
recalls  the  circumstance  that  his  father  Kurigalzu  had  refused  to  encourage  the  rebellion  of  one  of
the  Syrian  tribes,  subjects  of  Amenothes  III.  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  2,  pp.  6,  7,
11.  19-30).

'  See  the  letter  of  Dushratta,  King  of  Mitanni,  to  the  Pharaoh  Amenuthes  IV.  (Bezold-Budge,
Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  2S,  pp.  20,  21,  verso,  11.  61,  62).

'  See  Delattbe,  Mariages  princiers  en  Egypte,  in  the  Bemie  des  Questions  Historiques,  vol.  li.
p.  228,  et  seq.,  and  CorrespondanceAsiatiqued'AmendphisIIL,  etc.,  ibid.,vo\Aiv.  pp. SW,'S6l,3S0-3S2.

*  Burnaburiash  complains  that  the  king's  messengers  had  only  brought  him  on  one  occasion  two
minas  of  gold  (Bezold-Bvdge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  2,  p.  6,  1.  14),  on  another  occasion  twenty
minas ;  moreover,  that  the  quality  of  the  metal  was  so  bad  that  hardly  five  minas  of  pure  gold  could
be  extracted  from  it  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  8,  recto,  11.  18-21 ;  cl'.  Halevv,  La  Correspondance  d'Amenophis
III.,  etc  ,  in  the  lievue  Se'mitique,  vol.  i.  pp.  50-52).


ROYAL   PRESENTS   AND   MARRIAGES.  281

thy  father."  '  Pretexts  were  never  wanting  to  give  reasonable  weight  to  such
demands:  one  correspondent  had  begun  to  build  a  temple. or  a  palace  in  one
of  his  capitals,^  another  was  reserving  his  fairest  daughter  for  the  Pharaoh,
and  he  o-ave  him  to  understand  that  anything  he  might  receive  would  help
to  complete  the  bride's  trousseau.^  The  princesses  thus  sent  from  Babylon  or
Mitauni  to  the  court  of  Thebes  enjoyed  on  their  arrival  a  more  honourable
welcome,  and  were  assigned  a  more  exalted  rank  than  those  who  came  from
Kharu  and  Phcenicia.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  were  not  hostages  given  over
to  the  conqueror  to  be  disposed  of  at  will,  but  queens  who  were  united  in
legal  marriage  to  an  ally.*  Once  admitted  to  the  Pharaoh's  court,  they  retained
their  full  rights  as  his  wife,  as  well  as  their  own  fortune  and  mode  of  life.
Some  would  bring  to  their  betrothed  chests  of  jewels,  utensils,  and  stuffs,
the  enumeration  of  which  would  cover  both  sides  of  a  large  tablet ;  ^  others
would  arrive  escorted  by  several  hundred  slaves  or  matrons  as  personal
attendants."  A  few  of  them  preserved  their  original  name,'  many  assumed
an  Egyptian  designation,^  and  so  far  adapted  themselves  to  the  costumes,
manners,  and  language  of  their  adopted  country,  that  they  drojjped  all  inter-
course with  their  native  land,  and  became  regular  Egyptians.     When,  after

'  Literally,  "and  they  would  never  make  each  other  a  fair  request."  The  meaning  I  propose
is  doubtful,  but  it  appears  to  be  required  by  the  context.  The  letter  from  which  this  passage  was
taken  is  from  Burnaburiash,  King  of  Babylon,  to  Amenothes  IV.  (Bezold-Bddge,  Tell  el-Amarna
Tablets,  No.  2,  recto,  p.  6, 11.  7-13).

'  This  is  the  pretext  advanced  by  Buruaburiash  in  the  letter  just  cited,  11.  15,  10.

'  This  seems  to  have  been  the  motive  in  a  somewhat  embarrassing  letter  which  Dushratta,  King
of  Mitanni,  wrote  to  the  Pharaoh  Amenothes  III.  ou  the  occasion  of  his  fixing  the  dowry  of  his
daughter  (Winckler-Aeel,  Dtr  Thoiitaf elf  unci,  p.  18  a,  h  ;  of.  Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,
in  the  Proceedings  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  552,  553).

*  For  the  condition  of  these  women,  see  Delattre,  Mariages  priHcien  en  Egypte,  d'apres  les  lettres
de  Tell  el-Amarnu,  in  the  lievue  des  Questions  Historiques,  vol.  li.  pp.  222-235,  and  La  Correspondance
Asiatique  d'Am^nophis  III.,  etc.,  ibid.,  vol.  liv.  pp.  302-379.  The  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Kbati,
wife  of  Eamses  II.,  was  treated,  as  we  see  from  the  monuments,  with  as  much  honour  as  would  have
been  accorded  to  Egyptian  princesses  of  pure  blood  (Mariette,  Fragments  relalifs  aux  fouilles  do
San,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travuux,  vol.  ix.  pp.  10,  13).

''  Wincklek-Abel,  Ver  TItontaJelfund,  pp.  25,  20,  where  the  objects  belongiug  to  the  dowry
of  the  sister  of  King  Dushratta  of  Mitauui,  arc  enumerated* on  the  occasion  of  lier  marriage  with
Amenutliea  IV.

"  Gilukbipa,  who  was  sent  to  Egypt  to  become  the  wife  of  Amenothes  III ,  took  with  her  a
company  of  three  hundred  and  seventy  women  for  her  service  (Brugsch,  Ueber  ein  merhwurdiges
Imtorisches  Denkmal  aus  den  Zeiten  Ainenojihis  HI,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  18S0,  pp.  81-87 ;  Birch,
Scarabmi  of  Amenophie  III,  in  tlic  Records  of  the  Fast,  Ist  series,  vol.  xii.  pp.  39,  40).  Slie  was  a
daugliter  of  Sutarna,  King  of  Mitauui,  and  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  corre-
spondence (Erman,  Neues  aus  der  Tufeln  von  El-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxviii.  ii.  112  ;  Evetts,
Tatum-hipa  und  Gilu-hipa,  ibid.,  p.  1 13 ;  Winckler,  Satarna,  Konig  von  Naharina,  ibid.,  pp.  114,  11 .5).
'  For  example,  GilukhJpa,  whose  name  is  transcribed  Kilagipa  in  Egyptian,  aud  auotlier  princess
of  Mitunui,  niece  of  Gilukhipa,  caUed  Tadukliipa,  daughter  of  Dushratta  and  wife  of  Amenotlits  IV.
(Bezold-Bldge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  9,  p.  22, 11.  5,  6).

'  Tlie  prince  of  tlie  Khati's  daugliter  wlio  married  Eamses  II.  is  an  example  ;  we  liuow  her  only
by  her  Egyptian  name  Maitnofiiuri  (Lepsius,  iJenlcm.,  iii.  190  a;  Mariette,  Fragments  el  documents
relatifs  aux  fouilles  de  San,  iu  tlio  llecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ix.  pp.  10,  13).  Tlie  wife  of  llamses  III.
(Lepsics,  KSnigibuch,  Nos.  490,  491)  added  to  the  Egyptian  name  of  Isis  her  original  name,
Uumazarati.


■282  THE  EIGHTEENTU   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

several  years,  an  ambassador  arrived  with  greetings  from  their  father  or
brother,  he  would  be  puzzled  by  the  changed  appearance  of  these  ladies,  and
would  almost  doubt  their  identity ;  indeed,  those  only  who  bad  been  about
tliem  in  childhood  were  in  such  cases  able  to  recognise  them.^  These
princesses  all  adopted  the  gods  of  their  husbands,'-'  though  without  necessarily
renouncing  their  own.  From  time  to  time  their  parents  would  send  them,
with  much  pomp,  a  statue  of  one  of  their  national  divinities — Ishtar,  for
example — which,  accompanied  by  native  priests,  would  remain  for  some
months  at  the  court.^  The  children  of  these  queens  ranked  next  in  order  to
those  whose  mothers  belonged  to  the  solar  race,  but  nothing  prevented  them
marrying  their  brothers  or  sisters  of  pure  descent,  and  being  eventually  raised
to  the  throne.  The  members  of  their  families  who  remained  in  Asia  were
naturally  proud  of  these  bonds  of  close  affinity  with  the  Pharaoh,  and  they
rarely  missed  an  opportunity  of  reminding  him  in  their  letters  that  they
stood  to  him  in  the  relationship  of  brother-in-law,  or  one  of  his  fathers-in-
law  ;  their  vanity  stood  them  in  good  stead,  since  it  afforded  them  another
claim  on  the  favours  which  they  were  perpetually  asking  of  him.''

These  foreign  wives  had  often  to  interfere  in  some  of  the  contentions
which  were  bound  to  arise  between  two  States  whose  subjects  were  in
constant  intercourse  with  one  another.  Invasions  or  provincial  wars  may  have
affected  or  even  temporarily  suspended  the  passage  to  and  fro  of  caravans
between  the  countries  of  the  Tigris  and  those  of  the  Nile ;  but  as  soon  as
peace  was  re-established,  even  though  it  were  the  insecure  peace  of  those
distant  ages,  the  desert  traffic  was  again  resumed  and  carried  on  with  renewed
vigour.  The  Egyptian  traders  who  penetrated  into  regions  beyond  the
Euphrates,  carried  with  them,  and  almost  unconscioUslj-  disseminated  along  the
whole  extent  of  their  route,  the  numberless  products  of  Egyj^tian  industry,
hitherto  but  little  known  outside  their  own  country,  and  rendered  expensive
owing  to  the  difficulty  of  transmission  or  the  greed  of  the  merchants.  The
Syrians  now  saw  for  the  first  time  in  great  quantities,  objects  which  had  been
known  to  them  hitherto  merely  through  the  few  rare  specimens  which  made

'  This  was  the  case  with  the  daughter  of  Kallimmasin,  King  of  Babylon,  maniej  to  Amenothes
III.  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amariia  Tablets,  No.  1,  pp.  2-4,  11.  26-52,  and  pp.  xxvi.,  xxvii. ;  of.
Delattke,  Lellres  de  Tdl  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  26,  27 ;  Halevy,  La
Correspondance  d'Amenophis  III.,  etc.,  in  the  Revue  Simitique,  vol.  i.  p.  51) ;  her  father's  ambassador
<lid  not  recognise  her.

"  The  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  KhS,ti,  wife  of  Kamses  II.,  is  represented  in  an  attitude  of
worship  before  lier  deified  husband  and  two  Egyptian  gods  (LEPsros,  Denhm.,  iii.  196  a).

'  Dushratta  of  Mitannl,  sending  a  statue  of  Ishtar  to  hisdaughter,  wife  of  Amenothes  III.,  reminds
her  that  the  same  statue  had  already  made  the  voyage  to  Egypt  in  the  time  of  Ids  father  Sutarna
(Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  10,  pp.  24,  25,  11.  13-32,  .and  pp.  xlii.,  xliii.).

*  Dushratta  of  Mitanni  never  loses  an  opportunity  of  calling  Amenothes  III.,  husband  of  his  sister
Gilukhipa,  ami  of  one  of  his  daughters,  "  akhiya,"  my  brother,  and  "  khataui-ya,"  my  son-in-law
(Winoklbb-Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund,  p.  17,  11.  l-3\


TRADE  BETWEEN  EGYPT  AND   ASIA.


283


THE   LOTANU    AND   THE    COLDSMITHS'    WOIiK    CONSTITCTINS   THEIR    TRIBUTE."


their  way  across  the  frontier :  arms,  stuffs,  metal  implements,  household  utensils
— in  fine,  all  the  objects  which  ministered  to  daily  needs  or  to  luxury.  These
were  now  offered  to  them  at  reasonable  prices,  either  by  the  hawkers  who
accompanied  the  army  or  by  the  soldiers  themselves,  always  ready,  as  soldiers
are,  to  part  with  their  possessions  in  order  to  procure  a  few  extra  pleasures  in
the  intervals  of  fighting.  On  the  other  hand,  whole  convoys  of  spoil  were
despatched  to  Egypt  after  every  successful  campaign,  and  their  contents  were
distributed  in  varying  proportions  among  all  classes  of  society,  from  the  militia-
man belonging  to  some  feudal  contingent,  who  received,  as  a  reward  of  his
valour,  some  half-dozen  necklaces  or  bracelets,  to  the  great  lord  of  ancient
family  or  the  Crown  Prince,  who  carried  off  waggon-loads  of  booty  in  their
train.  These  distributions  must  have  stimulated  a  passion  for  all  Syrian
goods,  and  as  the  spoil  was  insufficient  to  satisfy  the  increasing  demands  of

'  Uriiwn  by  Boudior,  from  a  ijliotograijli  by  luaiiigi.'i'.     The  scene  liere  reproduced  occurs  in  most
of  the  Thobau  tombs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.


284  1HE  EIOHTEENTE    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

the  consumer,  the  waning  commerce  which  liad  been  carried  on  from  early
times  was  once  more  revived  and  extended,  till  every  route,  whether  by  land
or  water,  between  Thebes,  Memphis,  and  the  Asiatic  cities,  was  thronged
by  those  engaged  in  its  pursuit.  It  would  take  too  long  to  enumerate  the
various  objects  of  merchandise  brought  in  almost  daily  to  the  marts  on
the  Nile  by  Phoenician  vessels  or  the  owners  of  caravans.^  Tliey  comprised
slaves  destined  for  the  workshop  or  the  harem,^  Hittite  bulls  and  stallions,
horses  from  Singar,  oxen  from  Alasia,^  rare  and  curious  animals  such
as  elephants  from  Nii,  and  brown  bears  from  the  Lebanon,''  smoked  and
salted  fish,  live  birds  of  many-coloured  plumage,^  goldsmiths'  work  ^  and
precious  stones,  of  which  lapis-lazuli  was  the  chief,  wood  for  building  or  for
ornamental  work — pine,  cypress,  yew,  cedar,  and  oak,'  musical  instruments,**
helmets,  leathern  jerkins  covered  with  metal  scales,  weapons  of  bronze  and  iron,'-'

'  A  partial  list  has  been  drawn  up  by  Brugsch,  Geschichte  Mgyptem,  pp.  342-315 ;  by  Ekman,
JEgypten  unci  J^ciyptisches  Lebeti,  pp.  GSl,  682 ;  by  Bondi,  Dem  Hebrdifch-PIioiiisischen  Sprachzioeige
angeliSrige  Lehntcorter,  p.  2i,  et  seq. ;  and  by  VV.  Max  MCllek,  Aeien  uml  Europa,  pp.  305-309.

'  Syrian  slaves  are  mentioned  along  with  Ethiopian  in  the  Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xvi.
11.  2-5 ;  and  there  is  mention  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence  of  Hittite  slaves  whom  Dusliratta  of
Mitanni  brought  to  Amenothes  III.  (Bezold-Budge,  TM  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  9,  p.  23, 11.  36-oS),  and
of  other  presents  of  the  same  kind  made  by  the  King  of  Alasia  as  a  testimony  of  his  grateful  homage.

'  Anai-tasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xvii.  11.  S,  9 ;  cf.  as  to  the  horses,  p.  215  of  the  present  work.

*  The  elephant  and  the  bear  are  represented  on  the  tomb  of  Eakhmiri  among  the  articles  of
tribute  brought  into  Egypt  (Champollio>%  Monuments  tie  VEgypte,  etc.,  pi.  clxxvi.  1,  2 ;  Roselliki,
Monumenti  Cicili,  pi.  xxii.  3,  5 ;  Virey,  Le  Tomheau  de  lieMinara,  pi.  vii.,  in  the  Me'inoires  de  la
Mission,  vol.  V. ;  Hamy,  Etudes  sur  les  peintures  etliniques  d'uii  tombeau.  thebain,  pp.  H-16).

^  Annals  of  Thutmosit  III.,  11.  21,  25  ;  Mariette,  Karnal;  pi.  13, 1.  24.

'•  The  Annals  of  Tliiitmosis  III.  make  a  record  in  each  campaign  of  the  importation  of  gold  and
silver  vases,  objects  in  lapis-lazuli  and  crystal,  or  of  blocks  of  the  same  materials  (11.  3,  5,  tj,  11,  15.
22,  25,  26,  31,  32,  33,  35);  the  Theban  tombs  of  this  period  aflbrd  examples  of  the  vases  and  blocks
brought  by  the  Syrians  (Vikey,  Le  Tombeau  de  Eekhmara,  pis.  v.,  vii.,  viii.,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la
Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  v. ;  Le  Tombeau  de  Rameuhhepersenb,  ibid.,  p.  202,  et  seij.).  The  Tell  el-
Amarua  letters  also  mention  vessels  of  gold  or  blocks  of  precious  stone  sent  as  presents  or  as  objects  of
exchange  to  the  Pharaoh  by  the  King  of  Babylon  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  2,
p.  7, 1.  36,  No.  3,  p.  9,  11.  10-44),  by  the  King  of  Mitanni  (Id.,  ibid..  No.  9,  p.  23,  11.  41-45),  by  the
King  of  the  Hittites  (AVincklek-Abel,  Der  ThontafelfunJ,  p.  14,  11.  11-15),  and  by  other  princes.
The  lapis-lazuli  of  Babylon,  which  probably  came  from  Persia,  was  that  which  was  most  prized  by
the  Egyptians  on  account  of  the  golden  sparks  in  it,  which  enhanced  the  blue  colour;  this  is,
perhaps,  the  Uknu  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  which  has  been  read  for  a  long  time  as  "  crystal  "
(Lyos,  On  a  Lapis-lazuli  Disc  bearing  a  Cuneiform  Inscription,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
Oriental  Society,  1SS9,  pp.  cxxiv.-cxxvii. ;  STEraDOREF,  Ugni  Stein  =  Lapis-Lazuli,  in  the  Zeitschrifl
fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  194-197).

"  Building  and  ornamental  woods  are  often  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  Thiitmosis  III.  (^Annals,
11.  26,  31,  32,  34).  A  scene  at  Karnak  represents  Seti  I.  causing  building-wood  to  be  cut  in  the
region  of  the  Lebanon  (CHAJiPOLLioy,  Monuments  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  pi.  cccxxxix.,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  87, 88  ;
EosELLixi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  xlvi.  1).  A  letter  of  the  King  of  Alasia  speaks  of  contributions  of
wood  which  several  of  his  subjects  had  to  make  to  the  King  of  Egypt  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna
Tablets,  No.  5,  p.  12,  11.  27-29,  and  p.  xxxv.).

"  Some  stringed  instruments  of  music,  and  two  or  three  kinds  of  flutes  and  flageolets,  are  designated
in  Egyptian  by  names  borrowed  from  some  Semitic  tongue — a  fact  which  proves  that  they  were  im-
ported {Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  4,  pi.  xii.  1.  1,  et  seq.) ;  the  wooden  framework  of  the  harp,  decorated
with  sculptured  heads  of  Astarte,  figures  among  the  objects  coming  from  Syria  in  the  temple  of  the
Theban  Amon  (Prisse,  Hist,  de  VArt  Egyplien,  vol.  ii.  pi.  99)  ;  cf.  the  cut  on  p.  2So  of  the  present  work.

°  Several  names  of  arms  borrowed  from  some  Semitic  dialect  have  been  noticed  in  the  texts  of
this  period.  The  objects  as  well  as  the  words  must  have  been  imported  into  Egypt,  e.g.  the  quiver
{Anaslasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xxv.  1.  7;  Dujiichen,  Ristorische  Inschriften,  vol.  i.  pi.  iv.  1.  25),  the


THE  RESOURCES  AND   DANGERS    OF  COMMERCE.  285


THE   BEAR   AND   ELEPHANT   llItOLT.HT    AS   TlilUDTE    IN    THE    TOMB   OP    IIAKHMIKl.'

chariots,^  dyed  and  embroidered  stuffs,^  perfumes,'*  dried  cakes,  oil,  wines  of
Kharu,  liqueurs  from  Alasia,  Khati,  Singar,  Naliaraim,  Amurru,  and  beer  from
Qodi.""     On  arriving  at  the  frontier,  whether  by  sea  or  by  land,  the  majority

sword  and  javelins  used  by  tlie  cbarioteers  {Anaslasi  Fajiyrus,  No.  1,  pi.  xvii.  1.  1).  Cuirasses  and
leathern  jerkins  are  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  Thiitmosis  III.  (Annals,  11.  11,  41 ;  Maspebo,
Le  r^cit  de  la  campagne  eontre  Mageddo,  in  the  Reciieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  p.  47).

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  of  Prisso  d' Avenues'  sketch.

'  Chariots  plated  with  gold  and  silver  iigure  frequently  amoug  the  spoils  of  Thiitmosis  III.
(Maspeko,  R^cit  de  la  campagne,  etc.,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  142-144,  14G,  147,
149,  150;  Annah.  11.  8-11,  34-42):  the  Anastasi  rapyrug.  No.  1,  contains  a  detailed  description  of
Syrian  chariots — Markabiiti — with  a  reference  to  tlie  localities  where  certain  parts  of  them  were  made ;
— the  country  of  the  Amurru,  that  of  Aupa,  the  towuof  Pahira(|il.  xvi.  1. 6,  et  seq.).  The  Tel  ol-Anmrna
correspondence  mentions  very  frequently  cliariots  sent  to  the  Pharaoh  by  the  King  of  Babylon,  either
as  presents  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No,  2,  p.  7, 11.  37,  38)  or  to  be  sold  in  Egypt  (Id.,
ibid.,  No.  1,  p.  5,  11.  88-95);  others  sent  by  the  King  of  Alasia  (Id.,  ibid..  No.  G,  p.  14,  11.  21,  22)
and  by  the  King  of  Mitanni  (Id.,  ibid.,  No.  9,  p.  23,  11. 3G-40).

'  Some  linen,  cotton,  or  woollen  stuflfs  are  mentioned  in  the  Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  4,  pi.  xvii.
I.  2,  et  seq.,  and  elsewhere  as  coming  from  Syria.  The  Egyptian  love  of  white  linen  always  prevented
their  estimating  highly  the  coloured  and  brocaded  stufts  of  Asia;  and  one  sees  nowhere,  in  the
representations,  any  examples  of  stuffs  of  such  origin,  except  on  furniture  or  in  ships  equipped  with
something  of  the  kind  in  the  form  of  sails.

*  The  perfumed  oils  of  Syria  are  mentioned  in  a  general  way  in  the  Anastasi  Papyrus,  No.  1,
pi.  XV.  11.  4,  5,  pi.  xvi.  1.  .1 ;  the  King  of  Alasia  speaks  of  essences  whicli  ho  is  sending  to  Amenothes
III.  (Bezold-Bidge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  G,  pp.  14,  15,  11.  25,  50-53);  the  King  of  Mitainii
refers  to  bottles  of  oil  which  he  is  forwarding  to  Cilukhipa  (Id.,  ibid..  No.  9,  p.  28,  1.  44)  and  to  Tii
(No.  11,  p.  27,  II.  56-58).

'  A  list  of  cakes  of  Syrian  origin  is  founil  in  the  Anastasi  Papyrus  (No.  1,  pi.  xvii.  11.  5,  G);  also
a  reference  to  balsamic  oils  from  Naharaim,  and  to  various  oils  which  had  arrived  in  the  pcn-ts  of  the
Delta  (pi.  XV.  11.  4,  5),  to  the  wines  of  Syria  (pi.  xvi.  1.  1),  to  palm  wino  and  various  liqueurs  manu-
factured in  Alasia,  in  Singar,  among  tlie  Khiiti,  Amorites,  and  the  people  of  Tikhisa  (pi.  xv.  11.  2-4)  ;
flnally,  to  the  beer  of  Qodi  (pi.  xvi.  11.  1,  4).


•286  THE     ElGETEEiJTB    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

of  these  objects  had  to  pay  the  custom  dues  which  were  rigorously  collected  by
the  oflicers  of  the  Pharaoh.  This,  no  doubt,  was  a  rei^risal  tariff,  since  inde-
pendent sovereigns,  such  as  those  of  Mitanni,  Assyria,  and  Babylon,  were  accus-
tomed to  impose  a  similar  duty  on  all  the  products  of  Egypt.^  The  latter,
indeed,  supplied  more  than  she  received,  for  many  articles  which  reached  her
in  their  raw  condition  were,  by  means  of  native  industry,  worked  up  and
exported  as  ornaments,  vases,  and  highly  decorated  weapons,  which,  in  the
course  of  international  traffic,  were  dispersed  to  all  four  corners  of  the  earth.
The  merchants  of  Babylon  and  Assyria  had  little  to  fear  as  long  as  they  kept
within  the  domains  of  their  own  sovereign  or  in  those  of  the  Pharaoh  ;  but
no  sooner  did  they  venture  within  the  borders  of  those  turbulent  states  which
separated  the  two  great  powers,  than  they  were  exposed  to  dangers  at  every
turn.  Safe-conducts  were  of  little  use  if  they  had  not  taken  the  additional
precaution  of  providing  a  strong  escort  and  carefully  guarding  their  caravan,
for  the  Shaiisu  concealed  in  the  depths  of  the  Lebanon  or  the  needy  sheikhs
of  Kharu  could  never  resist  the  temptation  to  rob  the  passing  traveller.^  The
victims  complained  to  their  king,  who  felt  no  hesitation  in  passing  on  their
woes  to  the  sovereign  under  whose  rule  the  pillagers  were  supposed  to
live.  He  demanded  their  punishment,  but  his  request  was  not  always
granted,  owing  to  the  difficulties  of  finding  out  and  seizing  the  offenders.  An
indemnity,  however,  could  be  obtained  which  would  nearly  compensate  the
merchants  for  the  loss  sustained.  In  many  cases  justice  had  but  little  to
do  with  the  negotiations,  in  which  self-interest  was  the  chief  motive ;  but
repeated  refusals  would  have  discouraged  traders,  and  by  lessening  the
facilities  of  transit,  have  diminished  the  revenue  which  the  state  drew  from
its  foreign  commerce.

The  question  became  a  more  delicate  one  when  it  concerned  the  rights  of
subjects  residing  out  of  their  native  country.  Foreigners,  as  a  rule,  were  well
received  in  Egypt ;  the  whole  country  was  open  to  them ;  they  could  marry,
they  could  acquire  houses  and  lands,  they  enjoyed  permission  to  follow  their  own
religion  unhindered,  they  were  eligible  for  public  honours,  and  more  than  one
of  the  officers  of  the  crown  whose  tombs  we  see  at  Thebes  were  themselves

'  See  Sayce,  Patriarchal  PahsUiu:,  pp.  S4,  So;  cf.  Maspeko,  £tudes £gyptitnnes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  47-50  :
and  ste  Brugsch,  Die  ^gyptologie,  pp.  217,  255,  for  the  mention  of  the  maritime  custom-house.

=  The  scribe  who  iu  the  reign  of  Kamses  II.  composed  the  Travels  of  an  Eijijptian,  speaks  in  several
places  of  marauding  tribes  and  robbers,  who  infested  the  roads  followed  by  the  hero  (Anantasi  Papyrus,
No.  1,  pi.  xs.  11.  1-6 ;  pi.  sxiii.  11.  tj,  7 ;  pi.  xxiv.  1.  S ;  pi.  xxv.  1.  7,  et  seq.).  The  Tel  el-Amarna  corre-
spondence contains  a  letter  from  the  King  of  Alusia,  who  exculpates  himself  from  being  implicated
in  the  harsh  treatment  certain  Egyptians  had  received  in  passing  through  his  territory  (Wixokler-
Abel,  Der  Thontafel/und,  p.  10,  11.  7-22) ;  and  another  letter  in  which  the  King  of  Babylon  com-
plains that  Chalda!an  merchants  had  been  robbed  at  Khinnatun,  in  Galilee,  by  the  Prince  of  Akku
(Acre)  and  his  accomplices :  one  of  them  had  his  feet  cut  off,  and  the  other  was  still  a  prisoner  iu
Akku,  and  Burnaburiash  demands  from  AmeuOthes  IV.  the  death  of  the  guilty  persons  (WiNCKLER-
Abel,  Der  Thoiita/elfund,  p.  7,  1.  S,  et  seq.).


PROTECTION  GRANTED    TO    NATIONAL   INDUSTRIES.  287

Syrians,  or  boru  of  Syrian  parents  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.^  Hence,  those  who
settled  in  Egypt  without  any  intention  of  returning  to  their  own  coxintry  enjoyed
all  the  advantages  possessed  by  the  natives,  whereas  those  who  took  up  a  merely
temporary  abode  there  were  more  limited  iu  their  privileges.  They  were
granted  the  permission  to  hold  property  in  the  country,  and  also  the  right  to
buy  and  sell  there,  but  they  were  not  allowed  to  transmit  their  possessions  at
will,  and  if  by  chance  they  died  on  Egyptian  soil,  their  goods  lapsed  as  a  forfeit
to  the  crown.  The  heirs  remaining  iu  the  native  country  of  the  dead  man,  who
were  ruined  by  this  confiscation,  sometimes  petitioned  the  king  to  interfere  in
their  favour  with  a  view  of  obtaining  restitution.  If  the  Pliaraoh  consented  to
waive  his  right  of  forfeiture,  and  made  over  the  confiscated  objects  or  their
equivalent  to  the  relatives  of  the  deceased,  it  was  solely  by  an  act  of  mercy,  and
as  an  example  to  foreign  governments  to  treat  Egyptians  with  a  like  clemency
should  they  chance  to  proifer  a  similar  request.^  It  is  also  not  improbable  that
the  sovereigns  themselves  had  a  personal  interest  in  more  than  one  commercial
undertaking,  and  that  they  were  the  partners,  or,  at  auy  rate,  interested  in  the
enterprises,  of  many  of  their  subjects,  so  that  any  loss  sustained  by  one  of  the
latter  would  eventually  fall  upon  themselves.  They  had,  in  fact,  reserved  to
themselves  the  privilege  of  carrying  on  several  lucrative  industries,  and  of
disposing  of  the  products  to  foreign  buyers,  either  to  those  who  purchased  them
out  and  out,  or  else  through  the  medium  of  agents,  to  whom  they  intrusted
certain  quantities  of  the  goods  for  warehousing.  The  King  of  Babylon,  taking
advantage  of  the  fashion  which  prompted  the  Egyptians  to  acquire  objects  of
Chaldsean  goldsmiths'  and  cabinet-makers'  art,  caused  ingots  of  gold  to  be  sent  to
him  by  the  Pharaoh,  which  he  returned  worked  up  into  vases,  ornaments,  house-
hold utensils,  and  plated  chariots.  He  further  fixed  the  value  of  all  such  objects,
and  took  a  considerable  commission  for  having  acted  as  intermediary  in  the  trans-
action.^ In  Alasia,  which  was  the  land  of  metals,  the  king  appears  to  have  held  a
monopoly  of  the  bronze.  Whether  he  smelted  it  in  the  country,  or  received  it  from
more  distant  regions  ready  prepared,  we  cannot  say,  but  he  claimed  and  retained
for  himself  the  payment  lor  all  that  the  Pharaoh  deigned  to  order  of  him.*

'  See  letter  I'rnm  the  King  of  Alasia  (Bezold-Bldge,  Tell  el-Aiuarna  Tablets,  No.  5,  p.  13,  11.  30-
34),  where  there  is  question  of  a  merchuut  who  had  died  iu  Egypt.  Among  other  monumrnta  proving
the  presence  of  Syrians  about  the  Pharaoh,  is  the  stele  of  Ben-Azaua,  of  the  town  of  Zairabizana  (cl.
Sayce,  Correspondence  between  Palestine  and  Egypt,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  '2nd  series,  vol.  v.
p.  39,  note  1),  surnamed  Ramses-EmpirS  (Maeiette,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pi.  50,  and  Cat.  Generale  des
Monuments  d'Aliydos,  No.  113G,  pp.  422,  423):  he  was  surrounded  witli  Semites  like  himself.

'  All  this  teems  to  result  from  a  letter  in  which  the  King  of  Alasia  demands  from  Amenothes  III.
the  restitution  of  the  goods  of  one  of  his  subjects  who  had  died  in  Egypt  (Bezold-Budgi:,  Tell  el-
Amarua  TahlHa,  No.  5,  p.  13,  11.  30-34,  and  p.  xxxv. ;  cf.  Boscawen,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahlet»,  iu  Uabyl.
a7id  Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.  pp.  30,  31);  the  tone  of  the  letter  is  that  of  one  asking  a  favour,  and  on  the
supposition  that  the  King  of  Egypt  liad  a  right  to  keep  the  property  of  a  foreigner  dying  on  his  territory.

'  Letter  of  Burnaburiash  to  Amenothes  IV.  (cf.  Delattbe,  La  Correspondance  Asialiquc  d'  Aminoijhis
111.,  etc.,  in  tlie  Revue  des  Questions  Mistoriqites,  vol.  liv.  pp.  382-388).

'  Letter  from  the  King  of  Alasia  to  Amenothes  III.  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Aniarna  'Tablets,  No.  !>,


288  777^  EIQETEENTH   TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

From  such  instances  we  can  well  understand  tlie  jealous  watch  which  these
sovereigns  exercised,  lest  any  individual  connected  with  corporations  of  workmen
should  leave  the  kingdom  and  establish  himself  in  another  country  without
special  permission.  Any  emigrant  who  opened  a  workshop  and  initiated  his
new  compatriots  in  the  technique  or  professional  secrets  of  his  craft,  was  regarded
by  the  authorities  as  the  most  dangerous  of  all  evil-doers.  By  thus  introducing
his  trade  into  a  rival  state,  he  deprived  his  own  peoj^le  of  a  good  customer,  and
thus  rendered  himself  liable  to  the  penalties  inflicted  on  those  who  were  guilty
of  treason.  His  savings  were  confiscated,  his  house  razed  to  the  ground,  and  his
whole  family — parents,  wives,  and  children — treated  as  partakers  in  his  crime.
As  for  himself,  if  justice  succeeded  in  overtaking  him,  he  was  punished  with
death,  or  at  least  with  mutilation,  such  as  the  loss  of  eyes  and  ears,  or  amputation
of  the  feet.^  This  severity  did  not  prevent  the  frequent  occurrence  of  such
cases,  and  it  was  found  necessary  to  deal  with  them  by  the  insertion  of  a  special
extradition  clause  in  treaties  of  peace  and  other  alliances.  The  two  contracting
parties  decided  against  conceding  the  right  of  habitation  to  skilled  workmen
who  should  take  refuge  with  either  party  on  the  territory  of  the  other,  and  they
agreed  to  seize  such  workmen  forthwith,  and  mutually  restore  them,  but
under  the  express  condition  that  neither  they  nor  any  of  their  belongings  should
incur  any  penalty  for  the  desertion  of  their  country.  It  would  be  curious
to  know  if  all  the  arrangements  agreed  to  by  the  kings  of  those  times  were
sanctioned,  as  in  the  above  instance,  by  properly  drawn  up  agreements.  Certain
expressions  occur  in  their  correspondence  which  seem  to  prove  that  this  was  the
case,  and  that  the  relations  between  them,  of  which  we  can  catch  traces,  resulted
not  merely  from  a  state  of  things  which,  according  to  their  ideas,  did  not  neces-
sitate any  diplomatic  sanction,  but  from  conventions  agreed  to  after  some  war,
or  entered  on  without  any  previous  struggle,  when  there  was  no  question  at
issue  between  the  two  states.^  When  once  the  Syrian  conquest  had  been
effected,  Egypt  gave  permanency  to  its  results  by  means  of  a  series  of  inter-
national decrees,  which  officially  established  the  constitution  of  her  empire,
and  brought  about  her  concerted  action  with  the  Asiatic  powers.

p.  12,  II.  10-22),  where,  whilst  pretending  to  have  nothing  else  in  view  than  making  a  present  to  his  roj'al
brother,  he  proposes  to  make  an  exchange  of  some  bronze  for  the  products  of  Egypt,  especially  for  gold.

'  Treaty  of  Ramses  II.  with  the  King  of  the  lOidti,  §§  xii.-xvi.,  xx.,  xxi. ;  cf.  E.  de  Eocge,  Traite
entre  Ramses  II.  et  le  prince  de  CIiAa,  in  Egger,  Htudes  stir  les  traitffs  piiblics,  pp.  2-18-251,  and  Chabas,
Voyage  d\m  Hgyjdien,  pp.  337-339.

'  The  treaty  of  Eamses  II.  with  the  King  of  the  Khati,  the  only  one  -which  has  come  down  to  us,
was  a  renewal  of  other  treaties  eiiected  one  after  the  other  between  the  fathers  and  grandfathers  of
the  two  contracting  sovereigns  (§  viii. ;  cf.  E.  de  Rouge,  Traits  entre  Ramses  II.  et  le  prince  de  Ch^a,
p.  247,  and  Ghabas,  Voyage  d'un  Syyptien,  p.  336).  Some  of  the  Tel  el-Amarna  letters  probably  refer
to  treaties  of  this  kind;  e.g.  that  of  Burnaburiash  of  Babylon,  who  says  that  since  tho  time  of
Karaindash  there  had  been  an  exchange  of  ambassadors  and  friendship  between  the  sovereigns  of
Chaldsea  and  of  Egypt  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  3,  p.  8, 11.  8-10),  anil  also  that
of  Dushratta  of  Mitanni,  who  reminds  Queen  Tii  of  the  secret  negotiations  which  had  taken  place
between  him  and  Amenothes  III.  (Id.,  ibid.,  No.  U,  p.  20,  11.  17,  18).


AMENOTHES  II.


289


She  already  occupied  an  important  position  among  them,  when  Tliutmosis
III.  died,  on  the  hist  day  of  Phamenoth,  in  the  LV"'  year  of  his  reign.^     He  was
buried,  probably,  at  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  fiimily  tomb  wherein
the  most  illustrious  members  of  his  house  had  been  laid  to  ''^'^'^^

rest  since  the  time  of  Thiitmosis  I.      His  mummy  was  /       '^r^..

not  securely  hidden  away,  for  towards  the  close  of  the
XX*""  dynasty  it  was  torn  out  of  the  coffin  by  robbers,  who
stripped  it  and  rifled  it  of  the  jewels  with  which  it  was
covered,  injuring  it  in  their  haste  to  carry  away  the  spoil.
It  was  subsequently  re-interred,  and  has  remained  undis-
turbed until  the  present  day ;   but  before  re-burial  some
renovation  of  the  wrappings  was  necessary,  and  as  portions
of  the  body  had  become  loose,  the  restorers,  in  order  to
give  the  mummy  the  necessary  firmness,  compressed  it
between  four  oar-shaped  slips  of  wood,  painted  white,
and  placed,  three  inside  the  wrappings  and  one  out-
side, under  tlie  bands  which  confined  the  winding-
sheet.   Happily  the  face,  which  had  been  plastered
over  with  pitch   at  the   time   of  embalming,  did
not  suffer  at  all  from   this  rough  treatment,  and
appeared    intact    when    the   protecting  mask  was
removed.     Its  appearance  does  not  answer  to  our
ideal  of  the  conqueror.     His  statues,  though  not
representing  him  as  a  type  of  manly  beauty,  yet

give  him  refined,  intelligent  features,  but  a  comparison  with  the  mummy  shows
that  the  artists  have  idealised  their  model.  The  forehead  is  abnormally  low,
the  eyes  deeply  sunk,  the  jaw  heavy,  the  lips  thick,  and  the  cheek-bones
extremely  pi'ominent ;  the  whole  recalling  the  physiognomy  of  Thutmosis  II.,
though  with  a  greater  show  of  energy.  Thutmosis  III.  is  a  fellah  of  the
old  stock,  squat,  thickset,  vulgar  in  character  and  expression,  but  not  lacking  in
firmness  and  vigour.''     Amenotbes  II.,  who  succeeded  him,  must  have  closely

'  Inscription  of  Amenemhahi,  11.  35-37;  cf.  EuKiis,  Tlialen  und  Zeit  Tutmes  III,  in  the  Zeilschri/I.
1873,  p.  7,  and  Chabas,  Mdanges  J^gyptnlogiques,  3rd  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  2S8,  302-304.  Dr.  Malilur
{KSm'g  Tliulmosis  III.,  in  the  ZeiUchrift,  1889,  pp.  b7-105)  has,  with  great  precision,  fixed  the  date
of  the  accession  of  Thiitmosis  III.  as  the  20th  of  March,  1503,  and  that  of  his  death  as  the  14th  of
February,  1449  li.c.  I  have  mentioned  {Daion  of  Civilization,  jip.  209,  210)  the  reasons  which
seem  to  me  to  make  the  application  of  astronomical  calculations  to  Egyptian  dates  difficult.  I  do  not
tliink  tliat  the  data  furnished  to  Dr.  Mahler  by  Brugsch  will  admit  of  such  exact  conclusions  being
drawn  from  them,  and  I  should  fix  the  fifty-four  years  of  the  reign  of  Thutmosis  III.  in  a  less  decided
manner,  between  l.iSO  and  1490  u.c,  allowing,  as  I  have  said  before,  for  an  error  of  half  a  century
more  or  less  in  the  dates  which  go  back  to  the  time  of  the  second  Theban  empire.

'  Drawn  by  Fancher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  taken  by  Imiil  Brugsch-Bey  in  1881  ;  cf.
Maspero,  Les  Monties  royaUt  de  fJetr  el-Bahari,  in  the  Me'nioires  de  la  Mission  l<'ran{aise,  vol.  i.  pi.  vi.  a.

'  Id.,  ibid.,  in  the  Miimoires,  vol.  i.  jip.  547,  548.  The  restored  remains  allow  us  to  estimate  the
height  at  about  5  ft.  3  in.  By  the  orders  of  Mens.  Grcbaut,  the  head  has  been  frecil  from  the
mask  of  bitumen  which  covered  it.

U


THE   MUMMY    OF   TULTMOSIS   III."


290


TEE  ElCiHTEENTE    THEBAN  DYNASTY.


HEAD   OF    THE   M03IMY    OP   THUTMOSIS    III.^


resembled  him,  if  we  may  trust  his  official  por-
traits. He  was  the  son  of  a  princess  of  the
\  blood,  Hiltshops^itu  II.,  daughter  of  the  great
HatshopsitV  and  consequently  he  came  into
his  inheritance  with  stronger  claims  to  it  than
any  other  Pharaoh  since  the  time  of  Ameno-
thes  I.  Possibly  his  father  may  have  associated
him  with  himself  on  the  throne  as  soon  as
the  young  prince  attained  his  majority  ;  '^  at
any  rate,  his  accession  aroused  no  appreciable
opposition  in  the  country,  and  if  any  diffi-
culties were  made,  they  must  have  come  from
outside.  It  is  always  a  dangerous  moment
in  the  existence  of  a  newly  formed  empire
when  its  founder  having  passed  away,  and
the  conquered  people  not  having  yet  become
accustomed  to  a  subject  condition,  they  are
called  upon  to  submit  to  a  successor  of
whom  they  know  little  or  nothing.  It  is
always  problematical  whether  the  new  sovereign  will  display  as  great  activity
and  be  as  successful  as  the  old  one ;  whether  he  will  be  capable  of  turning
to  good  account  the  armies  which  his  predecessor  commanded  with  such
skill,  and  led  so  bravely  against  the  enemy ;  whether,  again,  he  will  have
sufficient  tact  to  estimate  correctly  the  burden  of  taxation  which  each
province  is  capable  of  bearing,  and  to  lighten  it  when  there  is  a  risk  of  its
becoming  too  heavy.  If  he  does  not  show  from  the  first  that  it  is  his  purpose
to  maintain  his  patrimony  intact  at  all  costs,  or  if  his  officers,  no  longer  con-
trolled by  a  strong  hand,  betray  any  indecision  in  command,  his  subjects  will
become  unruly,  and  the  change  of  monarch  will  soon  furnish  a  pretext  for  wide-
spread rebellion.  The  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Amenothes  II.  was  marked  by  a
revolt  of  the  Libyans  inhabiting  the  Theban  Oasis,  but  this  rising  was  soon  put
down  by  that  Amenemhabi  who  had  so  distinguished  himself  under  Thutmosis.*

'  His  parentage  is  proved  by  the  pictures  preserved  in  tlie  tomb  of  liis  foster-fatlier,  where  he  is-
represented  in  company  with  the  royal  mother,  Marilii  Hatshopsitu  (Champoli.ion,  Monuments,  pi.
clx.  2 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  62  h,  c ;  cf.  pi.  64  a).

'  It  is  thus  that  Wiedemann  {^gyptische  Geschichte,  p.  87ri)  explains  his  presence  by  the  side  of
Thutmosis  III.  on  certain  bas-reliefs  in  the  temple  of  Amada  (Champollion,  Monuments,  pis.  Iv.-lvii.,
lix.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  101-105;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  65  b,  e).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  lent  by  M.  Gre'baut,  and  taken  in  ISOO  by  Emil  Brugsch-
Bey;  cf.  the  statue  of  the  king  on  p.  255  of  the  present  volume.

«  Inscription  of  AmencmliaU,  11.  39-42.  Brugsch  (Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  38S)  and  Wiedemann
(JEgyp.  Gesch..  p.  374)  place  this  expedition  at  the  time  when  Amenothes  If.  was  either  hereditary  prince
or  associated  with  his  father:  the  inscription  of  Amenemhabi  places  it  explicitly  after  the  death  of  Thiit-
moslB  III.,  and  this  evidence  outweighs  every  other  consideration  uulU  further  discoveries  are  made.


TEE    VICTORIES    OF  AMENOTHES   IT.   IN  SYRIA.


291


Soon  after,  fresh  troubles  broke  out  in  different  parts  of  Syria,  in  Galilee,
in  the  country  of  the  Amurru,  and  among  the  peoples  of  Naharaim.  The
king's  prompt  action,  how-
ever, prevented  their  re-
sulting in  a  general  war.^
He  marched  in  person
against  the  malcontents,
reduced  the  town  of  Sham-
sbiaduma,  fell  upon  the
Lamnaniu,  and  attacked
their  chief,  slaying  him
with  his  own  hand,  and
carrying  off  numbers  of
captives.  He  crossed  the
Orontes  on  the  26th  of
Pachons,  in  the  year  II.,
and  seeing  some  mounted
troops  in  the  distance,
rushed  upon  them  and  over-
threw tliem  ;  they  proved
to  be  the  advanced  guard
of  the  enemy's  force,  which
he  encountered  shortly
afterwards  and  routed,  col-
lecting in  the  pursuit  con-
siderable booty.  He  finally
reached  Naharaim,  where
lie  experienced  in  the  main
but     a     feeble    resistance.

Nil  surrendered  without  resistance  on  the  lUth  of  Epiphi,  and  its  inhabi-
tants, both  men  and  women,  with  censers  in  their  hands,  assembled  on
the  walls  and  prostrated  themselves  before  the  conqueror.     At  Akaiti,  where

'  The  campaigns  of  Amenntlua  II.  were  related  on  a  granite  stele,  wUioli  was  placed  against  tlie
second  of  the  soutliern  pylons  at  Karnak;  its  inscription  has  Iji-en  publislied  by  Ciumpolliox,  Monu-
menU,  vol.  ii.  p.  185 ;  by  E.  and  J.  de  Hougk,  Inscriptions  hi^roqlyphiquea  recudlties  en  Egypte,  pis.
cl.xxv.,  clx.'ivi. ;  by  Uoubiant,  Notes  de  voyage,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  160,  101  ;  and
iii  part  l)y  Wikdemann,  Texts  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  XVIII"'  Dynasty,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
liibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1888-81.1,  vol.  xl.  pp.  422,  423.  It  has  been  translated  and  commented  on  by  jM.\.sriti:o,
Xoles  sur  queJiiucs  points,  etc.,  in  the  Zeilschri/t,  1879,  pp.  5.")-58,  and  later  by  Krman,  Der  Syrische
Ftldziirj  AmenophiK  II.,  in  tlie  Zi'itschrift,\S»l,  vol.  xxix.  pp.  89-41,  who  has  suggested  several  important
corrections  in  the  text.  The  date  of  this  monument  is  almost  certainly  the  year  II. ;  there  is  strong
evidence  in  favour  of  this,  if  it  is  compared  with  the  inscription  of  Amada,  where  Amenothcs  II.
relates  that  in  the  year  III.  he  sacrificed  the  prisoners  whom  he  had  taken  in  the  country  of  Tikhisn.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Guilin;  see  the  entire  statue  in  the  vignette  on  p.  200  of  the  present  volume.


AMENOTHES  IF..  FROM  THE  STATU.  AT  TUKIX.'


292  THE   EIGIITEEXTH    TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

the  partisans  of  the  Egyptian  government  bad  suffered  persecution  from  a
considerable  section  of  the  natives,  order  was  at  once  re-established  as  soon  as
the  king's  approach  was  made  known.  No  doubt  the  rapidity  of  his  marches
and  the  vigour  of  his  attacks,  while  putting  an  end  to  the  hostile  attitude  of
the  smaller  vassal  states,  were  effectual  in  inducing  the  sovereigns  of  Alasia,
of  Mitanni,!  and  of  the  Hittites  to  renew  with  Amenothes  the  friendly  relations
which  they  had  established  with  his  father.^  This  one  campaign,  which  lasted
tliree  or  four  months,  secured  a  lasting  peace  in  the  north,  but  in  the  south
a  disturbance  again  broke  out  among  the  Barbarians  of  the  Upper  Nile.
Amenothes  suppressed  it,^  and,  in  order  to  prevent  a  repetition  of  it,  was
guilty  of  an  act  of  cruel  severity  quite  in  accordance  with  the  manners  of  the
time.  He  had  taken  prisoner  seven  chiefs  in  the  country  of  Tikhisa,  and  had
brought  them,  chained,  in  triumph  to  Thebes,  on  the  forecastle  of  his  ship.
He  sacrificed  six  of  them  himself  before  Amou,  and  exposed  their  heads  and
hands  on  the  fapade  of  the  temple  of  Karnak  ;  the  seventh  was  subjected  to  a
similar  fate  at  Napata  at  the  beginning  of  his  third  year,  and  thenceforth  the
sheikhs  of  Kiish  thought  twice  before  defying  the  authority  of  the  Pharaoh.*

Amenothes'  reign  was  a  short  one,  lasting  ten  years  at  most,^  and  the  end
of  it  seems  to  have  been  darkened  by  the  open  or  secret  rivalries  which  the
question  of  the  succession  usually  stirred  up  among  the  kings'  sons.  The
king  had  daughters  only  by  his  marriage  with  one  of  his  full  sisters,  who
like  himself  possessed  all  the  rights  of  sovereignty ;  those  of  his  sons  who
did  not  die  young  were  the  children  of  princesses  of  inferior  rank  or  of
concubines,  and  it  was  a  subject  of  anxiety  among  these  princes  which  of
them  would  be  chosen  to  inherit  the  crown  and  be  united  in  marriage
with  the  king's  heiresses,  Khuit   and   Mutemuau.     One  of   his    sons,  named

'  Amenotlies  11.  mentions  tribute  fnim  Mitauni  on  one  of  the  columns  wbich  he  decorated  at
Karnak,  iu  tlie  Hall  of  the  Caryatides,  close  to  the  pillars  finished  by  his  predecessors  (E.  and  J.  de
Rouge,  Inscriptions  hiifroglyphiques,  pi.  clxxvii.  1.  1 ;  Piehl,  Sur  VOrigine  des  colonnes  de  la  Salle  des
Caryatides  du  Grand  Temple  de  Karnak,  iu  the  Actes  du  Congres  de  Leyden,  4tb  part,  pp.  213,  216).

-  The  cartouches  on  the  pedestal  of  the  throne  of  Amenothes  II.,  in  the  tomb  of  one  of  his  officers
,at  Sheikh-Abd-el-Qiimel],  represent — together  with  the  inliabitants  of  the  Oasis,  Libya,  and  Kush —
the  Kefaliu,  the  people  of  Naharaim,  and  tlie  Upper  Lotauu,  that  is  to  say,  the  entire  dominion  of
Thutmosis  III.,  besides  the  people  of  Maniis,  probably  Mallos,  iu  the  Cilician  plain  (Ebers,  ^gypten
iind  die  Jiiicher  Moses,  p.  130 ;  W.  JIax  Mullek,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  340, 344, 345 ;  cf.  Chasipollion,
Monuments,  pi.  clx.  3,  and  vol.  i.  p.  500 ;  Lepsii's,  Denkm.,  iii.  ti3  o).

'  From  the  remains  of  a  stele  at  Ibiini,  where  Amenothes  II.  related  the  suppression  of  this  revolt
(Champollion,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  So).

*  Inscription  in  the  temple  of  Amada,  published  by  Champollion,  3Ionuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  105-
107,  and  more  fully  by  Lepsus,  Denkm.,  iii.  O.i  a,  11.  16-20.  It  is  there  said  that  the  king  offered
this  sacrifice  on  his  return  from  his  first  expedition  into  Asia,  and  for  this  reason  I  have  connected
the  facts  thus  related  with  those  known  to  us  through  the  stele  of  Karnak.  For  the  interpretation
of  the  last  lines  of  the  Inscription  of  Amada,  cf.  Bkugsch,  Uistoire  d'Egypte,  pp.  110,  111,  and
Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp.  3S9-391 ;  Chaeas,  Les  liiseriplions  des  Mines  d'or,  pp.  19-21.

'  The  last  known  date  of  his  reign  is  that  of  the  year  V.,  which  has  been  preserved  in  one  of
the  papyri  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  in  Paris  (Pleyte,  Les  Papyrus  Itollin  de  la  BihliotlUque
Imperiale,  pi.  xv.  jip.  23,  24).


TlIK    CHEAT    SPHINX    AND   T1[K    CIIArEL   OI'    THUTMOSIS    IV.

Drawn  liy  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  the  iiholognn/h  taken  in  1887  by  Eiuil  Brugscli-Bey.


294  THE  EIGETEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

*  Thiitmosis,  who  resided  at  the  "  White  Wall,"  was  iu  the  habit  of  betaking
himself  frequently  to  the  Libyan  desert  to  practise  with  the  javelin,  or  to
pursue  the  hunt  of  lions  and  gazelles  in  his  chariot.  On  these  occasions  it
was  his  pleasure  to  preserve  the  strictest  incognito,  and  be  was  accompanied
by  two  discreet  servants  only.  One  day,  when  chance  had  brought  him  into
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  he  lay  down  for  his  accustomed
siesta  in  the  shade  cast  by  the  Sphinx,  the  miraculous  image  of  Khopri  the
most  powerful,  the  god  to  whom  all  men  in  Memphis  and  the  neighbouring
towns  raised  adoring  hands  filled  with  offerings.  The  gigantic  statue
was  at  that  time  more  than  half  bui-ied,  and  its  head  alone  was  seen
above  the  sand.  As  soon  as  the  prince  was  asleep  it  spoke  gently  to  him,  as
a  father  to  his  son  :  "  Behold  me,  gaze  on  me,  0  my  son  Thutmosis,  for  I,  thy
father  Harmakhis-Khopri-Tumu,  grant  thee  sovereignty  over  the  two  countries,
iu  both  the  South  and  the  North,  and  thou  shalt  wear  both  the  white  and  the
red  crown  on  the  throne  of  Sibu,  the  sovereign,  possessing  the  earth  in  its
length  and  breadth ;  the  flashing  eye  of  the  lord  of  all  shall  cause  to  rain
on  thee  the  possessions  of  Egypt,  vast  tribute  from  all  foreign  countries,  and
a  long  life  for  many  years  as  one  chosen  by  the  Sun,  for  my  countenance  is
thine,  my  heart  is  thine,  no  other  than  thyself  is  mine !  Now  am  I  covered
by  tlie  sand  of  the  mountain  on  which  I  rest,  and  have  given  thee  this  prize
that  thou  mayest  do  for  me  what  my  heart  desires,  for  I  know  that  tliou
art  my  son,  my  defender;  draw  nigh,  I  am  with  thee,  I  am  thy  well-beloved
father."  The  prince  understood  that  tlie  god  promised  him  the  kingdom  on
condition  of  his  swearing  to  clear  the  sand  from  the  statue.  He  was,  in  fact,
chosen  to  be  the  husband  of  the  queens,  and  immediately  after  his  accession
lie  fulfilled  his  oath  ;  he  removed  the  sand,  built  a  chapel  between  the
paws,  and  erected  against  the  breast  of  the  statue  a  stele  of  red  granite,  on
which  he  related  his  adventure.^  His  reign  was  as  short  as  that  of  Amenothes,
and  his  campaigns  both  in  Asia  and  Ethiopia  were  unimportant.-^  He  had
succeeded  to  an  empire  so  firmly  established  from  Naharaim  to  Kari,^  that,

'  stele  of  the  Sphinx,  discovered  by  Caviglia  in  1818,  and  published  in  Young,  Hieroglyphics,  pi.
SO ;  in  Pebring-Vyse,  Operations  carried  on  at  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  vol.  iii.  pi.  vi.,  and  p.  107,  et
seq.,  and  iu  Lei'SIUS,  Denhm.,  iii.  60.  It  was  translated  by  Brugsch,  Der  Traum  Koni<fs  Thutines  IV.
hei  dem  Sphinx  (in  the  Zeitscliri/t,  1876,  pp.  89-95),  and  Geschichte  Aigyptem,  pp.  394-398  ;  afterwards
by  Birch,  Dream  of  Tliothmes  IV.,  in  tlio  Recdrds  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  xii.  pp.  43-49;  and  by
Mallet,  The  Stele  of  Thothmes  IV.  of  the  XVIII"'  Dynasty,  iu  the  Secords  of  the  Past,  2iid  series,  vol.
ii.  pp.  45-56.  The  importance  of  this  text  iu  deternjining  the  position  of  Thutmosis  IV.  in  the  family
of  Amenothes  II.  has  not  been  generally  recognised.

'  The  latest  date  of  his  reign  at  present  known  is  that  of  the  year  VII.,  on  the  rocks  of  Konosso
(Ch.^mpollion,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  164  ;  Lepsius,  Dcnlim.,  iii.  69  a),  and  on  a  stele  of  Sarbiit  el-
Khadim  (in  the  Survey  of  Sinai,  Textjp.  ISS).  There  is  an  allusion  to  his  wars  against  the  Ethiopians
iu  an  inscription  of  Amada  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  69/),  and  to  his  campaigns  against  the  peoples  of
the  Nortli  and  South  on  the  stele  of  Nofirhait(MAi!iETTE,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pi.  47,  and  Catalogue  General,
Xo.  1060,  p.  384).

"  The  peoples  of  Naharaim  and  of  Northern  Syria  are  represented  bringing  him  tribute,  iu  a  tom  b


DREAM  OF  THUTMOSIS  IV.  UNDER  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  SPHINX.    295


THE  STELE  OP  THE
SPHINX  OP  GIZEH.'


apparently,  no  re-
Ijellion  could  dis-
turb its  peace.  One
of  the  two  heiress-
princesses,  Ivhuit,  the
daughter,  sister,  and  wife  of  a  king,  had  no  living  male  offspring,  but  her
companion  Mutemuau  had  at  least  one  son,  mimed  Ameuothes.  lu  his  case,
again,  the  noble  birth  of  the  mother  atoned  for  the  defects  of  the  paternal
origin.  Moreover,  according  to  tradition,  Amon-Ea  himself  had  intervened  to
renew  the  blood  of  his  descendants :  he  appeared  in  the  person  of  Thutmosis
IV.,  and  under  this  guise  became  the  father  of  the  heir  of  the  Pharaohs.-
Like  Queen  Ahmasis  in  the  bas-reliefs  of  Deir  el-Bahari,  Mutemuau  is  shown
on  those  of  Luxor  in  the  arms  of  her  divine  lover,  and  subsequently  .greeted  by


at  Slieikh-Abd-el-Qurneh  (CuAMroi.LiON,  Manuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  499,  S3U,  840,  and  pi.  clx.  1).  The  in-
BCiiption  published  by  Mawette,  Kanialc,  pi.  33,  1.  4,  speaks  of  the  first  expedition  of  Thutmosis  IV.
to  the  land  of  [Naharaijua,  and  of  the  gifts  which  he  lavished  on  this  occasion  on  the  temple  of  Amou.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  plmtograph  taken  in  18S5  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey.

-  The  bas-reliefs  relating  to  this  incarnation  of  Amon  are  published  in  Cuampollion,  Munumenis,
pis.  cxcix.  3,  cclxv.  1,  cccxxxix.-cccxli. ;  Rosellini,  Monumcnli  lieali,  jjls.  xxxviii.-xli. ;  Lepsius,
Denhm.,  iii.  74  c,  75  a-d  ;  Gayet,  Le  Temple  de  Luxor,  pis.  Ixii.-lxviii.  It  was  at  first  thought  that
Sliitemuau  was  an  Ethiopian  (Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Cusloms,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  42 ;  Birch,  On
a  llemarhahle  Object  of  the  lieign  of  Amenophis  III.,  p.  3,  and  History  of  Egypt,  p.  107 ;  (i.  Rawlinson,
llittury  of  Ancient  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  2G1),  afterwards  that  she  was  a  Syrian  (Jensen,  Aus  dcm  Ilriefe
im  Mitunni  Sproche),  who  had  changed  her  name  on  arriving  at  the  court  of  her  husband  (Euman,
Neue»  auK  den  Tuftln  von  El-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitachrift,  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  112,  114).  The  manner  iii
which  «he  is  represented  at  Luxor,  and  in  all  the  texts  where  she  figures,  proves  not  only  that  slie
was  of  Egyptian  race,  but  that  alio  was  the  daugliter  of  Ameuothes  II.,  and  born  of  tlie  marriago
of  that  priuce  with  one  of  his  sisters,  who  was  herself  an  hereditary  priucess.


29G


THE  EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.


iilKEN    51UTEMCAU.-


bim  with  the  title  of  mother ;  in  another  bas-relief  we  see  the  queen  led  to  her
couch  by  the  goddesses  who  preside  over  the  birth  of  chiklren ;  her  son
Amenothes,  on  coming  into  the  world  with  his  double,  is  placed  in  the  hands
of  the  two  Niles,  to  receive  the  nourishment  and  the  education  meet  for  the

children  of  the  gods.  He  profited  fully  by
them,  for  he  remained  in  power  forty  years,
and  his  reign  was  one  of  the  most  pros-
perous ever  witnessed  by  Egypt  during  the
Theban  dynasties.

Amenothes  III.  had  spent  but  little  of  his
time  in  war.  He  had  undertaken  the  usual
raids  in  the  South  against  the  negroes  and  the
tribes  of  the  Upper  Nile.  In  his  fifth  year,
a  general  defection  of  the  sheikhs  obliged  him
to  invade  the  province  of  Abhait,  near  Semneh,
which  he  devastated  at  the  head  of  the  troops
collected  by  Marimosu,  the  Prince  of  Kiish ;
the  punishment  was  salutary,  the  booty  con-
siderable, and  a  lengthy  peace  was  re-estab-
lished.' The  object  of  his  rare  expeditions
into  Naharaim  was  not  so  mucii  to  add  new
provinces  to  his  empire,  as  to  prevent  disturbances  in  the  old  ones.  The  kings
of  Alasia,  of  the  Khati,  of  Mitauni,  of  Singar,^  of  Assyria,  and  of  Babylon  did  not
dare  to  provoke  so  powerful  a  neighbour.*  The  remembrance  of  the  victories
of  Thutmosis  III.  was  still  fresh  in  their  memories,  and,  even  had  their  hands
been  free,  would  have  made  them  cautious  in  dealing  with  his  great-grandson ;
but  they  were  incessantly  engaged  in  internecine  quarrels,  and  had  recourse  to

'  Stelse  of  the  year  V.,  in  the  island  of  Konosso  (Champollion,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  164,  165;
Lepsius,  Deiihni.,  iii.  82  a),  and  between  Ash  an  and  Thilie  (Id.,  ibid.,  iii.  81  g) ;  stelai  of  Aswan  (Id.,
/6id.,  iii.  81  7()  aitl  of  Semneh  (Bikch,  On  a  Remarkable  Egyptian  Object  of  the  Reign  of  Amenophis
III,  pp.  5,  6).  The  long  list  of  name.s  of  African  peoples,  engraved  on  the  base  of  the  colossus  A  IS
in  the  Louvre,  belonged  to  the  Pharaoh  of  the  XIl"'  dynasty,  who  erected  the  statue  (cf.  Maspeeo,
Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  491) ;  Amenothes  III.  usurped  it,  probably  because  his  campaigns  had  led
him  into  the  countries  inhabited  by  the  same  peoples.  The  tribute  paid  by  the  people  of  tJaiiait  i*
mentioned  in  the  tomb  of  Hui  at  Sheikh-Abd-el-Qurneh  (Champollion,  Nunuments,  vol.  i.  p.  47S).

-  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  the  photograph,  taken  in  1881  by  Daniel  Heron,  of  one  of  the
bas-reliefs  in  the  temple  of  Luxor.

=  Amenothes  entitles  himself  on  a  scarabsus  "  he  who  takes  prisoner  the  country  of  Singar  "■
(Petbie,  Historical  Scarabs,  ph  40,  No.  12G6);  no  other  document  has  yet  been  discovered  to  show
whether  this  is  hyperbole,  or  whether  he  really  reached  this  distant  region.

*  The  lists  of  the  time  of  Amenothes  III.  contain  the  names  of  Phoenicia,  Naharaim,  Singar,
Qodshu,  Tunipa,  Patina,  Carchemish,  and  Assur  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  all  the  subject  or  allied  nations
mentioned  in  the  correspondence  of  Tel  el-Amarna  (Lepsids,  Denhm.,  iii.  87  d-SS,  list  of  Soleb).
Oerlaiu  episodes  of  these  expeditions  had  been  engraved  on  the  exterior  face  of  the  pylon  construcled  by
the  king  for  the  temple  of  Amon  at  Karnak ;  at  the  present  time  they  are  concealed  by  tlie  wall  at  the
lower  end  of  the  Hypostyle  Hall  (Mariette,  Karnali,  Texte,  p.  26).  The  tribute  of  the  Lotanu  was  repre-
sented on  the  tomb  of  Hui,  at  Shtlkh-Abd-el-Qiiruch  (Champollion,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  479,  480).


(  Colossal  Head  in  the  British  Museum  )


TDE  RELATIONS    OF  AMENOTHES  III.    WITH  ASIA.


297


Pharaoh  merely  to  enlist  his  support,  or  at  any  rate  make  sure  of  his
neutrality,  and  prevent  him  from  joining  tlieir  adversaries.  Whatever  mif^ht
have  been  the  nature  of
their  private  sentiments,
tliey  professed  to  be  anxious
to  maintain,  for  their  mu-
tual interests,  the  relations
with  Egypt  entered  on
half  a  century  before,  and
as  the  surest  method  of
attaining  their  object  was
by  a  good  marriage,  they
would  each  seek  an  Egyji-
tian  wife  for  himself,  or
would  offer  Amenothes  a
princess  of  one  of  their
own  royal  families.  The
Egyptian  king  was,  how-
ever, firm  in  refusing  to
bestow  a  princess  of  the
solar  blood  even  on  the
most  powerful  of  the  foreign

kings ;  his  pride  rebelled  at  the  thought  that  she  miglit  one  day  be  consigned
to  a  place  among  the  inferior  wives  or  concubines,  but  he  gladly  accepted,
and  even  sought  for  wives  for  himself,  from  among  the  Syrian  and  Chaldai-an
princesses.^  Kallimmasin  of  Babylon  gave  Amenotiies  first  his  sister,  and
when  age  had  deprived  this  princess  of  her  beauty,  then  his  daughter
Irtabi  in  marriage.''  Sutarna  of  Mitanni  had  in  the  same  way  given  the
Pharaoh  his  daughter  Gilukhipa ;  *  indeed,  most  of  the  kings  of  that  period
had  one  or  two  relations  in  the  harem  at  Thebes.  This  connexion  usually
proved  a  support  to  the  Asiatic  sovereigns,  such  alliances  being  a  safeguard

'  Drawu  by  Uuudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  1881  by  Dauiol  Hcrun.

'  Letter  from  liurnaburiash,  to  whom  Ameuothes  III.  refused  an  Egyptian  princess  (Winokleh-
Abel,  Der  Tlioiitafelfund  von  El-Amarna,  p.  3, 11.  4-152  ;  ef.  Delattre,  Mariages  princiers  quiiize  siecles
avant  VKre  chrdlietme,  in  the  Ilevue  des  Questions  Uisioriques,  Jan.  1892,  vol.  li.  pp.  232,  233).

'  Letter  from  Amenothes  IIL  to  Kallimmasin,  concerning  a  sister  of  the  latter,  who  was  married  to
the  King  of  Egypt,  but  of  whom  there  are  no  further  records  remaining  at  ISabylon,  and  also  one
of  his  daughters  whom  Amei  olhes  had  dciijanded  in  marriage  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  cl-Amurii<i
TuhlelK,  No.  1,  pp.  1-4, 11.  lO-UG,  97) ;  and  letters  from  Kallimmasin,  consenting  to  bestow  his  daughter
Irtabi  on  the  Pharaoh  (Wincki.eis-Abei,,  Der  TlwiUafcl/und  von  lil-Aimirna,  p.  1,  11.  7,  8),  and  pro-
posing to  give  to  Amcnothc's  whichever  one  ho  might  choose  of  the  daughters  of  his  house  (Bezold-
Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahleh,  Xo.  3,  p.  9,  11.  29-32).

*  On  the  marriages  witli  the  princesses  of  Mitanni,  cf.  the  notes  of  Ermaii,  Evetts,  i  nd  Wincklcr
in  the  '/eiitelirift  )ur  Jiyyptische  Sprache.  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  112-UO.


AMENOTHES   III.

FBOJI    THE

TOMB    OF    KHAJIHAIT.'


•298


TEE  EIGETEENTH  THEBAN  DYNASTY.


i«>^.,-—


':l^.


^

u


O  !<="


r^l-L


against  the  rivalries  of  their  brothers  or  cousins.  At  times,  however,  they
were  the  means  of  ex{3osiug  them  to  serious  dangers.  When  Sutarna  died  he
was  succeeded  by  his  son  Dushratta,  but  a  numerous  party  jjut  forward
another  prince,  named  Artassumara,  who  was  probably  Gilukhipa's  brother,
on  the  mother's  side ;  ^  a  Hittite  king  of  the  name  of  Pirkhi  espoused  the
cause  of  the  pretender,  and  a  civil  war  broke  out.  Dushratta  was  victorious,
and  caused  his  brother  to  be  strangled,  but  was  not  without  anxiety  as  to  the

consequences  which  might  follow  this  execution
\  should  Gilukhij^a  desire  to  avenge  the  victim,  and
to  this  end  stir  up  the  anger  of  the  suzerain
against  him.  Dushratta,  therefore,  wrote  a  humble
-ii\  epistle,  showing  that  he  had  received  provocation,
and  that  he  had  found  it  necessary  to  strike
a  decisive  blow  to  save  his  own  life ;  the
tablet  was  accompanied  by  vai-ious  presents
to  the  royal  pair,  comprising  horses,  slaves,
jewels,  and  perfumes.^  Gilukhipa,  however,
bore  Dushratta  no  ill-will,  and  the  latter's
anxieties  were  allayed.  The  so-called  expe-
ditions of  Amenothes  to  the  Syrian  provinces
must  constantly  have  been  merely  visits  of  inspec-
tion, during  which  amusements,  and  especially  the
chase,  occupied  nearly  as  important  a  place  as
war  and  politics.  Amenothes  III.  took  to  heart  that  pre-eminently  royal  duty
of  ridding  the  country  of  wild  beasts,  and  fulfilled  it  more  conscientiously
than  any  of  his  predecessors.  He  had  killed  112  lions  during  the  first
ten  years  of  his  reign,  and  as  it  was  an  exploit  of  whicli  he  was  re-
markably proud,  he  perpetuated  the  memory  of  it  in  a  special  inscription,
which  he  caused  to  be  engraved  on  numbers  of  large  scarabs  of  fine
green  enamel.''  Egypt  prospered  under  his  peaceable  government,  and  if
the  king  made  no  great  efforts  to  extend  her  frontiers,  he  spared  no  pains
to   enricli   the    country   by   developing   industry   and   agriculture,   and   also

'  Her  exact  relationship  is  not  explicitly  expressed,  but  is  implied  in  the  facts,  for  there  seems
no  reason  why  Gilukhipa  should  have  taken  the  part  of  one  brother  rather  than  another,  unless
Artassumara  had  been  nearer  to  her  than  Dushratta;  that  is  to  say,  her  brother  on  the  mother's  side
as  well  as  on  the  father's.

-  Letter  from  Dusliratta  to  tlie  Pharaoh  Amenothes  III.,  in  Winckleb-Abel,  Der  Tlioiitafcl/und
von  Et-Amarna,  No.  9,  pp.  22,  23 ;  Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  118-122.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  published  in  Mabiette,  Album  photograpldque
du  Mu^ee  de  Boidaq,  pi.  36,  No.  532.

*  Scarabs  of  tliia  type  are  very  numerous:  most  of  them  will  be  found  catalogued  in  Wiede-
mann, jEgyptische  Geschichle,  p.  381,  note  6.  The  text  has  been  translated  by  Biech,  Scarahxi  of
Amenophis  III.,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  xii.  p.  40.


iW,


SUAKAB    OF,  THE   HUNT.'


THE    TEMPLES  AND   RELIGIONS    OF  NUBIA.  299

endeavoured  to  perfect  tlie  military  orgauisatioii  wliich  had  rendered  the
conquest  of  the  East  so  easy  a  matter.  A  census,  undertaken  by  his  minister
Amenothes,  the  son  of  Hapi,  ensured  a  more  correct  assessment  of  the  taxes,
and  a  regular  scheme  of  recruiting  for  the  army.  Whole  tribes  of  slaves
were  brought  into  the  country  by  means  of  the  border  raids  which  were
always  taking  place,  and  their  opportune  arrival  helped  to  lill  up  the  vacancies
which  repeated  wars  had  caused  among  the  rural  and  urban  population ;  such
a  strong  impetus  to  agriculture  was  also  given  by  this  importation,  that  when,
towards  the  middle  of  the  reign,  the  minister  Khamhait  presented  the  tax-
gatherers  at  court,  he  was  able  to  boast  that  he  had  stored  in  the  State
granaries  a  larger  quantity  of  corn  than  had  been  gathered  in  for  thirty  years.'
The  traffic  carried  on  between  Asia  and  the  Delta  by  means  of  both  Egyptian
and  foreign  ships  was  controlled  by  custom-houses  erected  at  the  mouths  of
the  Nile,  the  coast  being  protected  by  cruising  vessels  against  the  attacks
of  pirates.  The  fortresses  of  the  isthmus  and  of  the  Libyan  border,  having
been  restored  or  rebuilt,  constituted  a  check  on  the  turbulence  of  the  nomad
tribes,  while  garrisons  posted  at  intervals  at  the  entrance  to  the  Wadys  leading
to  the  desert  restrained  the  plunderers  scattered  between  the  Nile  and  the
Red  Sea,  and  between  the  chain  of  Oases  and  the  unexplored  regions  of  the
Sahara.^  Egypt  was  at  once  the- most  powerful  as  well  as  the  most  prosperous
kingdom  in  the  world,  being  able  to  command  more  labour  and  more  precious
metals  for  the  embellishment  of  her  tonus  and  the  construction  of  her  monu-
ments than  any  other.

Public  works  liad  been  carried  on  briskly  under  Thutmosis  III.  and  his
successors.  The  taste  for  building,  thwarted  at  first  by  the  necessity  of
financial  reforms,  and  then  by  that  of  defraying  the  heavy  expenses  incurred
through  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos  and  the  earlier  foreign  wars,  had  free
scope  as  soon  as  spoil  from  the  Syrian  victories  began  to  pour  in  year  by  vear.
While  the  treasure  seized  from  the  enemy  provided  the  money,  the  majority
of  the  prisoners  were  used  as  workmen,  so  that  temples,  palaces,  and  citadels
began  to  rise  as  if  by  magic  from  one  end  of  the  valley  to  the  other.^  Nubia,
divided  into  provinces,  formed  merely  an  extension  of  the  ancient  feudal  Egypt

'  Lepsius,  Benlcm.,  iii.  7G  h,  77  o.

'  All  this  information  is  gathcreJ  from  tho  inscription  on  the  statue  of  Amenothes,  the  son  of
Hapi,  which  was  discovc'red  and  published  by  Maui ette,  Karnah,  pis.  36,  37;  cf.  E.  and  J.  deEouge,
hiecriptions  hte'roglyplwptes  recueiUies  eti  Jigyple,  pis.  xxiii.-xxviii.  Tije  importance  of  it  was  pointed
out,  and  the  text  translated  by  BiifoscH,  Nach  einmal  Ametihvtep  der  Solm  dts  Uapu,  in  tlie  Zcit-
hchrijt,  1(J76,  pp.  OU-lUl,  and  Geschichte  JEijijptens,  pp.  403-400.

•  For  this  use  of  prisoners  of  war,  cf.  tlie  picture  from  tlie  tomb  of  Eaklirairi  on  p.  300  of  tlie  present
work,  in  which  most  of  the  earlier  Egyptologists  believed  tliey  recognised  tlie  Hebrews,  condemned
by  IMiaraoli  to  build  the  cities  of  Kamses  and  Pilhom  in  the  Delta  (Chami'OLLiun,  Monuments,  pi.
clxv.  1-3;  KosKi.LiNi,  Mnnumenti  Oivili,  pis.  xlvii.,  xlix.  1 ;  Lei'sh's,  IJeiilnii.,  iii.  40,  41  ;  Viuey,  Le
Tmnheau.  du  Uckhmura,  pis.  xiii.,  xix.,  in  the  Mdmoires  du  la  Mimonfrancaiee,  vol.  v.;.


300


THE  EIGETEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


— at  any  rate  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Tacazzeh — though  the  Egyptian
religion  had  here  assumed  a  peculiar  character.  The  conquest  of  Nubia  having
been  almost  entirely  the  work  of  the  Tlieban  dynasties,  the  Theban  triad,
Amon,  Maut,  and  Montu,  and  their  immediate  followers  were  paramount  in
this  region,  while  in  the  north,  in  witness  of  the  ancient  Elephantinite  coloni-
sation, we  find  Khnumii  of  the  cataract  being  worshipped,  in  connexion  with
Didun,  father  of  the  indigenous  Nubians.^  The  worship  of  Amon  had  been
the  means  of  introducing  that  of  Ea  and  of  Horns,  and  Osiiis  as  lord  of  the
dead,  while  Phtah,  Sokhit,  Atumii,  and  the  Jlemphite  and  Heliopolitan  gods


A    GANG   OF  SYIUAX    PKI30NEBS    MAKING    BEICK    FOR    THE   TEMPLE    OF    AMON."


were  worshipped  only  in  isolated  parts  of  the  province.  A  being,  however,
of  less  exalted  rank  shared  with  the  lords  of  heaven  the  favour  of  the  people.
This  was  the  Pharaoh,  who  as  the  son  of  Amon  was  foreordained  to  receive
divine  honours,  sometimes  figuring,  as  at  Bohani,  as  the  third  member  of  a
triad,  at  other  times  as  head  of  the  Ennead.  Usirtasen  III.  had  had  his  chapels
at  Semneh  and  at  Kummeh,*  they  were  restored  by  Thutmosis  III.,  who
claimed  a  share  of  the  worship  offered  in  them,  and  whose  son,  Amenothes
II.,  also  assumed  the  symbols  and  functions  of  divinity.  Amenothes  I.  was
venerated  in  the  province  of  Kari,*  and  Amenothes  III.,  when  founding  the
fortress  Hait-Kbammait^  in  the  neighbourhood   of  a  Nubian   village,  on  a

'  On  the  introduction  of  the  god  Amon  into  Nubia,  see  tlie  principal  article  of  Lepsics,  Veber  die
Widderliipjigen  Goiter  Amman  und  Khnumif,  in  Beziehiing  auf  die  Ammons-Oase  ttnd  die  gehSrnten
KSp/e  griechifcher  MUuzen,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1877,  pp.  14-22 ;  on  the  Elephanlinite  conquest  in  the
time  of  the  Mempliite  kings,  cf.  Maspero,  Davrn  of  Civilization,  p.  47S.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  chromolithograph  in  Lepsius,  Denim.,  iii.  40.

'  On  the  cultus  of  the  kings  of  the  XII"'  dynasty,  see  Maspero,  Daicn  of  Civiiization,  p.  479  ;  cf.
Cbcm,  Stela;  from  Wady  Haifa,  in  the  Proceedings,  1S93-94,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  16,  17.

*  Bekgmann,  Imchriftliche  Denhnalcr,  in  the  Becueil,  vol.  ix.  p.  50;  cf.  ou  the  same  subject,  p.  100,
note  3,  of  the  present  volume.

*  The  name  signifies  literally  "  the  Citadel  of  Khammait,"  and  it  is  formed,  as  Lepsius  recognised
from  the  first,  from  the  name  of  the  Sparrow-hawk  Khammait,  "Slait  rising  as  Goddess,"  which
Amenothes  had  assumed  on  his  accession  (Briefe  aus  JEgypten,  etc.,  p.  415).


SOLEB   AND    THE    TEMPLE    OF  AMENOTHES   III.


301


spot  now  l<nowu  as  Soleb,  built  a  temple  there,  of  wLieli  he  himself  was  the

protecting  genius.^     The  ediiice  was  of  considerable  size,  and  the  columns  and

walls  remaining  reveal  an  art  as  perfect  as  that  shown  in  the  best  monuments

at  Thebes.     It  was  approached  by  an  avenue  of  ram-headed  sphinxes,  while

colossal  statues  of  lions  and  hawks,  the  sacred  animals

of  the  district,   adorned   the   building.     The  sovereign

condescended  to  preside  in  person  at  its  dedication  on

one  of  his  journeys  to  the  southern  part  of  his  empire,

and  the    mutilated    pictures    still   visible  on  the

fapade  show  the  order  and  detail  of  the  ceremony

observed   on   this  occasion.     The  king,  with  the

crown  upon  his  head,  stood  before  the  centre  gate,

accompanied  by  the  queen  and  his  minister  Ame-

nothes,  the  son  of  Hapi,  who  was  better

acquainted  than  any  other  man  of  his

time  with  the  mysteries  of  the  ritual.'^

The  king  then  struck  the  door  twelve

times  with  his    mace  of  white

stone,  and  when   the   approach

to    the   first    hall   was   opened,      f

he    repeated    the    operation    at      I

the  threshold  of  the  sanctuarv      \

previous  to  entering  and  placing      ;j

his  statue  there.     He  deposited

it  on  the   painted   and   gilded

wooden   platform    on    which    the   gods   were    exhibited   on    feast-days,   and

enthroned  beside  it  the  other  images  which  were  thenceforth  to  constitute

the  local  Ennead,  after  which  he  kindled  the  sacred  fire  before  them.     The

queen,  with  the  priests  and  nobles,  all  bearing  torches,  then  passed  through

the  halls,  stopping  from  time  to  time  to  perform  acts  of  purification,  or  to

recite   formulas   to   dispel   evil    spirits  and  pernicious   influences;    finally,  a

triumphal   procession    was   formed,  and    the   whole   cortirje   returned   to   the


IINE   ub'    THE    RA31S   01'   AMENOTHES    III.'


*>,•  /"^''f  "^•J^*"'''"-'  "I-  83-SS.  Lepsius  had  recnguised  tlie  nature  of  the  divinity  worshipi.od  in
th.8  temple  {Bnefe  am  JEgypten  und  ^Ihiopien,  pp.  256,  415)  ;  the  deified  statue  of  tlin  kin-,  "his
living  Htatue  on  earth,"  which  represenied  the  god  of  the  temple,  is  tliere  named  "  Nibmauri,  lord
01  T>iubia     (la,  Denhm.,  iii.  pi.  ,S7  a-c).     Thutmoais  III.  had  already  worked  at  Solob.

On  Anienotlies,  tlie  son  of  Hapi,  see  pp.  298,  299  of  tlie  present  volume  ;  it  will  be  seen  in  the
loilowmg  chapter,  in  couneotion  with  the  Egyptian  accounts  of  the  Exodus,  what  tradition  made
of  him.

'  l^'--'«''''yF"ucher-Gudin,from  a  photograph  by  Mons.  de  Merteus;  the  original  was  carried
away  Iroin  feoleb  by  Lepaus,  and  is  at  the  present  time  in  the  Berlin  Museum  (Euman,  AusfuUrliche»
Verznchnm,  189t,  pp.  23,  24,  No.  7202)


302  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEDAX  DYNASTY.

palace,  where  a  banquet  brought   the  day's  festivities  to  a  close.'     It  was
Amenothes  III.  himself,  or  rather  one  of  his  statues  animated  by  his  double,
who  occupied  the  chief  place  in  the  new  building.      Indeed,  wherever   we
come  across  a  temple  in  Nubia  dedicated  to  a  king,  we  find  the  homage  of  the
inliabitants  always  offered  to  the  image  of  the  founder,  which  spoke  to  them
in  oracles.-      All  the  southern  part  of  the  country  beyond  the  second  cataract
is  full  of  traces  of  Amenothes,  and  the  evidence  of  the  veneration  shown  to
liim   would  lead  us   to  conclude  that  he  played  an  important  part   in   the
organisation  of  the  country.     Sedeinga  possessed  a  small  temple  under  the
patronage  of  his  wife  Tii.^      The  ruins  of  a  sanctuary  which  he   dedicated
to  Amon,  tlie  Sun-god,  have  been  discovered  at  Gebel-Barkal ;  Amenothes
seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  perceive  the  advantages  offered  by  the  site,
and  to  have  endeavoured  to  transform  the  barbarian  village  of  JSTapata  into
a  large  Egyptian  city.     Some  of  the  monuments  with  which  he  adorned  Soleb
were  transported,  in  later  times,  to  Gebel-Barkal,  among   them   some  rams
and  lions  of  rare  beauty.     They  lie  at  rest  with  their  paws  crossed,  the  head
erect,  and  their  expression  suggesting  both  power  and  repose.*     As  we  descend
the  Nile,  traces  of  the  work  of  this  king  are  less  frequent,  and  their  place
is  taken  by  those  of  his  predecessors,  as  at  Sai,^  at  Semneh,"  at  Wady  Halfa,^
at  Amada,'^  at  Ibrim,"  and  at  Dakkeh.'"     Distinct  traces  of  Amenothes  again

'  Thus  the  small  temple  of  Sarrah,  to  the  north  of  'Waily  Haifa,  is  tleiUcated  to  "  tlie  liTing  statue
of  Ramses  II.  in  the  land  of  Nubia."  a  statue  to  which  his  Majesty  gave  the  name  of  "  tisirmari
Zosir-Sliati "  (Satce,  Gleanings  J'rom  the  Land  of  Egypt,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.  xvii.  p.  163).

-  These  scenes  and  legends  are  represented  in  Lsrsius,  De/ikm..  iii.  83,  et  seq. ;  they  were  tirst
studied  by  Lefebure,  Rites  Egi/plie7is,  Construction  et  protection  des  e'dijices,  pp.  38-41,  who  was  also
the  first  to  recognise  their  value  in  the  history  of  religions.

^  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  82  e-i ;  cf.  Briefe  aiis  jEgypten  und  JSthiopien,  p.  257.

'  Cailli.\ud,  Voyage  a  Mero€,  vol.  iii.  p.  21U  ;  Lepsu's,  Denkm.,  i.  120,  iii.  89,  90  a-l.  One  of  the
rams  was  removed  from  Gebel  Barkal  by  Lepsius  {Briefe  aus  JEgyplen,  pp.  239,  240),  and  is  now  in
tlie  Berlin  Museum,  as  well  as  the  pedestal  of  one  of  the  hawks  (Ekman,  Aiisfiihrliches  Verzeichniss,
1894,  Nos.  7262  and  1622,  pp.  23,  24,  27).  Prisse  has  shown  {Notice  sur  les  Antiquit^s  Sgyptiennes  du
Miisie  Britannique,  pp.  10.  11)  that  these  two  monuments  originally  adorned  the  temple  of  Soleb,
and  that  they  were  afterwards  transported  to  Napata  by  an  Ethiopian  king,  who  engraved  his  name
on  the  pedestal  of  one  of  them  (cf.  Lepsius,  Briefe  aus  JEgypten,  p.  415,  and  Denkm.,  iii.  89  6).

'  Buildings  of  Thiitmosis  UI.  and  Amenothes  II.  at  Sai  (Lepsus,  Briefe,  etc.,  p.  257,  and  Denkm.,
iii.  57.  h,  c).

"  Buildings  of  Tlmtmosis  III.  at  Semneh  and  at  Kiimmeh  (Cailhacd,  Voyage  it  Mirog,  Atlas,  vol.
ii.  pis.  27-29  ;  Lepsids,  Denkm.,  iii.  47-59  a.  64-66).

■  BuiUlings  or  donations  of  Tliutmosis  III.  at  Wady  Haifa  (C'eAMPOLLiox,  Wonuments,  vol.  i.  p.  37  :
Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  16 ;  Wiedemanx,  T  ana,  in  the  Becueil,  vol.  xvii.  p.  6),  of  Amenothes  II.  (Cham-
POLLION,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  30),  and  of  Tliutmosis  IV.  (Cru.m,  Stela;  from  Wady  Haifa,  in  the
Proceedings  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  17-19).

'  Buildings  of  Tlu'itmosis  III.  at  Amada  (Champollion,  Monuments,  pis.  xliv.,  xlv.,  slvii.,  xlviii.,-
and  vol.  i.  pp.  96-107;  Rosellini,  Monu.  Stor.,  pis.  xxsv.,  xxxvi. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  45),  finished
by  Amenothes  II.  (Champollion,  Monuments,  pis.  xlv.-xlix.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  100-107 ;  Rosellixi,
Monu.  Stor.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  191-199  ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.;  iii.  65)  and  by  Thutmosis  IV.  (Champollion,
Momiments,  vol.  i.  pp.  96-100).

^  Small  chapels  of  Thutmosis  III.  at  Ibiim  (Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  79-84;  Rosellixi,  Monu.  Stor.,
vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  171),  and  of  Amenothes  II.  (Champollion,  Monuments,  pi.  xxxix.  1,  2.  and  vol.  i.
pp.  84-86).

'°  Remains  bearing  the  name  of  Thutmosis  III.  at  Dakkeh  (Wiedemann,  .S^gyptische  Gescli.,  p.  364).


THE  TEMPLES   OF  ELEPHANTINE.


303


ONE   OF    THE   LIOXS   OF   GEBEL   RARgAT.  '


appear  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  first  cataract,  and  in
the  island  of  Elephantine,  which  he  endeavoured  to  restore
to  its  ancient  splendour.     Two  of  the  small  buildings  which
he  there  dedicated  to  Khniimii,  the  local  god,  were  still  in
existence   at   the  beginning  of
the  present  century.     That
least    damaged,   on    the
south  side  of  the  island,
consisted  of  a  single
chamber      nearly
forty      feet       in
length.  The  sand-
stone  walls,   ter-
minating    in     a
curred      cornice,

rested  on  a  hollow  substructure  raised  rather  more  than  six  feet  above  the
ground,  and  surrounded  by  a  breast-high  parapet.  A  portico  ran  round  the
building,  having  seven  square  pillars  on  each  of  its  two  sides,  while  at
each  end  stood  two  columns  having  lotus-shaped  capitals ;  a  flight  of  ten
or  twelve  steps  between  two  walls  of  the  same  height  as  the  basement,
projected  in  front,  and  afforded  access  to  the  eel  la.  The  two  columns  of
the  fapade  were  further  apart  than  those  at  the  opposite  end  of  the
buildiug,  and  showed  a  glimpse  of  a  richly  decorated  door,  while  a  second
door  opened  under  the  peristyle  at  the  further  extremity.  The  walls  were
covered  with  the  half-brutish  proiile  of  the  good  Khnumu,  and  those  of
his  two  companions,  Anukit  and  Satit,  the  spirits  of  stormy  waters.  The
treatment  of  these  figures  was  broad  and  simple,  the  style  free,  light,  and
graceful,  the  colouring  soft;  and  the  harmonious  beauty  of  the  whole  is
unsurpassed  by  anything  at  Thebes  itself  It  was,  iu  fact,  a  kind  of  oratory,
built  on  a  scale  to  suit  the  capacities  of  a  decaying  town,  but  the  design
was  so  delicately  conceived  in  its  miniature  proportions  that  nothing  more
graceful  can  be  imagined.^

'  Drawn  by  Fancher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  two  lions  of  Gelxl  Barkal  in  the  British  Museum.
The  cartooches  on  Kb  chest  are  those  of  the  Ethiopian  kingAnkhnoliribri  Asaro-JIiamon,  who  appro-
priated these  lions  about  the  Persian  period  ;  those  of  Amenothes  III.  can  still  be  read  on  the  base.

'  Amenothes  II.  erected  some  small  obelisks  at  Elephantine,  one  of  wliich  is  at  present  in  Eng-
land (Peisse,  ColUctions  d'AniiquWs  £gyptiennet  au  Caire,  pp.  4, 5).  The  two  buildings  of  Amenothes
III.  at  Elephantine  were  still  in  existence  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  They  have  been
described  and  drawn  by  French  scholars  (Jomaed,  Description  d'Ue  d' Elephantine,  in  the  Description
de  rigypU,  vol.  i.  pp.  180-197,  and  Antiquil^t,  vol.  i.  pis.  35-38);  between  18^2  and  1825  they  were
destroyed,  and  the  materials  used  for  building  barracks  and  magazines  at  Syene  (Cuampollios,
Lettre*  icrilet  d'£gijptf,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  ill,  171,  172,  382,  456,  and  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  215,  221  ;
Gliddox,  An  Appenl  to  the  Antiquaries  of  Europe  on  the  Destruction  of  the  Monuments  of  Egypt,  pp.
38-41).


304  rilE  EIGHTEENTH   TEEBAN  DYXASTT.

Ancient  Egypt  and  its  feudal  cities,  Ombos,^  Edfu,-  Nekhalit,^  Esneh,*
Medamot,''  Coptos,"  Denderali,'  Abydos,*^  Memphis,''  and  Heliopolis,i"  profited
largely  by  the  generosity  of  the  Pharaohs.  Since  the  close  of  the  XIP"
dynasty  these  cities  had  depended  entirely  on  their  own  resources,  and  their
public  buildings  were  either  in  ruins,  or  quite  inadequate  to  the  needs  of  the
population,  but  now  gold  from  Syria  and  Kiish  furnished  them  with  the  means
of  restoration.  The  Delta  itself  shared  in  this  architectural  revival,  but  it  had
suffered  too  severely  under  the  struggle  between  the  Theban  kings  and  the
Shepherds  to  recover  itself  as  quickly  as  the  remainder  of  the  country.  All
effort  was  concentrated  on  those  of  its  nomes  which  lay  on  the  Eastern
frontier,  or  which  were  crossed  by  the  Pharaohs  in  their  journeys  into  Asia,
such  as  the  Bubastite  ^^  and  Athribite^^  nomes;  the  rest  remained  sunk  in  their

'  Buildiugs  of  Thutniosis  III.  at  Ombos  (Cha.mpolliox,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  231,  232,  247;
KosELLiNi,  Monti.  Star.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  ],p.  ISO,  and  Monumenti  del  Culto,  pi.  xxviii.,  and  pp.  19G-199  ;
Lepsius,  VeiiTim.,  iii.  'IS;  Maspeko,  Notes  sur  quelques  points,  etc.,  ^  xly.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1SS3,
jip.  78,  79).

■  Tlie  works  undertaken  by  Thutniosis  III.  in  the  temple  of  Edfu  are  mentioned  in  an  iuseriptiou
of  the  rtolemaic  period  (DCmichen,  i?aMur/a(nde(ier  Tempelanlagen  von  Edfu,  in  the  Zeitselirift,  1871.
pp.  97,  98) ;  some  portions  are  still  to  be  seen  among  the  ruins  of  the  town  (Champolliox,  Lettres
e'crites.  etc.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  202 ;  Eosellini,  Monu.  Star.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  181).

'  Buildings  of  Thutniosis  III.  and  Amenothes  III.  at  El-Kab  (Chamfolliox,  Lettres,  2nd  edit.,
p.  194,  and  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pp.  166,  265,  266,  274  ;  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  80).

*  An  inscription  of  the  Roman  period  attributes  the  rebuilding  of  the  great  temple  of  Esneh  to
Thutmosis  III.  (Champoluox,  Monuments,  vol.  i.  p.  728;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  vi.  77  d,  78  a).  GreTiaut
discovered  some  fragments  of  it  in  the  quay  of  the  modern  town.

'  Amenothes  II.  appears  to  have  built  the  existing  temple  (Champollion,  Monuments,  vol.  i.
p.  291 ;  BoiRiANT,  Petits  Monuments  et  Fetits  Textes,  in  the  Eecueil,  vol.  vii.  p.  129).

'  Eemains  of  the  temple  of  Thutniosis  III.  at  Coptos  (Wilkijjsox,  Modern  Egypt  and  Tliehes,
p.  411 ;  cf.  Petrie,  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  Antiquities  from  the  Temple  of  Coptos,  discovered  1S94,
pp.  5,  9,  11).     One  of  the  pillars  was  overturned  by  treasure-seekers  in  1SS3.

"  Eebuilding  of  the  temple  of  Hathor  by  Thutmosis  III.,  from  an  inscription  published  by
Df  MICHEN,  Bauurkunde  der  Tempelanlagen  von  Denderah,  pis.  xiv.,  xvi.,  and  Baugefchichte  des  Dendera-
tempels,  p.  14,  et  seq. ;  Mariette,  Dendgrah,  vol.  iii.  pi.  78.  Some  fragments  found  in  the  Ptolemaic
masonry  bear  the  cartouche  of  Thutmosis  IV.  (Id.,  ihid..  Supplement,  pi.  H,  a,  h).

'  Works  of  Thutmosis  I.  and  Thutmosis  III.  in  the  temple  of  Osiris  (E.  and  J.  de  Kouge,  Inscrip-
tions higroglyphiques,  etc.,  pis.  xix.-xxii. ;  Mariette,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pi.  31,  and  Catalogue  General  des
Momiments  d' Abydos,  No.  1,  p.  6,  So.  104S,  p.  376).

=  Amenothes  II.  certainly  carried  on  works  at  Memphis,  for  he  opened  a  new  quarry  at  Turah,  in
the  year  IV.  (Perrixg-Vyse.  Operations  carried  on  at  the  Pyramids,  vol.  iii.  pi.  on  p.  94) :  on  the
clearing  of  the  Sphinx  of  Gizch  by  Thutmosis  IV.,  see  p.  294  of  the  present  volume.     Amenothes

III.  also  worked  limestone  quarries  (Perring-Vyse,  Operations,  vol.  iii.  pp.  96-98;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,
iii.  71  a,  h),  and  built  at  Saqqarah  the  earliest  chapels  of  the  Serapeum  which  are  at  present  known
to  us  (Mariette,  Eemeignements  sur  les  soixanie-qxtatre  Apis,  in  the  Bulletin  Archgologique  de
I'Alhgnaium  Franfais,  1855,  p.  53).

'"  Stele  of  the  year  XLVII.,  where  Thutmosis  III.  relates  the  buildiug  of  a  wall  in  the  temple  of
Ea  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  29  b);  also  remains  of  bas-reliefs  representing  that  prince  (Brugsch,
Rcctteil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pi.  x.  23  o,  b,  and  pp.  20,  21).

"  Remains  of  a  building  of  Amenothes  II.  discovered  by  Naville,  Buhastis,  pi.  xxxv.  ii,  and
pp.  30,  31 ;  monuments  of  Amenothes  III.  at  Bubastis  (Id.,  ibid.,  pis.  xiii.,  xxv.  b,  xxxv.  e-h,  and
pp.  31-34).     It  was  perhaps  from  thence  that  the  columns  named  after  Amenothes  II.  and  Thutmosis

IV.  Were  brought,  which  were  carried  to  Alexandria  in  Roman  times,  and  recently  presented  to  the
Vienna  Museum  (E.  de  Bergmans,  Inschriftliche  Denkmdler,  in  the  Becucil,  vol.  vii.  pp.  147-149).

"  Monuments  of  Amenothes  III.  at  Athribis,  from  whence  came  the  serpent  in  the  Gizeh  Museum
(Makiette-Maspero,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  63  h,  and  p.  21).


777A'  TEMPLES  OF  MAUT  AT  KARNAK,  AND  OF  AMON  AT  LUXOJi.      305

I

!


THE   TEMPLE   AT   ELEPHANTINE,   AS    IT    WAS   IN    1799.'

ancient  torpor.'-  Beyond  the  Bed  Sea  the  mines  were  actively  worked,^  and
even  tlie  oases  of  the  Libyan  desert  took  part  in  the  national  revival,  and
buildings  rose  in  their  midst  of  a  size  proportionate  to  their  slender
revenues.^  Thebes  naturally  came  in  for  the  largest  share  of  the  spoils  of  war.
Although  her  kings  had  become  the  rulers  of  the  world,  they  had  not,  like  the
Pharaohs  of  the  XII">  and  XIII"'  dynasties,  forsaken  her  for  some  more  illus-
trious city  :  here  they  had  their  ordinary  residence  as  well  as  their  seat  of
government,  hither  they  returned  after  each  campaign  to  celebrate  their
victory,  and  hither  they  sent  the  prisoners  and  the  spoil  which  they  had  re-
served for  their  own  royal  use.  In  the  course  of  one  or  two  generations
Thebes  had  spread  in  every  direction,  and  had  enclosed  within  her  circuit

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Guilin,  from  tlic  Description  de  VEiiijpte,  Ant.,  vol.  i.  p.  35.  A  good  restora-
tion of  it,  niaiie  from  the  statements  in  tlie  Deecription,  is  to  Ik-  found  iu  Pekiiot-Chipiez,  Eistoire
de  I'Art  dam  VAniiindtg,  vol.  i.  pp.  402,  40o.

-  JIabiette,  Deujciime  Letlre  h  M.  h'  vicomle  dc  Rnmj<;  mr  hs  fouilles  de  Tatiis,  pp.  13,  14,  and
E.  de  Rooge,  Lefons  profess^ts  aii  College  de  France,  Feb.-Juue,  18G9,  in  tlie  Mglamjes  d'Areheologie,
vol.  ii.  jip.  284,  2S5.  attribute  this  torpor,  at  least  as  far  as  Tanis  is  concerned,  to  I  lie  aversion  felt"  by
the  Pliaraoha  of  Egyptian  blood  for  the  Ilyksoseapital.and  for  the  provinces  where  the  invaders  had
formerly  established  themselves  in  large  numbers.

'  Kestoratiou  of  the  temjile  of  Ilitlior,  at  Sarbut-el-KhadJm  (for  this  temple,  cf.  Maspero,  Dau-a
of  CimlizatioH,  pji.  474-47G),  by  Tlnitiiiosis  III.,  and  stelsB  of  the  years  XXV.,  XXVI.,  and  XXVII.
of  that  Pharaoh  in  the  same  locality  (I.uttin  ue  Laval,  Voijage  de  VAraUe  J'd'tre'e,  pi.  ii.  1,  2,  xv. ;
Lei'sus,  Denkm.,  iii.  29  »;  Survey  cf  Sinai,  vol.  iil.  pi.  14,  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  ISG-ISS).  Stela3  of  the
year  VII.  of  Thutmosis  IV.  and  of  the  year  XXXVf.  of  AinciiOthes  III.  are  also  to  be  found  there
(Survey  of  iVK«i,  vol.  iv.  p.  18H  ;  Lepsii  s.  Denkm.,  iii.  71  c.  d).

'  Stele  of  Thutmosis  H.  at  El-Aiiin  iu  the  Small  Oasis,  and  remains  of  buildings  at  El-Bauiti
(AsciiEUsoN  in  the  Zeittclirifl,  l,S7i;,  ]>.  120);  unfortuuately  these  fragmeuls  liave  been  hitherto
unpublished.


306


THE   EIGHTEENTH   THE  DAN  DYNASTY.


the  neighbouring  villages  of  Ashiru,  the  fief  of  Maut,  and  Apit-risit,  the  southern
Thebes,  which  lay  at  the  confluence  of  the  Nile  with  one  of  the  largest  of  the
canals  which  watered  the  plain.  The  monuments  in  these  two  new  quarters
of  the  town  were  unworthy  of  the  city  of  which  they  now  formed  part,  and
Amenothes  III.  consequently  bestowed  much  pains  on  improving  them.  He
entirely  rebuilt  the  sanctuary  of  Maut,  enlarged  the  sacred  lake,  and  collected
within  one  of  the  courts  of  the  temple  several  hundred  statues  in  black  granite
of  the  Memphite  divinity,  the  lioness-headed  Sokhit,  whom  he  identified  with
his  Theban  goddess.^  The  statues  were  crowded  together  so  closely  that  they
were   in  actual  contact  with  each  other  in  places,  and  must  have  presented


THE  GREAT  COURT  OP  THE  TEMPLE  OP  LUXOR  DURING  THE  INUNDATION.^

something  of  the  appearance  of  a  regiment  drawn  up  in  battle  array.  The
succeeding  Pharaohs  soon  came  to  look  upon  this  temple  as  a  kind  of  store-
house, whence  they  might  provide  themselves  with  ready-made  figures  to
decorate  their  buildings  either  at  Thebes  or  in  other  royal  cities.  About  a
hundred  of  them,  however,  still  remain,  most  of  them  without  feet,  arms,
or  head ;    some   overturned  on  the  ground,  others  considerably  out   of  the


'  Mariette,  Karnali,  Texte,  i>p.  4,  1-t,  15.     Eamses  II.  placed  a  certain  number  of  thorn  in  tlie
Bmall  temple  of  Meshtikh  (Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d' Arch€ologie  Egypiiennes,  vol.  i.  p.  219).
-  Drawn  by  Boudler,  from  .i  photograph  by  Beato,  taken  iu  the  autumn  of  1893.


TEE   GREAT    TEMPLE   OF  AMON  AT  KAIiNAK.


307


perpendicular,  from  the  earth  having  given  way  beneath  them,  and  a  small
number  only  still  perfect  and  in  situ.  At  Luxor  Amenothes  demolished  the
small  temple  with  which  the  sovereigns  of  the  XII'"  and  XIII"'  dynasties  had
been  satisfied,'  and  replaced  it  by  a  structure  wliich  is  still  one  of  the  finest
yet  remaining  of  the  times  of  the  Pharaohs.  The  naos  rose  sheer  above  the
waters  of  the  Nile,  indeed  its  cornices  projected  over  the  river,  and  a  stair-
case at  the  south  side  allowed  the  priests  and  devotees  to  embark  directly
from  the  rear  of  the  building.  The  sanctuary  was  a  single  chamber,  with
an  opening  on  its  side,  but  so  completely  shut  out  from  the  daylight  by  the


PAKT    OF   THE    AVENUE   OF    RAMS,    BETWEEN   THE    TESirLES   OK    AMON    AND    MAUT.=

long  dark  hall  at  whose  extremity  it  was  placed  as  to  be  in  perpetual  obscurity.
It  was  flanked  by  narrow,  dimly  lighted  chambers,  and  was  approached  through
a  pronaos  with  four  rows  of  columns,  a  vast  court  surrounded  with  porticoes
occupying  tlie  foreground.  At  the  present  time  the  thick  walls  which  en-
closed the  entire  building  are  nearly  level  with  the  ground,  half  the  ceilings
have  crumbled  away,  air  and  light  penetrate  into  every  nook,  and  during  the


'  Cf.  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  508,  530;  Amenothes  III.  said  that  he  had  restored  the
Ajnt-iisit  (Grkbaut,  FouHleedeLouxor,'m  the  Bulletin  deVInditul  iriyplicn,  1889,  vol.  x.  pp.  :!35,  330).
'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudlu,  from  a  photograph  Ijy  Bcato,  taken  in  18S7.


308


THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN   DYNASTY.


THE    PYLONS   OF    ThCtmOSIS    HI.    AND   HAKMHABI    AT    KARSAK.'


inundation  the  water  flowing  into  the  courts,  transformed  them  until  recently
into  lakes,  whither  the  flocks  and  herds  of  the  village  resorted  in  the  heat  of
the  day  to  bathe  or  quench  their  thirst.  Pictures  of  mysterious  events  never
meant  for  the  public  gaze  now^  display  their  secrets  in  the  light  of  the  sun,
and  reveal  to  the  eyes  of  the  profane  the  supernatural  events  which  preceded
the  birth  of  the  king.  On  the  northern  side  an  avenue  of  sphinxes  and  crio-
sphinxes  led  to  the  gates  of  old  Thebes.^  At  present  most  of  these  creatures
are  buried  under  the  ruins  of  the  modern  town,  or  covered  by  the  earth  which
overlies  the  ancient  road ;  but  a  few  are  still  visible,  broken  and  shapeless  from
barbarous  usage,  and  hardly  retaining  any  traces  of  the  inscriptions  in  which
Amenothes  claimed  them  boastingly  as  his  work.  Triumphal  processions  pass-
ing along  this  route  from  Luxor  to  Karnak  would  at  length  reach  the  great
court  before  the  temple  of  Amon,  or,  by  turning  a  little  to  the  right  after
passing  the  temple  of  Maut,  would  arrive  in  front  of  the  southern  facade,
near  the  two  gilded  obelisks  whose  sjjlendour  once  rejoiced  the  heart  of  the
famous  Hatshopsitu.  Thutmosis  III.  was  also  determined  on  his  part  to  spare
no  expense  to  make  the  temple  of  his  god  of  proportions  suitable  to  the  patron
of  so  vast  an  empire.  Not  only  did  he  complete  those  portions  which  his  pre-
decessors had  merely  sketched  out,  but  on  the  south  side  towards  Ashirii  he
also  built  a  long  row  of  pylons,  now  half  ruined,  on  which  he  engraved,  according
to  custom,  the  list  of  nations  and  cities  which  he  had  subdued  in  Asia  and

'  Drawn  by  Bouilier,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

'  Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'Egijpte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  ii.  p.  20.").


THE   TOMB    OF  AMENOTBES   III.


:5()f>


THE    SACBEU    LAKE

AXD    THE   SOVTHERX    PART    OF

THE   TEMPLE    0[''    KARNAK.'


-m^:^


;*§?si*^


Africa.  To  the  east  of  the  temple  he  rebuilt
'^.  some  ancient  structures,  tlie  largest  of
which  served  as  a  halting-place  for
processions,  and  he  enclosed  the  whole
witli  a  stone  rampart.  The  outline  of  the  sacred  lake,  on  which  the  mystic  boats
were  launched  on  the  nights  of  festivals,  was  also  made  more  symmetrical,  and
its  margin  edged  witli  masonry.'-^  By  these  alterations  the  harmonious  pro-
portion between  the  main  buildings  and  the  facade  had  been  destroyed,  and  tlie
exterior  wall  was  now  too  wide  for  the  pylon  at  the  entrance.  Amenothes  III.
remedied  this  defect  by  erecting  in  front  a  fourth  pylon,  which  was  loftier,
larger,  and  in  all  re.^pects  more  worthy  to  stand  before  the  enlarged  temple.
Its  walls  were  partially  covered  with  battle-scenes,  which  informed  all  be-
holders of  the  glory  of  the  conqueror.''

Progress  had  been  no  less  marked  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  As  long
as  Thebes  bad  been  merely  a  small  provincial  town,  its  cemeteries  had  covered
but  a  moderate  area,  including  the  sandy  plain  and  low  mounds  opposite
Karnak  and  the  valley  of  Deir  el-Bahari  beyond  ;  but  now  that  the  city  had
more  than  doubled  its  extent,  the  space  required  for  the  dead  was  propor-
tionately greater.  The  tombs  of  private  persons  began  to  spread  towards
the  south,  and  soon  reached  the  slopes  of  the  Assassif,  the  hill  of  Siieikh-
Abd-el-Qurnah  and  the  district  of  Qurnet-Miirrai — in  fact,  all  that  part  whicli

'  Drawn  Ijy  Boudier,  from  a  pliot()gra])li  by  ISeatu :  tlio  buililing  near  tlie  centre  nt  the  picture  is
tlie  covoieil  walk  constructed  by  Thutniosid  lU.

-  The  part  taken  by  Thutniosis  III.  and  his  auccessors  in  the  conslruetioii  of  the  temples  of
Karuak  has  been  determined  by  E.  uh  Rougk,  J'Jtude  den  Monuments  (hi  Massif  de  Karnah,  in  the
M^anges  d' Archifologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  40-45,  67,  68,  and  by  Marietti;,  Karnah,  Texte,  jip.  :!,  16,  'i7-;i7,
47,  .'51,  ,")4  ;  and  their  conclusions  have  been  but  slightly  moditied  by  later  research.

'  .Mauiktte,  Karnah,  Texlc,  pp.  8,  9,  26,  27.  I'ortiuns  of  the  military  bas-reliefs  which  covernl
the  exterior  face  of  the  pylon  are  still  to  be  seen  thron;;;h  the  gaps  in  the  wall  at  the  end  of  the  groat
Hall  of  Pillars  built  by  Seti  1.  and  Uanises  11.


310  THE  EIGHTEENrn   TIIEBAN  DYNASTY.

the  people  of  the  country  called  the  "  IJrow  "  of  Thebes.^  On  the  borders  of  the
cultivated  land  a  row  of  chapels  and  niastabas  with  pyramidal  roofs  sheltered
the  remains  of  the  princes  and  princesses  of  the  royal  family.  The  Pharaohs
themselves  were  buried  either  sepai'ately  under  their  respective  brick  pyramids
or  in  groups  in  a  temple,  as  w-as  the  case  with  the  first  three  Thutmosis  and
Hatshopsitu  at  Deir  el-Bahari.  Amenothes  II.  and  Thutmosis  IV.  could  doubt-
less have  found  room  in  this  crowded  necropolis,"  although  the  space  was
becoming  limited,  but  the  pride  of  the  Pharaohs  began  to  rebel  against  this
promiscuous  burial  side  by  side  with  their  subjects.  Amenothes  III.  sought
for  a  site,  therefore,  where  he  would  have  ample  room  to  display  his  mag-
nificence, far  from  the  vulgar  crowd,  and  found  wliat  he  desired  at  the  further
end  of  the  valley  which  opens  out  behind  the  village  of  Qurnah.  Here,  an
hour's  journey  from  the  bank  of  the  Nile,  he  cut  for  himself  a  magnificent
rock-tomb  with  galleries,  halls,  and  deep  pits,  the  walls  being  decorated
with  representations  of  tlie  Voyage  of  the  Sun  through  the  regions  which
he  traverses  during  the  twelve  hours  of  his  nocturnal  course.  A  sarcophagus
of  red  granite  received  his  mummy,  and  Ushahtis  of  extraordinary  dimensions
and  admirable  workmanship  mounted  guard  around  him,  so  as  to  release
him  from  the  corvee  in  the  fields  of  lalu.*  The  chapel  usually  attached  to
such  tombs  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  neighbourhood.  As  the  road  to  the
funeral  valley  was  a  diflicult  one,  and  as  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  condemn
an  entire  priesthood  to  live  in  solitude,  the  king  decided  to  separate  the
component  parts  which  bad  hitherto  been  imited  in  every  tomb  since  the
Memphite  period,  and  to  place  the  vault  for  the  mummy  and  the  passages
leading  to  it  some  distance  away  in  the  mountains,  while  the  necessary
buildings  for  the  cultus  of  the  statue  and  the  accommodation  of  the  priests
were  transferred  to  the  plain,  and  were  built  at  the  southern  extremity  of
the  lands  which  were  at  that  time  held  by  private  persons.*  The  divine
character  of  Amenothes,  ascribed  to  him  on  account  of  his  solar  origin
and  the  co-operation  of  Amon-Ra  at  his  birth,  was,  owing  to  this  separation
of  the  funerary  constituents,  brought  into  further  prominence.     When  once

'  Maspero,  Notes  siir  quelques  puinls  de  Grammaire  et  d' Histoire,  in  the  Eecueil,  vol.  ii.  p.  112.

'  The  generally  received  opinion  is  that  these  sovereigns  of  the  XYlIl"'  dynasty  were  buried  iu
the  Biban  el-3Iolnk,  but  I  have  made  several  examinations  of  this  valley,  and  cannot  think  that  this
was  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  the  scattered  notices  in  the  fragments  of  papyrns  preserved  at  Turin
seem  to  me  to  indicate  that  Amenothes  II.  and  Thutmosis  IV.  must  have  been  buried  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Assassif  or  of  Deir  el-Bahaii.

^  Several  of  these  Ushahti,  or  "  Respondents,"  are  reproduced  in  the  Description  de  Vligijpte,  Ant.,
vol.  ii.  pis.  SO,  SI ;  cf.  Pierret,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle  Historiqtie  de  la  Galerie  Egyptienne  du  Musge  da
Louvre,  No.  12,  p.  12,  and  for  the  smaller  Ushahti  of  various  materials,  Nos.  .'iO-52,  p.  24.

■*  This  division  of  the  royal  tomb  into  two  separate  parts,  and  the  nature  of  the  temples  which
rise  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Nile  at  Thebes,  were  first  pointed  out  by  Mariette,  Itingraire  des  Inrite'g.
p.  97,  et  seq. ;  cf.  the  development  of  Mariette's  theory  iu  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans
I'Aiitiquitg,  vol.  i.  i)p.  2GG-280.


THE   CHAPEL  AND    COLOSSI   UF  MEMNON.  311

the  body  wliich  he  had  animated  while  on  earth  was  removed  and  bidden
from  sight,  the  people  soon  became  accustomed  to  think  only  of  his  Double
enthroned  in  the  recesses  of  the  sanctuary :  seeinj^  him  receive  there  the
same  honours  as  the  gods  themselves,  they  came  naturally  to  regard  him  as
a  deity  himself.     The  arrangement  of  his  temple  differed  in  no  way  from


THE   TWO    COLOSSI    01'    MliMXO-N    IX    THE    I'LAIX    i  iF    THEDES.'

those  in  which  Amon,  Maiit,  and  Montu  were  worshipped,  while  it  sur-
passed in  size  and  splendour  most  of  the  sanctuaries  dedicated  to  the  patron
gods  of  the  chief  towns  of  the  nomes."  It  contained,  moreover,  colossal
statues,  objects  which  are  never  found  associated  with  the  heavenly  gods.
Several  of  these  figures  have  been  broken  to  pieces,  and  only  a  few  scattered
fragments  of  them  remain,  but  two  of  them  still  maintain  their  positions  on
each  side  of  the  entrance,  with  their  faces  towards  the  east.  They  are  each
formed  of  a  single  block  of  red  breccia  from  Syene,'^  and  are  fifty-three  feet
high,  but  the  more  northerly  one  was  shattered   in  the   earthquake   which

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  fnim  a  pliotograpli  by  Hoato.  The  "  Vocal  Statue  of  Memmm  "
is  that  on  tlie  right-band  side  of  the  illustration.

''  The  remaius  of  tliis  temple  have  been  described  and  restored  by  .Jollois-Devii.liers,  Deecri)i-
tion  des  Colosses  de  la  plainc  de  Thchea  et  ileg  Kuincs  qui  Ics  enviranneiit,  in  the  Descrijition  de  rA'tji/pli:,
vul.  ii.  pp.  179-201  ;  all  that  luis  been  said  about  them  since  has  been  taken  almo.st  exclusively  from
this  description.

'  It  is  often  asserted  that  they  are  made  of  rose  granite,  hut  Jollois  and  Dovilliers  describe  them
as  being  of  "  a  species  of  sandstone  breccia,  composed  of  a  mass  of  agate  flint,  conglomerated  together
by  a  remarluibly  hard  cement.  This  material,  being  very  dense  and  of  a  heterogeneous  composition,
presents  to  the  sculptor  perhaps  greater  difliculties  than  even  granite"  {Description  dee  Colonel  de  la
riaine  de  Tliebes,  iu  the  iJemr'plion  de  V KgyiAe,  vol.  ii.  p.  154).


312  THE  EIOETEENTH   TEEBAN  DYNASTY.

completed  the  ruin  of  Thebes  in  the  year  27  B.C.  The  upper  part  toppled  over
with  the  shock,  and  was  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  floor  of  the  court,  wliile  the
lower  half  remained  in  its  place.  Soon  after  the  disaster  it  began  to  be
rumoured  that  sounds  like  those  produced  by  the  breaking  of  a  harp-strin"-
proceeded  from  the  pedestal  at  sunrise,  whereupon  travellers  flocked  to  witness
the  miracle,  and  legend  soon  began  to  take  possession  of  the  giant  who
spoke  in  this  marvellous  way.  In  vain  did  the  Egyptians  of  the  neigh-
bourhood declare  that  the  statue  represented  the  Pharaoh  Amenothes;  the
Greeks  refused  to  believe  them,  and  forthwith  recognised  in  the  colossus  an
image  of  Memnon  the  Ethiopian,  son  of  Tithonus  and  Aurora,  slain  by  their
own  Achilles  beneath  the  walls  of  Troy— maintaining  that  the  music  heard
every  morning  was  the  clear  and  harmonious  voice  of  the  hero  saluting  his
mother.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  second  century  of  our  era,  Hadrian
undertook  a  journey  to  Upper  Egypt,  and  heard  the  wonderful  song ;  sixty
years  later,  Septimus  Severus  restored  the  statue  by  the  employment  of
courses  of  stones,  which  were  so  arranged  as  to  form  a  rough  representation
of  a  human  head  and  shoulders.  His  piety,  however,  was  not  rewarded  as
he  expected,  for  Memnon  became  silent,  and  his  oracle  fell  into  oblivion. i
The  temple  no  longer  exists,  and  a  few  ridges  alone  mark  the  spot  where
it  rose ;  but  the  two  colossi  remain  at  their  post,  in  the  same  condition
in  which  they  were  left  by  the  Koman  Caesar :  the  features  are  quite
obliterated,  and  the  legs  and  the  supporting  female  figures  on  either  side  are
scored  all  over  with  Greek  and  Latin  inscriptions  expressing  the  apprecia-
tion of  ancient  tourists.  Although  the  statues  tower  high  above  the  fields
of  corn  and  hersim  which  surround  them,  our  first  view  of  them,  owing  to
the  scale  of  proportion  observed  in  their  construction,  so  different  from  that
to  which  we  are  accustomed,  gives  us  the  impression  that  they  are  smaller
than  they  really  are,  and  it  is  only  when  we  stand  close  to  one  of  them  and
notice  the  insignificant  appearance  of  the  crowd  of  sightseers  clustered  on  its
pedestal  thai  we  realize  the  immensity  of  the  colossi.

The  descendants  of  Ahmosis  had  by  their  energy  won  for  Thebes  not  only
the  supremacy  over  the  peoples  of  Egypt  and  of  the  known  world,  but  had
also  secured  for  the  Theban  deities  pre-eminence  over  all  their  rivals.  The
booty  collected  both  in  Syria  and  Ethiopia  went  to  enrich  the  god  Amon  as
much  as  it  did  the  kings  themselves  ;  every  victory  brought  him  the  tenth  part
of  the  spoil  gathered  on  the  field  of  battle,  of  the  tribute  levied  on  vassals,  and
of  the  prisoners  taken  as  slaves.     When  Thutmosis  III.,  after  having  reduced

'  Tlie  history  of  this  statue  has  beeu  collected  and  related  by  Letronne,  La  Statue  vocale  de
Memnon,  considCree  dans  ses  rapports  avec  Vfigypte  et  la  Grice,  in  the  (Evrres  choices,  1st  series,
vol.  i.  pp.  1-236.  The  bibliograjihy  of  the  subject  since  Letronnc's  time  is  to  be  found  nearly
complete  in  Wiedemann,  ^riyptlsche  GescMchte,  p.  ^87,  note  5.  and  Appendi.'j,  p.  44.


THE  INCREASING    GREATNESS    OF  AMON  AND    JUS   PRIESTS.      313


Megiddo,  organised  a  systematic  jilundering  of  the  surrouuding  country,  it  was
for  the  benefit  of  Amon-Ea  that  he  reaped  the  fields  and  sent  their  harvest  into
Egypt ;  ^  if  during  his  journeys  he  collected  useful  plants  or  rare  animals,
it  was  that  he  might  dispose  of  tliem  in  the  groves  or  gardens    of  Amon  as

well  as  in  his  own,'^  and
he  never  retained  for  his
personal  use  the  whole
of  what  lie  won  by  arms,
but  always  reserved  some
portion    for     the    sacred


A    I'AKTY    Ol     IULIUjT.S    AT    THE    I'OUT    l.lF    THE    VOUAI,    STATUE    01'    .MEMSON.''

treasury.  His  successors  acted  in  a  similar  manner,  and  in  the  reigns  of
Amenothes  II.,  Thutmosis  IV.,  and  Amenothes  III.,  tiie  patrimony  of  the  Theban
priesthood  continued  to  increase.^  The  Pliaraohs,  perpetually  called  upon  as
they  were  to  recompense  one  or  other  of  their  servants,  were  never  able  to  retain
for  long  their  share  of  the  spoils  of  war.  Gold  and  silver,  lands,  jewels,  and
slaves  passed  as  quickly  out  of  their  hands  as  they  had  fallen  into  them,
and  although  their  fortune  was  continually  having  additions  made  to  it  in
every  fresh  campaign,  yet  the  increase  was  rarely  in  proportion  to  the  trouble
expended.  The  god,  on  the  contrary,  received  what  he  got  for  all  time,  and
gave  back  nothing  in  return :  fresh  accumulations  of  precious  metals  were
continually  being    added    to    his    store,   his    meadows  were    enriched    by  the

'  The  gifts  of  Thatmoais  III.  to  his  fatlier  Anion,  ou  his  return  from  his  first  campaign,  are
enumerated  in  Lepsius,  Venhm.,  iii.  .30  h;  of.  liurcscH,  liecueil  de  Monumeuh,  vol.  i.  pis.  xliii.,  xliv.

=  On  tlie  Eending  of  plants  ;uiil  animals,  cf.  p.  2G1  of  the  ]iresent  volume.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograpli  by  Insinger,  taken  in  lS8ti.

'  For  inscriptions,  unfortunately  much  mutilated,  which  mentioned  the  donations  of  Tlnitmosis  IV.
and  Amenothes  HI.  in  favour  of  .\mon-Ua,  .tee  Mauiette,  Knrnah,  Tt'xie,  pp.  Ml  57,  and  pis.  33-3.^.


314  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

addition  of  vineyards,  and  with  his  palm  forests  he  combined  fish-ponds  full  of
fish ;  he  added  farms  and  villages  to  those  he  already  possessed,  and  each
reign  saw  the  list  of  his  possessions  increase.^  He  had  his  own  labourers,  his
own  tradespeople,  his  own  fishermen,  soldiers,  and  scribes,  and,  presiding  over
all  these,  a  learned  hierarchy  of  divines,  priests,  and  prophets,  who  administered
everything.  This  immense  domain,-  which  was  a  kind  of  State  within  the
State,  was  ruled  over  by  a  single  high  priest,  chosen  by  the  sovereign  from
among  the  prophets.  He  was  the  irresponsible  head  of  it,  and  his  spiritual
ambition  had  increased  step  by  step  with  the  extension  of  his  material
resources.  As  the  human  Pharaoh  showed  himself  entitled  to  homage  from
the  lords  of  the  earth,  the  priests  came  at  length  to  the  conclusion  that  Amon
had  a  right  to  the  allegiance  of  the  lords  of  heaven,  and  that  he  was  the
Supreme  Being,  in  respect  of  whom  the  others  were  of  little  or  no  account,
and  as  he  was  the  only  god  who  was  everywhere  victorious,  he  came  at  length
to  be  regarded  by  them  as  the  only  god  in  existence.  It  was  impossible  that
the  kings  could  see  this  rapid  development  of  sacerdotal  power  without
anxiety,  and  with  all  their  devotion  to  the  patron  of  their  city,  solicitude
for  their  own  authority  compelled  them  to  seek  elsewhere  for  another  divinity,
whose  influence  might  in  some  degree  counterbalance  that  of  Amon.  The
only  one  who  could  vie  with  him  at  Thebes,  either  for  the  antiquity  of  his
worship  or  for  the  rank  which  he  occuj^ied  in  (he  public  esteem,  was  the  Sun-
lord  of  Heliopolis,  head  of  the  first  Enuead.  Thutmosis  IV.  owed  his  crown
to  him,  and  displayed  his  gratitude  in  clearing  away  the  sand  from  the  Sphinx,
in  which  the  spirit  of  Harmakhis  was  considered  to  dwell ;  ^  and  Amenothes
III.,  although  claiming  to  be  the  son  of  Amon  himself,  inherited  the  dis-
position shown  by  Thutmosis  in  favour  of  the  Heliopolitan  religions,  but
instead  of  attaching  himself  to  the  forms  most  venerated  by  theologians,  he
bestowed  his  afiection  on  a  more  popular  deity — Atonu,  the  fiery  disk.*     He

'  We  possess  no  catalogues  of  this  period,  but  tlie  Great  Harris  Papyrus  has  preserved  the  list  of
Anion's  possessions  in  the  time  of  Ramses  III. ;  cf.  Erman,  JEgypten,  p.  405,  et  seq.

'  Devekia,  Monument  hiograpMque  de  Bakenchmsou,  pp.  13,  16,  and  Mginoires  et  fragments,
vol.  i.  pp.  286,  289  ;  A.  Baillet,  De  V Election  el  de  la  dure'e  des/onctions  du  Grand-pretre  d' Amman
a  Thebes  (extract  from  the  Bevue  ArcJiiologique,  1862,  vol.  viii.).

^  On  the  connexion  of  this  king  with  the  god,  cf.  pp.  292-201  of  the  present  volume.

*  The  worship  of  the  solar  disk  was  lirst  studied  by  Kestob  L'hote,  Lettres  gcrites  d'Egypte,  pp.
ai,  o5  (cf  Lepsics,  XJeher  den  ersten  JSgyptischen  GStterhreis,  in  tlie  Memoirs  of  the  Berlin  Academy,
1S5I,  pp.  196-202),  and  by  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Bemar}:s  on  the  Ancient  Materials  of  the  Propylxa  at
Karnak  (in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Literature.  ne\r  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  76-92);  the  documents
which  explain  the  nature  of  it  were  first  examined  by  liRUGScH,  Histoire  d'Egypte,  pp.  119,  120  (cf
Gesckiehte  JEgyptens,  pp.  426-428),  by  Bouriant,  2  Thebes,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  pp.
53-5.5,  and  Deux  Jours  de  fouilles  a  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Mginoires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.
pp.  1-22,  by  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alien  JSgyptens,  pp.  267-269,  and  finally  by  Breasted,  De
Hymnis  in  Salem  sub  rege  Amenophide  IV.  conceptis,  1895.  Atonu,  the  name  given  to  the  disk,  has
been  compared  with  Adonai  or  Adonis,  and  the  form  of  its  worship  explained  by  a  Syrian  influence  ;
this  theory  still  has  some  upholders  (Bryant-Read,  An  Inscription  of  Khuenaten,  in  the  Proceedings
of  the  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  206,  207).     Other  scholars  have  thought  that  Khflnia-


THE  MARBIAOE   OF  AMENOTHES  III.    WITH   TIL


315


MAKllIAGE    SOABABjEUS.'^


laav  have  been  influenced  in  his  choice  by  private  reasons.     Like  his  pre-
decessors, he  had  taken,  while  still  very  young,  wives
from  among  his  own  family,  but   neither   these       -^ "  "■    '   '■^'    *^  ^"^
reasonable  ties,  nor   his   numerous  diplomatic
alliances  with  foreign  princesses,  were  enough
for  him.      From    the   very  beginning  of    liis
reign  he  had  loved  a  maiden  who  was  not  of
the  blood  of  the  Pharaohs,  Til,  the  daughter
of  Iiiia  and  his  wife  Tuia.^     Connexions  of
this   kind  had  been   frequently  formed  by
his   ancestors,  but  the  Egyptian  women  of
inferior   rank  whom  they  had  brought  into
their   harems    had   always  remained  in  the

background,  and  if  the  sons  of  these  concu-
bines were  ever  fortunate  enough  to  come  to

the  throne,  it  was  in  default  of  heirs  of  pure

blood.     Amenothes  III.  married  Tii,  gave  her  for

her  dowry  the  town  of  Zalii  in  Lower  Egypt,^  and

raised  her  to  the  position  of  queen,  in  spite  of  her

low  extraction.     She  busied  herself  in  the  affairs  of  State,  took  precedence  of

tomVa  reform  was  an  attempt  to  establisli  a  monotlieistic  religion  in  Egypt  (Tiele,  Gescltichte  der
Religion  im  Altertunt,  vol.  i.  pj).  S4-'J2 ;  Bkeasted,  De  Urjmnis  in  Sulem,  pp.  0-9).

'  For  the  last  tbirty  years  Queen  Tii  has  been  the  subject  of  many  hypotheses  and  of  much  con-
fusion. The  scarabiei  engraved  under  Amenothes  IK.  (Kosellini,  Moh.  Star.,  pi.  xliv.  1,  and  vol.
iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  200-208;  cf.  Birch.  Scarahxi  of  Amenophis  III.,  \a  Vae  Records  of  Die  Past,  1st  series,
p.  o9)  say  explicitly  that  the  was  the  daughter  of  two  personages,  Iiiia  and  Tiiia,  but  these  names  aie
not  accompanied  by  any  of  the  signs  which  are  characteristic  of  foreign  names,  and  were  considered
Egyptian  by  contemporaries.  Hincks  was  tho  first  who  seems  to  have  believed  her  to  be  a  Syrian  ;
he  compares  her  father's  name  with  that  of  Levi,  and  attributes  the  religious  revolution  which  followed
lo  the  influence  of  her  foreign  education.  This  theory  has  continued  to  predominate  ;  it  is  found  in
Mariette,  Aper(u  de  I'Histoire  d'Egyple,  edit,  of  1874,  pp.  70,  71 ;  in  l![ii'GSCH,  Geschichte  .^Sgyptens,
p  41S;  and  in  IjALTH,  Aus  JEgijptenn  Vorztit,  p.  268.  AV'iedemann,  JEgyptisclie  Geschichte,  pp.  393,
394,  and  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Allen  yEgyptens,  p.  260,  prefer  a  Libyan  origin  to  the  Asiatic  one,
and  latterly  there  bus  been  an  attempt  to  recognise  in  Tii  one  of  the  princesses  of  Mitanni  mentioned
in  the  corresjiondence  of  Tel  el-Amarna  (Budge,  On  Cuneiform  Despatches,  in  the  rroceedings  Soc.
Bibl.  Arch.,  1S87-8S,  vol.  x.  pp.  555,  350;  Petiue,  Tell  el-Amarna,  p.  40).  As  long  ago  as  1877,  I
showed  at  the  lieolo  des  Hautes  Etudes  that  Tii  was  an  Egyptian  of  middle  rank,  probably  of  Helio-
politau  ori^iiu,  and  pointed  out  shortly  the  reasons  for  this  opinion  given  in  Kayet,  Les  Monuments
de  I'Art  Antique,  vol.  i..  Notice  7,  in  the  Rapport  sur  une  Mission  en  Ilulie  {Recueil  de  Traraux,  vol.
iii.  pp.  127,  128),  and  finally  in  the  Revue  Critique,  1893,  vol.  i.  pp.  422,  423;  they  have  been  furthej-
developed  by  Bouhiant,  Le  Tomheau  de  Ranisis  ii  Che'ikh  Abd-el- Kournah  (in  tlie  Revue  Arclafologique,
1882,  vol.  xliii.  p.  279,  et  seq.),  and  A  Thebes  (in  the  Recueil,  vol.  vi.  pp.  51-55),  aud  partially
adopted  by  En.  Meyek,  Gest-hichte  der  Alien  JEijyptens,  p.  200,  et  seq.

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  iihotugraph  of  tho  scarabaius  preserved  at  Gizeli,  aud  pub-
lished in  Makiktti:,  Album  du  Musife  de  lioulaq,  ]il.  30,  No.  541.

'  The  scarabieus  of  the  Vatican  descriljed  by  Uosellini,  Mon.  Star.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  2li3-2G8,
and  Miin.  Reali,  pi.  xliv.  2,  speaks  of  a  basin  dug  by  the  king  in  tho  town  of  Ziilu,  whicli  belonged
to  Tii ;  cf.  Steun,  llieroghjphisch-Koplisches,  in  the  Zeitschrifl,  1877,  p.  87,  note  2.  Bii:ch,  Scarabiei
of  Amenophis  III.,  in  the  Records  of  the  I'ast,  1st  series,  vol.  xii.  41,  and  Wiedemann,  JEgrjptische
Geschichte,  p.  382,  read  Zarilkha,  aa  the  name  of  the  town.


316  THE  EIGHTEENTn   THEDAN  DYNASTY.

the  princesses  of  tlie  solar  family,  ami  appeared  at  her  husband's  side  in
public  ceremonies,  and  was  so  figured  on  the  monuments.  If,  as  there  is
reason  to  believe,  she  was  born  near  Heliopolis,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how
Jier  influence  may  have  led  Amenothes  to  pay  special  honour  to  a  Heliopolitan
divinity.  He  had  built,  at  an  early  period  of  his  reign,  a  sanctuary  to  Atonu
at  Memphis,^  and  in  the  X'"  year  he  constructed  for  him  a  chapel  at  Thebes
itself,-  to  the  south  of  the  last  pylon  of  Thutmosis  III.,  and  endowed  this  deity
with  property  at  the  expense  of  Am  on.

He  had  several  sons ;  *  but  the  one  who  succeeded  him,  and  who,  like  him,
was  named  Amenothes,  was  the  most  paradoxical  of  all  the  Egyptian  sovereigns
of  ancient  times.^  He  made  up  for  the  inferiority  of  his  birth,  on  account  of
the  plebeian  origin  of  his  mother  Tii,^  by  his  marriage  with  Nofrititi,  a  princess
of  the  pure  solar  race."     Tii,  long  accustomed  to  the  management  of  affairs,

'  Mariette,  ilonumtntf  divers,  pi.  50  h,  and  p.  18,  wliere  the  collective  representations,  and  above
all  the  presence  of  the  name  of  Amon,  show  that  the  stele  belongs  to  the  reign  of  Amenothes  III.

-  This  temple  seems  to  have  been  raised  on  the  site  of  the  building  marked  S  (E.  de  Rouge,
Etude  sur  les  monuments  du  Massif  de  KarmiJ:,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arcligologie,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  4'2-45  ;
Mariette,  Karnali,  pi.  1,  A-D,  and  Texte,  pp.  11,  12),  which  is  usually  attributed  to  Amenothes  II.
and  AmeLOthes  III.  Tlie  blocks  bearing  the  name  of  Amenothes  II.  had  been  used  previously,  like
most  of  those  which  bear  the  cartouches  of  Amenothes  III.  The  temple  of  Atonii,  which  was
demolished  by  Harmhaln  or  one  of  the  Eamses,  was  subsequently  rebuilt  with  the  remains  of  earlier
edifices,  and  dedicated  to  Amon.

'  One  of  them,  Thijtmosis,  was  high  priest  of  Phtah  (Mariette,  Henseignements  sur  les  soixante-
quatre  Apis,  in  Bull.  Arch,  de  VAili^n.  Fratifais,  1855,  p.  53),  and  we  possess  several  monuments  erected
by  him  in  the  temple  of  Memphis  (Dabesst,  Notes  it  Remarques,  in  the  liecueil,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  174, 175)  ;
another,  Tutonkhamon,  subsequently  became  king  (cf.  pp.  33i,  335  of  the  present  volume).  He  also
had  several  daughters  by  Tii — Sitamon  (Birch,  On  a  Remarkable  Object  of  the  Reign  of  Ameiiophis  III.,
p.  3;  cf.  EosELLiNi,  Mon.  Star.,  vol.  i.  p.  240),  Isis,  and  Honitmarhabi  (LErsus,  Denkm.,  iii.  8G  a,  b).

'  The  absence  of  any  cartouches  of  Amenothes  IV.  or  his  successors  in  the  table  of  Abydos  pre-
vented ChampoUion  and  Kostllini  from  classifying  these  sovereigns  with  any  precision.  Nestor
L'hute  tried  to  recognise  in  the  first  of  them,  whom  he  called  Bakhen-Balchnan,  a  king  belonging  to
the  very  ancient  dynasties,  ptrhaps  the  Hyksos  Apakhnan  (Lettres  e'criles  d'jSgypte,  pp.  55,  50,  (10,
07,  69-72),  but  I.epsius  {Briefe  aus  ^Egypttn,  pp.  100, 101)  and  Hincks  (Oh  the  defacement  of  Egyptian
Monuments,  pp.  5-9)  showed  that  he  must  be  placed  between  Amenothes  III.  and  Harmhabi,  that  he
was  first  called  Amenothes  like  his  father,  but  that  he  afterwards  took  the  name  of  Bakhnaten,  which
is  now  read  Khunateu  or  Khiniaton.  His  singular  aspect  made  it  difficult  to  decide  at  first  whether
a  man  or  a  woman  was  represented  (Nestor  L'hcVje,  Lettres  e'crites  d'Egypte,  pp.  ,"i8,  59 ;  Bi'nsen,
Jigyptens  Stelle  in  der  Weltgeschichte,  vol.  iii.  pp.  88,  89).  Mariette,  while  pronouncing  him  to  be  a
man,  tliought  that  he  had  perhaps  been  taken  prisoner  in  the  Sudan  and  mutilated,  which  would
ha\'e  explained  his  efl'eminate  appearance,  almost  like  that  of  an  eunuch  (^Renseignemetits,  etc.,  in  the
Bulletin  Arch.,  elc,  1855,  p.  57).  Kecent  attempts  have  been  made  to  prove  that  Amenothes  IV.  and
Khiiniaton  were  two  distinct  persons  (Yilliers-Stuakt,  A7ie  Gleanings,  pp.  299-301,  and  Egypt  after
the  War,  pp.373-391),  or  that  Khun iaton  was  a  queen  (^LEFEBVUE.Sur  Differents  ilotset  Xoms  Egyptieus,
Proceedings,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  479-483);  but  they  have  hitherto  been  rejected  by  Egyptologists.

^  The  filiation  of  Ameiiuthes  IV.  and  Tii  has  given  rise  to  more  than  one  controversy.  The
Egyptian  texts  do  not  define  it  explicitly,  and  the  title  borne  by  Tii  (Lepsus,  Denhm.,  iii.  101,  102)
has  been  considered  by  some  to  prove  that  Amenothes  IV.  was  her  son  (Bbcgsch,  Geschiehte
JEgyptens,  pp.  419.  420;  Wiedemann,  JEgyptische  Geschiehte.  p.  401 ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschiehte  des  Alien
.^igyptens,  p.  260),  and  by  others  that  she  was  the  mother  of  (^ueen  Nofrititi  (Wiedemann,  Inscriptions
of  the  Time  of  Amcnophis  IV.,  Proceedings  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1894-95,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  156,  157).  [The
Tel  el-Amarna  correspondence  solves  the  question,  however,  as  it  gives  a  letter  from  Dusliratta  to
Khuniaton  (trans,  by  Prof.  Sayce  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  new  ser.),  in  which  Tii  is  called  "  thy
mother." — Ed.]

"  Nofrititi,  the  wife  cf  .VmenOthes  IV.,  like  all  tlie  princesses  of  that  time,  has  been  supposed  to


THE  BEGINNING    OF    THE   liEIGN   OF  AMENoTHES   IV.  :>  1  7

exerted  her  influence  over  him  even  more  tbaa  slie  had  done  over  her  husband.
"Without  officially  assuming  the  rank,  she  certainly  for  several  years  possessed
the  power,  of  regent,  and  gave  a  definite  Oriental  impress  to  her  son's  religious
policy.  No  outward  changes  were  made  at  first ;  Amenothes,  although  showing
his  preference  for  Heliopolis  by  inscribing  in  his  protocol  the  title  of  prophet
of  Harmakhis,  which  he  may,  however,  liave  borne  before  his  accession,^  main-
tained his  residence  at  Thebes,  as  his  father  had  done  before  him,  continued  to
sacrifice  to  the  Theban  divinities,  and  to  follow  tlie  ancient  paths  and  the  con-
ventional practices."  He  either  built  a  temple  to  the  Theban  god,  or  enlarged  the
one  which  his  father  had  constructed  at  Kurnak,  and  even  opened  new  quarries
at  Syene  and  Silsileh  for  providing  granite  and  sandstone  for  the  adornment
of  this  monument.^  His  devotion  to  the  invincible  Disk,  however,  soon  began
to  assert  itself,  and  rendered  more  and  more  irksome  to  him  the  religious  obser-
vances which  he  had  constrained  himself  to  follow.  There  was  nothing  and  no
one  to  hinder  him  from  giving  free  course  to  his  inclinations,  and  the  nobles
and  priests  were  too  well  trained  in  obedience  to  venture  to  censure  anything
he  might  do,  even  were  it  to  result  in  putting  the  whole  population  into
motion,  from  Elephantint'  to  the  sea-coast,  to  prepare  for  the  intruded  deity
a  dwelling  which  should  eclipse  in  magnificence  the  splendour  of  the  great
temple.  A  few  of  those  around  him  had  become  converted  of  their  own
accord  to  his  favourite  worship,  but  these  formed  a  very  small  minority.
Thebes  had  belonged  to  Amon  so  long  that  the  king  could  never  hope  to
bring  it  to  regard  Atouii  as  anything  but  a  being  of  inferior  rank.  Each
city  belonged  to  some  god,  to  whom  was  attributed  its  origin,  its  development,

be  of  Syrian  origin,  ami  to  liave  change  1  her  name  on  lier  arrival  iu  Egypt  (Lefebire,  Sur  Dijf'g'rentx
MoU  et  yom»  EgyiAi'ms^  iu  the  Froceediiiff%  lSitO-91,  vol.  siii.  p.  478;  Bryant-Kead,  Ah  Inscription
of  Khuenatin,  ihid.,  1892-9J,  vol.  .\v.  p.  206).  Tlie  place  which  she  holds  beside  her  husband  is  the
8ame  iis  that  which  belongs  to  legitimate  queens,  like  Nofritari,  Ahmosis,  and  Ilatshopsitii,  and  the
example  of  these  princesses  is  enough  to  show  us  what  was  her  real  position  ;  she  was  most  probably  a
<laughter  of  one  of  the  princesses  of  the  solar  blood,  perhaps  of  one  of  the  sisters  of  Amenothes  III.,
and  Amenothes  IV.  married  her  so  as  to  obt,iin  through  her  the  rights  which  were  wanting  to  him
through  his  mother  Tii.

'  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  110  /,  1.2.

'  The  tomb  of  Rimses,  governor  of  Thebes  and  priest  of  Malt,  shows  us  iu  one  part  of  it  the  king,
still  faithful  to  his  name  of  Amenothes,  paying  homage  to  the  god  Amon,  lord  of  Karnak  (Villiebs-
Stuart,  Egypt  after  the  Ifur,  pi.  27,  and  pp.  386-388 ;  Bouriant,  Le  Tombeau  de  Ramses  a  Cheikh  Alid
el-Goiirnah,  iu  the  lievue  Archeologique,  1882,  vol.  xliii.  p.  27'J,  et  seq.),  while  everywhere  else  the
worship  of  Atonu  predominates.  The  cartouches  on  the  tomb  of  Pari,  read  by  Bouriant  Akhopiriiri
{Notts  de  Voyage,  in  the  liecueil,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  70,  71),  and  by  Scheil  more  correctly  Nofirkhopiruri
(Le  Tomhtau  de  Pari,  in  the  M€inoires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  V.  p.  588),  seem  to  me  to  repre-
sent a  transitional  form  of  the  protocol  of  Amenothes  IV.,  and  not  the  name  of  a  new  Pharaoh  ;  the
iuBcription  in  which  they  are  to  be  found  bears  the  date  of  his  third  year.

'  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  110  i.  Cf.  Bkl-usch,  Geseh.  JEgijptens,  pp.  424,  425,  where  the  value  of
this  monument  has  been  well  shown;  the  king  in  it  still  calls  himself  Amenothes.  The  remains  of
tlie  temple,  used  later  by  Harmliabi,  have  been  collected  and  commented  on  for  the  first  time  by
Puis.se  d'Avennks,  ItemarJ;s  on  the  Ancient  Materials  of  the  Fropyhca  of  Karnak,  iu  tlie  Transactions
of  the  Society  of  Literature,  imw  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  70-92,  and  Monuments  ^gypticw,  pis.  x.,  xi.,  and
Bubsoquently  by  Bouriant,  ^i  Thebes,  in  the  liecueil,  vol.  vi.  j)p.  5!i-55.


318  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

and  its  prosperity,  aud  whom  it  could  not  forsake  without  renouncing  its  very
existence.  If  Thebes  became  separated  from  Amon  it  would  be  Thebes  no
longer,  and  of  this  Amenothes  was  so  well  aware  that  he  never  attempted  to
induce  it  to  renounce  its  patron.  His  residence  among  surroundings  which
he  detested  at  lengtli  became  so  intolerable,  that  he  resolved  to  leave  the
place  and  create  a  new  capital  elsewhere.  The  choice  of  a  new  abode  would
have  presented  no  difficulty  to  him  had  he  been  able  to  make  up  his  mind  to
relegate  Atonu  to  the  second  rank  of  divinities ;  Memphis,  Heracleopolis,
Siut,  Khmunii,  and,  in  fact,  all  the  towns  of  the  valley  would  have  deemed
themselves  fortunate  in  securing  the  inheritance  of  their  rival,  but  not  one
of  them  would  be  false  to  its  convictions  or  accept  the  degradation  of  its  own
divine  founder,  whether  Phtah,  Harshafitu,  Anubis,  or  Thot.  A  newly  pro-
moted god  demanded  a  new  city ;  Amenuthes,  therefore,  made  selection  of  a
broad  plain  extending  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Nile,  in  the  eastern  part  of
the  Hermopolitan  nome,  to  which  he  removed  with  all  his  court  about  the
fourth  or  fifth  year  of  his  reign.^  He  found  here  several  obscure  villages
without  any  historical  or  religious  traditions,  and  but  thinly  populated;
Amenothes  chose  one  of  them,  the  Et-Tel  of  the  present  day,  and  built
there  a  palace  for  himself  and  a  temple  for  his  god.^  The  temple,  like  that
of  Ea  at  Heliopolis,  was  named  Hait-Bayibomi,  the  Mansion  of  the  Obelisk.^
It  covered  an  immense  area,  of  which  the  sanctuary,  however,  occupied  an
inconsiderable  part ;  it  was  flanked  by  brick  storehouses,  and  the  whole  was
surrounded  by  a  thick  wall.  The  remains  show  that  the  temple  was  built
of  white  limestone,  of  fine  quality,  but  that  it  was  almost  devoid  of  ornament,
for  there  was  no  time  to  cover  it  with  the  usual  decorations.^     The  palace  was

'  The  Last  date  with  the  name  of  Amenothes  is  that  of  the  year  V.,  on  a  papyrus  from  the  Fayilm
(Petkie,  lUahun,  Kahtm  and  Gurob,  p.  50)  ;  elsewhere  we  fiud  from  the  year  VI.  the  name  of  Khuniaton
(Pkisje  d'Avennes,  Moninnents  Jigyptien,  pis.  xii.-xiv. ;  Lefsius,  Derikm.,  iii.  110  6),  by  the  side  of
monuments  with  the  cartouche  of  Amenothes  (Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pi.  xiii.);  we  may  conclude
from  this  that  the  foundation  of  the  town  dates  from  the  year  IV.  or  V.  at  the  latest,  when  the  prince,
having  renounced  the  worship  of  Amon,  left  Thebes  that  he  might  be  able  to  celebrate  freely  that  of
Atonu.

'  For  the  desciiption  of  the  plain  and  of  the  ruins  of  Tel  el-Amaina,  see  Jomard,  Deseription  des
AntiquMs  de  I' Heptanomide,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egijpte,  vol.  iv.  pp.  308-312,  and  Nestor  L'hote,
Lettres  Antes  de  VEgypte,  pp.  53-78 ;  and  for  its  present  condition,  VlLLiERS-STrART,  Egypt  after  the
War,  pp.  434-444,  and  above  all,  Petuie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  1-6.  The  plan  of  it  is  briefly  described
in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  Ant.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  63,  folio  6 ;  in  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  i.  63,  64,  who
seems  to  have  developed  the  indications  in  the  Description;  and  by  Peisse  d'Avennes,  Histoire
de  I'Art  £gyptien,  who  confines  himself  to  reproducing  the  data  given  in  the  Description  aud  by
Lepsius.

'  Lepsius,  Deiikm.,  iii.  97  h,  where  the  king  speaks  of  the  chambers  he  has  caused  to  be  built  and
decorated  in  Hait-Banbonu  of  Pa-Atonu.

*  Tlie  ruins  of  the  temple  have  been  explored  by  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  18-20,  and  the  plau
of  it  is  given  on  plate  ssxvii.  of  that  work.  The  opinion  of  Brugsch  (^Gesch.  JEgyptens,  p.  421),  that
the  arrangement  of  the  various  parts  diflered  from  that  of  other  temples,  and  was  the  effect  of  foreign
influence,  has  not  been  borne  out  by  the  excavations  of  Prof.  Petrie,  the  little  which  he  has  brought
to  light  being  entirely  of  Egyptian  character.  The  temple  is  represented  on  the  tomb  of  the  higli
priest  MarirJ  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  94-96 ;  cf.  Ebman,  ^gypten,  pp.  387-390).


THE  FOUNDATION   OF  KnuiTATONU.


319


built  of  brick  ;  it  was  approached  by  a  colossal  gateway,  and  contained  vast
halls,  interspersed  with  small  apartments  for  the  accommodation  of  the  house-
hold, and  storehouses  for  the  necessary  provisions,  besides  gardens  which  had
been  hastily  planted  with  rare  shrubs  and  sycamores.  Fragments  of  furniture
and  of  the  roughest  of  the  utensils  contained  in  the  different  chambers  are  still
unearthed  from  among  the  heaps  of  rubbisb,  and  tlie  cellars  especially  are  full
of  potsherds  and  cracked  jars,  on  which  we  can  still  see  written  an  indica-
tion of  the  reign  and  the  year  when  the  wine  they  once  contained  was  made.


r|s^  KHUITATONU,

^  THE   HORIZON   OF

J),  THE    DISK

Scale


V      5  Kil


L  ThuiUier.del"-

Altars  of  massive  masonry  rose  in  the  midst  of  the  courts,  on  which  the  king
or  one  of  his  ministers  heaped  offerings  and  burnt  incense  morning,  noon,  and
evening,  in  honour  of  the  three  decisive  moments  in  the  life  of  Atonu.^  A
few  painted  and  gilded  columns  supported  the  roofs  of  the  principal  apart-
ments in  which  the  Pharaoh  held  his  audiences,  but  elsewhere  the  walls  and
pillars  were  coated  with  cream-coloured  stucco  or  whitewash,  on  which  scenes
of  private  life  were  depicted  in  colours.  The  pavement,  like  the  walls,  was  also
decorated.'-^     In  one  of  the  halls  which  seems  to  have  belonged  to  tlie  harem.


'  Naville  discovered  at  Di  ir  el-Bahari  a  similar  altar,  nearly  intact  {The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari,
pp.  10-12).  No  other  example  was  before  known  in  any  of  the  ruined  towns  or  temples,  and  no  one
had  any  idea  of  the  dimensions  to  which  these  altars  attained.

■■■  Viu-nnv.,TeU  el-Amarna,  pp.  7-16;  also  the  remains  reproduced  in  pis.  v.-xii.  The  plan  of  the
palace  is  to  be  found  in  pi.  xxxvi.  of  the  same  work.


320  THE  ElOETEEKTH    TUEBAN  DYNASTY.

there  is  still  to  be  seen  distinctly  the  picture  of  a  rectangular  piece  of  water
containing  fish  and  lotus-tiowers  in  full  bloom  ;  the  edge  is  adorned  with
water-plants  and  flowering  shrubs,  among  which  birds  fly  and  calves  graze
and  gambol ;  on  the  right  and  left  were  depicted  rows  of  stands  laden  with
fruit,  while  at  each  end  of  the  room  were  seen  the  grinning  faces  of  a  gang
of  negro  and  Syrian  prisoners,  separated  from  each  other  by  gigantic  arches.
The  tone  of  colouring  is  bright  and  cheerful,  and  the  animals  are  treated
with  great  freedom  and  facility.'  The  Pharaoh  had  collected  about  him
several  of  the  best  artists  then  to  be  found  at  Thebes,  placing  them  under
the  direction  of  Baiiki,  the  chief  of  the  corporation  of  sculptors,^  and  probably
others  subsequently  joined  these  from  provincial  studios.  Work  for  them  was
not  lacking,  for  houses  had  to  be  built  for  all  the  courtiers  and  government
officials  who  had  been  obliged  to  follow  the  king,  and  in  a  few  years  a  large
town  had  sprung  up,  which  was  called  Khuitatonu,  or  the  "  Horizon  of  the
Disk."  It  was  built  on  a  regular  plan,  with  straight  streets  and  open  spaces,
and  divided  into  two  separate  quarters,  interspersed  with  orchards  and  shady
trellises.''  Workmen  soon  began  to  flock  to  the  new  city — metal-founders,
glass-founders,  weavers ;  in  fine,  all  who  followed  any  trade  indispensable  to
the  luxury  of  a  capital.  The  king  appropriated  a  territory  for  it  from  the
ancient  nome  of  the  Hare,  thus  comi^elling  the  god  Thot  to  contribute  to
the  fortune  of  Atonu ;  he  fixed  its  limits  by  means  of  stelas  placed  in  the
mountains,  from  Gebel-Tunah  to  Deshluit  on  the  west,  and  from  S!ieikh-Said
to  El-Hauata  on  the  eastern  bank ;  ^  it  was  a  new  nome  improvised  for  the
divine  parvenu.

Atonu  was  one  of  the  forms  of  the  Sun,  and  perhaps  the  most  material
one  of  all  those  devised  by  the  Egyptians.  He  was  defined  as  "  the  good
god  who  rejoices  in  truth,  the  lord  of  the  solar  course,  the  lord  of  the  disk,
the  lord  of  heaven,  the  lord  of  earth,  the  living  disk  which  lights  up  the
two  worlds,  the  living  Harmakhis  who  rises  on  the  horizon  bearing  his  name

"  The  vignette  on  p.  321  gives  only  an  idea  of  it.  To  judge  of  the  delicacy  of  detail  and  the  rich-
ness of  the  effect,  see  tlie  coloured  plates  in  which  Petrie  has  reproduced  the  principal  scenes  {Tell
tl-Amarnn,  pis.  iii.,  iv.).

^  Bauki  belonged  to  a  family  of  artists,  and  his  father  Mani  had  filled  before  him  the  post  of
chief  ef  the  sculptors  (Mariettk,  MormmeiUs  divers,  pi.  20  u).  The  part  played  by  tliese  personages
was  first  defined  by  Brugsch,  with  perhaps  some  exaggeration  of  tlieir  artistic  merit  and  originality
of  talent  (Geicldchie  JEgyptens,  pp.  421-423).

'  Nestor  L'hote,  Ltttres  ecrites  d'Eyijpte,  pp.  7G,  77,  who  considers  them  two  separate
towns.

*  We  know  .it  present  of  fourteen  of  these  stelie,  and  the  position  of  the  principal  of  them  will  be
seen  in  the  map  of  the  nome.  The  earlitst  discovered  were  published  by  PiussE  d'Avennes,  Monu-
ments Hgyjitiens,  pis.  xii.-xiv.,  partly  from  the  copies  made  by  Nestor  L'hote ;  and  others  have  been
gradually  added  to  them  through  the  labours  of  Lepsu  s,  Venkni.,  iii.  91,  110  a,  b,  of  Dakessy,  Tom-
beaux  et  Steles- Limiles  de  Hagi-Qandil,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  pp.  'iii-&i,  and  of  Petiue,
Tell  el-Amarna,  jip.  5,  C.  A  certain  number  must  still  remain  to  be  discovered  on  both  banks  of
the  Nile.


322  THE  EIOETEENTH   TEEBAN   DYNASTY.

of  Shu,  which  is  disk,  the  eternal  infuser  of  life."  ^  His  priests  exercised  the
same  functions  as  those  of  Heliopolis,  and  his  high  priest  was  called  "Oirimau,"
like  the  high  priest  of  Ea  in  Aunii.  This  functionary  was  a  certain  Hariri',
upon  whom  the  king  showered  his  favours,  and  he  was  for  some  time  the  chief
authority  in  the  State  after  the  Pharaoh  himself.^  Atonu  was  represented
sometimes  by  the  ordinary  figure  of  Horus,^  sometimes  by  the  solar  disk,  but  a
disk  whose  rays  were  prolonged  towards  the  earth,  like  so  many  arms  ready  to
lay  hold  with  their  little  hands  of  the  offerings  of  the  faithful,  or  to  distribute
to  mortals  the  crux  ansata,  the  symbol  of  life.  The  other  gods,  except  Amon,
were  sharers  with  humanity  in  his  benefits.  Atonu  proscribed  him,  and  tolerated
him  only  at  Thebes  ;  he  required,  moreover,  that  the  name  of  Amon  should  be
effaced  wherever  it  occurred,  but  he  respected  Ra  and  Horus  and  Harmakhis — ■
all,  in  fact,  but  Amon  :  he  was  content  with  being  regarded  as  their  king,  and
he  strove  rather  to  become  their  chief  than  their  destroyer.*  His  nature,
moreover,  had  nothing  in  it  of  the  mysterious  or  ambiguous ;  he  was  the
glorious  torch  which  gave  light  to  humanity,  and  which  was  seen  every  day
to  flame  in  the  heavens  without  ever  losing  its  brilliance  or  becoming  weaker.
When  he  hides  himself  "the  world  rests  in  darkness,  like  those  dead  who  lie
in  their  rock-tombs,  with  their  heads  swathed,  their  nostrils  stuffed  up,  their
eyes  sightless,  and  whose  whole  property  might  be  stolen  from  them,  even
that  which  they  have  under  their  head,  without  their  knowing  it ;  the  lion
issues  from  his  lair,  the  serpent  roams  ready  to  bite,  it  is  as  obscure  as  in  a
dark  room,  the  earth  is  silent  whilst  he  who  creates  everything  dwells  in  his
horizon."  He  has  hardly  arisen  when  "  Egypt  becomes  festal,  one  awakens,,
one  rises  on  one's  feet ;  when  thou  hast  caused  men  to  clothe  themselves,  they
adore  thee  with  outstretched  hands,  and  the  whole  earth  attends  to  its  work,
the  animals  betake  themselves  to  their  herbage,  trees  and  green  crof)s  abound,
birds  fly  to  their  marshy  thickets  with  wings  outstretched  in  adoration  of  thy
double,  the  cattle  skip,  all  the  birds  which  were  in  their  nests  shake  them-
selves when  thou  risest  for  them ;  the  boats  come  and  go,  for  every  way  is
open  at  thy  appearance,  the  fish  of  the  river  leap  before  thee  as  soon  as
thy  rays  descend  upon  the  ocean."  It  is  not  without  reason  that  all  living
things  thus  rejoice  at  his  advent ;  all  of  them  owe  their  existence  to  him,  for
"  he  creates  the  female  germ,  he  gives  virility  to  men,  and  furnishes  life  to

'  This  is  the  title  of  Atonu,  considered  as  god-king  in  Lepsius,  Deiilcm.,  iii.  105  h,  107  d,  1.  1.

'  Some  of  the  bas-reliefs  from  his  tomb  are  reproduced  in  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  97  h-e.

'  BouRiANT,  A.  Thebes,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  53.  It  was  probably  tliis  form  of
Horus  which  had,  in  the  temple  at  Thebes,  the  statue  called  "  the  red  image  of  Atonu  in  Paatouii "
(BoiujiANT,  Le  Tombeau  de  Bainses  a  Chgihh-abd-el-Gournah,  p.  7).

'  Prisse  d' Avenues  (Jiemarhs  on  Propylaia  at  Karnali,  in  the  Transacliuns  of  tlie  Society  of  Litera-
ture, 2nd  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  76-92)  has  found  at  Karnak,  on  fragments  of  the  temple,  the  names  of  other
divinities  than  Atonii  worsliipped  by  Khuniatonu.


ATONU  AND   HIS    WOBSEIP.  323

tlie  infant  in  its  mother's  womb ;  he  calms  and  stills  its  weeping,  he  nourishes
it  iu  the  maternal  womb,  giving  forth  the  breathings  which  animate  all  that
he  creates,  and  when  the  infant  escapes  from  the  womb  on  the  day  of  its
birth,  thou  openest  his  mouth  for  speech,  and  thoix  satisfiest  his  necessities.
When  the  chick  is  in  the  egg,  a  cackle  in  a  stone,  thou  givest  to  it  air  while
within  to  keep  it  alive;  when  thou  hast  caused  it  to  be  developed  in  the
egg  to  the  point  of  being  able  to  break  it,  it  goes  forth  proclaiming  its
existence  by  its  cackling,  and  walks  on  its  feet  from  the  moment  of  its  leaving
the  egg."  Atonu  presides  over  the  universe  and  arranges  within  it  the  lot  of
human  beings,  both  Egyptians  and  foreigners.  The  celestial  Nile  springs  up
in  Hades  far  away  in  the  north ;  he  makes  its  current  run  down  to  earth,  and
spreads  its  waters  over  the  fields  during  the  inundation  in  order  to  nourish  his
creatures.  He  rules  the  seasons,  winter  and  summer ;  he  constructed  the  far-
off  sky  in  order  to  display  himself  therein,  and  to  look  down  upon  his  works
below.  From  the  moment  that  he  reveals  himself  there,  "  cities,  towns,  tribes,
routes,  rivers — all  eyes  are  lifted  to  him,  for  he  is  the  disk  of  the  day  upon
the  earth."  ^  The  sanctuary  in  which  he  is  invoked  contains  only  his  divine
shadow ;  ^  for  he  himself  never  leaves  tlie  firmament.  His  worship  assumes
none  of  the  severe  and  gloomy  forms  of  the  Theban  cults :  songs  resound
therein,  and  hymns  accompanied  by  the  harp  or  flute  ;  ^  bread,  cakes,  vegetables,
fruits,  and  flowers  are  associated  with  his  rites,  and  only  on  very  rare  occasions
one  of  those  bloody  sacrifices  in  which  the  other  gods  delight.  The  king
made  himself  supreme  pontiff  of  Atonu,  and  took  precedence  of  the  high
priest.  He  himself  celebrated  the  rites  at  the  altar  of  the  god,  and  we  see  him
there  standing  erect,  his  hands  outstretched,  offering  incense  and  invoking
blessings  from  on  high.*  Like  the  Caliph  Hakim  of  a  later  age,  he  formed  a
school  to  propagate  his  new  doctrines,  and  preached  them  before  his  courtiers  :
if  they  wished  to  please  him,  they  had  to  accept  his  teaching,  and  show
that  they  had  profited  by  it.""'     The  renunciation  of  the  traditional  religious

'  These  estractB  aro  taken  from  tlie  bynins  of  Tel  el-Aniarna.  They  have  been  translated  by
BocRlANT,  Deux  jours  de  fouilUs  a  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Mission  Francaise,  vol.  i.
pp.  2-7,  and  afterwards  by  Breasted,  De  Hijmnis  in  Solem  sub  Eege  Amenophide  IV.  cnnceptis,  1895.

'  III  one  of  the  tombs  at  Tel  cl-Amarna  the  king  is  depicted  leading  his  mother  Tii  to  the  temple  of
AtoDii  in  order  to  see  ''the  Shadow  of  Ka"  (Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  101,  102),  and  it  was  thought  with
some  reason  that  "  the  Shadow  of  Ra  "  was  one  of  the  names  of  the  temple  (Bryant-Read,  An  Intcrip-
lioH  of  Khueualen,  in  the  Proceedinys  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  2US,  213,  215).  I  think
that  this  designation  applied  also  to  the  statue  or  symbol  of  the  gotl ;  the  shadow  of  a  god  was  attached
to  the  stiitue  in  the  same  manner  as  the  "double,"  and  transformed  it  into  an  animated  body.

'  Choirs  of  singers  ami  musicians  are  represented  in  Lepsius,  Denltm.,  iii.  94,  9(1  a,  lOU  a ;  some
of  them  seem  to  be  blind.

'  Nestor  L'iiote,  Lettres  e'crites  d'P.'ijijplc,  pp.  C2,  G3.  The  altar  on  which  the  king  stands  upright
is  one  of  these  cube  s  of  masonry  of  whicli  Naville  discovered  such  a  lino  example  in  the  temple  of
Hatshoj  sitii  at  iJeir  el-Bahaii  {The  Temple  of  Deir  el-Hahari,  pp.  10-12).

'  Lei'sIUS,  Denkm.,  iii.  107  a,  I.  10,  where  TutO,  tlic  royal  messenger  who  carried  the  letters  of  Tel
el-Amarna,  says  that  every  morning  he  took  lessons  from  the  king,  "  beciuise  of  the  great  love  which
li.  bori-  to  the  royal  teaching."    Ai  aflirms,  moreover  {ibid.,  107  (7,  1.  4),  that  his  name  penetrated


324  THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

observances  of  the  solar  house  involved  also  the  rejection  of  such  personal
names  as  implied  an  ardent  devotion  to  the  banished  god ;  in  place  of
Atuenothes,  "he  to  whom  Amon  is  united,"  the  king  assumed  after  a  time
the  name  of  Khuniatonu,  "the  Glory  of  the  Disk,"  and  all  the  members
of  his  family,  as  well  as  his  adherents  at  court,  whose  appellations  involved
the  name  of  the  same  god,  soon  followed  his  example.  The  proscription  of
Amon  extended  to  inscriptions,  so  that  while  his  name  or  figure,  wherever
either  could  be  got  at,  was  chiselled  out,  the  vulture,  the  emblem  of  Mut,
which  expressed  the  idea  of  mother,  was  also  avoided.^  The  king  would
have  nothing  about  him  to  suggest  to  eye  or  ear  the  remembrance  of
the  gods  or  doctrines  of  Thebes.  It  would  consequently  have  been  fatal
to  them  and  their  pretensions  to  the  primacy  of  Egypt  if  the  reign  of
the  young  king  had  continued  as  long  as  might  naturally  have  been  ex-
pected. After  having  been  for  nearly  two  centuries  almost  the  national
liead  of  Africa,  Amon  was  degraded  by  a  single  blow  to  the  secondary  rank
and  languishing  existence  in  which  he  had  lived  before  the  expulsion  of  the
Hyksos.  He  had  surrendered  his  sceptre  as  king  of  heaven  and  earth,  not
to  any  of  his  rivals  who  in  old  times  had  enjoyed  the  highest  rank,  but
to  an  individual  of  a  lower  order,  a  sort  of  demigod,  while  he  himself  had
thus  become  merely  a  local  deity,  confined  to  the  corner  of  the  Said  in
which  he  had  had  his  origin.  There  was  not  even  left  to  him  the  peaceful
possession  of  this  restricted  domain,  for  he  was  obliged  to  act  as  host  to
the  enemy  who  had  deposed  him :  the  temple  of  Atonu  was  erected  at  the
door  of  his  own  sanctuary,  and  without  leaving  their  courts  the  priests  of
Amon  could  hear  at  the  hours  of  worship  the  chants  intoned  by  hundreds  of
heretics  in  the  temple  of  the  Disk.  Amon's  priests  saw,  moreover,  the  royal
gifts  flowing  into  other  treasuries,  and  the  gold  of  Syria  and  Ethiopia  no  longer
came  into  their  hands.  Should  they  stifle  their  complaints,  and  bow  to  this
insulting  oppression,  or  should  they  raise  a  protest  against  the  action  which  had
condemned  them  to  obscurity  and  a  restricted  existence?  If  they  had  given
indications  of  resistance,  they  would  have  been  obliged  to  submit  to  prompt
repression,  but  we  see  no  sign  of  this.  The  bulk  of  the  people — clerical  as  well
as  lay — accepted  the  deposition  with  complacency,  and  the  nobles  hastened  to

into  the  palace  owing  to  the  zeal  with  which  he  applied  himself  "  to  hear  the  doctrine  "  of  the  king.
Klidniatonu,  speaking  elsewhere  to  the  high  priest  Mariii,  calls  him  "  ray  servant— soimu  asAu— who
hears  the  doctrine  "  (Id.,  ibid.,  97).  Other  expressions  of  a  similar  kind  are  found  in  many  of  the
inscriptions  in  the  tombs  at  Tel  el-Amarna,  leaving  no  donbt  in  the  mind  as  to  the  proselytising  spirit
wliich  animated  the  prince.  The  Caliph  Hakim  seems  to  me,  of  all  known  individuals,  to  resemble
Khuniatonu  the  most,  both  in  his  character  and  in  tlie  riile  he  played  ;  his  reign  seems  to  have  repro-
duced in  Maliometan  Egypt  that  of  KhuiiiatonQ  in  the  Egypt  of  the  Pharaohs.

'  Lepsii'S,  XJeher  den  1''"'  JEgyjitischen  Gijtlerkreis,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in
Berlin,  1851,  pp.  198,  199.  We  find,  however,  some  instances  where  the  draughtsman,  either  from
custom  or  design,  had  used  the  vulture  to  express  the  word  maid,  "  the  mother,"  without  trouljliug
himself  to  think  whether  it  answered  to  the  name  of  tlie  goddess.


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  AMON  AT   THEBES.


325


ofier  their  adlierence  to  that  which  afterwards  became  the  official  confession  of
faith  of  the  Lord  King.*  The  lord  of  Tliebes  itself,  a  certain  Ramses,  bowed  his
head  to  the  new  cult,  and
tlie  bas-reliefs  of  his  tomb
display  to  our  eyes  the
proofs  of  his  apostasy  :
on  tlie  right-hand  side
Amon  is  the  only  object
of  his  devotion,  while  on
the  left  he  declares  him-
self an  adherent  of  Atonu.
Religious  formularies,
divine  appellations,  the
representations  of  the
costume,  expression,  and
demeanour  of  the  figures
are  at  issue  with  each
other  in  the  scenes  on
the  two  sides  of  the  door,
and  if  we  were  to  trust
to  appearances  only,  one
would  think  that  the  two
pictures  belonged  to  t>vo
separate  reigns,  and  were
concerned  with  two  indi-
viduals strangers  to  each
other.^

The  rupture  between  the  past  and  the  jjresent  was  so  complete,  in  fact,  that
the  sovereign  was  obliged  to  change,  if  not  his  face  and  expression,  at  least  the

'  The  political  character  of  tLib  reaction  against  the  growing  power  of  the  high  priests  ami  the
town  of  Amon  was  pointed  out  for  the  first  time  by  Maspero  in  187S,  in  his  course  of  lectures  at  the
School  for  Advanced  Studies,  and  dealt  with  briefly  by  0.  Ratet,  Les  Monuments  de  I'Art  antique,  vol.  i.,
Am€nijphi»  IV.,  statuette  ea  steatite  jaune,  mus6i  du  Louvre,  pp.  3,  4  ;  cf.  BonniANT,  A  TItehes,  in  the
liecueil  de  Tmvaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  5a.  This  idea  was  developed  by  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichle  des  Alter-
thums,  vol.  i.  pp.  2(59-274,  and  Geschichle  Ji:gi/j)ttns,  p.  2l!0,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Geschichle  von
Allen  JF.gypten,  \>\>.  97-104,  and  Tiei.e,  Geschichle  der  lieligion  im  AUertum,  vol.  i.  p.  89.  Ed.  Meyer
and  Tide  blend  witli  the  political  idea  a  nionotlieistic  conception  which  does  not  seem  to  me  to  bo
fully  justified,  at  least  at  present,  by  anything  in  the  materials  we  possess.

-  His  tomb  was  discovered  iu  1878  Ijy  ViLLiEits-STfAiiT,  Nile  Gleanings,  pp.  297-302,  and  Egi/iit
after  the  War,  pp.  369-392 ;  cf.  Bouriant,  Le  Tomheau  de  Ramses  a  Chiihh-Ahd-el-Gournah,  iu  tlie
Revue  Archifologique,  1882,  vol.  ii.,  and  A  Thebes,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.  vi.  pp.  55,  50.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograpli  by  Petkie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pi.  i.  10,  and  frontis-
piece; cf.  the  drawing  in  Lepsius,  Dcnkm.,  iii.  Ill,  in  which  the  likeness  to  that  given  above  is
striking.  Petrie  tliinks  that  the  monument  discovered  by  liim,  which  is  of  fine  plaster,  is  a  cast  of
the  dead  king,  executed  possibly  to  enable  the  sculptors  to  make  Ushabtiu,  "  Kospoudonts,"  for  him
(Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  17,  18,  10).


THE    MASK    01''    KHLNIATONU.'


326


THE  EIQETEEKTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


mode  in  which  tliey  were  represented.  The  name  and  personality  of  an  Egyptian
were  so  closely  allied  that  interference  with  one  implied  interference  with  the
other.^  Khuniatonu  could  not  continue  to  be  such  as  he  was  when  Amen6thes>
and,  in  fact,  their  respective  portraits  differ  from  each  other  to  that  degree  that

there  is  some  doubt  at  moments  as  to
their  identity.  Amenothes  is  hardly
to  be  distinguished  from  his  father :
he  has  the  same  regular  and  somewhat
heavy  features,  the  same  idealised
body  and  conventional  shape  as  those
which  we  find  in  the  orthodox
Pharaohs.  Khuniatonu  affects  a  long
and  narrow  head,  conical  at  the  top,
with  a  retreating  forehead,  a  large
aquiline  and  pointed  nose,  a  small
mouth,  an  enormous  chin  projecting
in  front,  the  whole  being  supported  by
a  long,  thin  neck.  His  shoulders  are
narrow,  with  little  display  of  muscle,
but  his  breasts  are  so  full,  his  abdomen
so  prominent,  and  his  hips  so  large,
that  one  would  think  they  belonged
to  a  woman.  Etiquette  required  the
attendants  upon  the  king,  and  those
who  aspired  to  his  favour,  to  be  por-
trayed in  the  bas-reliefs  of  temples
AMENOTHES  IV.,  «'"  touibs  \u  all  poiuts,  both  as  regards

FROM    THE    STATUETTE  IN  THE  LOUVKE.^  f^^g      ^^^     deinCanOUr,     liko     tho     kiug

himself.  Hence  it  is  that  the  majority  of  his  contemporaries,  after  having
borne  the  likeness  of  Amenothes,  came  to  adopt,  without  a  break,  that  of
Khuniatonii.  The  scenes  at  Tel  el-Amarna  contain,  therefore,  nothing  but
angular  profiles,  pointed  skulls,  ample  breasts,  flowing  figures,  and  swelling
stomachs.  The  outline  of  these  is  one  that  lends  itself  readily  to  caricature,
and  the  artists  have  exaggerated  the  various  details  with  the  intention,  it  may
be,  of  rendering  the  representations  grotesque.  There  was  nothing  ridiculous,
however,  in  the  king,  their  model,  and  several  of  his  statues  attribute  to  him
a  languid,  almost  valetudinarian,  grace,  whicli  is  by  no  means  lacking  in
dignity.     He  was  a  good  and  affectionate  man,  and  was  passionately  fond  of

•  Cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  259.  260,  for  further  iuformation  on  this  subject.
'  Drawn  by   Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Faucher-GuJiQ  ;  cf.   Maspero,   in  O.  Eayet,  Les
Monuments  de  I'Art  antique,  vol.  i.     The  lower  part  of  the  legs  has  been  restored  by  a  modern  sculptor.


EEUNIATONirS  ADMINISTRATION.


327


m^M3


KHUNIATONU    WITH    HIS    WIFE    UPON    HIS   KNEES."


liis  wife,  Nofiititi,  assoeiating  her  with  himself  in  his  sovereign  acts.  If  he
set  out  to  visit  the  temple,  she  followed  him  in  a  chariot ; '  if  he  was  about  to
reward  one  of  his  faithful  subjects,  she  stood  beside  him  and  helped  to  dis-
tribute the  golden  necklaces,'-  She  joined  him  in  his  prayers  to  the  Solar
Disk  ;"  she  ministered  to  him  in  domestic  life,  when,  having  broken  away  from
the  worries  of  his  public  duties,*  he  sought  relaxation  in  his  harem  ;  and  their
union  was  so  tender,  that  we  find  her  on  one  occasion,  at  least,  seated  in  a
coaxing  attitude  on  her  husband's  knees — a  unique
instance  of  such  affection  among  all  the  represeu-  , •  ':i't.m:,x

tations  on  the  monuments  of  Egypt.     They  had  "^^^^^^iT

six    daughters,   whom   they   brought    up   to  ^^^"^^?^^^ri~^

live  with  them  on  terms  of  the  closest
intimacy :  they  accompanied  the
father  aiid  mother  everywhere,
and  are  exhibited  as  playin
around  the  throne  while  their
parents  are  engaged  in  per-
forming tlie  duties  of  their
office.''  The  gentleness  and
gaiety  of  the  king  were
reflected  in  the  life  of  his  subjects :  all  the  scenes  which  they  have  left  us
consist  entirely  of  processions,  cavalcades,  banquets,  and  entertainments,
Kliuniatonu  was  prodigal  in  the  gifts  of  gold  and  the  eulogies  which  he  bestowed
on  Mariri,  the  chief  priest :  tlie  people  dance  around  him  while  he  is  receiving
from  the  king  the  just  recompense  of  his  activity.''  When  Huia,  who  came
back  from  Syria  in  the  XII'"  year  of  the  king's  reign,  brought  solemnly  before
him  the  tribute  he  had  collected,  the  king,  borne  in  his  jolting  palanquin  on
the  shoulders  of  his  officers,  proceeded  to  the  temple  to  return  thanks  to  his
god,  to  the  accompaniment  of  chants  and  the  waving  of  the  great  fans.**  When
the  divine  father  Ai  had  married  the  governess  of  one  of  the  king's  daughters,
the  whole  city  gave  itself  up  to  enjoyment,  and  wine  flowed  freely  during  the
wedding  feast.^     Notwithstanding  the  frequent  festivals,  tlie  king  found  time

'  Lepsics,  Denhn.,  iii.  92,  93.

=  Id.,  ihid.,  iii.  97  e,  103,  109.

'  Nestok  L'hote,  Lettres  Writes  (VEgyple,  p.  59 ;  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Hist,  de  I'Arl  Egyptien  ;
LEPSirs,  Denkm.,  iii.  91  a,  lOU  b,  110  a,  b.

'  Nestor  L'huie,  Leltrcs  icriles  d'Ajtjpte,  pp.  GG,  G7  ;  Lepsius,  Denltm.,  iii.  98  b.

^  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  93,  wliure  tlio  princesses  are  seen  followiuy  the  king  to  tlio  temple  of
Atonft  in  a  chariot ;  ibid.,  103,  109,  where  they  are  present  at  the  distribution  of  the  golden  necklaces.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Giidin,  from  a  drawing  by  Pe'irii;,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pi.  i.  IG,  and  pis.  10,  41.
A  picture  in  Lepsius,  IJenhm.,  iii.  99  b,  shows  them  seated  un  the  same  scat  aud  embracing  each  other.

•  Nestor  L'hote,  Leitres  ^criles  d'Egtjpte,  pp.  Gl-GG;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  91-iil,  97.

'  Lepsiu.s,  Den/fm.,  ill.  100  b.  Wo  ought  possibly  to  read  the  name  Huiti;  the  cuneiform  tran-
scriptions, however,  place  after  the  i  a  final  «,  which  inclines  me  to  prefer  Huia.

'  Lepsids,  Denkm.,  Iii3,  IOC  a.


328


THE  EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.


KHUNIATONU    AND    HIS    WIFE    REWARDING    ONE    OF  THE    fiKEAT    OFFICEIIS   OP    THE   COURT.'


to  watch  jealously  over  the  ordinary  progress  of  governinent  and  foreigo
affairs.  The  architects,  too,  were  not  allowed  to  staud  idle,  and  without
taking  into  account  the  repairs  of  existing  buildings,  had  plenty  to  do
in  constructing  edifices  in  honour  of  Atonii  in  the  principal  towns  of  the
Nile  valley,  at  Memphis,^  Heliopolis,^  Hermopolis,*  Hermonthis,''  and  in  the
Fayiim.^  The  provinces  in  Ethiopia  remained  practically  in  the  same
condition  as  in  the  time  of  Amenothes  III. ; '  Kush  was  pacified,  notwith-
standing the  raids  which  the  tribes  of  the  desert  were  accustomed  to  make
from  time  to  time,  only  to  receive  on  each  occasion  rigorous  chastisement
from  the  king's  viceroy.  The  sudden  degradation  of  Amon  had  not  brought
about  any  coldness  between  the  Pharaoh  and  his  princely  allies  in  Asia.  The
aged  Amenothes  had,  towards  the  end  of  his  reign,  asked  the  band  of  Dushratta's
daughter  in  marriage,  and  the  Mitannian  king,  highly  flattered  by  the  request,,
saw  his  opportunity  and  took  advantage  of  it  in  the  interest  of  his  treasury.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  lusinger,  taken  in  1SS2.

^  C.  Nicholson,  On  some  Bemains  uf  the  Disl^-Worshijjpers  at  Memphis,  in  the  Jlgyptiaca,  pp.  115-
1 34 ;  M ARIETTE,  Monmnents  Divers,  pi.  27  e.

'  Maspero,  Notes  sur  qnelques  points  de  Grammaire,  §  xvii.  c,  in  Zeilschri/t,  1881,  p.  1 1(J.  Thu  f^reater
part  of  the  fragments  from  Heliopolis  are  walled  up  in  the  mosque  of  the  Caliph  Hakim  at  Cairo.

'  A  granite  altar  from  Ashmunen  ia  described  by  Prisse  u'Avennes,  Lettre  a  M.  ChampoUion-
Figeac,  in  the  Bevue  Archeologique,  1847,  p.  730;  I  saw,  in  1882,  in  the  village  of  Ashmuueu  itself,
some  insignificant  remains  which  seemed  to  bear  the  cartouche  of  Khuniatonu.

'  Wiedemann,  Mgyplische  Geschichte,  p.  400.

"  Petihe,  lllalmn,  Kahun  and  Guroh,  pp.  IG,  20,  and  pi.  xxiv.  10.

'  The  name  and  the  figure  of  Khiiniatouii  are  met  with  on  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  Soleb-
(LEP.S1US,  Denhm.,  iii.  110  /(),  and  he  received  in  his  XII"'  year  the  tributes  of  Kusb,  as  Well  as.
those  of  Syria  (Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  100  h,  11.  1,  2).


KBUNIATONU'S  RELATIONS    WITH  SYRIA.


329


He  discussed  the  umouct  of  the  dowry,  demanded  a  considerable  sum  of  gold,
uud  wheu  the  afiair  had  been  finally  arranged  to  his  satisfaction,  he  despatched
the  princess  to  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  On  her  arrival  she  found  her  afiSanced
iiusbaud  was  dead,  or,  at  all  events,  dying.  Amenothes  IV.,  however,  stepped
into  his  father's  place,  and  inherited  his  bride  with  his  crown.^  The  new  king's
relations  with  other  foreign
princes  were  no  lessfriendly ;
the  chief  of  the  Kbati
(^Hittites)  complimented
him  on  his  accession,-  the
King  of  Alasia  wrote  to  him
to  express  his  earnest  desire
for  a  continuance  of  peace
between  the  two  states;^
Burnaburiash  of  Babylon
had,  it  is  true,  hoped  to
obtain  an  Egyptiau  prin-
cess in  marriage  for  his  son,
and  being  disappointed,
had  endeavoured  to  pick  a
quarrel  over  the  value  of
the  presents  which  had
been  sent  him,  together
with  the  notice  of  the  ac-
cession of  the  new  sovereie-n.

But  his  kingdom  lay  too  far  away  to  make  his  ill-will  of  much  consequence,  and
his  complaints  passed  unheeded.'"'  In  Coele-Syria  and  Phoenicia  the  situation
remained  unchanged.  The  vassal  cities  were  in  a  perpetual  state  of  disturbance,
though  not  more  so  than  in  the  past.  Azirii,  son  of  Abdashirti,  chief  of  the
country  of  the  Amorites,  had  always,  even  during  the  lifetime  of  Amenothes  III.,
been  the  most  turbulent  of  vassals.*^  The  smaller  states  of  the  Orontes  and  of  the
coast  about  Arvad  had  been  laid  waste  by  his  repeated  incursions  and  troubled
by  his  intrigues.      He  liad  taken  and  pillaged  twenty  towns,  among  which

'  Marriage  of  AmenOthus  IV.  with  Tad ukhipa,  daughter  of  Diishratta  (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-
Amarna  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  11,  p.  26,  11.  4,  5).

'  WfsCK.LER-XDV.L,  Der  Thonliifel/und  von  El-AmariM,NoAS,  p\.  15;  cf.  Velattre,  Leltres  de  Tell
el-Amarna,  in  the  I'roceediwjs  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  1890-iH,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  SlS-.'ioO.

'  Bezold-Buiigk,  Tdl  el-AtiKirna  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  (J,  pp.  14,  15,  and  xx.wi.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  lusiuger.     The  tomb  is  that  of  Tutit.

'  Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  etc.,  Nos.  2-4,  pU.  (J-ll,  and  pp.  xxx.-xxxiii.

"  For  further  account  of  thia  stirring  personage,  cf.  the  memoir  of  Vkia:  Delattke,  Azlru,  in  the
I'roceedinijs  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  1890-01,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  215-234,  and  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,
in  the  Proceedings,  1892-!J3,  vol.  xv.  pp.  1(1-20,  21,  22,  345-37:i,  501,  502,  50S-510,  51G-520.


THE    DOOn    OF    A    TOMB    AT    TEI.    EL-AMAKNA.''


330  THE  EIGETEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

were  Simyra,  Sini,  Irqata,  and  Qodshu,  and  he  was  already  threatening  Byblos,
Berytus,  and  Sidon.  It  was  useless  to  complain  of  him,  for  he  always
managed  to  exculpate  himself  to  the  royal  messengers.  Khai,  DMu,  Ame-
nemaupit  had  in  turn  all  pronounced  him  innocent.  Pharaoh  himself,  after
citing  him  to  appear  in  Egypt  to  give  an  explanation  of  his  conduct,  had
allowed  himself  to  be  won  over  by  his  fair  speaking,  and  had  dismissed  him
uncondemned.  Other  princes,  who  lacked  his  cleverness  and  power,  tried
to  imitate  him,  and  from  north  to  south  the  whole  of  Syria  could  only  be
compared  to  some  great  arena,  in  which  fighting  was  continually  carried  on
between  one  tribe  or  town  and  another — Tyre  against  Sidon,  Sidon  against
Byblos,  Jerusalem  against  Lachish.  All  of  them  appealed  to  Khuniatonii,  and
endeavoured  to  enlist  him  on  their  side.  Their  despatches  arrived  by  scores,
and  the  perusal  of  them  at  the  present  day  would  lead  us  to  imagine  that
Egypt  had  all  but  lost  her  supremacy.  The  Egyptian  ministers,  however,  were
entirely  unmoved  by  them,  and  continued  to  refuse  material  support  to  any
of  the  numerous  rivals,  except  in  a  few  rare  cases,  -(Ahere  a  too  prolonged
indifference  would  have  provoked  an  open  revolt  in  some  part  of  the  country.
Khimiatonii  died  young,  about  the  XVIIP"  year  of  his  reign. ^  He  was
buried  in  the  depths  of  a  ravine  in  the  mountain-side  to  the  east  of  the  town,
and  his  tomb  remained  unknown  till  within  the  last  few  years.  Although  one
of  his  daughters  who  died  before  her  father  had  been  interred  there,  the  place
seems  to  have  been  entirely  unprepared  for  the  reception  of  the  king's  body.
The  funeral  chamber  and  the  passages  are  scarcely  even  rough-hewn,  and  the
reception  halls  show  a  mere  commencement  of  decoration.-  The  other  tombs
of  the  locality  are  divided  into  two  groups,  separated  by  the  ravine  reserved  for
the  buryiug-place  of  the  royal  house.  The  noble  families  possessed  each  their
own  tomb  on  the  slopes  of  the  hillside  ;  the  common  people  were  laid  to  rest  in
pits  lower  down,  almost  on  the  level  of  the  plain.  The  cutting  and  decoration  of
all  these  tombs  had  been  entrusted  to  a  company  of  contractors,  who  had  exe-
cuted them  according  to  two  or  three  stereotyped  plans,  without  any  variation,
except  in  size.^  Nearly  all  the  walls  are  bare,  or  present  but  few  inscriptions  ;
those  tombs  only  are  completed  whose  occupants  died  before  the  Pharaoh.
The  fafades  of  the  tombs  are  cut  in  the  rock,  and  contain,  for  the  most  part,

'  The  length  of  Khuniatonu's  reign  was  fixed  by  Griffith  with  almost  absolute  certainty  by  means
of  the  dates  written  in  ink  on  the  jars  of  wine  and  preserves  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  palace  (Petbie,
Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  32-.34,  and  pis.  xxii.-xxv.

^  The  tomb  has  been  found,  as  I  anticipated,  in  the  ravine  which  separates  tlie  northern  from  the
southern  group  of  burying-places.  The  Arabs  opened  it  in  ISOl,  and  Gre'baut  has  since  completely
excavated  it  (Dakessy,  Toinheaux  et  Steles-Umites  de  Hagi-Qandil,  in  the  Recueilde  Travaux,  vol.  xv.
p.  62).  The  scenes  depicted  in  it  are  connected  with  the  death  and  funeral  of  the  Princess  Maqita-
ton^  (BouKiANT,  Notes  de  voyage,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  121-127.

'  Nestou  L'hote,  Letlres  ^crites  d'£gypte,  p.  53,  et  seq. ;  Bocwant,  Deux  Jours  defouilles  a  Tell
el-Amarna,  in  the  Memoires  de  la  Mission  fratifaise  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  8,  9,  15,  10,  21,  22.


Till-:    TOMBS    OF    TEL   EL-AMAIiNA.


331


HKHB^'"^'^  '*^"^''^ii^

^SBIil

SB^^HI

^^B^^^*""^;;

^^H

^^^^^^^^^^

p^^^

^fe^^      ^^^Bi

B^^B

^hh

^^^^^^■r -^E^^mI

^^Hfr^^^l

^^^^^^99H^^^^I

^^^H|    """^^l

^B  fl

^IK ''  ^'  '^l^^HI^^B

^■^^^■^^^^^^H

H  HH

PM^H

^^^^^^^8r              ' fcB

Hb  ^^h

■H

M^BB|M|^^|^^jr..l  V-  -A  ^'^'->---

^^^H  '^   ^199

=^<  ^^^=^^^^^1

HS9HH^H

H^M

^^^

INTERIOR   OF    A    T0-MI5    AT    TEL    EL-AIIARN'A.


Lilt  one  door,  the  jaiubs  of  which  are  covered  on  both  sides  by  several  lines  of
liieroglyphs ;  and  it  is  just  possible  to  distinguish  traces  of  the  adoration  of  the
radiant  Disk  on  the  lintels,  together  with  the  cartouches  containing  the  names
of  the  king  and  god.  The  chapel  is  a  large  rectangular  chamber,  from  one  end
of  wliich  opens  the  inclined  passage  leading  to  the  cofSu.  The  roof  is  some-
times supported  by  columns,  having  capitals  decorated  with  designs  of  flowers
or  of  geese  hung  from  the  abacus  by  their  feet  with  their  heads  turned  upwards.'-*
Tlie  religious  teaching  at  Tel  el-Amarua  presents  no  diflerence  in  the  main
from  that  which  prevailed  in  other  parts  of  Egypt.^  The  Double  of  Osiris  was
(supposed  to  reside  in  the  tomb,  or  else  to  take  wing  to  heaven  and  embark
with  Atonu,  as  elsewhere  he  would  embark  with  Ra.  The  same  funerary
furniture  is  needed  for  the  deceased  as  in  other  local  cults — ornaments  of

'   Dfinvii  by  Boudiur,  after  a  photo^'rapli  by  Insiuger  of  the  interior  of  the  tomb  of  Tutu.

-  (Jf.  the  drawing  of  the  column  ornamented  with  geese,  in  Lui'isius,  Denhn.,  in.  U)6o;  Pri.s.sk
ii'AvENNEs,  Histoire  de  I'Art  Egyplim.  Fragments  of  similar  columns  have  been  found  in  the  palace
of  the  king,  in  the  middle  of  the  ruins  of  the  town,  by  Vktiue,  Tdlel-Amarna,  pis.  vii.,  xi.  (5,  and  p.  S.

'  According  to  Ureastkd,  De  Ui/nmis  in  Soleiii  gub  Amenopliide  IV.  conceplis,  p.  8,  there  was  an
esBentlul  dillcrence.  But  the  peculiar  treatment  of  tlie  two  extremities  of  the  sign  for  the  sky,  which
surmounts  the  great  scene  on  tlie  tomb  of  Ahmosis,  show.s  that  there  had  been  no  cliange  in  the  ideas
concerning  tlje  two  horizons  or  the  divine  tree  found  in  them  (Nestor  L'uote,  Papkrs  inedits,  vol.  iii.
fol.  2tiU; :  the  aspiratious  for  the  soul  of  Mariri,  the  high  priest  of  Atouii  (Ii>.,  ibid.,  ful.  2St),  or  for
that  of  the  sculptor  Bauku,  are  the  same  as  tho.sc  usually  found  (Brugsuh,  Gefchichte  jEgyplem,  pji.
422, 12:!>,  and  tlie  formula  on  the  funerary  stehe  dillers  only  iu  the  name  of  the  god  from  that  on  the
ordinary  stelse  of  the  same  kind  (Wieoemann,  Inscriptions  of  the.  Time  of  Amenophia  IV.,  in  the  Pro-
ctedinijn  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  .Vrchreology,  vol.  xvii  pp.  153-156).


332  THE  EIGHTEENTH    THEBAN  DYNASTY.

vitreous  paste,  amulets,  and  Ushahtiu,  or  "  Respondents,"  to  labour  for  the  dead
man  in  the  fields  of  lalu.  Those  of  Khuniatonu  were,  like  those  of  Ameno-
thes  III.,  actual  statuettes  in  granite  of  admirable  workmanship.^  The  dead
who  reached  the  divine  abode,  retained  the  same  rank  in  life  that  they  had  pos-
sessed here  below,  and  in  order  to  ensure  the  enjoyment  of  it,  they  related,  or
caused  to  be  depicted  in  their  tombs,  the  events  of  their  earthly  career.  A  citizen
of  Khuitatouu  would  naturally  represent  the  manners  and  customs  of  his  native
town,  and  this  would  account  for  the  local  colouring  of  the  scenes  in  which  we
see  him  taking  part.  They  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  traditional  pictures
of  the  buildings  and  gardens  of  Thebes  with  which  we  are  familiar ;  we  have
instead  the  palaces,  colonnades,  and  pylons  of  the  rising  city,  its  courts  planted
with  sycamores,  its  treasuries,  and  its  storehouses.  The  sun's  disk  hovers  above
and  darts  its  prehensile  rays  over  every  object ;  its  hands  present  the  crux
ansata  to  the  nostrils  of  the  various  members  of  the  family,  they  touch  caress-
ingly the  queen  and  her  daughters,  they  handle  the  oflerings  of  bread  and
cakes,  they  extend  even  into  the  government  warehouses  to  pilfer  or  to  bless.
Throughout  all  these  scenes  Khuniatonii  and  the  ladies  of  his  harem  seem  to
be  ubiquitous :  here  he  visits  one  of  the  officers,  there  he  repairs  to  the  temple
for  the  dedication  of  its  sanctuary.  His  chariot,  followed  at  a  little  distance
by  that  of  the  princesses,  makes  its  way  peaceably  through  the  streets.  The
police  of  the  city  and  the  soldiers  of  the  guard,  whether  Egyptians  or  foreigners,
run  before  him  and  clear  a  path  among  the  crowd,  the  high  priest  Mariri  stands
at  the  gate  to  receive  him,  and  the  ceremony  is  brought  to  a  close  by  a  dis-
tribution of  gold  necklaces  or  rings,  while  the  populace  dance  with  delight
before  the  sovereign.  Meantime  the  slaves  have  cooked  the  repast,  the  dancers
and  musicians  within  their  chambers  have  rehearsed  for  the  evening's  festival,
and  the  inmates  of  the  house  carry  on  animated  dialogues  during  their  meal.
The  style  and  the  technique  of  these  wall-paintings  dift'er  in  no  way  irom  those
in  the  necropolis  of  the  preceding  period,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
artists  who  decorated  these  monuments  were  trained  iu  the  schools  of  Thebes.
Their  drawing  is  often  very  refined,  and  there  is  great  freedom  in  their  com-
position ;  the  perspective  of  some  of  the  bas-reliefs  almost  comes  up  to  our  own,
and  the  movement  of  animated  crowds  is  indicated  with  perfect  accuracy.  It
is,  however,  not  safe  to  conclude  from  these  examples  that  the  artists  who
executed  them  would  have  developed  Egyptian  art  in  a  new  direction,  had  not
subsequent  events  caused  a  reaction  against  the  worship  of  Atonii  and  his
followers.  Although  the  tombs  in  which  they  worked  differ  from  the
generality  of  Egyptian  burying-places,  their  originality  does  not  arise  from  any

>  For  these  granite  Ushabtiu,  cf.  Petrie,  Tell  elAmarna,  pp.  17,  IS.   For  olliers  of  the  snme  period,
see  Wiedemann,  On  a  Monument  of  the  Time  of  King  Khu-n-Ateu,  in  Proceedings,  vol.  iii.  pp-  20U-203.


THE  ART   OF   THE    TIME    OF  EHUNIATONU.


333


efibrt,  either  conscious  or  otherwise,  to  break  through  the  ordinary  routine  of
the  art  of  the  time;  it  is  rather  the  result  of  the  extraordinary  appearance  of
the  sovereign  whose  features  they  were  called  on  to  portray,  aud  the  novelty
of  several  of  the  subjects  whicli  they  had  to  treat.  That  artist  among  them
who  first  gave  concrete  form  to  the  ideas  circulated  by  the  priests  of  Atonu,
and  drew  the  model
cartoons,  evidently  pos-
sessed a  master  -  hand,
and  was  endowed  with  un-
deniable originality  and
power.  No  other  Egyp-
tian draughtsman  ever
expressed  a  child's  grace
as  he  did,  and  tbe  por-
traits which  he  sketched
of  the  daughters  of
Khuniatonu  playing  un-
dressed at  their  mother's
side,  are  examples  of  a
reserved  and  delicate
grace.  But  these  models,
when  once  composed  and
finished  even  to  the
smallest     details,     were

entrusted  for  execution  to  workmen  of  mediocre  powers,  who  were  recruited
not  only  from  Thebes,  but  from  the  neighbouring  cities  of  Hermopolis  and
Slut.  These  estimable  people,  with  a  praiseworthy  patience,  traced  bit  by  bit
the  cartoons  confided  to  them,  omitting  or  adding  individuals  or  groups  accord-
ing to  tbe  extent  of  the  wall-space  they  had  to  cover,  or  to  the  number  of
relatives  and  servants  whom  the  proprietor  of  the  tomb  desired  should  share
in  his  future  happiness.  The  style  of  these  draughtsmen  betrays  the  influence
of  the  second-rate  schools  in  which  they  had  learned  their  craft,  and  tbe
clumsiness  of  their  work  would  often  repel  us,  were  it  not  that  the  interest  of
the  episodes  portrayed  redeems  it  in  the  eyes  of  the  Egyptologist.

Khuniatonu  left  no  son  to  succeed  him  ;    two  of  his  sons-in-law  succes-
sively occupied    the  throne — Saakeri,'-^  who  Iiad  married  his  eldest  daughter

'   Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pi.  1,  No.  12.

'  This  king's  name  was  discovered  by  PnissE  u'Avennes,  Monuments  Egypliene,  p.  3,  and  was  in-
correctly copied  by  liim,  so  that  Brugsch  (Gesch.  JSgyptena,  p.  i'.Vi)  renders  it  Sa'ueeht,  and  AViedemunn
(Jiijypt.  Oesch.,  p.  ■103)  Ra-se-aa-ka,  while  Value  (Tell  el-Amurna,\>.  29,  aud  pi.  \v.  102-lUi))  gives  to  it
the  form  Samankhkeii  ZosirkhopirQ.  I  know  of  no  example,  during  tliis  period,  of  the  verb  monkhu
being  expressed  by  the  mallet  only  ;  I  tliorefore  read  provisionally  the  name  Siiakeri  with  the  sign  aa.


TWO   OF   THE    DArGHTEHS    OF   KHUNIATONU.'


334  THE   EIGHTEENTH   THEBAN  DYNASTY.

Maritatomx,  and  Tutankhamon,  the  liusband  of  Ankhnasaton.  The  first  had
been  associated  in  the  sovereignty  by  his  father-in-law ;  ^  he  showed  liimself
a  zealous  partisan  of  the  "  Disk,"  and  he  continued  to  reside  in  the  new
capital  during  the  few  years  of  liis  sole  reign.^  The  second  son-in-law  was
a  son  of  Araenothes  III.,  probably  by  a  concubine.^  He  returned  to  the
religion  of  Anion,  and  his  wife,  abjuring  the  creed  of  her  father,  changed  her
name  from  Ankhnasaton  to  that  of  Ankhnasamon.  Her  husband  abandoned
Khuitatonu  *  at  the  end  of  two  or  three  years,  and  after  his  departure  the
town  fell  into  decadence  as  quickly  as  it  had  arisen.  The  streets  were  unfre-
quented, the  palaces  and  temples  stood  empty,  the  tombs  remained  unfinished
and  unoccupied,  and  its  patron  god  returned  to  his  former  state,  and  was
relegated  to  the  third  or  fourth  rank  in  the  Egyptian  Pantheon.  The  town
struo-gled  for  a  short  time  against  its  adverse  fate,  which  was  no  doubt  re-
tarded owing  to  the  various  industries  founded  in  it  by  Khuniatonu,  the  manu-
factories of  enamel  and  coloured  glass  requiring  the  presence  of  many
workmen ;  ^  but  the  latter  emigrated  ere  long  to  Thebes  or  the  neighbouring
city  of  Hermopolis,  and  the  "  Horizon  of  Atonu  "  disappeared  from  the  list
of  nomes,  leaving  of  what  might  have  been  the  capital  of  the  Egyptian  empire,
merely  a  mound  of  crumbling  bricks  with  two  or  three  fellahin  villages
scattered  on  the  eastern  bank  of  tlie  Nile.'^  Thebes,  whose  influence  and
population  had  meanwhile  never  lessened,  resumed  her  supremacy  undisturbed.
If,  out  of  respect  for  the  past,  Tutankhamon  continued  the  decoration  of  the

'  Lepsius,  Denhn.,  iii.  99  a,  where  he  and  bis  wife  are  represented  by  the  side  of  KhflniatonO,
with  the  protocol  and  the  attributes  of  royalty.  Petrie  assigns  to  this  double  reign  those  minor
objects  on  which  the  king's  prcnomen  Ankbkhopiruri  is  followed  by  the  epithet  beloved  of  Uanird,
which  formed  part  of  the  name  of  Khuniatonu  (_TeU  el-Amarna,  p.  42).

2  Petrie  thinks,  on  the  testimony  of  the  lists  of  Manetho,  which  give  twelve  years  to  Akenkheres,
daui'bter  of  Horos  (MiJLLEK-DiDor,  Frugmenta  Historicorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  573-578),  tliat
Saakeri  reigned  twelve  years,  and  only  two  or  three  years  as  sole  monarch  without  his  father-in-law
(Tell  el-Anmrna,  pp.  43,  44).  I  think  these  two  or  three  years  a  probable  maximum  length  of  his  reign,
whatever  may  be  the  value  we  should  here  assign  to  the  lists  of  Manetho.

'  This  relationship  was  recognised  by  the  early  Egyptologists  (Wilkinson,  Extracts  from  several
Hieroghjphic  Subjects,  p.  11;  Leemans,  Letlre  a  M.  Francois  SalvoHni,  p.  68,  et  seq. ;  E.  de  Eouge,
Leitre  h  M.  Alfred  Maury,  in  the  Revue  Archeologtque,  1847,  pp.  120-123;  M.\riette,  Renseignements
sur  les  soixaufe-quatre  Apis,  in  the  Bulletin  Archgologique  de  VAthinxum  Fran^ais,  1S55,  pp.  53,  5S),
but  was  forgotten  for  some  thirty  years.  It  has  been  again  pointed  out  by  Loret,  Tout-aiikh-amen,  fih
d'Amgiwphis  III.,  iu  the  Recueil  de  Trnvaux,  vol.  xi.  p.  212  (of.  Lefebuke,  Sur  diffgrents  Moh  et  Nairn
iJgtjptiens,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Arcbieology,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  p.  478).  Tlie
Princess  Maritri  was  neither  his  mother  nor  his  grandmother,  as  Wiedemann  (JEgyptische  Geschichte,
p.  404)  anil  Lefebure  (,Sur  dif  (Trent s  Mots  et  Noms  Egypiiens,  p.  478)  have  affirmed,  but  was  the  mother
of  a  King  Nibkhopirniri,  whose  position  cannot  yet  be  determined  (Makiette,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pi.  40  «).
*  Petiue,  in  Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  43,  44,  judging  from  the  number  of  minor  objects  which  he  has
found  in  his  excavations  at  Tel  el-Amarna,  believes  that  he  can  fix  the  length  of  Tutankhamon's
sojourn  at  Khiiitatonu  at  six  years,  and  that  of  his  whole  reigu  at  nine  years.
'  Numerous  specimens  mny  be  seen  in  Petiue's  Tell  el-Amarna.  pis.  siii.-xx.

«  Petrie  thinks  that  tlie  temples  and  palaces  wore  systematically  destroyed  by  Harmhabi,  and  the
ruins  used  by  bim  in  the  buildings  which  he  erected  at  dift'erent  places  in  Egypt  {Tell  el-Amarna,
p.  44).  But" there  is  no  need  for  this  theory:  the  beauty  of  the  limestone  which  Khuniatonu  bad
used  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  rapid  disappearance  of  the  deserted  edifices.


rnE  SUCCESSOR  of  khuniatonu.


335


^


JITTImllliiJi


dW^M


riy;j>,u|tj-f|v'r^.|:lf,


r'v


J    ^^-"x


SAKOOPHAGDS   OF    THE    I'HAEAOH    Al.'

temple  of  Atonu  at  Karnak,^  he  placed  in  every  other  locality  tlie  name  and
figure  of  Amon  ;  a  little  stucco  spread  over  the  parts  which  had  been  mutilated,
enabled  the  outlines  to  be  restored  to  their  original  purity,  and  the  alteration  was
rendered  invisible  by  a  few  coats  of  colour.  Tutankhamen  was  succeeded  by
the  divine  father  Ai,  whom  Khuniatonu  had  assigned  as  husband  to  one  of  his
relatives  named  Tii,  so  called  after  the  widow  of  Amenothes  III.  Ai  laboured
no  less  diligently  than  his  predecessor  to  keep  up  the  traditions  which  had
been  temporarily  interrupted.^    He  had  been  a  faithful  worshipper  of  the  Disk,

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  after  the  drawing  of  Prisse  d'AveDnes(cf.  Hisloire  de  I'Art  Egyptien.
vol.  ii.,  and  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  113  a.rj.).

'  Stones  from  this  temple  bearing  the  name  of  Atonii  have  been  noticed  by  Nestor  L'hotb,  Lettres
icTilen  d'Erjypte,  pp.  9i-97,  by  PiiissE  d'Avennes,  Monuments  Hgyptit-ns,  pi.  xi.  1,  and  by  Lepsius
Denhm,,  in.  119  a,  b  (of.  Pieul,  Letlre  a  M.  A.  Erman,  sur  une  dt'couverte  concernant  le  second  pylone
de  Karnak,  in  the  Zeitschrifl,  188.3,  p.  41),  in  the  construction  of  the  pylons  of  Harmhabi  at  Karuak,
and  even  in  the  buildings  of  Seti  I.  and  Kamses  11.  at  Luxor.

'  The  name  of  this  king  and  his  place  iu  the  sequence  of  dynasties  have  been  frequently  die-
cussed  by  early  Egyptologists.  ChampoUion  called  him  Skhai,  and  placed  him  before  the  XVII"'
dynasty  (^Lettres  ecrites  d'Egypte,  2nd  edit.,  p.  247).  In  this  he  was  followed  by  Charles  Lenormaut
(Eclaircissements  sur  le  cereueil  dii  Roi  Memphite  Myr^rinus,  p.  24),  while  Eoselliiu  {Monumenti  Slorici,
vol.  i.  p.  145)  calls  him  N&tei  or  Terei.  and  Nestor  L'liote  {Lettres  dcrites  d'Egypte,  pp.  95,  9(j)  Pinii-
terei,  in  order  to  identify  him  with  Binoihris  of  the  11'"'  dynasty.  Wilkinson  {Modern  Egypt  and
Thebes,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  256)  styles  liim  Eesii,  and  Major  Felix  Asa  {Note  sopia  le  Uinustie  del
Faraoni,  p.  18).  Prisse  reads  his  name  Schai  or  Scherai,  and  gives  him  his  true  position  {Hrcherches
sur  les  legendet  royales  et  I'^poque  du  regne  de  Schai  et  Scherai,  in  the  Revue  Arche'ologique,  vol.  ii.  pp.
457—174),  while  Lepsius  and  Bunsen  {JEgyplens  Slelle,  vol.  iii.  pp.  88,  89),  though  they  keep  the  form
lieneter,  Beneter-Imesi,  place  him  among  the  last  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.  E.  do  Rouge,
after  having  proposed  tlie  reading  Acherei  {Examen  de  I'ouvrage  de  M.  le  Clievalier  de  Bunsen,  ii.  pp.
57,58),  at  last  found  tlie  true  one,  viz.  the  divine  father  Ai  {Notice  des  Monuments  Egyptiens  du
Louvre,  1849,  p.  .07).  The  order  of  succession  of  the  three  sovereigns  is  not  quite  certain  ;  the  one
given  in  the  text  is  accepted  as  the  most  probable  by  the  majority  of  historians  (BitUGSOii,  Geschichte
JEgyplens,  pp.  433-4;iS ;  Wiedemann,  JEgyptisehe  Geschichte,  pp.  403-400).  Ed.  Meyer  (Geschichte
(les  Alien  Aigypdetis,  pp.  209-271)  reverses  the  order  of  the  two  last,  and  places  Tutankharaon's  reign
before  that  of  Ai,  but  Petrie's  discoveries  {Tell  el-Amarna,  pp.  42-44)  have  now  rendered  this  view
improbable.


33  G  TEE  EIGHTEENTH   THE  DAN  DYNASTY.

aud  had  given  orders  for  the  construction  of  two  funerary  chapels  for  himself
in  the  mountain-side  above  Tel  el-Amarna,  the  paintings  in  which  indicate
a  complete  adherence  to  the  faith  of  the  reigning  king.  But  on  becoming
Pharaoh,  he  was  proportionally  zealous  in  his  submission  to  the  gods  of  Thebes,
and  in  order  to  mark  more  fully  his  return  to  the  ancient  belief,  he  chose  for
his  royal  burying-place  a  site  close  to  that  in  which  rested  the  body  of  Ameno-
thes  III.^  His  sarcophagus,  a  large  oblong  of  carved  rose  granite,  still  lies
open  and  broken  on  the  spot.  Figures  of  goddesses  stand  at  the  four  angles
and  extend  their  winged  arms  along  its  sides,  as  if  to  embrace  the  mummy  of
the  sovereign.^  Tutankhamon  and  Ai  were  obeyed  from  one  end  of  Egypt  to
the  other,  from  Napata  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  peoples  of
Syria  raised  no  disturbances  during  their  reigns,  and  paid  their  accustomed
tribute  regularly  ;  ^  if  their  rule  was  short,  it  was  at  least  happy.  It  would
appear,  however,  that  after  their  deaths,  troubles  arose  in  the  state.  The  lists
of  Manetho  give  two  or  three  princes— Eathotis,  Khebres,  and  Akherres— whose
names  are  not  found  on  the  monuments.''  It  is  possible  that  we  ought  not  to
regard  them  as  historical  personages,  but  merely  as  heroes  of  popular  romance,
of  the  same  type  as  those  introduced  so  freely  into  the  history  of  the  preceding
dynasties  by  the  chroniclers  of  the  Saite  and  Greek  periods.^  They  were,
perhaps,  merely  short-lived  pretenders  who  were  overthrown  one  by  the  other
before  either  had  succeeded  in  establishing  himself  on  the  seat  of  Horus.  Be
that  as  it  may,  the  XVIH'"  dynasty  drew  to  its  close  amid  strife  and  quarrel-
liuw,  without  our  being  able  to  discover  the  cause  of  its  overthrow,  or  the
name  of  the  last  of  its  sovereigns."

Scarcely  half  a  century  had  elapsed  between  the  moment  when  the  XYIII"'
dynasty  reached  the  height  of  its  power  under  Amenothes  III.  and  that  of  its
downfall.  It  is  impossible  to  introduce  with  impunity  changes  of  any  kind
into  the  constitution  or  working  of  so  complicated  a  machine  as  an  empire

'  The  first  tomb  seems  to  have  been  dug  before  his  marriage,  at  the  time  when  he  had  no  definite
ambitions  ;  the  second  (the  No.  3  of  Lepsius)  was  prepared  for  him  and  his  wife  Tli.  The  identity
of  the  divine  father  Ai  of  Tel  el-Araarna  witli  the  Pharaoh  AI  wlio  was  buried  at  Thebes  has  been
shown  by  Lepsius  (.Briefe  cms  ^gypttn  und  Mihiojiien,  p.  415);  only  Wiedemann,  as  I'ar  as  I  know,
has  contested  it.

2  For  the  description  of  the  tomb,  see  Nestor  L'uoie,  Letlres  (fcriies  d'£gypte,  pp.  '2-11.

'  Tutankhamon  receives  the  tribute  of  the  Kflshites  as  well  as  that  of  tlie  Syrians  (Champolliox,
Monuments  de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  pp.  477-4SII;  Lei'SIUS,  Denkm.,  iii.  115-llS);  Ai  is
represented  at  Shataiii  in  Nubia  as  accompanied  by  Puiiiru,  the  prince  of  Kiish  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,
iii.  114  c.  7i.).

'  Manetho,  in  JIuli.ek-Didot,  Fragmenta  Uisloricorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  573-57S.  Wiede-
mann CJ^gyptischo  Geschichte,  pp.  400-408)  lias  collected  six  royal  names  whicli,  with  much  hesi-
tation, he  places  about  this  time.

'  Maspeuo,  Notes  sur  qiielques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'llistoire,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Tiaoaux,
vol.  xvii.  pp.  56-GS,  121-13S.

«  The  list  of  kings  who  make  up  the  XVIIl"'  dynasty  can  be  established  with  certainty,  with  the
exception  of  the  order  of  tlie  three  last  sovereigns  who  succeed  Khiiniatouu.     It  is  here  given  in  its


THE   END    OF   THE  DYNASTY.  337

founded  ou  conquest.  AVhen  the  parts  of  the  mechanism  have  been  once  put
together  and  set  in  motion,  and  have  become  accustomed  to  work  harmoniously
at  a  proper  pace,  interference  witli  it  must  not  be  attempted  except  to  replace
such  parts  as  are  broken  or  worn  out,  by  others  exactly  like  them.  To  make
alterations  while  the  machine  is  in  motion,  or  to  introduce  new  combinations,
however  ingenious,  into  any  part  of  the  original  plan,  might  produce  an
accident  or  a  breakage  of  the  gearing  when  perhaps  it  would  be  least  expected.
Wiien  the  devout  Khiiniatonu  exchanged  one  city  and  one  god  for  another,  he
thought  that  he  was  merely  transposing  equivalents,  and  that  the  safety  of
the  commonwealth  was  not  concerned  in  the  operation.  Whether  it  was
Amon  or  Atonii  who  presided  over  the  destinies  of  his  people,  or  whether
Thebes  or  Tel  el-Amarna  were  the  centre  of  impulse,  was,  in  his  opinion,
merely  a  question  of  internal  arrangement  which  could  not  affect  the  economy
of  the  wliole.  But  events  soon  showed  that  he  was  mistaken  in  his  calculations.
It  is  probable  tliat  if,  on  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos,  the  earlier  princes  of  the
dynasty  had  attempted  an  alteration  in  the  national  religion,  or  had  moved  the
capital  to  any  other  city  they  might  select,  the  remainder  of  the  kingdom
would  not  have  been  affected  by  the  eliange.  But  after  several  centuries  of
faithful  adherence  to  Amon  in  his  city  of  Thebes,  the  governing  power  would

;iuthfntic  form,  as  the  monuments  have  permitted  us  to  reconstruct  it,  and  iu  its  Greek  form  as  it  is
found  in  tlie  lists  of  Manetho  :

ACCORDIXG    TO    THE    MOKUMKXTS.
I.    AhMOSI    I.    NlBPAHITUii.
II.    AmENHOTPC    I.    ZOSIRKERI.

III.  ThCtmosi  I.  Akhpirheri.

IV.  TiiCtMOSI  II.    AKHPIRXUit.
V.    TuCtMOSI  III.    MANAKHPIRRt.

VI.  Amexhotpc  II.  Akhpiiuiri.

VII.    ThCtMOSI   IV.    MANAKHPiBLJii.
VIII.    AmEXDOTPU    III.    NlEMAURi.

,,,   /Amexhotpu  IV.)  1.,  .  .  ,  ,.

ikui'niatonu      i

X.    SaKKr!    SoZIRKHOPiRU    ANKHKHOPLRLRt.

XI.  TCtankhamonu     uaq-On-risit     Nibkho-

PIRURI.
XII.    IuTNCtIH    Ai    NUTIR-HIQ-OisiT    KUOPUIKIIO-
PIrCri  IRI-M-ilT.

Manetbo'B  list,  as  we  have  it,  is  a  very  ill-umdu  extract,'  wherein  the  official  kings  are  mixed  up  with
the  legitimate  queens,  as  well  as,  at  least  towards  the  end,  with  persons  of  doubtful  authenticity.
Several  kings,  between  Khuniatonu  and  Hurmhabi,  are  sometimes  added  at  the  end  of  the  list
(Wiedemaxx,  JEgijiiUscke  Geschichte,  pp.  4oiJ  40.S) ;  some  of  these,  I  think,  belonged  to  previous
dynasties,  e.y.  Teti  to  the  VI"'  (cf.  Dawn  of  Cirilhatioi,,  p.  41G,  note  3),  Kahotpu  to  the  XVII"'  (cf.
p.  77  of  this  volume)  ;  several  are  heroes  of  romance,  as  Mernebplitah  or  Merkhopirphtah  (Maspero,
Lee  ConUs  populaires,  2ud  edit,,  pp.  xxxviii.-xl.),  while  the  names  of  the  others  are  either  variants
Irom  the  cartouche  names  of  known  princes,  or  eUe  are  nicknames,  such  as  was  Sesu,  Ses'flri  for
Ramses  II,  Dr,  Mahler  believes  that  he  can  fix,  witliin  a  low  days,  the  date  of  the  kings  of  whom
the  list  is  eomiiosed,  from  Alimosis  I.  to  Ai.  I  hold  to  the  approximate  date  which  I  have  given  on
p.  107  of  this  volume,  and  I  give  the  years  IGOO  to  18.50  as  the  period  of  the  dynasty,  with  a  possible
error  of  about  titty  years,  more  or  less.


According  to  Manetho.

I.  Ajiosis.
II.  Kheisros,

III.  Aminophthis.

IV.  Amensis.
V,  Misaphris.

VI.    MlSPHKAGMOCTHoSIS.

VII.  Thoutmosis.
VIII.  Amenophis.
IX.  HoRos.
X.  Akherres  I.
XI.  Rathos.

XII.    KUEBRES.

Xm,  Akherres  II,


338  THE  EIGETEENTH   TEEBAN  BTNASTT.

find  it  uo  easy  matter  to  accomplish  such  a  resolution.  Ihiring  three  centuries
the  dynasty  had  become  wedded  to  the  city  and  to  its  patron  deity,  and  the
locality  had  become  so  closely  associated  with  the  dynasty,  that  any  blow  aimed
at  the  god  could  not  fail  to  destroy  the  dynasty  with  it ;  indeed,  had  the
experiment  of  Khuniatonu  been  prolonged  beyond  a  few  years,  it  might  liave
entailed  the  ruin  of  the  whole  country.  All  who  came  into  contact  with
Egypt,  or  were  under  her  rule,  whether  Asiatics  or  Africans,  were  quiclv  to
detect  any  change  in  her  administration,  and  to  remark  a  falling  away  from  the
traditional  systems  of  the  times  of  Tiiutmosis  III.  and  Amenothes  II.  The
successors  of  the  heretic  king  had  the  sense  to  perceive  at  once  the  first
symptoms  of  disorder,  and  to  refrain  from  persevering  in  his  errors;  but  how-
ever quick  they  were  to  undo  his  work,  they  could  not  foresee  its  serious  con-
sequences. His  immediate  followers  were  powerless  to  maintain  their  dynasty,
and  their  posterity  had  to  make  way  for  a  family  who  had  not  incurred  the
hatred  of  Amon,  or  rather  that  of  his  priests.  If  those  who  followed  them  were
able  by  their  tact  and  energy  to  set  Egypt  on  her  feet  again,  they  were  at  the
same  time  unable  to  restore  her  former  prosperity  or  her  boundless  confidence
in  herself.


THE    REACTION    AGAINST    EGYPT.


TIIK    XIX'ii    DYNASTY  :    HARMlIAIii — THE     HITTITE   EMPIRE   IS    SYRIA     AND     IN    ASIA    JIISOR

SETI   I.    AND    RAMSES    II. — THE    I'EOi'LE    OF    THE   SEA:    MlNEPHTAIl    AMI'    THE    ISRAELITE
EXODUS.


Tlie  birth  and  uutecedeiits  of  lliirinliahi,  hi.i  youth,  his  cidhfonemeut — Thi-  final  trinnipli
of  Amoii  and  Ii is  priests — Harmlicibi.  infuses  order  into  tlie  ijovcrnment :  his  wars  ayainat
the  Ethiopians  and  Asiatics — Tht-  Khdti,  their  civilization,  rcliijion ;  their  polilieal  and
military  constUuiimi ;  the  extension  of  their  empire  towards  the  north. — The  countries  and
populations  of  Asia  Minor;  commercial  routes  betiveen  the  Euphrates  and  the  JEtjean  Sea
—  The  treaty  concluded  between  Harmhabt  and  Sapalitlii.

Ea>nses  I.  and  the  nncertainties  as  to  hi^  origin — Seti  I.  and  the  cainpaiyn  afjainst  Sijria
in  the  I"  year  of  his  reig'n ;  the  re-estahlishment  of  the  Egyptian  empire — Worhing  of  the
gold-mines  at  Elba'i — Tlie  moniiments  constructed  by  Seti  I.  in  Nubia,  at  Kaniak,  Luxor,
and  Al/gdos  —  The  valley  of  the  kinys  and  lonili  of  Scli  I.  at  Thebes.

Ramses  II.,  his  infancy,  liis  association  in  tlie  Governincnt,  his  dt'lmt  in  Ethiopia:  he
builds  a  residence  in  the  Delta — His  campaign  against  l/n-  Khdti  in  the  5"'  gear  of  his
reign — The  lalcing  of  Qodshi),  the  victory  of  liamses  II.  imdlhe  truce  estahlished  n'ifli  Khdtn-
sarii  :  tlif  poem  of  Penfa/ltrit — His  treaty  irilh   tin-   Khdti    in   the  21"'   year  if  his  reign:  the


(     340     )

liil'iiii-e  uf  power  ill  Sijriii:  tin:  man-iai/e  uf  V^khsis  H.  iritli  u  Ilittite  piini-ess—Piihlii-
iriids:  the  Speos  nt  Ahn-Simbel ;  Luxur,  Kmniik,  the  HiiinesseKin,  the  muunments  in  the
Delta— The  reijeiini  of  Kluniwisit  and  Mtiieplitnli.  Ih'-  leijuul  nf  Sesostris.  the  eoffiu  and
iniimmii  of  Ruinses  II.

Minephtah  —  The  hiiiijdom  nf  Libya,  the  penile  uf  the  sea— The  Jirst  invasion  of  Libya  :
the.  Eijijptian  eictonj  at  Piriil  ;  the  trinwph  of  Miiaphtah — Seti  II.,  Amenineses,  Siphtah-
Minephtah — Tlie  foieiejn  captives  in  Egypt;  the  E.nnlns  of  the  Hebreu-s  and  their  march
io  Sinai — An  E<i]iptian  rnmance  of  the  E.rodux:  Amenopliis.  snv  of  Pa-apis.


,,.  ^M^M


c,  ^/-^^


f-J


""^MMtti,


THE   GBEAT    HTPOSTYI.E    HAL].
AT    KARNAK,    SEEM    FROM
THE  SOUTHERN  SIDE  OF  THE  SACRED  LAKI-


CHAPTEE    IV,


&■:


THE     REACTION     AGAINST     EGYPT.

rUe  XIX'"  dynasty:  Hariuluibi— The  Hittite  empire  in  Syria  and  in  Asia  Minor— Seti  I.  iind
Kamses  II. — The  people  of  the  sta  :  Jlinephtah  and  the  Israelite  Exodus.

inirC]         I        ^T^HII.E  none  of  tliese  ephemeral  Pharaolis  left  bebintl

l/alU  i'  1  <  ,     I.  I  them  a  son,  either  legitimate  or  illegitimate,  there

prnn|>,    1  >  b  »  >

'  ^'^    ■*'    was  no  lack  of  princesses,  any  of  which,  iiaving  on   her

accession  to  the  throne  to  choose  a  consort  after  her
own  heart,  might  thus  become  the  founder  of  a  new
lynasty.  By  sucli  a  chance  alliance  Harmhabi,
who  was  himself  descended  from  Thutmosis  III.,
was  raised  to  the  kingly  office.^  His  motlier,
]\lutnozniit,  was  of  the  royal  line,  and  one  of  the
most  beautiful  statues  in  the  Gizeh  Museum
[iiobubly  represents  her.  The  body  is  mutilated,
but  the  head  is  charming  in  its  intelligent  and
animated  expression,  in  its  full  eyes  and  some-
what large,  but  finely  modelled,  month.  The
material  of  the  statue  is  a  fine-grained  limestone,
and  its  milkv  whiteness  tends  to  soften  the  malign


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey ;  the  vignette,  which  is  by  Faucher-
Gudin,  represents  a  photograph  by  Petrie  of  Anionra  and  Harmhabi,  a  group  now  in  the  Tnrin  Museum
(OacrRTi,  Catahnjo  iUustraio  det  Mimumenii  lupzii,  vol,  i.  pp.  59,  GO).

■  A   fragment  of  an  inscription  at  Karnak   ealls   Thutmosis  III.  "  tlie  fatlier  of  liis  fatliera
(Wilkinson,  Materia  Uieroijbjpliim,  pt.  ii.  pi.  1;  I.ei'SHs,  Denkm.,  iii.  119  c).     CliampoUion  i-alled


.'542  THE   REACTION  AGAINST  EGTPT.

character  of  her  look  and  smile.^  It  is  {possible  that  Mutnozmit  was  the
daughter  of  Anienothes  III.  by  his  marriage  with  one  of  his  sistei's :  it  •
was  from  her,  at  any  rate,  and  not  from  his  great-grandfather,  that  Harmhabi
derived  his  indisputable  claims  to  royalty.^  He  was  born,  probably,  in  the
last  years  of  Amenotlies,  when  Tii  was  the  exclusive  favourite  of  the  sovereign  ;
but  it  was  alleged  later  on,  when  Harmhabi  had  emerged  from  obscurity,  that
Araon,  destining  him  for  the  throne,  had  condescended  to  become  his  father  by
Mutnozmit — a  customary  procedure  with  the  god  when  his  race  on  earth
threatened  to  become  debased;'  It  was  he  who  had  rocked  tlie  newly  born
infant  to  sleep,  and,  while  Harsiesis  was  strengthening  his  limbs  with  protective
amulets,  had  spread  over  the  child's  skin  the  freshness  and  brilliance  which  are
the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  immortals.  While  still  in  the  nursery,  the  great
and  the  insignificant  alike  prostrated  themselves  before  Harmhabi,  making  him
liberal  offerings.  Every  one  recognised  in  him,  even  when  still  a  lad  and  inca-
pable of  reflection,  the  carriage  and  complexion  of  a  god,  and  Horus  of  Cynopolis
was  accustomed  to  follow  his  steps,  knowing  that  the  time  of  his  advancement
was  near.  After  having  called  the  attention  of  the  Egyptians  to  Harmhabi,
Amon  was  anxious,  in  fact,  to  hasten  the  coming  of  the  day  when  he  might  confer
upon  him  supreme  rank,  and  for  this  purpose  inclined  the  heart  of  the  reign-
ing Pharaoh  towards  him.     Ai  proclaimed  him  his  heir  over  the  whole  land.^

him  Hornemneb  (Letlres  ii  M.  le  due  de  Blacas,  vol.  i.  pp.  47-83),  Rosellini,  Horhemheb,  Hor-em-hbai
(^MoHumenti  Storici,  vol.  i.  p.  241,  aud  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  275),  and  both  identified  him  with  the  Horos
of  JIunctho,  hence  the  custom  among  Egyptologists  for  a  long  time  to  designate  him  by  the  name
Horus.  Dcve'ria  was  the  first  to  show  that  the  name  corresponded  with  the  Armais  of  the  lists
of  Manetho  (Le  Papyrus  judiciare  de  Turin,  pp.  GS-81),  and,  in  fact,  Armais  is  the  Greek  transcrip-
tion of  the  group  Harmhabi  in  the  bilingual  texts  of  the  Ptolemaic  period  (BRrcscH,  Sammlung
Deinotisch-Griechischer  Eiijennimeii  ^ijyptischer  Privatleute,  p.  17,  No.  150).

'  See  the  tail-piece  at  bottom  of  p.  338  of  the  present  work,  drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a
photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey.  Mariette  called  her  Taia,  thinking  it  was  a  statute  of  Tii.  Ex-
cavations at  Karnak  liave  resulted  iu  the  discovery  of  some  parts  of  the  body  which  have  inclined  me
to  see  in  the  statue  some  woman  of  the  family  of  Harmhabi  {Guide  du  Visiteur  an  Mm^c  du  Boulaq,
p.  425,  No.  Gl7),  probably  Mutnozmit.

'  Miituozmit  was  at  first  considered  the  daughter  and  successor  of  Harmhabi  (Chajipollios,
Lettres  it  M.  le  due  de  Blacas,  vol.  i.  pp.  50-t)4  :  IIosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  i.  pp.  240-244,  and  vol.
ill.  pt.  1,  pp.  290-202;  Champolliox-Figeac,  i'iS'!;i/p(eyl«c»e)rHe,  pp.  ;>20-o22),  or  his  wife(WiLKixsoN,
Materia  Hieroglyph.,  pt.  ii.  pi.  4 ;  Lefsius,  Kouigsbuch,  pi.  sxx.,  Nu.  411;  Bkugsch.  Bist.  d'Egyple,  p.  125,
and  Gesch.  J^gyptens,  pp.  421,  439,  441 ;  Wiedemann,  yEgyptixche  Gesch.,  p.  411  ;  Ed.  Meter,  Gesclt.  des
Allen  .Egypteus,  p.  273).  Birch  showed  that  the  monuments  did  not  confirm  these  hypotheses,  and  he
was  inclined  to  think  that  she  was  Harmbabi's  motlier  (Inscriptionof  Haremhehi  imhis  Statue  at  Turin,
in  Trans.  Bibl.  .\rch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  490, 491).  As  far  as  I  can  see  for  the  present,  it  is  the  only  solu-
tion wliich  agrees  with  the  evidence  on  the  principal  monument  which  has  made  known  her  existence.

'  All  that  we  know  of  the  youth  of  Harmhabi  is  contained  in.  tlie  texts  on  a  group  preserved  in
tlie  Turin  Museum,  and  pointed  out  by  L'liampollion  (Lettres  ii  de  Blacas,  vol.  i.  pp.  4S-IJ4),  translated
and  publislied  subsequently  by  Birch  (^Inscription  of  Haremhehi,  in  Trans.  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  iii.
pp.  480-495,  and  Inscrip.  of  Haremhehi,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  x.  pp.  29-30)  and  by  Brugsch
( Gcfch.  .Egyptens,  pp.  440-444).  The  first  lines  of  the  inscription  seem  to  me  to  contain  an  account  of
the  union  of  Amon  with  the  queen,  analogous  to  those  at  Deir  el-Bahaii  treating  of  the  birth  of
Hatshopsitu,  and  to  those  at  Luxor  bearing  upon  AmeiioLhes  III.  (cf.  pp.  236,  237,  295,  296  of  the
present  work),  and  to  prove  for  certain  that  Harmhabi's  mother  was  a  princess  of  the  royal  line  by  right.

'  The  king  is  not  named  in  the  inscription.     It  cannot  liave  been  Amenothea  IV.,  for  an  individual


THE    YOUTH   AXD   ENTHRONEMENT   OF  HARMIIABL  ■'343

He  never  gave  cause  for  any  dissatisfactiou  wlieii  called  to  court,  and
when  he  was  asked  questions  by  the  monarch  he  replied  always  in  fit  terms,
in  such  words  as  were  calculated  to  produce  serenity,  and  thus  gained  for
himself  a  reputation  as  the  incarnation  of  wisdom,  all  his  plans  and  intentions
appearing  to  have  been  conceived  by  Thot  the  Ibis  himself.  For  many  years
he  held  a  place  of  confidence  with  the  sovereign.  The  nobles,  from  the  moment
he  appeared  at  the  gate  of  the  palace,  bowed  their  backs  before  him  ;  the
barbaric  chiefs  from  the  north  or  south  stretched  out  their  arms  as  soon  as
they  approached  him,  and  gave  him  the  adoration  they  would  bestow  upon  a
god.^  His  favourite  residence  was  Memphis,  his  preference  for  it  arising  from
his  having  possibly  been  born  there,  or  from  its  having  been  assigned  to  him
for  his  abode.  Here  he  constructed  for  himself  a  magnificent  tomb,  the  bas-
reliefs  of  which  exhibit  him  as  already  king,  with  the  sceptre  in  his  hand  and
the  nraeus  on  his  brow,  while  the  adjoining  cartouche  does  not  as  yet  contain  his
name.2  He  was  the  mighty  of  the  mighty,  the  great  among  the  great,  the
general  of  generals,  the  messenger  who  ran  to  convey  orders  to  the  people  of
Asia  and  Ethiopia,  the  indispensable  companion  in  council  or  on  the  field  of
battle,-'  at  the  time  when  Horus  of  Cynopolis  resolved  to  seat  him  upon  his
eternal  thione.     Ai  no  longer  occupied  it.     Horus  took  Harmhabi  with  him  to

of  the  imjiurtaace  of  Harmhabi,  living  alougside  this  king,  would  at  least  have  haJ  a  tomb  begun
for  him  at  Tel  el-Amarna.  We  may  hesitate  between  Ai  and  Tiitankharaon  ;  but  the  inscription
seems  to  say  deiinitely  that  Harmhabi  succeeded  directly  to  the  king  under  whom  he  had  held  im-
portant offices  for  many  years,  and  this  compels  us  to  tix  upon  Ai,  who,  iis  we  have  said  at  p.  334,
et  seq.,  was.  to  all  apjiuarances,  the  last  of  the  so-called  heretical  sovereigns.

'  Turin  Inscription,  11.  2-11;  cf.  Birch,  Inscripliou  nf  Haremliebi,  iu  the  Transactions  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  492,  493,  iind  Inscription  of  Haremhebi,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,
vol.  X.  pp.  31-33;  Brcgsch,  Geschichte  .Egyptens,  pp.  440,  441.  The  description  given  follows  the
text  closely,  and  preserves  the  chief  expressions.

-  This  part  of  the  account  is  not  borrowed  from  tin:  Turin  inscription,  but  is  based  upon  a  study
of  a  certain  number  cjf  texts  and  representations  all  coming  from  Harnihabi's  tomb  at  .Saqqarah,  and
now  scattered  among  the  various  museums —at  Gizoh  (M.\iiiette,  Monuments  Dicers,  pis.  74,  75,  and
text,  pp.  2.5.  '26),  at  Leyden  (I,eem.\ns,  Description  raisonn^e  dus  Mon.  £gijptiens,  pp.  40,  41,  c.  1-3,
and  Monuments  du  Mat€e  d'Antiquit(fs,  vol.  i.  pis.  21-24),  at  London  (Bincu,  Guide  to  the  Egyptian
Galleries,  Nos.  550-552,  p.  :JC;  cf.  Sh.\iu'e,  Egyptian  Inscriptions,  vol.  ii.  pi.  112),  at  Alexandria
(Wiedemann,  Texts  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  X  VIII"'  Dynasty,  iu  the  Proceedings  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
1888-89,  vol.  xi.  p.  424).  Birch  was  the  first  to  assign  these  monuments  to  the  Pharaoh  Harmliabi,
supposing  .-it  the  same  time  that  he  had  been  dethroned  by  Kamses  I.,  and  had  lived  at  Memphis  iu
an  intermediate  position  between  that  of  a  prince  and  that  of  a  private  individual  {Insc.  of  Harem-
hebi,in  tlie  Transactions,  vol.  iii.  p.  491);  this  opinion  was  adopted  by  Ed.  Meyer  (Die  Stele  des
Horeniheb,  in  the  ZeitschriJ'l,  1875,  pp.  148,  149),  rejected  by  Wiedemann  (/Egyptische  Geschichte,
pp.  412,  413,  and  Supplement,  p.  48)  and  by  myself  {Hist.  Ancietine  des  Peuples  de  I'Orient,  4th  edit.,
p.  213,  note  C).  .\fter  full  examination,  I  think  th(!  Harmhabi  of  the  tomb  at  Saqqarah  and  the
Pharaoh  Harmhabi  are  one  and  the  same  person;  Haimhabi,  sufficiently  high  placed  to  warrant  his
wearing  the  urasus,  but  not  high  enough  to  have  his  name  inscribed  in  a  cartouche,  must  have  had  his
tomb  constructed  at  Saqqarah,  as  Ai  and  possibly  Ramses  I.  had  theirs  built  for  them  at  Tel  el-
-•Vmarna  (see  pp.  335,  33G  of  the  present  work)  :  this  is  now  the  opinion  of  Ed.  Meyer,  as  recorded
in  Ills  Geschichte  des  Alien  .Egyptens,  pp.  271,  272.

'  The  fragments  of  the  tomlj  preserved  at  Leyden  (cf.  Leem  ans,  Description  raisonn^e  des  Monuments
Egyptiens,  p.  40)  show  him  leading  to  the  Pharaoh  Asiatics  and  Ethiopians,  burthencd  with  tribute  ;
the  expressions  and  titles  given  in  the  text  on  tliis  page  are  borrowed  from  the  fragments  at  Gizeh
(■JIariette-Masim;i:o,  Monuments  Dicers,  pi.  74,  i>p.  25,  20).


:')44  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

Thebes,  escorted  him  thither  amid  expressions  of  general  joy,  and  led  him  to  Amon
ia  order  that  the  god  might  bestow  upou  hiiu  the  right  to  reign.  The  reception
took  place  in  the  temple  of  Luxor,  which  served  as  a  kind  of  private  chapel
for  the  descendants  of  Amenothes.  Amon  rejoiced  to  see  Harmhabi,  the  heir  of
the  two  worlds  ;  he  took  him  with  him  to  the  royal  palace,  introduced  him  into
the  apartments  of  his  august  daughter,  Slutnozmit ;  then,  after  she  had  recog-
nised her  child  and  had  pressed  him  to  her  bosom,  all  the  gods  broke  out  into
acclamations,  and  their  cries  ascended  up  to  heaven. ^  "  Behold,  Amon  arrives
with  his  son  before  him,  at  the  palace,  in  order  to  put  upon  his  head  the  diadem,
and  to  prolong  tlie  length  of  his  life !  We  install  him,  therefore,  in  his  office,
we  give  to  him  the  insignia  of  Ka,  we  pray  Amon  for  him  whom  he  has  brought
as  our  protector :  may  he  as  king  have  the  festivals  of  l\a  and  the  years  of
Horus  ;  may  he  accomplish  his  good  pleasure  in  Thebes,  in  Heliopolis,  in  Mem-
phis, and  may  he  add  to  the  veneration  with  which  these  cities  are  invested."
And  they  immediately  decided  that  the  new  Pharaoh  should  be  called  Horus-
sturdy-bull,  mighty  in  wise  projects,  lord  of  the  Vulture  and  of  the  very  marvel-
lous Urfeus  in  Thebes,  the  conquering  Horus  who  takes  pleasure  in  the  truth,
and  wlio  maintains  tlie  two  lands,  the  lord  of  the  south  and  north,  Sozir
Khopiiuii  chosen  of  Ra,  the  offspring  of  the  Sun,  Harmhabi  Miamun,  giver  of
life.  The  cortege  came  afterwards  to  the  palace,  the  king  walking  before  Amon  :
there  the  god  embraced  his  son,  placed  the  diadems  upon  his  head,  delivered  to
him  the  rule  of  the  whole  world,  over  foreign  populations  as  well  as  those  of
Egypt,  inasmuch  as  he  possessed  this  power  as  the  sovereign  of  the  universe."

This  is  the  customary  subject  of  the  records  of  enthronement.  Pharaoh  is
the  son  of  a  god,  chosen  by  his  father,  from  among  all  those  who  might  have
a  claim  to  it,  to  occupy  for  a  time  the  throne  of  Horus ;  and  as  he  became  king
only  by  a  divine  decree,  he  had  publicly  to  express,  at  the  moment  of  his  eleva-
tion, his  debt  of  gratitude  to,  and  his  boundless  respect  for,  the  deity,  who  had
made  him  what  he  was.  In  this  case,  however,  the  protocol  embodied  some-
thing more  than  the  traditional  formality,  and  its  hackneyed  phrases  borrowed  a
special  meaning  from  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.     Anion,  who  had  been

'  Owing  to  ;i  gap,  tLe  text  cannot  be  accurately  translatci-l  at  this  point  (Turin  Inscription^
11. 15,  16).  The  reading  can  be  made  out  that  Amon  "  betooli  himself  to  tlie  palace,  placing  the  prince
before  liim,  as  far  as  the  sanctuary  of  his  (Amon's)  daughter,  the  very  august .  .  .  ;  she  poured  water
on  his  hands,  she  embraced  the  beauties  (of  the  prince),  she  placed  herself  before  him."  It  will  be
eeen  that  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Amon  is  wanting,  and  Birch  thought  that  a  terrestrial  princess
whom  Harmhabi  had  married  was  in  question  (Inscription  of  Ilaremlichi  on  a  Statue  at  Turin,  iu  the
Transactiom  o(  the  Biblical  Archwological  Society,  vol.  iii.  pp.  489-491),  Miitnozmit,  according  to
Brugsch  (Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp.  442-444).  If  the  reference  is  not  to  a  goddess,  who  along  with
Amon  took  part  in  the  ceremonies,  but  to  Blutnozmit,  we  must  come  to  the  conclusion  that  she,  as
heir  and  queen  by  birth,  must  have  ceded  her  rights  by  some  ritual  to  her  son  before  he  could  be
crowued.

=  Turin  Inscription,  11.  l?.-20;  cf.  Brugsch,  Geschichle  Ji:iji/ptens,  pp.  441-443.


THF.    FINAL    TniUMPIl   OF  AMON  AXD    HIS   PRIESTS.


345-


insulted  and  proscribed  by  Khuniatonu,  liad  uot  fully  recovered  liis  prestige
under  the  rule  of  the  immediate  successors  of  his  enemy.  They  had  restored
to  him  his  privileges  and  his  worship,  they  had  become  reconciled  to  him,  and
avowed  themselves  his  faithful  ones,  but  all  this  was  as  much  an  act  of  political
necessity  as  a  matter  of  religion :  tliey  still  continued  to  tolerate,  if  not  to
favour,  the  rival  doctrinal  system,  and  the  temple  of  the  hateful  Disk  still
dishonoured  by  its  vicinity  the  sanctuary  of  Karuak.  Harmhabi,  on  the  other
hand,  was  devoted  to  Anion,  who  had  moulded  him  in  embryo,  and  had  trained


THE    FIRST    PYLON    Of   HAK.MUAU1    AT    KAllNAK.'


him  from  his  birth  to  worship  none  but  liim.  Harmhabi's  triumph  marked  the
end  of  the  evil  days,  and  inaugurated  a  new  era,  in  which  Amon  saw  himself
again  master  of  Thebes  and  of  the  world.  Immediately  after  his  enthronement
Harmhabi  rivalled  the  first  Amenothes  in  his  zeal  for  the  interests  of  his  divine
father:  he  overturned  the  obelisks  of  Atonu  and  the  building  before  which  they
stood  ;  then,  that  no  trace  of  them  might  remain,  lie  worked  up  the  stones  into
the  masonry  of  two  pylons,  which  he  set  up  upon  the  site,  to  the  south  of  the
gates  of  Thutmosis  III.  They  remained  concealed  in  the  new  fabric  for
centuries,  but  in  the  year  27  B.C.  a  great  earthquake  brought  them  abruptly  to
light.  We  find  everywhere  among  the  ruins,  at  the  foot  of  the  dislocated
gates,  or  at  the  bases  of  the  headless  colossal  figures,  heaps  of  blocks  detached
from  the  structure,  on  which  can  bo  made  out  remnants  of  prayers  addressed

'  Drawn  by  Faucliei-Guiliii,  from  ;i  pliotogrnpli  taken  by  Bcato  in  1884.


"346  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

to  the  Disk,  scenes  of  worship,  and  cartouches  of  Amenothes  IV.,  Ai,  and
Tiitankhamon.i     The  work  begun  by  Harmhabi  at  Thebes  was  continued  with
■unabated  zeal  through  the  length  of  the  whole  river- valley.     "He  restored  the
sanctuaries  from  the  marshes  of  Athu  even  to  Nubia ;  he  repaired  their  sculp-
tures so  that  they  were  better  than  before,  not  to  speak  of  the  fine  things  he
did  in  tliem,  rejoicing  the  eyes  of  Ea.     That  which  he  had  found  injured  he
put  into  its  original  condition,  erecting  a  hundred  statues,  carefully  formed  of
valuable  stone,  for  everyone  which  was  lacking.    He  inspected  the  ruined  towns
of  the  gods  in  the  land,  and  made  them  such  as  they  had  been  in  the  time  of
the  first  Ennead,^and  he  allotted  to  them  estates  and  offerings  for  every  day,  as
well  as  a  set  of  sacred  vessels  entirely  of  gold  and  silver  ;  he  settled  priests  in
them,  bookmen,  carefully  chosen  soldiers,  and  assigned  to  them  fields,  cattle,
all  the  necessary  material  to  make  prayers  to  Eil  every  morning."  ^      These
measures  were  inspired  by  consideration  for  the  ancient  deities  ;  but  he  added
to  them  others,  which  tended  to  secure  the  welfare  of  the  people  and  the
stability  of  the  government.     Up  to  this  time  the  officials  and  the  Egyptian
soldiers  had  displayed  a  tendency  to  oppress  the  fellahin,  without  taking  into
consideration  the  injury  to  the  treasury  occasioned  by  their  rapacity.     Constant
supervision  was  the  only  means  of  restraining  them,  for  even  the  best-served
Pharaohs,  Thutmosis,  and   Amenothes  III.  themselves,  were  obliged  to  have
frequent  recourse  to  the  rigour  of  the  law  to  keep  the  scandalous  depredations
of  the  officials  within  bounds.*     The  religious  disputes  of  the  preceding  years,
in  enfeebling  the  authority  of  the  central  power,  had  given  a  free  hand  to  these
oppressors.     The  scribes  and  tax-collectors  were  accustomed  to  exact  contribu-
tions for  the  public  service  from  the  ships,  whether  laden  or  not,  of  those  who
were  in  a  small  way  of  business,  and  once  they  had  laid  their  hands  upon  them,
they  did  not  readily  let  them  go.     The  poor  fellow  falling  into  their  clutches
•lost  his  cargo,  and  he  was  at  his  wits'  end  to  know  how  to  deliver  at  the  royal
storehouses  the  various  wares  with  which  he  calculated  to  pay  his  taxes.     No
sooner  liad  the  Court  arrived  at  some  place  than  the  servants  scoured  the  neigh-
bourhood, confiscating  the  land  produce,  and  seizing  upon  slaves,  under  pretence
that  they  were  acting  for  the  king,  while  they  had  only  their  personal  ends  in
view.   Soldiers  appropriated  all  the  hides  of  animals  with  the  object,  doubtless,  of
making  from  them  leather  jackets  and  helmets,  or  of  duplicating  their  shields,

'  The  relics  of  these  inscriptions  have  been  put  together  in  JTestob  L'hote,  Papiers  inediis,
vol.  iii.  pp.  .SO,  91),  97,  101,  104,  105,  in  TmssE  d'Avennes,  Monuments,  pis.  x.,  xi.,  and  in  Lepsius,
Derilim.,  iii.  110  c-g,  1U»  a,  b.

-  For  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  see  Daicn  of  Civilization,  pp.  142,  159.

^  Turin  Inscription,  11.  22-25 ;  of.  Brugsch,  Geschichte  .Egyptens,  pp.  443,  444.

*  llarinhabi  refers  to  the  edicts  of  Tlnitmosis  lit.  (InscrijJtion  oj  Uarniliubi,  1.  29);  for  the  fiscal
measures  of  Amenothes  III.,  see  p.  299  of  the  present  work.


HARMHAlli   IS  FUSES    ORDER   INTO    THE   GOVERNMENT.


347


AMENUTHES    IV.,    IT.OM    A    FKAGMENT
USED   AGAIN    BV    HAKMHAEi.^


witli  the  result  that  when  the  treasury  made  its  claim  for  leather,  none  was  to

be  fuund.     It  was  hardly  possible,  moreover,  to  bring  the  culprits  to  justice,  for

the  chief  men  of  the  towns  and  villages,  the  prophets,  and  all  those  who  ought

to  have  looked  after  the  interests  of  the    taxpayer,   took    money    from    the

criminals  for  protecting  them  from  justice,  and  compelled  the  innocent  victims

also    to    purchase    their    protection.     Harmhabi,

who  was  continually  looking  for  opportunities  to

put   down  injustice    and    to   punish    deceit,    at

length  decided  to  promulgate  a  very  severe  edict

against  tlie  magistrates  and  the  double-dealing

officials :    any   of   them  who  was  found  to  have

neglected  his  duty  was  to  have  his  nose  cut  off,

and  was  to  be  sent  into  perpetual  exile  to  Zalu,

on   the  eastern  frontier.^     His  commands,  faitli-

fiilly  carried  out,  soon  produced  a  salutary  effect,

and    as    he   would    on    no    account    relax    the

severitv  of  the  sentence,  exactions  were  no  lonsrer

heard  of,  to  the  advantage  of  the  revenue  of  tlie

State.     On  the  last  day  of  each  month  the  gates

of  his  palace  were  open  to  every  one.     Any  one  on  giving  his  name  to  the

guard  could  enter  the  court  of  honour,  where  he  would  find  food  in  abundance

to  satisfy  his  hunger  while  he  was  awaiting  an  audience.     The  king  all  the

while  was  seated  in  the  sight  oF  all  at  the  tribune,  whence  he  would  throw

among  his  faithful  friends  necklaces  and  bracelets  of  gold :  he  inquired  into

complaints  one  after  another,  heard  every  case,  announced  his  judgments  in

brief  words,  and  dismissed  his   subjects,  wlio  went  away  proud  and  happv  at

having  had  their  affairs  dealt  with  by  the  sovereign  himself^

The  portraits  of  Harmhabi  which  have  come  down  to  us  give  us  the  impres-
sion of  a  character  at  once  energetic  and  agreeable.  The  most  beautiful  of  these
is  little  more  than  a  fragment  broken  off  a  black  granite  statue.  Its  mournful
expression  is  not  pleasing  to  the  spectator,  and  at  the  first  view  alienates
his  sympathy.     The  face,  which  is  still  youthful,  breathes  an  air  of  melanclioly,

'  See  pp.  '^2,  2.3  of  tliu  present  work  for  a  notice  of  Zalu  and  its  convicts.

■  Drawn  by  Fduclier-Gudiii,  from  a  sketoli  by  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Munumenta  Hgyptiens,  pi.  xi.
n.  2,  It  is  one  of  tlio  bas-reliefs  of  tlie  teinplo  of  Atonu  at  Karniik,  re-employed  liy  llurmhabt  in  the
construction  of  one  of  his  own  pylons.

'  All  these  details  are  taken  from  a  stele  discovered  in  IS,S2  (JlAsrEiiO,  Notes  siir  quehiuen
jminU  de  Grummaire,  in  the  Ztilmhrlfl,  ISS2,  p.  134),  published  in  a  brii-f  summary  by  Bouriaut
(.1  Thcbi-f,  in  the  Jiecui:il  <h:  Travnux,  vol.  vi.  pp.  11-56),  afterwards  translated  and  commented  upon
by  W.  Jlax  Midler  (Ar/fterunj  r/p«  GVosscH  ZW.re<8  dcs  Kwiiijg  Unr-em-hebe,  in  the  Xeitschri/I,  ISSS,
pl>.  70-94).  Tlie  text  is  so  mutilated  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  a  literal  rendering;  of  it  in  all
Its  parls,  but  the  sense  is  sullieicntly  clear  to  warrant  our  filling  up  the  whole  with  considerable
•  •ertainty.


;U8


THE  BEACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


an  expression  which  is  somewhat  rare  among  the  Pharaohs  of  the  best  period  r
the  thin  and  straiglit  nose  is  well  set  on  the  face,  the  elongated  eyes  have  some-
what heavy  lids  ;  the  large,  fleshy  lips,  slightly  contracted  at  the  corners  of  the
mouth,  are  cut  with  a  sharpness  that  gives  them  singular
vigour,  and  the  firm  and  finely  modelled  chin  loses
little  of  its  form  from  the  false  beard  depending  from
it.  Every  detail  is  treated  with  such  freedom  that
one  would  think  the  sculptor  must  have  had  some
soft  material  to  work  upon,  rather  than  a
rock  almost  hard  enough  to  defy  the
chisel ;  the  command  over  it  is  so  com-
plete that  the  difficulty  of  the  work  is
forgotten  in  the  perfection  of  the  result.
The  dreamy  expression  of  his  fece,
however,  did  not  prevent  Harmhabi
from  displaying  beyond  Egypt,  as
within  it,  singular  activity.  Although
Egypt  had  never  given  up  its  claims  to
dominion  over  the  whole  river-valley,
as  far  as  the  plains  of  Sennar,  yet
since  the  time  of  Amenothes  111.  no
sovereign  had  condescended,  it  would
appear,  to  conduct  in  person  the  ex-
peditions directed  against  the  tribes
of  the  Upper  Nile.  Harmhabi  was
anxious  to  revive  the  custom  which
imposed  upon  the  Pharaohs  the  obliga-
tion to  make  their  first  essay  in  arms  in  Ethiopia,  as  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  had
done  of  yore,  and  he  seized  the  pretext  of  the  occurrence  of  certain  raids  there
to  lead  a  body  of  troops  himself  into  the  heart  of  the  negro  country.  He  had
just  ordered  at  this  time  the  construction  of  the  two  southern  pylons  at  Karnak,
and  there  was  great  activity  in  the  quarries  of  Silsileh.  A  commemorative
chapel  also  was  in  course  of  excavation  here  in  the  sandstone  rock,  and  he  had
dedicated  it  to  his  father,  Amon-Ra  of  Thebes,  coupling  with  him  the  local

'  Di-awu  by  Fiiuclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey.  This  monument  was
reproduceil  in  JNIariette,  Alhmn  photograph ique  du  Muse'e  de  Boulaq,  pi.  34;  in  Eatet.  Moiiiimeiits
de  I'AH  Antique,  vol.  i. ;  afterwards  in  Pekrot-Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  i.  p.  711,
and  in  Masperi.',  Arch€ologie  Eqyptienne,  p.  222.  Marirtte  was  under  the  impression  that  it  was  a
statue  of  Minephtah,  son  and  successor  of  Ramses  II.  (Nutiees  des  principaux  Monuments,  iSld,  p.  92,
Xo.  22).  While  carrying  out  excavations  at  Kariiak  at  the  spot  where  it  had  been  found,  I  brought
to  light  other  fragments,  from  which  it  seems  to  be  clear  that  it  represents  Harmhabi,  and  not
Jlinephtah  {Guide  du  Visileur  nu  Miisee  de  Botdaq,  p.  425,  Xo.  GIO) ;  the  expression  is  very  similar
to  that  of  the  statue  at  Turiu.


U.\R51I1A1-.I,


HARMHABVS    WARS   IN  ETHIOPIA.


:?49


•divinities,  Hapi  the  Nile,  and  8obku  the  patron  of  Ombos.  The  saiu'tiiaiy  is
excavated  somewhat  deeply  into  the  hillside,  and  the  dark  rooms  witjiin  it  are
decorated  with  the  usual  scenes  of  worship,  but  the  vaulted  approach  to  them


THi;    VAll.TKD    PASSAGI-;    OF   THK    BOCK-TOMB    AT    GEBEL    blLSlLKU.'


displays  upon  its  western  wall  the  victory  of  the  king.  We  see  here  a  figure
receiving  from  Amon  the  assurance  of  a  long  and  happy  life,  and  another  letting
fly  his  arrows  at  a  host  of  fleeing  enemies ;  Etiiiopians  raise  their  heads  to  him
in  suppliant  gesture  ;  soldiers  march  past  with  their  captives  ;  above  one  of  the

'  Drawu  by  Faucher-Gudin,  fiom  a  pliotogrii[ili  by  Intinger.


350  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

doors  we  see  twelve  military  leaders  marching  and  carrying  the  king  aloft  upon
their  shoulders,  whil-e  a  group  of  priests  and  nobles  salute  him,  offering  incense.^
At  this  period  Egyptian  ships  were  ploughing  the  Red  Sea,  and  their  captains
were  renewing  official  relations  with  Puaiiit.  Somali  chiefs  were  paying  visits
to  the  palace,  as  in  the  time  of  Thutmosis  III.^  The  wars  of  Amou  had,  in
fact,  begun  again.  The  god,  having  suffered  neglect  for  half  a  century,  had  a
greater  need  than  ever  of  gold  and  silver  to  fill  his  coffers  ;  he  required  masons
for  his  buildings,  slaves  and  cattle  for  his  farms,  perfumed  essences  and
incense  for  his  daily  rites.  His  resources  had  gradually  become  exhausted,
and  his  treasury  would  soon  be  empty  if  he  did  not  employ  the  usual  means
to  replenish  it.  He  incited  Harmhabi  to  proceed  against  the  countries  from
which  in  olden  times  he  had  enriched  himself — to  the  south  in  the  first  place,
and  then,  having  decreed  victory  there,  and  having  naturally  taken  for  himself
the  greater  part  of  the  spoils,  he  turned  his  attention  to  Asia.  In  tlie  latter
campaign  the  Egyptian  troops  took  once  more  the  route  through  Ccele-Syria,
and  if  the  expedition  experienced  here  more  difficulties  than  on  the  banks  of
the  Upper  Nile,  it  was,  nevertheless,  brought  to  an  equally  triumphant  conclusion.
Those  of  their  adversaries  who  had  offered  au  obstinate  resistance  were  trans-
ported into  other  lands,  and  the  rebel  cities  were  eitlier  razed  to  the  ground  or
given  to  the  flames :  the  inhabitants  having  taken  refuge  in  tlie  mountains,
where  they  were  in  danger  of  perishing  from  hunger,  made  supplications  for
peace,  which  was  granted  to  them  on  the  usual  conditions  of  doing  homage  and
paying  tribute.^  We  do  not  exactly  know  how  far  he  penetrated  into  tlie
country ;  the  list  of  the  towns  and  nations  over  which  he  boasts  of  having
triumphed  contains,  along  with  names  unknown  to  us,  some  already  famous
or  soon  to  become  so — Arvad,  Pibukhu,  the  Khati,  and  possibly  Alasia.*  The
Haui-Nibu  themselves  must  have  felt  the  effects  of  the  campaign,  for  several  of
their  chiefs,  associated,  doubtless,  with  the  Phoenicians,  presented  themselves

'  Chami'cjlliom,  Monumenls  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  j)ls.  ex.,  cxiii.,  aud  vol.  i.  pp.  2G0,  201 ;  Rosellini,
Monumentl  Slorici,  pi.  xliv.  2-.*),  aud  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  277-287;  Lkpsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  liO,  121.  The
signlficauce  of  the  monument  was  pointed  out  first  by  Chami'OLLION,  Lettres  Writes  d'Egypte,  2nd
edit.,  pp.  185-187.  The  aeries  of  races  conquered  was  represented  at  Karnak  on  the  internal  face  of
one  of  tlie  pylons  built  by  Harmhabi  (Chamtollion,  Mon.  de  VEgtjpie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  177,  178  ;  Kcsellini.
Monumenti  Sturici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  289) ;  it  appears  to  have  been  "  usurped  "  by  Kamses  II.

^  Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  179,  180;  Bbugsoh,  Uecueil  de  Monuments,  vol  ii.
pi.  Ivii.  3,  and  p.  69 ;  Mariette,  Monuments  diverges,  pi.  88,  and  Text,  p.  27  ;  Bodriant,  Letire  a  M.
ir.  Max  Mailer,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  43.

'  These  details  are  taken  from  the  fragment  of  an  inscription  now  in  the  museum  at  Vienna,  and
published  by  Wiedemann  {Texts  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  XV 111"'  Dynasty,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1886-89,  vol.  xi.  p.  425),  alterwards  by  Bergmann  {Ansiedlung  Semitischer  Nomaden
in  jEgypteii,  in  the  Zeitsclmft,  vol.  xxvii.  pp.  125-127);  Bergmann,  and  also  Erman,  think  that  we
have  in  this  text  the  indication  of  an  immigration  into  Egypt  of  a  tribe  of  the  Monatiu.

*  The  list  of  northern  tribes  owing  allegiance  more  or  less  to  Harmhabi,  was  published  in  1882
(Masi'ERO,  Hid.  Aiirienne  des  peuples  de  VOrient,  4th  edit.,  p.  213,  note  5)  ;  it  was  also  published  by
Bouriant  (Letire  a  M.  W.  M.  Miiller,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  41-44),  and  commented
upon  briefly  by  W.  Mas  Miiller  (_Asien  utid  Europa,  p.  292).


THK  KHATI.


35L


before  the  Pharaoh  at  Thebes.^  I^gXP^  "'^**  maintaining,  therefore,  its  ascend-
ency, or  at  least  appearing  to  maintain  it  in  those  regions  where  the  kings^
of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  had  ruled  after  the  campaigns  of  Thiitmosis  I.,.
Thiitmosis  III.,  and  Aiueuothes  II.  Its  influence,  nevertheless,  was  not  so
undisputed  as  in  former  days ;  not  that  the  Egyptian  soldiers  were  less  valiant,
but  owing  to  the  fnct  that  anotlier  power  had  risen  up  alongside  them  whose


THE   TRIUMPH    OF    HABMHAIil    IN    THE    SANCTUAliY    OF    GEBEL    SILSILEH."


armies  were  strong  enough  to   encounter  them  on  the  field  of  battle  and  to
obtain  a  victory  over  them.

Beyond  Naharaim,  in  the  deep  recesses  of  the  Amanus  and  Taurus,  there
had  lived,  for  no  one  knows  how  many  centuries,  the  rude  and  warlike  tribes
of  the  Khiiti,  related  not  so  much  to  the  Semites  of  the  Syrian  plain  as
to  the  populations  of  douijtiul  race  and  language  who  occupied  the  upper
basins  of   the  Halys  and  Euphrates.^      The  Chalda;au    conquest  had  barely

'  Wiedemann,  Texis  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  XVIII"'  Dynasty,  in  tlie  Proceedingt  of  the  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  1888-89,  vol.  xi.  pp.  423,  424  ;  BouRlAN r,  Lettre  a  M.  W.  M.  MiiUer  sur  U  mur  d'Horemheb
ii  Karnah,  in  the  Recueil  de  Trauaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  42.

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Guflin,  from  a  photograph  Ijy  Daniel  Heron.  The  black  spots  are  duo  to  the
torchea  of  the  fullabin  of  the  noighliourhood  who  have  visited  the  rock-tomb  in  bygone  yeiirs.

'  Upon  the  vocalisation  Khtti  of  this  name,  see  p.  12G,  note  G,  of  the  present  work.  Ibilcvy  asserts
that  the  Khati  were  Semites,  and  bases  liis  assertion  on  materials  of  the  Assyrian  period  (La  Lanque
des  Uittitei  d'aprig  lea  lextes  Assyrleng,  in  the  Recherclicn  ISiblifjues.  |)p.  270-288,  anil  Deux  Inscriptions
nM€ennea  de  Zindjlrli,  in  tlie  Recue  Si'miiique,  vol.  i.  pp.  242-258).  The  Khati,  absorbed  in  Syria
by  the  Semite.",  with  whom  they  were  blended,  apjiear  to  have  been  by  origin  a  non-Semitic  people,,
as  Sayce  and  others  have  pointed  out  (T/ii-  tlamatliile  Inscription",  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.


352  TEK  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

touched  them ;  tlie  Egyptian  campaign  had  not  more  effect,  and  Thut-
mosis  III.  himself,  after  having  crossed  their  frontiers  and  sacked  several
of  their  towns,  made  no  serious  pretence  to  reckon  them  among  his  subjects.^
Their  chiefs  were  accustomed,  like  their  neighbours,  to  use,  for  correspondence
with  other  countries,  the  cuneiform  mode  of  writing ;  they  had  among  them,
therefore,  for  this  purpose,  a  host  of  scribes,  interpreters,  and  official  registrars
of  events,  such  as  we  find  to  have  accompanied  the  sovereigns  of  Assyria  and
Babylon.^  These  chiefs  were  accustomed  to  send  from  time  to  time  a  present
to  the  Pharaoh,  which  the  latter  was  pleased  to  regard  as  a  tribute,^  or  they
would  offer,  perhaps,  one  of  their  daughters  in  marriage  to  the  king  at
Thebes,  and  after  the  marriage  show  themselves  anxious  to  maintain  good
faith  with  their  son-in-law.  They  had,  moreover,  commercial  relations  with
Egypt,  and  furnished  it  with  cattle,  chariots,  and  those  splendid  Cappa-
docian  horses  whose  breed  was  celebrated  down  to  the  Greek  period.'*  They
were  already,  indeed,  people  of  consideration ;  their  territory  was  so  extensive
that  the  contemporaries  of  Thiitmosis  III.  called  them  the  Greater  Khati ;
and  the  epithet  "  vile,"  which  the  chancellors  of  the  Pharaohs  added  to  their
name,  only  shows  by  its  virulence  the  impression  which  they  had  produced  upon

Arcb.  Soc,  vol.  v.  pp.  27,  29,  aud  The  Monuments  of  the  Eittites.  ibid.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  251,  252,  2S8-293),
also  F.  Leuormant  (^Les  Origines  de  I'Eistoire,  vol.  ii.  p.  267,  et  seq.),  Ed.  Meyer  {Gescli.  des  Alter-
ihums,  vol.  i.  p.  213,  and  Gesch.  des  Alien  JEgyptens.  p.  22G),  Lantsheere  (J5e  la  Race  el  de  la  Langue
des  Eittites,  in  the  Compte-rendu  du  Congres  des  Catholiqites,  1S91,  V"'  Section,  p.  173,  et  setj.),  W.  M.
Miiller  (_Asien  und  Europa,  p.  317,  et  seq.),  Winckler  (Geschichle  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  134-136),  and  the
greater  number  of  scholars  wlio  have  dealt  with  the  question.

'  Sec  pp.  265,  278,  279  of  the  present  work.  Upon  this  ignoring  of  the  Khati  in  the  time  of
Tliiitmosis  III.,  cf.  the  position  taken  up  by  E.  de  EouGii  in  Lefons  prn/essees  au  College  de  France,
in  the  Mdanges  d' Arckg'jlogie  £gyptienne  et  Assyrienne,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270, 271 ;  this  was  the  first  serious
contribution  to  the  discussion  of  the  subject,  and  has  served  as  the  starting-point  of  subsequent  works
on  the  rise  of  the  Hittite  power.

^  A  letter  from  the  King  of  tlie  Khati  to  the  Pharaoh  Amenothes  IV.  is  written  in  cuneiform
writing  aud  in  a  Semitic  language  (Winokler-Abei.,  Der  Thontafelfund  von  El-Amarna,  p.  17 ;  ef.
Delattre,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Froceedings  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.
548-550).  It  has  been  thouglit  that  other  documents,  ilrawn  up  in  a  non-Semitic  language  and
coming  from  Mitanni  and  Arzapi  (Winckler-Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund,  pis.  9,  28-33;  cf.  the  essays
of  Jensen,  Vorsludien  zur  Kntzifferung  des  Mitauni;  Brvnnow,  Die  Mitani-Sprache,  aud  Sayce,  The
Latiguage  of  Mitanni,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assi/riologie,  vol.  v.  pp.  166-274),  contain  a  dialect  of  the
Hittite  speech  or  that  langu.age  itself.  A  "  writer  of  books,"  attached  to  the  person  of  the  Hittite
King  Khatusaru,  is  named  amongst  the  dead  found  on  the  field  of  battle  at  Qodshu  (E.  de  Kouge,
Le  Poeme  de  Pen-ta-our,  1856,  pp.  9,  111).

"  It  is  thus  perhaps  we  must  understand  the  mention  of  tribute  from  the  Khati  in  the  Aunals  of
Thutmosis  III.,  1.  26,  in  the  year  XXXIII.,  also  in  the  year  XL.  (Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  30  a,  1.  7),
One  of  the  Tel  el-Amania  letters  refers  to  presents  of  this  kind  (Winckler-Abel,  Der  Thontafelfund,
No.  18,  pi.  15),  which  the  King  of  Khati  addresses  to  Amenothes  IV.  to  celebrate  his  enthronement,
and  to  ask  him  to  maintain  with  himself  the  traditional  good  relations  of  their  two  families:  see
p.  329  of  tlie  present  work.

*  The  liorses  of  the  Khati  were  called  aiari,  strong,  vigorous,  as  also  their  bulls  (^Hasfase  Papyrus
IV.,  pi.  xvii.  11.  8,  9 ;  cf.  Bondi,  Dem  Eehraisch-phSuizischen  Siirachzireige  angehurige  Lehnworler,
pp.  24-26).  The  King  of  Alasia,  while  oft'ering  to  Amenotlies  III.  a  jirofitable  speculation,  advises
him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  King  of  the  Khati  or  with  the  King  of  Sangar  (Bezold-Budge,
Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  ."i,  p.  13,  11.  20.  21),  and  thus  furnishes  proof  that  the  Egyptians  held
•constant  eommeroial  relations  with  the  Khati.


EITTITE   CIVILIZATION.


353


TUliEE   HEADS   OF    lUTTITE   SOLDIEUS."


the  mind  of  their  adversaries.^  Their  type  of  face  distinguishes  them  clearly
from  the  nations  conterminous  witli  them  on  the  south.  The  Egyptian
draughtsmen  represented  them  as  squat  and  short  in  stature,  though  vigorous,
strong-limbeil,  and  with  broad  and  full  shoulders  in  youth,  but  as  inclined
frequently  to  obesity  in
old  age.  The  head  is
long  and  heavy,  the
forehead  flattened,  the
chin  moderate  in  size,
the  nose  prominent,  the
eyebrows  and  cheeks  pro-
jecting, the  eyes  small,
oblique,  and  deep  -  set,
the  mouth  fleshy,  and
usually  framed  in  by  tun
deep  wrinkles ;  the  flesh
colour  is  a  yellowish  or
reddish  white,but  clearer
than  that  of  the  Phce-
nicians  or  the  Auuirru.''  Their  ordinary  costume  consisted,  sometimes  of  a
shirt  with  short  sleeves,  sometimes  of  a  sort  of  loin-clotii,  more  or  less  ample
according  to  the  rank  of  the  individual  wearing  it,  and  bound  round  tlie  waist
by  a  belt.  To  these  they  added  a  scanty  mantle,  red  or  blue,  fringed  like  tliat
of  the  Chahteans,  which  fhey  passed  over  the  left  shoulder  and  brought  back
under  the  right,  so  as  to  leave  the  latter  exposed.  They  wore  shoes  with
thick  soles,  turning  up  distinctly  at  tlie  toes,^  and  tliey  encased  their  hands

'  Annah  of  Thulmosi's  111.,  1.  20,  aud  Lepsivs,  Denlcm.,  iii.  oO  a,  1.  7  :  M.  de  Rouge  suggested  that
Khati  "tlie  Little"  was  the  name  of  tlie  Hittites  of  Hebron  {Lefons,  in  the  Melanges  d' ArcMologie,
vol.  il.  p.  270).  The  expressiou,  "  Khati  the  Great,"  has  been  compared  with  that  of  Khanirabhat,
"Khani  the  Great,"  which  in  the  Assyrian  texts  would  seem  to  designate  apart  of  Cappadoeia,  in  wliicli
the  province  of  Jliliddi  occurs,  and  the  identification  of  the  two  has  found  an  ardent  defender  in  \V.
Max  Ml'LLER,  Anen  nnd  Europa,  p.  ."2U ;  cf.  Niebuhh,  Studien  und  Bemertuvgen  zur  Geschiclite dea  Alien
Orienls,  pp.  04-06.  Until  further  light  is  thrown  upon  it,  the  most  probable  reading  of  the  word  is
not  Khani-raihat,  but  IChanif/fi/bat  (.Iensex,  Vnrstudien  zur  EnUifferung  des  Mitanni,  in  the  Ze.llschrift
fur  As«yriologie,  vol.  v.  p.  177,  note  1,  and  Grundlagea  fur  eine  linlzlfferung  dir  Cilicischen  hischri/teii,
pp.4,  .');  WiNX'KLEB,  Gesch.  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  174,  2.')9).  The  name  Khani-Galbiit  is
possibly  preserved  in  Julbat,  which  the  Arab  geographers  applied  in  the  Middle  Ages  to  a  province
situated  in  Lesser  Armenia  (Halevy,  Deux  Inscriptions  liitc'ennes  da  Zituljirli,  in  the  llcvite
Semitique,  vol.  i.  p.  244).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insingcr.  These  were  three  Hittite  soldiers
engaged  in  the  battle  of  Qodshii  in  the  time  of  Ramses  tl.

'  Sayce-Mi';n'ant,  I.es  Bifl&ns,  Uintoire  d'un  Empire,  ouhlie.  p.  (i,  and  Savce,  The  Races  of  the  Old
Testament,  pp.  132-14(1;  F.  LENoniiAjiT,  Les  Origines  de  I'Hisioire,  vol.  iii.  pp.  270-280;  W.  JIax
Miii.LEn,  Asien  W'd  Europa,  p.  IKU.  Races  of  a  similar  typo  still  exist  in  Coele-Syria  (Condei!,  Iltlh
nnd  Moab,  pp.  10,  22)  and  in  Anatolia  CWii.soN,  Recent  Biblical  Research  in  Palestine,  Syria,  and  Asia
Minor,  in  the  Quarterly  Statements  of  the  Palestine  Expl.  Fund,  1881.  p.  40).

*  This  detail,  which  cannot  fail  to  be  of  considerable  importance,  was  pointed  out  for  the  first  time

•2    A


354  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

in  gloves,  reacliing  halfway  up  the  arm.  They  shaved  off  both  moustache
and  beard,  but  gave  free  growth  to  their  hair,  which  they  divided  into
two  or  three  locks,  and  allowed  to  fall  upon  their  backs  and  breasts.  The
king's  head-dress,  which  was  distinctive  of  royalty,  was  a  tall  pointed  hat,
resembling  to  some  extent  the  white  crown  of  the  Pharaohs.  The  dress  of  the
people,  taken  all  together,  was  of  better  and  thicker  material  than  that  of
the  Syrians  or  Egyptians.^  The  mountains  and  elevated  plateaus  which  they
inhabited  were  subject  to  extraordinary  vicissitudes  of  heat  and  cold.  If  the
summer  burnt  up  everything,  the  winter  reigned  here  with  an  extreme  rigour,
and  dragged  on  for  months  :  clothing  and  foot-gear  had  to  be  seea  to,  if  the
snow  and  the  icy  winds  of  December  were  to  be  resisted.  The  character  of  their
towns,  and  the  domestic  life  of  their  nobles  and  the  common  people,  can  only
be  guessed  at.  Some,  at  least,  of  the  peasants  must  have  sheltered  themselves
in  villages  half  underground,  similar  to  those  which  are  still  to  be  found  in
this  region.^  The  town-folk  and  the  nobles  had  adopted  for  the  most  part
the  Chaldaean  or  Egyptian  manners  and  customs  in  use  among  the  Semites
of  Svria.  As  to  their  religion,  they  reverenced  a  number  of  secondary  deities
who  had  their  abode  in  the  tempest,  in  the  clouds,  the  sea,  the  rivers,  the
springs,  the  mountains,  and  tlie  forests.  Above  this  crowd  there  were  several
sovereign  divinities  of  the  thunder  or  the  air,  sun-gods  and  moon-gods,  of  which
the  chief  was  called  Khati,  and  was  considered  to  be  the  father  of  the  nation.^
They  ascribed  to  all  their  deities  a  warlike  and  savage  character.  The
Egyptians  pictured  some  of  them  as  a  kind  of  R:i,,^  others  as  representing  Sit,

by  Sayce  (cf.  Weight,  The  Empire  uf  the  nittite!<,  1st  edit.,  pp.  xii.,  xiii.)-  This  characteristic  is
found  on  the  majority  of  the  monuments  which  the  peoples  of  Asia  Minor  hare  left  to  us  (Perkot,
Me'moires  d'Arche'ologie,  etc.,  pp.  52,  53,  and  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquiU,  vol.  iv.  pp.  562-564),
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  striking  indications  of  the  northern  origin  of  the  Khati  (F.  Lesorsiant,  Les
Origines  del'Hisloire,  vol.  iii.  p.  299,  et  seq. ;  W.  Max  MCller,  A>ien  und  Europa,  pp.  327,  32S;  see
Jensen  for  doubts  on  this  subject  Grundlage  fur  eine  Enlzifferung  der  Cilicischen  Inschriften,  pp.  5,  6).
The  Egyptian  artists  and  modern  draughtsmen  have  often  neglected  it,  and  the  majority  of  them
have  represented  the  Khati  without  shoes.

'  The  information  about  the  costume  of  the  Khati  was  put  together  first  by  Osbuen,  Egypt,  her
Testimony  to  the  Truth,  pp.  130-132 ;  afterwards  completed  by  F.  Lexormant,  Les  Origines  de
;'Hjs(o(Ve,  vol.  iii.  pp.  297-299,  303-305 ;  by  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt,  vol.  iv.  pp.  562-564 ;
and  lastly  by  W.  Max  Mljller,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  324-330.

■  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  VAniiquite,  vol.  iv.  p.  587.

'  The  little  that  can  be  gathered  about  the  religion  of  the  Khati  has  been  summarised  by  E.  de
Rouge,  Lemons  prof ess€es  au  College  de  France,  in  tlie  ile'langes  d' Archeologie,  vol.  li.  pp.  274,  275,
27S-2S0;  afterwards  by  F.  Lenormant,  Les  Origines,  vol.  iii.  pp.  305-313,  and  by  Wright,  The
Empire  of  the  Hittites,  1st  edit.,  pp.  73-7S ;  cf.  W.  Max  Mui.ler,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  330, 331.  The
priacipal  source  of  our  information  is  the  treaty  of  Ramses  II.  with  Khatusaru,  of  which  the  later
clauses  (11.  26-32,  36,  37)  invoke  the  gods  of  Egypt  and  tliose  of  the  Khati ;  see  the  text  in  Bouriant's
Notes  de  Voyage,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Tranaux,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  157-160.

*  The  Cilician  inscriptions  of  the  Grteco-Roman  period  reveal  the  existence  in  this  region  of  a
god  'Pw,  'Pms  (Sachau,  Bemerhungen  za  Cilicischen  Eigennamen,  in  the  Zeitschriftfiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  vii.  pp.  S8-90).  Did  this  god  exist  among  the  Khati,  and  did  the  similarity  of  the  pronunciation
of  it  to  that  of  the  god  Ra  suggest  to  the  Egyptians  the  existence  of  a  similar  god  among  these  people,
•or  did  they  simply  translate  into  their  language  tlie  name  of  the  Hittite  god  representing  the  sun  ?


THE  RELIGION    OF   THE  KHaTI.


355


or  rather  Sutkhu,that  patron  of  the  Hyksos  which  was  identified  by  them  with

Sit :  every  town  had  its  tutelary  heroes,  of  whom  they

were   accustomed    to   speak   as   if  of    its   Sutkhu —

Sutkhu  of   Paliqa,   Sutkhu  of   Khissapa,    Sutkhti  of

Sarsu,   Sutkhu   of  Salpina.     The   goddesses  in  their

eyes  also  became  Astartes,  and  this  one  fact  suggests

that  these   deities  were,  like   their   Phoenician  and

Canaanite  sisters,  of  a  double  nature^ — in  one  aspect

chaste,  fierce,  and  warlike,  and  in  another  lascivious

and  pacific.    One  god  was  called  Mauru,  another  Targu,

others  Qaui  and  Khepa.^     Tishubu,  the  Kamman  of

the  Assyrians,  was  doubtless  lord  of  the  tempest  and

of  the  atmosphere;  Shausbe  answered  to  Shala  and  to

Ishtar  the  queen  of  love ;  ^  but  we  are  frequently  in

ignorance  as   to   the  attributes  covered   by  each  of

these  divine  names,  and  as  to  the  forms  with  which

they  were  invested.    The  majority  of  them,  both  male

and    female,    were    of    gigantic    stature,    and    were

arrayed  in  the  vesture  of  earthly  kings  and  queens  :

they  brandished  their   arms,  displayed   the  insignia

A    IHTTITE    KIXG."

of  their  authority,   such   as   a   flower   or    bunch   of

grapes,  and  while  receiving  the  offerings  of  the  people  were  seated  on  a  chair


'  TUe  names  Mauru  and  Qaui  are  deduced  from  the  forms  Maurusaru  and  Qauisaru,  which  were
borne  by  the  Khati  (E.  de  Rocge,  Legons,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arch^oIogie  ^tjyptienne  et  Assyrienne,
vol.  ii.  pp.  27-1,  275) :  Qaui  was  probably  the  eponymous  hero  of  the  Qui  people,  as  Khati  was  of  the
Khati.  Tarku  and  Tisubu  appear  to  me  to  be  contained  in  the  names  Targauunasa,  Targazatas,  and
Tartisubu  (E.  de  Eovge,  11.  p.  275);  Tisubu  is  probably  the  Tes^upas  mentioned  in  the  letter  from
Dushratta  written  in  Mitannian  (Satce,  llie  Language  of  Ike  Milanni.  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir  Assi/rio-
logie,  Tol.  V.  pp.  209,  27il ;  of.  Jen.sen,  Vorsiudien  zur  Entzifferniig  des  ilUanni,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir
Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  59,  60,  65,  66,  68),  and  identical  with  the  Tushupu  of  another  letter  from  the
same  king  (BEZOLD-EnDGE,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  S,  p.  18,  2,  II.  15,  75;  cf.  Zimmern,  Brief e  aus
dem  Funde  in  El-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  v.  pp.  154,  155,  162,  163),  and  in  a
despatch  from  Tarkondaraush  (Ai;el-WikokleI£,  Dcr  Thontafelfund.  Ho.  10,1.  22;  cf.  Buissier,  in
the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ix.  pp.  421,  422).  Targu,  Targa,  Targanu.  resemble  the  god
Tarkhu,  which  is  known  to  us  from  tlie  proper  names  of  these  regions  preserved  in  Assyrian  and
Greek  inscriptions  (Sayce,  The  Monuments  of  the  Ilittites,  in  tlio  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  .Soc,
vol.  vii.  pp.  284-286 ;  Jensen,  Vorstudien,  etc.,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  p.  70 ;  Saohau,
ISemerkungen  zu  Cilicitchen  Eigemuimen,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  90-94).  Upon
the  resemblance  between  this  god  and  tbeCossaianTurgu(p.  Hoof  the  present  work),  see  Hilpreoht,
Die  Votiv-Inschrift  eines  nicM  erhannten  KassitenhSnigs,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.
p.  316,  n.  3.  Kheba,  Khepa,  Khipa,  is  said  to  be  a  denomination  of  Ramnian  (Boissier,  Notes  sur  les
lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  p.  IJIS);  wo  find  it  ill  tile  names
of  the  princesses  Tadu-khipa,  Gilu-khlpa,  Puu-kliipa.

'  Drawn  by  F,aucher-(judin,  from  the  picture  in  Lei'Sil's,  Detilim.,  iii.  196  a.  It  represents
Khatusaru,  King  of  the  Khati,  who  was  for  thirty  years  a  contemjiorary  of  Ramses  II.

'  Tlie  association  of  Tusliupu,  Te.ssiipas,  Tisubu,  with  Rammanu  is  made  out  from  an  Assyrian
tablet  published  by  Bezuld  (i'roccedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1886-87,  vol.  ix.  p.  377,  and  A
Cuneiform  Liet  of  Gods,  1888  89,  vol.  xi.  pi.  i.  1.  18):  it  was  reeervc'l  for  Sayce  (The  Language  of


356  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

before  an  altar,  or  stood  each  on  the  animal  representing  him — such  as  a  lion,  a
stag,  or  wild  goat.^  The  temples  of  their  towns  have  disappeared,  but  they  coulct
never  have  been,  it  would  seem,  either  large  or  magnificent :  the  favourite  places
of  worship  were  the  tops  of  mountains,  in  the  vicinity  of  springs,  or  the  depths
of  mysterious  grottoes,  where  the  deity  revealed  himself  to  his  priests,  and
received  the  faithful  at  the  solemn  festivals  celebrated  several  times  a  year.^

We  know  as  little  about  their  political  organisation  as  about  their  religion.
We  may  believe,  however,  that  it  was  feudal  in  character,  and  that  every  clan
had  its  hereditary  chief  and  its  proper  gods :  the  clans  collectively  rendered
obedience  to  a  common  king,  whose  effective  authority  depended  upon  his
character  and  age.^  The  various  contingents  which  the  sovereign  could
collect  together  and  lead  would,  if  he  were  an  incapable  general,  be  of  little
avail  against  the  well-ofScered  and  veteran  troops  of  Egypt.  Still  they  were
not  to  be  despised,  and  contained  the  elements  of  an  excellent  army,  superior
both  in  quality  and  quantity  to  any  which  Syria  had  ever  been  able  to  put  into
the  field.  The  infantry  consisted  of  a  limited  number  of  archers  or  slingers.
They  had  usually  neither  shield  nor  cuirass,  but  merely,  in  the  way  of  pro-
tective armour,  a  padded  head-dress,  ornamented  with  a  tuft.  The  bulk  of
the  army  carried  short  lances  and  broad-bladed  choppers,  or  more  generally,
short  thin-handled  swords  with  flat  two-edged  blades,  very  broad  at  the  base
and  terminating  in  a  point.  Their  mode  of  attack  was  in  close  phalanxes,
whose  shock  must  have  been  hard  to  bear,  for  the  soldiers  forming  them  were
in  part  at  least  recruited  from  among  the  strong  and  hardy  mountaineers  of
the  Taurus.*  The  chariotry  comprised  tlie  nobles  and  the  elite  of  the  army,
but  it  was  differently  constituted  from  tiiat  of  the  Egyptians,  and  employed
other  tactics.  The  Hittite  chariots  were  heavier,  and  the  framework,  instead
of  being  a  mere  skeleton,  was  panelled  on  the  sides,  the  contour  at  the  top

Milanni,  in  the  Zeitschrijt  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  v.  j)p.  260,  270)  and  Jensen  {Vorttudien,  in  the  Zeit-
schri/t  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  59,  60)  to  determine  the  natnre  of  the  god.  Shausbe  (Aeel-
WiNCKLER,  Der  Thontafel/und,  pi.  33,  1.  98)  has  been  identitied  with  Ishtar  or  Shala  by  Jensen
(^Vorsludien,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  v.  p.  202,  note  1 ;  vol.  vi.  p.  71).

'  For  figures  of  this  character,  of  which  several  will  be  reproduced  later  on,  see  Perrot-Chipiez,
Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  525,  526,  519,  550,  767.

2  The  religious  cities  and  the  festivals  of  the  Greek  epoch  are  described  by  .Str.\bo,  XII.  ii.  §§  3,
6,  7,  pp.  53.5,  536,  537;  these  festivals  were  very  ancient,  and  their  institution,  if  not  the  method  of
celebrating  them,  may  go  back  to  the  time  of  the  Hittite  empire  (Eajisat-Hogakth,  Pre-hellenic
jilonuments  of  Cappadocia,  in  the  Secueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  siv.  p.  77,  etseq.).

'  The  description  of  the  battle  of  Qodshil  in  tlie  time  of  Ramses  II.  shows  us  the  King  of  the
Khati  surrounded  by  his  vassals  (see  the  passage  in  pp.  397, 398  of  the  present  work).  The  evidence
of  the  existence  of  a  similar  feudal  organisation  from  the  time  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  is  furnished
by  a  letter  of  Dushratta,  King  of  Mitanni,  where  he  relates  to  Ameuothes  IV.  the  revolt  of  his  brother
Artassumara  (see  p.  298  of  the  present  work),  and  speaks  of  tbe  htlp  which  one  of  the  neighbouring
chiefs,  Pirkhi,  and  all  the  Khati  had  given  to  the  rebel.

*  The  passages  bearing  upon  the  weapons  of  the  Khati  have  been  put  together  by  W.  Max
MuLLEB,  Asien  und  Europa  nach  aliUgypiischen  DeulnniHerii,  pp.  324-329.


POLITICAL    AND   MILITARY    OROANISATION    OF    THE  KHATL      357


A    HITTITE    CHARIOT    WITH    ITS    THREE    OCCOPANTS.'


being  sometimes  quite  square,  at  other  times  rudely  curved.  It  was  bound
together  in  the  front  by  two  disks  of  inetal,  and  strengthened  by  strips  of
copper  or  bronze,  which  were  sometimes  plated  with  silver  or  gold.  There
were  no  quiver-cases  as  in  Egyptian  chariots,  for  the  Ilittite  charioteers  rarely
resorted  to  the  bow  and  arrow.  The  occupants  of  a  chariot  were  three  in
number— the  driver ;  the  shield-bearer,  whose  ofiSce  it  was  to  protect  his  com-
panions by  means  of  a  shield,
sometimes  of  a  round  form,
with  a  segment  taken  out
on  each  side,  and  some-
times square ;  and  finally,
the  warrior,  with  his  sword
and  lance.  The  Hittite
princes  wliom  fortune  had
brought  into  relations  with
Thutmosis  III.  and  Ameno-
thes  II.  were  not  able  to
avail  themselves  properly  of

the  latent  forces  around  them.  It  was  owing  probably  to  the  feebleness  of  their
character  or  to  the  turbulence  of  their  barons  that  we  must  ascribe  the  poor
part  they  played  in  the  revolutions  of  the  Eastern  world  at  this  time.  The
establishment  of  a  strong  military  power  on  their  southern  frontier  was  certain,
moreover,  to  be  anything  but  pleasing  to  them ;  if  they  preferred  not  to  risk
everything  by  entering  into  a  great  struggle  with  the  invaders,  they  could,
without  compromising  themselves  too  much,  harass  them  with  sudden  attacks,
and  intrigue  in  an  underhand  way  against  them  to  their  own  profit.  Pharaoh's
generals  were  accustomed  to  punish,  one  after  the  other,  these  bands  of  invading
tribes,'^  and  the  sculptors  duly  recorded  their  names  on  a  pylon  at  Thebes
among  those  of  the  conquered  nations,  but  these  disasters  had  little  effect  in
restraining  the  Hittitos.  They  continued,  in  spite  of  them,  to  march  south-
ward, and  the  letters  from  the  Egyptian  governors  record  their  progress  year
after  year.  They  had  a  hand  in  all  the  plots  which  were  being  hatched
among  the  Syrians,  and  all  the  disaffected  who  wished  to  be  free  from  foreign
oppression — such  as  Abdashirti  and  his  son  Aziru — addressed  themselves  to

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Guilin,  from  Cuami'OLLIOn's  Momimvnts  de  I'ligypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,
pi.  xxvi.  Thu  is  one  of  the  Hittite  cliariots  wliicli  took  part  in  tlie  battle  of  QoJshu  in  the  lime
of  llamses  II. ;  cf.  Koshllini,  Monumenti  l^turiai,  pi.  ciii.,  anil  the  vignette  on  ji.  225  of  the  present
work.

'  There  is  an  allusion  to  these  incursions  of  the  Khati  in  the  letters  from  Aziru  (Wincki.eh-Aeel,
])er  riwntafel/und,  p.  I^S,  U.  21-29;  ;;9,11.  20-27;  40,  II.  :i7-40;  43, 11.  27-32;  45, 11.  13-26),  in  those
from  Akizzi  (Bezoi.u-Bcdge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  3ij,  p.  75, 11.  32-37,  and  No.  37,  ji.  70,  1.  9,
et  seq.).


358  TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

them  for  help  in  the  way  of  chariots  and  men.^  Even  in  tlie  time  of  Amenothes
III.  they  had  endeavoured  to  reap  profit  from  the  discords  of  Mitanni,  and  had
asserted  their  supremacy  over  it.  Dushratta,  however,  was  able  to  defeat  one
of  their  chiefs."  Kepulsed  on  this  side,  they  fell  back  upon  that  part  of
Naharaim  lying  between  the  Euphrates  and  Orontes,  and  made  themselves
masters  of  one  town  after  another  in  sjiite  of  the  despairing  appeals  of  the
conquered  to  the  Thebau  king.  From  the  accession  of  Khuniatonu,  they  set
to  work  to  annex  the  countries  of  Nukhassi,  Nii,  Tunipa,  and  Zinzauru  :  they
looked  with  covetous  eyes  upon  Phoenicia,  and  were  already  menacing  Ccele-
Syria.^  The  religious  confusion  in  Egypt  under  Tutankhamon  and  Ai  left
them  a  free  field  for  their  ambitious,  and  whem  Harmhabi  ventured  to  cross
to  the  east  of  the  isthmus,  he  found  them  definitely  installed  in  the  region
stretching  from  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Lebanon  to  the  Euphrates.  Their
then  reigning  prince,  Sopalulu,  appeared  to  have  been  the  founder  of  a  new
dynasty :  he  united  the  forces  of  the  country  in  a  solid  body,  and  was
within  a  little  of  making  a  single  state  out  of  all  Northern  Syria.*  All
Naharaim  had  submitted  to  him :  Zahi,  Alasia,  and  the  Amurru  had  passed
under  his  government  from  that  of  the  Pharaohs;  Carchemish,  Tunipa,  Nii,
Hamath,  figured  among  his  royal  cities,  and  Qodshu  was  the  defence  of  his
southern  frontier.  His  progress  towards  the  east  was  not  less  considerable.
Mitanni,  Arzapi,  and  the  principalities  of  the  Euphrates  as  far  as  the  Balikh,
possibly  even  to  the  Khabur,^  paid  him  homage  :  beyond  this,  Assyria  and
Chaldsea  barred  his  way.  Here,  as  on  his  other  frontiers,  fortune  brought
him  face  to  face  with  the  most  formidable  powers  of  the  Asiatic  world.

Had  he  sufiicient  forces  at  his  disposal  to  triumph  over  them,  or  only

'  Aziru  defends  himself  ia  one  of  liis  letters  against  the  accusation  of  having  received  four
messengers  from  the  King  of  the  Khati,  while  he  refused  to  receive  those  from  Egypt  (Bezold-Bddge,
Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  35,  p.  73, 11. 47-53).  The  complicity  of  Aziru  with  the  Kh^ti  is  denounced
in  an  appeal  from  the  inhabitants  of  Tunipa  (Id.,  ibid..  No.  41,  pp.  S4,  85, 11.  21-28).  In  a  mutilated
letter,  published  by  Bezold-Budge,  ibid..  No.  46,  p.  95,  an  unknown  person  calls  attention  to  the
negotiations  which  a  petty  Syrian  prince  had  entered  into  with  the  King  of  the  Kbati.

=  See  p.  2'JS  of  the  present  work  for  the  account  of  the  quarrel- between  Dushratta  and  the  Khati.

'  See  the  letter  from  Akizzi,  in  which  this  individual  relates  the  evils  resulting  from  an  invasion
of  the  Khati,  and  asks  help  for  himself  and  for  the  kings  of  Nukhassi,  Nii,  and  Zizauru  (Bezold-
Bddge,  Tell  el-Amariia  Tablets,  No.  37,  p.  7S,  1.  40,  et  seq.).  See  also  the  letter  from  the  inhabitants
of  Tunipa,  who  ask  that  an  Egyptian  army  might  be  sent  to  protect  tliera  from  Aztru  and  the  Khati
(Id.,  ibid..  No.  41,  pp.  84,  85, 11.  21-28).

*  Sapalulu  has  the  same  name  as  tliat  we  meet  with  later  on  in  the  country  of  Patin,  in  the  time
of  Salmanasar  III.,  viz,  Sapalulme  (Monolith,  col.  i.  11.  41,  42).  It  is  known  to  us  only  from  a  treaty
with  the  Khilti,  which  makes  him  coeval  with  Eamses  I.  (1.  3;  cf.  p.  401  of  the  present  work):  it
was  with  him  probably  that  Harmhabi  had  to  deal  in  his  Syrian  campaigns  (W.  Max  Muller,  Asien
und  Europa,  pp.  322,  332).  The  limit  of  his  empire  towards  the  south  is  gathered  in  a  measure  from
what  we  know  of  the  wars  of  Seti  I.  with  the  Khati.  The  latter  prince  was  obliged  to  capture
Qodshu,  and  to  conquer  the  people  of  the  Lebanon  (see  p.  371  of  the  present  work).

'  The  text  of  the  poem  of  Pentauirit  (ed.  J.  de  Rouge,  in  Eecue  Egyptolog.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  151, 159-161).
mentions,  among  the  countries  confederate  with  the  Khati,  all  Naharaim;  that  is  to  say,  the  country
on  either  side  of  the  Euphrates,  embracing  Mitanni  and  the  principalities  named  in  the  Amarna  cor-
respondence, and  in  addition  some  provinces  whose  sites  have  not  yet  been  discovered,  but  which  may
be  placed  without  much  risk  of  error  to  the  north  of  the  Taurus ;  see  p.  389  of  the  present  work.


EXTENSION   OF   THE   IIITTITE  EMPIRE   TOWARDS    THE  NORTH.      359

euougli  to  hdlil  his  ground?  Both  hypotheses  could  have  beeu  answered  in
the  affirmative  if  each  one  of  these  great  powers,  confiding  in  its  own  resources,
had  attacked  him  separately.  The  Amorites,  tlie  people  of  Zahi,  Alasia,  and
Naharaim,  together  with  recruits  from  Hittite  tribes,  would  then  have  put  him
in  a  position  to  resist,  and  even  to  carry  off  victory  with  a  high  hand  in  tlie  final
struggle.  But  an  alliance  between  Assyria  or  Babylon  and  Thebes  was  always-
possible.  There  had  been  such  things  before,  in  the  time  of  Thutmosis  IV.  and
in  that  of  Amenothes  III.,^  but  they  were  lukewarm  agreements,  and  tlieir
effect  was  not  much  to  boast  of,  for  the  two  parties  to  the  covenant  had  then
no  common  enemy  to  deal  with,  and  their  mutual  interests  were  not,  therefore,
bound  up  with  their  united  action.  The  circumstances  were  very  different  now.
The  rapid  growth  of  a  nascent  kingdom,  the  restless  spirit  of  its  people,  its
trespasses  on  domains  in  wliich  the  older  powers  had  beeu  accustomed  to  hold
tlie  upper  hand, — did  not  all  this  tend  to  transform  the  convention,  more
commercial  than  military,  with  which  up  to  this  time  they  had  been  content,
into  an  offensive  and  defensive  treaty  ?  If  they  decided  to  act  in  concert,
how  could  Sapalulii  or  his  successors,  seeing  that  he  was  obliged  to  defend
iiimself  on  two  frontiers  at  the  same  moment,  muster  sufficient  resources  to
withstand  the  double  assault  ?  Tlie  Hittites,  as  we  know  them  more  espe-
cially from  the  hieroglypliic  inscriptions,  might  be  regarded  as  the  lords
only  of  Northern  Syria,  and  their  power  be  measured  merely  by  the  extent
of  territory  which  they  occupied  to  tlie  south  of  the  Taurus  and  on  the
two  banks  of  the  Bliddle  Euphrates.  But  this  does  not  by  any  means
represent  the  real  facts.  This  was  but  the  half  of  their  empire ;  the  rest
extended  to  tlie  westward  and  northward,  beyond  the  mountains  into  that
region,  known  afterwards  as  Asia  Minor,  in  which  Egyptian  tradition  had
from  ancient  times  confused  some  twenty  nations  under  the  common  vague
epithet  of  Haiii-nibii.^  Official  language  still  employed  it  as  a  convenient
and  comprehensive  term,  but  the  voyages  of  the  Phoenicians  and  the  travels
of  the  '•'  Royal  Messengers,"  as  well  as,  probably,  the  maritime  commerce
of  the  merchants  of  the  Delta,  had  taught  the  scribes  for  more  than  a  cen-
tury and  a  half  to  make  distinctions  among  these  nations  which  they  had
previously  summed  up  in  one.     The  Luku  ^  were  to  be  found  there,  as  well  as

'  See  pp.  288,  29G,  297  of  the  present  work  for  uoticeg  of  these  aUiances.

'  See  the  passages  in  the  Daion  of  Cicillzalion,  pp.  391-393,  bearing  ou  the  Haui-nibii.

'  The  Luku,  Luka,  are  mentioned  in  the  Amarua  correspondence  under  the  form  TiUkki  (Abel-
WiNCKLER,  Jkr  Tkonfa/elfumI,  No.  11,  pi.  10,  11.  10-22  ;  of.  Delattke,  Lettres  de  Tell  d-Amania,  in
Proc.  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1892-93,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  129-131),  as  pirates  and  highway  robbers.  The  identity  of
these  people  with  the  Lycians  was  pointed  out  for  the  first  time  by  E.  de  Rocge,  Exlrnit  d'uii  M^iii.,  etc.,
p.  4.  It  was  opposed  by  Brugsch,  who  prefers  the  identification  with  the  T.igyos  (Gescli.  /Eijypfeiie,
J).  578),  by  Ungor  (MaiiKthu,  p.  218),  by  llali-vy  {t'Audes  lierbirea,  pt.  1,  Egsai  d'Kpiijr.  Lihijiiue,  pp.  171-
173),  by  Wiedeaianu  (i*/<;  altealen  Bezieliuiujfu  zwischcn  .Kijijptat  und  Griechenland,  pp. 9 -U,  and  JEgypt.
Gegcli.,  p.  47.5),  by  Kd.  Meyer  (Geseh.  des  Alhrthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  278, 312,  and  Gesck.  des  Alten  yRjyptem.
p.  281).     Along  with  W,  Max  Midler,  I  hold  it  as  well  established  {Aslen  und  Europa,  pp.  354-399).


360  TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

the  Danauna/  the  Sbardaua,^  and  others  besides,  who  lay  behind  one  another
on  the  coast.  Of  the  second  line  of  populations  behind  the  region  of  the  coast
tribes,  we  have  up  to  the  present  no  means  of  knowing  anything  with  certainty.
Asia  Minor,  furthermore,  is  divided  into  two  regions,  so  distinctly  separated  by
nature  as  well  as  by  races  that  one  would  be  almost  inclined  to  regard  them
as  two  countries  foreign  to  each  otlier.^  In  its  centre  it  consists  of  a  well-
defined  undulating  plain,  having  a  gentle  slope  towards  the  Black  Sea,  and  of
the  shape  of  a  kind  of  convex  trapezium,  clearly  bounded  towards  the  north
by  the  highlands  of  Poutus,  and  on  the  south  by  the  tortuous  chain  of  the
Taurus.  A  line  of  low  hills  fringes  the  country  on  the  west,  from  the
Olympus  of  Mysia  to  the  Taurus  of  Pisidia.  Towards  the  east  it  is  bounded
by  broken  chains  of  mountains  of  unequal  height,  to  which  the  name  Anti-
Taurus  is  not  very  appropriately  applied.  An  immense  volcanic  cone,  Mount
Argseus,  looks  down  from  a  height  of  some  13,000  feet  over  the  wide  isthmus
which  connects  the  country  with  the  lands  of  the  Euphrates,  This  volcano  is
now  extinct,  but  it  still  preserved  in  old  days  something  of  its  languishing
energy,  throwing  out  flames  *  at  intervals  above  the  sacred  forests  which  clothed
its  slopes.  The  rivers  having  their  sources  in  the  region  just  described,  have
not  all  succeeded  in  piercing  the  obstacles  which  separate  them  from  the  sea,
but  the  Pyramus  and  the  Sarus  find  their  way  into  the  Mediterranean  and  the
Iris,  Halys  and  Sangarios  into  the  Euxine.     The  others  flow  into  the  lowlands,

'  Tlie  Danauna  are  mentioned  along  with  the  Luku  in  the  Amarna  correspondence  (Bezold-
BiDGE,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  oO,  p.  65,  11.  52-.'i5,  and  p.  1x1. ;  of.  Delattbe,  Letlres  de  Tell  el-
Amarna,  ia  the  Proceedings  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1892-93,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  6,  7,  S).  E.  de  Eouge  {Etude  sur
Monuments  de  Thutmes  III.,  p.  29  ;  cf.  F.  Lenokmant,  Les  Fremieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  p.  413,  Les
Antiquite's  de  la  Troade,  vol.  i.  pp.  73,  76,  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  iii.  pp.  46-48)  tried  to
identify  them  with  the  Dauaaus ;  Chabas  (Etudes  sur  V Antiquity  historique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  292,  and
Recherches  pour  servir  ii  I'histoire  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  38  40)  with  the  Daunians  of  Italy ;  and
Brugsch  {Gesch.  ASgyptens,  p.  578)  with  the  Libyans  inhabiting  the  Tienia  of  Lake  Mareotis.  The
termination,  -auna,  -ona  of  this  word  appears  to  be  the  ending  in  -acui/  (see  a  possible  explanation  of
this  term  in  Jensen,  Vorstadien,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,\o].  vi.  pp.  CS,  69)  found  in  Asiatic
names  like  Lykaon  by  the  side  of  Lykos,  Kataun  by  the  side  of  Ketis  and  Kat-patuka ;  while  the
form  of  the  name  Danaos  is  preserved  in  Greek  legend,  Danaon  is  found  only  on  Oriental  monu-
ments. The  Danauna  came  "  from  their  islands,"  that  is  to  say,  from  the  coasts  of  Asia  Minor,  or
from  Greece,  the  term  not  being  pressed  too  literally,  as  the  Egyptians  were  inclined  to  call  all
distant  lands  situated  to  the  north  beyond  the  Mediterranean  Sea  "  islands."

'  E.  de  Eouge'  (Exlrait  d'un  memoire  sur  les  Attaques  dirigies  contre  I'i'gijpte  par  les  peuples  de  la
Me'diterranie,  pp.  19-25)  was  inclined  to  identify  the  Shardana  with  the  Sardes  and  the  island  of
Sardinia;  also  Chabas  {Etudes  sur  V  Antiquity  Historique,  2nd  edit.,  186,  187,  224,  298-308,  317-321,
and  Eecherches  pour  servir  a  I'histoire  de  la  XIX-  dynustie,  pp.  35-38).  Unger  {Manetho,  p.  218)  made
tlicm  out  to  be  tlie  Khartanoi  of  Libya,  and  was  fallowed  by  Brugsch  {Gesch.  Jlgyptens,  pp.  578,  579).
W.  Max  Miiller  {Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  371-379)  revived  the  hypotheses  of  De  Kouge'  and  Chabas,  and
saw  in  them  bands  from  the  Italian  island.  I  am  still  persuaded,  as  I  was  twenty-five  years  ago,
that  they  were  Asiatics — the  Mseonian  triba  which  gave  its  name  to  Sardis  {Revue  Critique,  1873,
vol.  i.  pp.  84-86;  1878,  vol.  i.  p.  320;  1889,  vol.  i.  pp.  109,  110  :  cf.  F.  Lenoemant,  Les  Antiquit^s  de
la  Troade,  i.  pp.  73,  75 ;  Brugsch,  2'roie  et  I'Egypte,  in  Sculie.iiann,  Troie,  Eggek's  trans.,  p.  983).
The  Scrdaui  or  Shardana  are  mentioned  as  serving  in  the  Egyptian  army  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets.

'  I  am  obliged  here,  for  want  of  space,  to  limit  my  original  plan.  I  have  preserved  of  it  only  a
summary  description  of  Asia  Minor,  and  the  most  necessary  facts  for  understanding  the  history  of
Egypt  and  Syria.  Cf.  for  the  geographical  positions,  Elisee  Reclus,  Ge'ogr.  Univ.,  vol.  ix.  p.  461,  et  seq.

•  Stbabo,  xiv.  ii.  §  7,  p.  538.


302  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

forming  meres,  marshes,  and  lakes  of  fluctuating  extent.     The  largest  of  these
lakes,  called  Tatta,  is  salt,  and  its  superficial  extent  varies  witli  the  season.
In  brief,  the  plateau  of  this  region  is  nothing  but  an  extension  of  the  highlands
of  Central  Asia,  and  has  the  same  vegetation,  fauna,  and  climate,  the  same
extremes  of  temperature,  the  same  aridity,  and  tlie  same  wretched  and  poverty-
stricken  character  as  the  latter.     The  maritime  portions  are  of  an  entirely
different  aspect.    The  western  coast  which  stretches  into  the  ^Egean  is  furrowed
by  deep  valleys,  opening  out  as  they  reach  the  sea,  and  the  rivers — the  Caicus,
the   Hermos,   the    Cayster,   and    Meander — which    flow    through   them    are
effective  makers  of  soil,  bringing  down  with  them,  as  they  do,  a  continual
supply  of  alluvium,   which,  deposited  at  their  mouths,  causes   the   land   to
encroach  there  upon  the  sea.     The  littoral  is  penetrated  here  and  there  by
deep  creeks,  and  is  fringed  with  beautiful  islands — Lesbos,  Chios,  Samos,  Cos,
Ehodes — of  which  the  majority  are  near  enough  to  the  continent  to  act  as
defences  of  the  seaboard,  and  to  guard  the  mouths  of  the  rivers,  while  they  are
far  enough  away  to  be  secure  from  the  effects  of  any  violent  disturbances
which  might  arise  in  the  mainland.     The  Cyclades,  distributed  in  two  lines,
are  scattered,  as  it  were,  at  hazard  between  Asia  and  Europe,  like  great  blocks
which  have  fallen  around  the  piers  of  a  broken  bridge.     The  passage  from  one
to  the  other  is  an  easy  matter,  and  owing  to  them,  the  sea  rather  serves  to  bring
together  the  two  continents  than  to  divide  them.     Two  groups  of  heights,
imperfectly  connected  with  the  central  plateau,  tower  above  the  iEgean  slope —
wooded  Ida  on  the  north,  veiled  in  cloud,  rich  in  the  flocks  and  herds  upon  its
sides,  and  in  the  metals  within  its  bosom  ;  and  on  the  south,  the  volcanic  bastions
of  Lycia,  where  tradition  was  wont  to  place  the  flre-breathing  Chimaera.     A
rocky  and  irregularly  broken  coast  stretches  to  the  west  of  Lycia,  in  a  line
almost  parallel  with  the  Taurus,  through  which,  at  intervals,  torrents  leaping
from  the  heights  make  their  way  into  the  sea.      At  the  extreme  eastern  point
of  the  coast,  almost  at  the  angle  where  the  Cilician  littoral  meets  that  of  Syria,,
the  Pyramus  and  the  Sarus  have  brought  down  between  them  sufficient  material
to  form  an  alluvial  plain,  which  the  classical  geographers  designated  by  the
name  of  the  Level   Cilicia,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  rough  region  of  the
interior,  Cilicia  Trachea.

The  populations  dwelling  in  this  peninsula  belong  to  very  varied  races.  On
the  south  and  south-west  certain  Semites  had  found  an  abode — the  mysterious
inhabitants  of  Solyma,  and  especially  the  Phoenicians  in  their  scattered
trading-stations.^  On  the  north-east,  beside  the  Khati,  distributed  throughout
the  valleys  of  the  Anti-Taurus,  between  the  Euphrates  and  Mount  Argaius,
there  were  tribes  allied  to  the  Khati " — possibly  at  this  time  the  Tabal  and

'  See  pp.  202,  203  of  the  present  work  for  notices  of  the  Phcouiciau  trading  posts.

'  A  certain  number  of  these  tribes  or  of  their  towns  are  to  be  found  in  the  list  contained  in  the


THK   POPULATIONS   OF  ASIA   MIXOP.  :36o-

the  Mushka — and,  ou  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  those  workers  iu  metal,
which,  following  the  Greeks,  we  may  call,  for  want  of  a  better  designation,
the  Chalybes.^  We  are  at  a  loss  to  know  the  distribution  of  tribes  in  the
centre  and  in  the  noith-west,  but  tlie  Bospliorus  and  the  Hellespont,  wo  may
rest  assured,  never  formed  an  ethnograpliical  frontiei'.  The  continents  on^
either  side  of  them  appear  at  this  point  to  form  the  banks  of  a  river,  or  the
two  slopes  of  a  single  valley,  whose  bottom  lies  buried  beneath  the  waters.
The  barbarians  of  the  Balkans  had  forced  their  way  across  at  several  points.
Dardanians  were  to  be  encountered  iu  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Ida,  as  well
as  on  the  banks  of  the  Axios,  from  early  times,  and  the  Kebrenes  of  Macedonia
had  colonised  a  district  of  the  Troad  near  Ilion,  while  the  great  nation  of
the  Mysians  had  issued,  like  them,  from  tlie  European  populations  of  the
Hebrus  and  the  Strymon.  The  hero  Dardanos,  according  to  legend,  had  at
first  founded,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Idasan  Zeus,  the  town  of  Dardania;  and
afterwards  a  portion  of  his  progeny  followed  the  course  of  the  Scamander,
and  entrenched  themselves  upon  a  precipitous  hill,  from  the  top  of  which  they
could  look  far  and  wide  over  the  plain  and  sea."  The  most  ancient  Ilion,  at
tirst  a  village,  abandoned  on  more  than  one  occasion  in  the  course  of  centuries,
was  rebuilt  and  transformed,  earlier  than  the  XV"'  century  before  Christ,  into
an  important  citadel,  the  capital  of  a  warlike  and  prosperous  kingdom.  The
ruins  on  the  spot  prove  the  existence  of  a  primitive  civilization  analogous  to
that  of  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago  before  the  arrival  of  the  Phoenician
navigators.^  We  fiud  that  among  both,  at  the  outset,  flint  and  bone,  clay,.
baked  and  unbaked,  formed  the  only  materials  for  their  utensils  and  furniture;
metals  were  afterwards  introduced,  and  we  can  trace  their  progressive  employ-
ment to  the  gradual  exclusion  of  the  older  implements.  These  ancient  Trojans
used  copper,  and  we  encounter  only  rarely  a  kind  of  bronze,  in  which  the
proportion  of  tin  was  too  slight  to  give  the  requisite  hardness  to  the  alloy,  and
we  find  still  fewer  examples  of  iron  and  lead.  They  were  fairly  adroit  workers
in  silver,  electrum,  and  especially  in  gold.  The  amulets,  cups,  necklaces,  and
jewellery  discovered  in  their  tombs  or  in  the  ruins  of  their  houses,  are  some-
tinjes  of  a  not  ungraceful  form.  Their  pottery  was  made  by  hand,  and  was-
not  painted  or  varnished,  but  they  often  gave  to  it  a  fine  lustre  by  means  of  a
stone-polisher.^     Other  peoples  of  uncertain  origin,  but  who  had  attained  a

treaty  of  Ramses  II.  with  the  Khati  (11.  2G-30 ;  cf.  Bouiuant,  2\'olee  de  Voyage,  iu  the  Recueil  de
Travaux,  vol.  xii.  pp.  157-lGO,  auil  W.  Max  MOller,  Asien  und  Etiropa,  pp.  S'M,  335).

'  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschidde  des  Konigsreichs  Pantos,  pp.  II,  12,  ami  C.  de  Caka,  GH  Uelei-Pdusgi,
vol.  i.  pp.  548-565,  have  brought  together  the  greater  part  of  the  scattered  notices  we  liave  of  these  races.

'  See  the  monograph  of  Ed.  Meyer,  GegchicJde  roii  Troas,  p.  !),  et  seq.,  for  all  the  legends  relating
to  the  earliest  Troj;in  population.

'  See  pp.  201,  202  of  the  present  work.

*  For  information  on  this  early  civilization,  consult,  In  default  of  Schliemann's  Ilios  and  Troja,
where  the  materials  are  scattered,  the  summary  of  them  given  by  Peruot-Chipiez,  Hisioire  de  I'Arf,
pp.  151-258,  or  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  de»  Alli-riums,  vol.  ii.  pp.  121-127.


364  THE   BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EQYPT.

civilization  as  advanced  as  that  of  the  Trojaus,  were  the  Ma3onians,  the
Leleges,  and  the  Carians  who  had  their  abode  to  the  south  of  Troy  and  of  the
Mysians.  The  Maeonians  held  sway  in  the  fertile  valleys  of  the  Hermos,
Cayster,  and  Miieander.  They  were  divided  into  several  branches,  such  as  the
Lydians,  the  Tyrseni,  the  Torrhebi,  and  the  Shardana,  but  their  most  ancient
traditions  looked  back  with  pride  to  a  flourishing  state  to  which,  as  they  alleged,
they  had  all  belonged  long  ago  on  the  slopes  of  Mount  Sipylos,  between  the
valley  of  the  Hermos  and  the  Gulf  of  Smyrna.  The  traditional  capital  of  this
kingdom  was  Magnesia,  the  most  ancient  of  cities,  the  residence  of  Tantalus,
the  father  of  Niobe  and  the  Pelopidae.  The  Leleges  rise  up  before  us  from
many  points  at  the  same  time,  but  always  connected  with  the  most  ancient
memories  of  C4reece  and  Asia.  The  majority  of  the  strongholds  on  the
Trojan  coast  belonged  to  them — such  as  Antandros  and  Gargara — and  Pedasos
on  the  Satniois  boasted  of  having  been  one  of  their  colonies,  while  several
other  towns  of  the  same  name,  but  very  distant  from  each  other,  enable  us  to
form  some  idea  of  the  extent  of  their  migrations.^  In  the  time  of  Strabo,
ruined  tombs  and  deserted  sites  of  cities  were  shown  in  Carii  which  the  natives
regarded  as  Lelegia — that  is,  abode  of  the  Leleges.^  The  Carians  were  domi-
nant in  tlie  southern  angle  of  the  peninsula  and  in  the  ^gean  Islands;  and
the  Lycians  lay  next  them  on  the  east,  and  were  sometimes  confounded  with
them.  One  of  the  most  powerful  tribes  of  the  Carians,  the  Tremihe,  were  in  the
eyes  of  the  Greeks  hardly  to  be  separated  from  the  mountainous  district  which
they  knew  as  Lycia  proper;  while  other  tribes  extended  as  far  as  the  Halys.
A  district  of  the  Troad,  to  the  south  of  Mount  Ida,  was  called  Lycia,  and  there
was  a  Lycaonia  on  both  sides  of  the  Middle  Taurus ;  while  Attica  had  its
Lycia,  and  Crete  its  Lycians.  These  three  nations— the  Lycians,  Carians,  and
Leleges — were  so  entangled  together  from  their  origin,  that  no  one  would
venture  now  to  trace  the  lines  of  demarcation  between  them,  and  we  are  often
obliged  to  apply  to  them  collectively  what  can  be  appropriately  ascribed  to
only  one.

How  tar  the  Hittite  power  extended  in  the  first  years  of  its  expansion  we
have  now  hardly  the  means  of  knowing.  It  would  appear  that  it  took  within
its  scope,  on  the  south-west,  the  Cilician  plain,  and  the  undulating  region
bordering  on  it — that  of  Qodi :  the  prince  of  the  latter  distiict,  if  not  his  vassal,
was  at  least  the  colleague  of  the  King  of  the  Khati,  and  he  acted  in  concert

'  According  to  the  scholiast  on  Nicander  {Ther.,  v.  804),  the  word  "  Pedasos"  signified  "  moun-
taiB,"  probably  in  the  language  of  the  Lelegts.  We  know  up  to  the  present  of  four  Pedasi,
or  Pudasa:  the  first  in  Messenia  (Strabo,  YIII.  iv.  §  3,  p.  551),  which  later  on  took  tlie  name  of
Metlione;  the  second  in  the  Troad,  on  the  banks  of  the  Satnioia  (Strabo,  XIII.  i.  §  7,  p.  581);  the
third  in  the  neighbourliood  of  Cyzicus  (Agathooles,  §4,in  Mulleu-Didot,  Frag.  Hist.  Grasc,  vol.  iv.
p.  289;  and  the  fourtli  in  Caria.

'  With  regard  to  tlie  Leleges,  consult  the  somewhat  confused  work  of  Dimmleu,  Die  Leleger,
where  all  the  classical  texts  relative  to  these  people  are  collected.


COMMERCIAL   ROUTES   FROM    THE   EUPHRATES    TO    THE  JSGEAN.      365

with  him  in  peace  as  well  as  iu  war.^  It  embraced  alsu  the  upper  basin  of
the  Pyramos  and  its  afHuents,  as  well  as  the  regions  situated  between  tlie
Euphrates  and  tlie  Halys,  but  its  frontier  in  this  direction  was  continually
fluctuating,  and  our  researches  fail  to  follow  it.  It  is  somewhat  probable  that
it  extended  considerably  towards  the  west  and  north-west  in  the  direction  of
the  ^gean  Sea.  The  forests  and  escarpments  of  Lycaonia,  and  the  desolate
steppes  of  the  central  plateau,  have  always  presented  a  barrier  difficult  to
surmount  by  any  invader  from  the  east.  If  the  Khati  at  that  period  attacked
it  in  front,  or  by  a  flank  movement,  the  assault  must  rather  have  been  of  the
nature  of  a  hurried  reconnaissance,  or  of  a  raid,  tlian  of  a  methodically
conducted  campaign.-  They  must  have  preferred  to  obtain  possession  of  the
valleys  of  the  Thermodon  and  the  Iris,  which  were  lich  iu  mineral  wealth,
and  from  which  they  could  have  secured  an  inexhaustible  revenue.  The  ex-
traction and  working  of  metals  in  this  region  had  attracted  thither  from  time
immemorial  merchants  from  neighbouiing  and  distant  countries— at  first  from
the  south  to  supply  the  needs  of  Syria,  Chaldsea,  and  Egypt,  then  from  the
west  for  the  necessities  of  the  countries  on  the  ^Egean.  The  roads,  which,
starting  from  the  archipelago  on  the  one  hand,  or  the  Euphrates  on  the
other,  met  at  this  point,  fell  naturally  into  one,  and  thus  formed  a  continuous
route,  along  whicli  the  caravans  of  commerce,  as  well  as  warlike  expeditions,
might  henceforward  pass.  Starting  from  the  cultivated  regions  of  Mseonia,
the  road  proceeded  up  the  valley  of  the  Hermos  from  west  to  east ;  then,
scaling  the  heights  of  the  central  plateau  and  taking  a  direction  more  and
more  to  the  north-east,  it  reached  the  fords  of  the  Halys.  Crossing  this  river
twice — for  the  first  time  at  a  point  about  two-thirds  the  length  of  its  course,
and  for  the  second  at  a  short  distance  from  its  source — it  made  an  abrupt
turn  towards  the  Taurus,  and  joined,  at  Melitene,  the  routes  leading  to
the  Upper  Tigris,  to  Nisibis,  to  Singara,  and  to  Old  Assur,  and  coonecting
further  down  beyond  the  mountainous  region,  under  the  walls  of  Carchemisli,
with  the  roads  which  led  to  the  Nile  and  to  the  river-side  cities  on  the  Persian
Gulf.''     There  were  other  and  shorter  route.s,  if  we  think  only  of  the  number

'  The  country  of  Qidi,  Qadi,  Qodi,  has  been  connected  by  Chabas  with  Galilee  (^Voyage  d'un
Egyptien,  pp.  lOS,  109),  and  Brugsch  adopted  the  identification  (^Gesch.  jEgyplens,  p.  549).  W.  Max
Miiller  identified  it  with  Phcenicia  (Asien  und  Europe,  pp.  242-2i8).  I  thiuk  the  name  served  to
designate  the  Cilician  ooait  and  plain  from  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes,  and  the  country  wliish  was
known  in  the  Grajcn-Roman  period  by  the  name  Ketis  and  Kataonia  (Maspero,  Dc  Gircliemis  Oppiili
Situ,  map  2  ;  cf.  Sayce,  Monuments  of  tlie  Ilittites,  in  Trans.  IJibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  285,  285);
F.  Le.vormant,  Les  Grig,  de  I'Uist.,  vol.  iii.  p.  72,  et  seq. ;  Ed.  Meykr,  Gesch.  des  Aliertums,  vol.  i.  p.  277).

'  The  idea  of  a  Hittile  empire  ixtending  over  almost  all  Asia  Minor  was  advanced  by  Sajce
{Monuments  of  the  Uillit'f,  in  the  Tranmclions  Liibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  2G.S-298  ;  cf.  Sayce-
Menant,  Let  JlgtUenr,  Uuloire  d'un  Empire  oullitT,  p.  75,  tt  seq.;  WlUfiHT,  Tke  Empire  of  the
Ilillilef,  Ist  edit.,  pp.  45-GI).  This  view  las  been  opposed  by  Ilirschfeld  (Die  Eelsenrdir/s  in  Klein-
aeien,  pp.  7,  8,  45,  et  acq.),  defended  by  Ramsay  (Hist.  Geog.  nf  Asia  Minor,  pp.  :i,s,  39,  and  Cities  and
Bishoprics  of  Phrygia,  vol.  i.  pp.  xiii.-xv.).  and  by  Radet  ( La  Lydia  el  le  Monde  Grcc,  etc.,  p.  24,  et  teq.).

»  The  very  early  existence  of  this  road,  which  partly  coincides  with  the  royal  route  of  the  Persian
Aohcmenid.a,  was   (.n^ved   by  Iviepeht,   Ueber  die   Fersische   KiJnigsrtrasse  durcli    Torrfi  lonVii  nach


3G6  'THE  HE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

of  miles,  from  the  Hermes  in  Pisidia  or  Lycaonia,  across  the  central  steppe
and  through  the  Ciliciau  Gates,  to  the  meeting  of  the  ways  at  Carchemish ;
but  they  led   through  wretched  regions,  without   industries,  almost  without
tillage,  and  inhospitable  alike  to  man  and  beast,  and  they  were  ventured  on
only  by  those  who  aimed  at  trafficking  among  the  populations  who  lived  in
their   neighbourhood.'      The   Khati,  from   the   time   even    when   they   were
enclosed  among  the  fastnesses  of  the  Taurus,  had  within  their  control  the  most
important  section  of  the  great  land  route  whicli  served  to  maintain  regular
relations  between  the  ancient  kingdoms  of  the  east  and  the  rising  states  of
the  ^^gean,  and  whosoever  would  pass  through  their  country  had  to  pay  them
toll.      The  conquest  of  Naharaim,  in  giving  them  control  of  a  new  section,
placed  almost  at  their  discretion  the  whole  traffic  between  Chaldaea  and  Egypt.
Prom  the  time  of  Thufmosis  III.  caravans  employed  in  this  traffic  accom-
plished the  greater  part  of  their  journey  in  territories  depending  upon  Babylon,
Assyria,  or  Memphis,  and  enjoyed  thus  a  relative  security ;  the  terror  of  the
Pharaoh  protected  the  travellers  even  when  they  were  no  longer  in  his  domains,
and  he  saved  them  from  the  flagrant  exactions  made  upon  them  by  princes
who  called  themselves  his  brothers,  or  were  actually  his  vassals."-^     But  the
time  had  now  come  when  merchants  had  to  encounter,  between  Q.odshu  and
the  banks  of  the  Khabur,  a  sovereign  owing  no  allegiance  to  any  one,  and
who  would  tolerate  no  foreign  interference  in  his  territory.     From  the  out-
break of  hostilities  with  the  Khati,  Egypt  could  communicate  with  the  cities
of  the  Lower  Euphrates  only  by  the  Wadys  of  the   Arabian  Desert,  which
were  always  dangerous  and  difficult  for  large  convoys ;  ^  and  its  commercial
relations  with  Chald^a  were  practically  brought  thus  to  a  standstill,  and,  as
a  consequence,  the  manufactures  which  fed  this  trade   being   reduced   to  a
limited  production,  the  fiscal  receipts  arising  from  it  experienced  a  sensible
diminution.    When  peace  was  restored,  matters  fell  again  into  their  old  groove,
with  certain  reservations  to  the   Khati  of  some  common  privileges :   Egypt,
which   had  formerly  possessed  these   to   her   own   advantage,  now  bore  the
burden  of  them,  and  the  indirect  tribute  which  she  paid  in  this  manner  to
her  rivals  furnished  them  with  arms  to  fight  her  in  case  she  should  endeavour
to   free   herself  from  the  imposition.     All  the  semi-barbaric  peoples  of  the
peninsula  of  Asia  Minor  were  of  an  adventurous  and  warlike  temperament.

Herodotos,  in  the  Mvnatsherichte  of  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Berlin,  1S57,  pp.  123-140,  and  by  Kamsay,
Hist.  Geog.  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  27-35,  wliere  the  irregularities  of  the  route  are  explained  ;  of.  Kadet,
La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grcc,  pp.  23-32,  and  Eamsay-Hogarth,  Prehellenic  Monuments  of  Cappadocia,
in  the  Becueil,  vol.  xv.  pp.  92-94,  in  which  important  corrections  of  previous  views  are  adduced.

'  On  these  secondary  routes,  see  Eamsat,  Hist.  Geog.  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  35-43,  and  Kadet,  La
Lydie  et  le  Monde  Orec,  pp.  33-35,  where  the  authors,  while  sliowiug  that  the  general  use  of  these
roads  was  not  anterior  to  the  Seleucids,  admit  that  they  existed  in  the  centuries  preceding  the
'Macedonian  conquest.

-  See  as  to  this  commerce,  p.  2S6  of  the  present  work.

'  On  these  routes  through  Northern  Arabia,  see  pp.  G13,  614,  of  the  Daimi  of  Civilization.


THE   TREATY  BETWEEN  IIARMEABI  AND   SAPALULU.  367

They  were  always  willing  to  set  out  on  au  expedition,  iiuder  the  leadership  of
some  chief  of  noble  family  or  renowned  for  valour ;  sometimes  by  sea  in  their
light  craft,  which  would  bring  them  unexpectedly  to  the  nearest  point  of  the
Syrian  coast,  sometimes  by  land  in  companies  of  foot-sokliers  and  charioteers.
They  were  frequently  fortunate  enough  to  secure  plenty  of  booty,  and  return
with  it  to  their  homes  safe  and  sound ;  but  as  frequently  they  would  meet  with
reverses  by  falling  into  some  ambuscade :  in  such  a  case  their  conqueror  would
not  put  them  to  the  sword  or  sell  them  as  slaves,  but  would  promptly  incor-
porate them  into  his  army,  thus  making  his  captives  into  his  soldiers.  The
King  of  the  Khati  was  able  to  make  use  of  them  without  difficulty,  for  his
empire  was  conterminous  on  the  west  and  north  with  some  of  their  native
lands,  and  he  had  often  whole  regiments  of  them  in  his  army— Mysians,^
Lycians,  people  of  Augarit,"  of  Ilion,^  and  of  Pedasos.*  The  revenue  of  the
provinces  taken  from  Egypt,  and  the  products  of  his  tolls,  furnished  him  with
abundance  of  means  for  obtaining  recruits  from  among  thera.^

All  these  things  contributed  to  make  the  power  of  the  Khati  so  consider-
able, that  Harmhabi,  when  he  had  once  tested  it,  judged  it  prudent  not  to  join
issues  with  them.   He  concluded  with  Sapalulu  a  treaty  of  peace  and  friendship,

'  Attempts  were  made  to  identify  the  Mauau  with  the  Myaians  by  E.  de  Kouge'  (Extrait  d'uu
Me'moire  sur  les  Attaquca  dirigees  conlre  V Kijijple  jiar  Us  penples  de  la  MgditerrmWe,  p.  4);  and  this
view,  adopted  by  Chabas  {J'Jtiides  sur  VAnliquM hisloriij;ue,'2.aA  edit.,  p.  185),  has  been  disputed  with-
out Buificieut  reason  by  Brugsdi  {Gesch.  JEgypUns,  pp.  578,  579),  by  Ed.  Meyer  {Gesch.  des  Alterlums,
vol.  i.  p.  278,  and  Gesch.  des  Allen  Jigyplens,  p.  281),  and  by  W.  Mjx  Miiller  (Asieti  and  Earopa,  p.  355).

-  The  country  of  Augartt,  Ugarit,  is  mentioned  on  several  occa-sions  in  the  Tel  el-Amarna  corre-
spondence (Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  1,  p.  3,  1.  39;  No.  30,  p.  65,  U.  55-57;  cf.
Delattee,  Lettres  de  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.
pp.  21,  27,  29,  and  1892-93,  vol.  xv.  pp.  500-508).  The  name  has  been  wrongly  associated  with
Caria  (F.  Lenokmant,  Les  Origines  de  Vllistoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  73) ;  it  has  been  pUiced  by  W.  Max
Miiller  (Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  262-209)  well  within  Naharaim,  to  the  east  of  the  Orontes,  between
Khalybon  (Aleppo)  and  Apamsea,  the  writer  confusing  it  with  Akaiti,  named  in  the  campaign  of
Ameuothes  II.  (see  pp.  291,  292  of  the  present  work).  I  am  not  sure  about  the  site,  but  its  association
in  the  Amarna  letters  with  Gugu  and  Khanigalbat  inclines  me  to  place  it  beyond  the  northern  slopes
of  the  Taurus,  possibly  on  the  banks  of  the  Halys  or  of  the  Upper  Euphrates.

'  Tlie  name  of  this  people  was  read  Eiuna  by  Champollion,  who  identified  it  with  the  loniana
{Grammaire  Hie^roylyphique,  p.  151,  and  Diotionnaire,  p.  66  ;  cf.  RosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Slorici,  vol.  iii.
p.  42G)  ;  this  reading  and  ideulitication  were  adopted  by  Leuormant  {Les  Origines,  vol.  iii.  p.  353)
and  by  W.  Max  Miiller  {Asien  und  Earopa,  pp.  369-371).  Chabas  hesitates  between  Eiiina  and
MaiCina,  Ionia  and  Msconia  {Eludes  sur  VAntiijuite'  Uislorique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  185),  and  Brugsch  read
it  Maluniia  {Gesch.  Ai'yyplens,  p.  491).  Tlie  reading  Iriuna,  Iliiina,  seems  to  me  the  only  possible  one
{Les  llirn,  in  the  Jiecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viii.  p.  SI),  and  the  identification  with  lliou  as  well.

*  E.  de  Rouge  thouglit  that  Pidasa,  owing  to  the  transposition  of  letters,  was  for  Pisada,  Pisidia
{Cours  professes  au  College  de  France,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arch^olugie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  267),  and  this
<p|iinion  has  been  adopted  by  \V.  Max  Miiller  {Asien  und  Europa,  p.  355).  Owing  to  its  association
with  the  Dardanians,  Mysians,  and  Ilion,  I  think  it  answers  to  the  Pedasos  ou  the  Sataiois  near
Troy  (M.4SPEU0,  Ve  Carchemis  oppidi  silu,  pp.  57,  58).

'  E.  de  Rouge  and  the  Egyptologists  who  Ibllowed  him  thought  at  first  that  the  troops  designated  in
the  Egyptian  texts  as  I.,ycian8,  Mysians,  Dardanians,  were  the  national  armies  of  these  nations,  each
one  commanded  by  its  king,  wlio  had  hastened  from  Asia  Minor  to  succour  their  ally  the  King  of  the
Khati.  I  now  tliink  that  tiiose  were  bands  of  adventurers,  consisting  of  soldiers  belonging  to  these
nations,  who  came  to  put  themselves  at  the  service  of  civilized  monarchs,  as  the  Carians,  lonians,
and  the  Greeks  of  various  cities  did  later  on  :  the  individuals  whom  the  texts  mention  as  their  princes
were  not  the  kings  of  those  nations,  but  the  warrior  chiefs  to  which  each  band  gave  obedience.


368  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

which,  leaving  the  two  powers  iu  possession  respectively  of  the  territory
each  then  occupied,  gave  legal  sanction  to  the  extension  of  the  sphere  of  the
Khati  at  the  expense  of  Egypt.^  Syria  continued  to  consist  of  two  almost  equal
parts,  stretching  from  Byblos  to  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  and  Damascus:
the  northern  portion,  formerly  tributary  to  Egypt,  became  a  Hittite  possession  ;
while  the  southern,  consisting  of  Phoenicia  and  Canaan,^  which  tlie  Pharaoh
had  held  for  a  long  time  with  a  more  effective  authority,  and  had  more  fully
occupied,  was  retained  for  Egypt.  This  could  have  been  but  a  provisional
arrangement:  if  Thebes  had  not  altogether  renounced  the  hope  of  repossessing
some  day  the  lost  conquests  of  Thutmosis  III.,  the  Khati,  drawn  by  the  same
instinct  which  had  urged  them  to  cross  their  frontiers  towards  the  south,  were
not  likely  to  be  content  with  less  than  the  expulsion  of  the  Egyptians  from
Syria,  and  the  absorption  of  the  whole  country  into  the  Hittite  dominion.
Peace  was  maintained  during  Harmhabi's  lifetime.  We  know  nothing  of
Egyptian  aiiairs  during  the  last  years  of  his  reign.  His  rule  may  have  come
to  an  end  owing  to  some  court  intrigue,  or  he  may  have  had  no  male  heir  to
follow  him."  Eamses,  who  succeeded  him,  did  not  belong  to  the  royal  line,  or
was  only  remotely  connected  with  it.'*  He  was  already  an  old  man  when  he
ascended  the  throne,  and  we  ought  perhaps  to  identify  him  with  one  or  other
of  the  Ramses  who  flourished  under  the  last  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIIP"  dynasty,

•  It  is  not  certain  that  Harmhabi  was  the  Pharaoh  with  whom  Sapalulu  entered  into  treaty,  and
it  might  be  insisted  with  some  reason  that  Ramses  I.  was  the  party  to  it  on  the  side  of  Egypt
(Bkugsch,  Geech.  JEgyptens,  pp.  456,  457);  but  this  hypothesis  is  rendered  less  probable  by  the
fact  of  the  extremely  short  reign  of  the  latter  Pharaoh.  I  am  inclined  to  think,  as  W.  Max  Miiller
has  supposed  {Asien  und  Europa,  p.  392,  ncte  1),  that  the  passage  in  the  Trealij  of  Ramses  II.  with
the  Prince  of  the  Khali  (11.  5-7),  whicli  speaks  of  a  treaty  concluded  with  Sapalulu,  looks  back  to  the
time  of  Eamses  II.'s  predecessor,  Harmhabi.

-  This  follows  from  the  situation  of  the  two  empires,  as  indicated  in  the  account  of  the  campaign
of  Seti  I.  in  his  first  year.  The  king,  after  having  defeated  the  nomads  of  the  Arabian  desert,  passed
on  without  further  fighting  into  the  country  of  the  Amiirru  and  the  regions  of  the  Lebanon  (see
p.  371  of  the  present  work),  which  fact  seems  to  imply  the  submission  of  Kharu.  W.  Max  MuUer  was
the  first  to  discern  clearly  this  part  of  the  history  of  Egyptian  conquest  (Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  275,
276)  ;  he  appears,  however,  to  have  circumscribed  somewhat  too  strictly  the  dominion  of  Harmhabi
iu  assigning  Carmel  as  its  limit.  The  list  of  the  nations  of  the  north  who  yielded,  or  are  alleged  to
have  yielded,  submission  to  Harmhabi,  were  traced  on  the  first  pylon  of  this  monarch  at  Karnak,  and
on  its  adjoining  walls;  what  remains  of  this  list  has  been  reproduced  by  Bouriamt,  LeItreaM.W.  Max
Miiller  sur  le  mur  d'Horemheb  a  Knrnnh,  in  the  Beciieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  41-43.  Among
others,  the  names  of  the  Khati  and  of  Arvad  are  to  be  read  there.

=  It  would  appear,  from  an  Ostracon  in  the  British  Museum  (Birch,  Inscriptions  in  the  Hieratic
and  Demotic  Characters,  pi.  xiv..  No.  5624,  that  the  year  XXI.  follows  after  the  year  VII.  of  Harm-
habi's reign  (BRrsscH,  Die  Gruppe  man,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1876,  pp.  122-124,  and  Gesch.  .^gyptens.
pp.  447,  448  ;  cf.  Wiedemasn,  .^gyptifche  Geschichte,  p.  411);  it  is  possible  that  the  year  XXI.  may
ijelong  to  one  of  Harmhabi's  successors,  Seti  I.  or  Ramses  II.,  for  example.

*  The  eflorts  to  connect  Eamses  I.  wilh  a  family  of  Semitic  origin,  possibly  the  Shepherd-kings
themselves,  have  not  been  successful  (E.  de  Rouge,  Lettre  ti  M.  Quigniaut,  in  the  Revue  Arch€ologique,
2nd  series,  vol.  ix.  p.  132;  Mariette,  Deuxieme  Lettre  a  M.  le  vicomte  de  Rougg  sur  lesfouilles  de
Tanis,  p.  2 ;  La  Stele  de  Van  400,  p.  5  ;  Chabas,  Les  Ramses  sont-ils  de  la  race  des  Pasteurs  f  Etudes
surla  Stele  de  Van  40O,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1865,  pp.  29-38).  Everything  goes  to  prove  that  the  Bamses
family  was,  and  considered  itself  to  be,  of  Egyptian  origin.  Brugsch  (Gesch.  JEgi/ptens,  p.  456)  and  Ed.
Meyer  (Gesch.  JEgyptens,  p.  274)  were  inclined  to  see  in  Ramses  I.  a  younger  brother  of  Harmhabi.  This
hypothesis  has  nothing  either  for  or  against  it  up  to  the  present  (WiE-D-e:u.\K}i,^gyptieche  Gesch.,  p.  413).


RAMSES  I.   AND   BIS    UNCERTAIN  ORIGIN.


369


perhaps  the  one  wlio  governed  Thebes  under  Khuniatonu,^  or  another,  who
began  but  never  finished  his  tomb  in  the  hillside  above  Tel  el-Amariia,  in
the  burying-place  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Disk.  He  had  held  important
offices  under  Harmhabi,-^  and  had  obtained  in  marriage  for  his  son  Seti  the
hand  of  Tuia,  wlio,  of  all  the  royal  family,  possessed  the  strongest  rights  to
the  crown.^  Kamses  reigned  only  six  or  seven  years,  and  associated  Seti  with
himself  in  the  government  from  his  second
year.''  He  undertook  a  short  military
expedition  into  Ethiopia,  and  perhaps  a
raid  into  Syria ;  and  we  find  remains  of
his  monuments  in  Nubia,  at  Bohani  near
Wady  Haifa,  and  at  Thebes,  in  the  temple
of  Amon.^  He  displayed  little  activity,
his  advanced  age  preventing  him  from
•entering  on  any  serious  undertaking  :  but
his  accession  nevertheless  marks  an  im-
portant date  in  the  history  of  Egypt.
Although   Harmhabi    was   distantly   con-

^  _  BAMSES  1."

nected  with  the  line  of  the  Alimessides,  it

is  difficult  at  the  present  day  to  know  what  jiosition  to  assign  him  in  the
[Pharaonic  lists :  while  some  regard  him  as  the  last  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,
others  prefer  to  place  him  at  the  head  of  the  XIX'".  No  such  hesitation,  bow-
ever,  exists  with  regard  to  Eamses  I.,  who  was  undoubtedly  the  founder  of  a  new
family.  The  old  familiar  names  ofThutmosis  and  Amenothes  henceforward  dis-
appear from  the  royal  lists,  and  are  replaced  by  others,  such  as  Seti,  Minephtah,

'  Cf.  what  is  said  about  this  Ramses,  governor  of  Thebes,  pp.  32-t,  325,  supra.

^  BoCRiANT,  Deux  jours  de  fouilles  a  Tell  el-Amarna,  in  HUmoires  de  la  Mission  francaise,  vol.  i.
pp.  y-11.     This  Tel  el-Amarna  Bamses  is,  perhaps,  identical  with  the  Theban  one:   he  may  have
followed  his  master  to  his  new  capital,  and  have  had  a  tomb  dug  for  himself  there,  which  he  subse- '
quently  abandoned,  on  the  death  of  Khuniatonii,  in  order  to  return  to  Thebes  witli  Tatankhamon  and  Al.

'  Maspebo,  Essai  sur  V inscription  d'Ahydos,  pp.  68-70,  and  lievue  Critique,  1S70,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.
The  fact  that  the  marriage  was  celebrated  under  the  auspices  of  Harmhabi,  and  that,  consequently,
Kamses  must  have  occupied  an  important  position  at  the  court  of  that  prince,  is  proved  by  the
appearance  of  Kamses  11.,  son  of  Tuia,  as  early  as  the  first  year  of  Seti,  among  the  ranks  of  the  com-
ibatants  in  the  war  carried  on  by  that  prince  against  the  Tihomi  (Cn  ampollion,  Monuments,  pi.  ccxovii.
-2) ;  even  granting  that  he  was  then  ten  years  old  (cf.  p.  S.stJ,  infra),  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  he
must  have  been  born  before  hie  grandfather  came  to  the  throne.  There  is  in  the  Vatican  a  statue  of
Tuia  which  has  been  remarked  on  by  Lei'Sius,  Notice  sur  deux  statues  e'gi/ptieiines,  iu  the  Annahs  de
VInstitut  de  Correspondance  Arch^ologiqne,  vol.  iv.  pp.  5-11,  and  pi.  xl. ;  other  statues  have  been  dis-
covered at  San  (Maiiiette,  Notice  sur  les  prinr.ipaux  Monuments  du  Muse'e  de  Botdaq,  lSt!4,  p.  267,
and  Fragments  et  Documents  relatifs  aux  Fouilles  de  Sun,  in  the  liecueil  de  Traeaux,  vol.  ix.  pp.  14,
15;  I'ETuiE,  Tunis,  vol.  i.  pi.  ii.,  No.  11,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  17).

'  Stele  C  57  iu  the  Louvre,  publiahed  in  CiiAMroi.i.ioN,  Monuments,  pis.  1,  2  ;  cf.  Kosellini,
Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  xlv.  1.

»  He  began  the  great  Hypostyle  HallatKaruak  (Makiette,  Karnal;  pp.  21,  22,  21,  25,  38);  E.  de
Kouge  thinks  that  the  idea  of  building  this  was  first  conceived  under  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  {Melanges
■d'Arch^ologie,  vol.  i.  p.  6C).

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  in  Kosellixi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  v..  No.  17.

2    B


370  THE   REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

and,  especially,  Ramses,  which  now  figure  in  them  for  the  first  time.  The
princes  who  bore  these  names  showed  themselves  worthy  successors  of  those
who  had  raised  Egypt  to  the  zenith  of  her  power;  like  them  they  were
successful  on  the  battle-field,  and  like  them  they  devoted  the  best  of  the
spoil  to  building  innumerable  monuments.  No  sooner  had  Seti  celebrated
his  father's  obsequies,  than  he  assembled  his  army  and  set  out  for  war.

It  would  appear  that  Southern  Syria  was  then  in  open  revolt.  "  Word  had
been  brought  to  His  Majesty :  '  The  vile  Shausu  have  plotted  rebellion ;  the
chiefs  of  their  tribes,  assembled  in  one  place  on  tlie  confines  of  Kharu,  have
been  smitten  with  blindness  and  with  the  spirit  of  violence  :  every  one  cutteth
iiis  neighbour's  throat."  ^  It  was  imperative  to  send  succour  to  the  few  tribes
who  remained  faithful,  to  prevent  them  from  succumbing  to  the  repeated
attacks  of  the  insurgents.  Seti  crossed  the  frontier  at  Zalu,  but  instead  of
pursuing  his  way  along  the  coast,  he  marched  due  east  in  order  to  attack  the
Shausu  in  the  very  heart  of  the  desert.  The  road  ran  through  wide  wadys,
tolerably  well  supplied  with  water,  and  the  length  of  the  stages  necessarily
de^iended  on  the  distances  between  the  wells.  This  route  was  one  frequented
in  early  times,  and  its  security  was  ensured  by  a  number  of  fortresses  and
isolated  towers  built  along  it,  such  as  "  The  House  of  the  Lion  " — ta  ait  fa
mail — near  the  pool  of  the  same  name,  the  IMigdol  of  the  springs  of  Huzina,
the  fortress  of  Uazit,  the  Tower  of  the  Brave,  and  the  Migdol  of  Ssti  at  the
pools  of  Absakaba."-  The  Bedawin,  disconcerted  by  the  rapidity  of  this  move-
ment, offered  no  serious  resistance.  Their  flocks  were  carried  off,  their  trees
cut  down,  their  harvests  destroyed,  and  they  surrendered  their  strongholds  at
discretion.  Pushing  on  from  one  halting-place  to  another,  the  conqueror  soon
leached  Eabbiti,  and  finally  Pakanana.^     The  latter  town  occupied  a  splendid

'  The  pictures  of  this  campaiga  aud  the  inscriptions  which  explain  tliem  were  engraved  by  Seti  I.
on  the  outside  of  the  north  wall  of  the  great  hypostyle  hall  at  Karnak.  They  were  collected  and
published  by  Champolliox,  Monuments,  pis.  cclxxxix.-cocii.,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  86-112  ;  then  by  Rosellini,
Monumenti Storici,  pis.  xlvi.-li.,  and  by  Lepsius,  DenAma7cr,iii.  126-130.  They  have  been  tabulated  and
examined  by  Brugsoh,  Beiseherichte  am  .^gypten,  pp.  149-157,  and  Geschichte  JSgijptens,  pp.  458-469  ;
then  by  Lauth,  Ucber  Sethosis'  Triiimphzug,  in  the  Reports  of  tlie  Proceedings  of  the  Munich  Academy
of  Sciences,  1889,  vol.  i.  pp.  319-355,  and  by  LusaiNGTOX,  The  Victories  of  Seti  I.  recorded  in  the
Great  Temple  at  Karnal;  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  vol.  vii.  pp.  509-
534  ;  lastly,  the  texts  have  been  carefully  edited  and  translated  by  GriETSSE,  Inscription  Historiqtte
lie  Sili  I",  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xi.  pp.  52-77.

-  Brugsch  has  endeavoured  to  map  out  the  route  followed  by  Seti  I.,  and  his  deductions  led  him
to  carry  it  to  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea  {Dictionnaire  Gebgrapliique,  pp.  590-597,  and  Geschichte
^gyptens,  pp.  459,  460).  I  agree  with  Tomkins  (TAe  Fortress  of  Canaan,  in  the  Palestine  Exploration
Fund,  Quarterly  Statements,  1SS4,  pp.  59,  60)  in  thinking  that  the  line  followed  by  the  Egyptian
army  coincided  for  the  most  part  with  the  route  explored  by  Holland  (4  Journey  on  Foot  through
Arabia  Petrsea,  in  the  Quart.  Stat.,  1879,  pp.  70-72 ;  cf.  WiLSOX,  Notes  to  accompany  a  Map  of  the  late
Rev.  F.  W.  Holland's  Journey,  in  the  Quart.  Stat.,  1884,  pp.  4-15).

'  The  site  of  Pakanana  has,  with  much  probability,  been  fixed  by  Conder  (The  Fortress  of  Canaan,
in  the  Quart.  Statements,  1883,  pp.  175,  176;  cf  Tomkixs,  The  Fortress  of  Canaan,  in  the  Quart.
Statements.  1884,  pp.  57-61)  at  El-Kenan  or  Khurbet-Kauaau,  to  the  south  of  Hebron.  Brugsch  had
previously  taken  this  name  to  indicate  the  country  of  Canaan  (Geographisohe  Inschrif  ten,  vol.  i.  pp.  59,


SETI  I.   AND    THE   STUIAX   CAMPAIGN   OF    THE    TEAR   I.         ^tl

position  on  the  slope  of  a  rocky  liill,  close  to  a  small  lake,  and  defended  tlie
approaches  to  the  vale  of  Hebron.  It  surrendered  at  the  first  attack,  and  by
its  fall  the  Egyptians  became  possessed  of  one  of  the  richest  provinces  in  the
southern  part  of  Kharu.  This  result  having  been  achieved,  Seti  took  the
caravan  road  to  his  left,  on  the  further  side  of  Gaza,  and  pushed  forward  at  full
speed  towards  the  Hittite  frontier.     It  was  probably  unprotected  by  any  troops.


'.  t^^Pie^U.  JiVt^ ',  lit.  i»>.yi,d


THE   KETDKN    OF   THE    NORTH    WALL    OF   THE    HYPOSTTLB    HALL    AT    KARNAK,    WHERE    SETI    I.
REPBESENTS   SOME    EPISODES    IN    HIS    FIRST   UAMPAIGN.'


and  the  Hittite  king  was  absent  in  some  other  part  of  his  empire.  Seti  pillaged
the  Amurru,  seized  lanuamu  and  Qodshu  by  a  sudden  attack,  marched  in  an
oblique  direction  towards  the  Mediterranean,  forcing  the  inhabitants  of  the
Lebanon  to  cut  timber  from  their  mountains  for  the  additions  which  he  was
premeditating  in  the  temple  of  the  Theban  Amon,  and  finally  returned  by  the
coast  road,  receiving,  as  he  passed  tiirough  their  territory,  the  homage  of
the  Phoenicians.  His  entry  into  Egypt  was  celebrated  by  solemn  festivities.
The  nobles,  priests,  and  princes  of  both  south  and  north  hastened  to  meet  him
at  the  bridge  of  Zalu,  and  welcomed,  with  their  chants,  both  the  king  and

261,  vol.  ii.  p.  51 ;  cf.  Lacth,  TJeber  Sethosit'  Triumphzu(i,  pp.  337,  338),  but  Chabas  rightly  cod-
teated  this  view  (Voyage  d'un  Egyplien,  pp.  112,  113).  W.  Max  Miiller  took  up  the  matter  afresh  :
he  perceiveil  that  we  have  hero  an  allusion  to  the  first  town  eucountere.l  by  Seti  I.  in  the  country  of
Canaan  to  tlio  south-west  of  Hapliia,  the  name  of  which  is  not  mentioned  by  the  Egyjitiau  sculptor
(Asienund  Euri'pa,  pp.  149,  205,  20G);  it  eeonis  to  me  tliat  tliia  name  should  bo  Pakimaiia,  and  that
the  town  bore  the  same  name  as  the  country.

'  Drawn  by  Uoudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Ernil  lirugsch-Bey.


:572  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

the  troops  of  captives  \vli(im  he  was  bringing  biiL-k  lor  tiie  service  of  his
father  Amou  at  Karnak.^  The  delight  of  his  subjects  was  but  natural,
since  for  many  years  the  Egyptians  had  not  witnessed  such  a  triumph,  and
they  no  doubt  believed  that  the  prosperous  era  of  Thutmosis  III.  was  about
to  return,  and  that  the  wealth  of  Naharaim  would  once  more  flow  into  Thebes
as  of  old.  Their  illusion  was  short-lived,  for  this  initial  victory  was  followed
liy  no  other.  Maurusaru,  King  of  the  Khati,  and  subsequently  his  son  Mau-
tallu,  withstood  the  Pharaoh  with  such  resolution  that  he  was  forced  to
treat  with  them.  A  new  alliance  was  concluded  on  the  same  conditions  as
the  old  one,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  two  kingdoms  remained  the  same  as
under  Harmhabi,  a  proof  that  neither  sovereign  had  gained  any  advantage
over  his  rival.^  Hence  the  campaign  did  not  in  any  way  restore  Egyptian
supremacy,  as  had  been  hoped  at  the  moment ;  it  merely  served  to  strengthen
her  authority  in  those  provinces  which  the  Khati  had  failed  to  take  from  Egypt.
The  Phoenicians  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  had  too  many  commercial  interests  on  the
banks  of  the  Nile  to  dream  of  breaking  the  slender  tie  wliich  held  them  to  the
Pharaoh,  since  independence,  or  submission  to  another  sovereign,  might  have
ruined  their  trade.  The  Kharu  and  the  Bedawin,  vanquished  wherever  they
had  ventured  to  oppose  the  Pharaoh's  troops,  were  less  than  ever  capable  of
throwing  off  the  Egyptian  yoke.  Syria  fell  back  into  its  former  state.  The
local  princes  once  more  resumed  their  intrigues  and  quarrels,  varied  at  intervals
by  appeals  to  their  suzerain  for  justice  or  succour.  The  "Eoyal  Messengers"
appeared  from  time  to  time  with  their  escorts  of  archers  and  chariots  to  claim
tribute,  levy  taxes,  to  make  peace  between  quarrelsome  vassals,  or,  if  the  case
required  it,  to  supersede  some  insubordinate  chief  by  a  governor  of  undoubted
loyalty ;  in  fine,  the  entire  administration  of  the  empire  was  a  continuation
of  that  of  the  preceding  century.-''  The  peoples  of  Kiish  meanwhile  had
remained  quiet  during  the  campaign  in  Syria,  and  on  the  western  frontier
the  Tihonii  had  suffered  so  severe  a  defeat  that  they  were  not  likely  to
recover  from  it  for  some  time.*  The  bands  of  pirates,  Shardaua  and  others,  who
infested  the  Delta,  were  hunted  down,  and  the  prisoners  taken  from  among  them

'  A  part  of  this  picture,  tlmt  showing  the  bridge  thrown  across  the  canal  at  Zalii,  is  reproduced
on  p.  123,  supra.

'  Treaty  of  Ramses  II.  with  the  Prince  of  Kh.'iti,  11.  5-7.  The  name  is  written  Mautauru,  but
the  combination  nr  in  the  Egyptian  texts,  more  often  th;m  not,  represents  an  r  or  strong  /  sound.  It
has  been  rightly  connected  with  the  name  Mutallu,  borne  by  a  King  of  Kummukh,  under  Sargon  of
Assyria  (Savce,  The  Monuments  of  the  Hiltites,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archjeology,
vol.  vii.  pp.  290  ;  cf  Jensen,  Grundlagen  fiir  eine  Entzifferung  der  cUieisr.hen  Inschriften.  pp.  7,  S).

'  As  to  the  boundaries  of  these  provinces,  cf.  wliat  is  said  by  W.  M.\x  Muller,  Asien  und  Europa,
pp.  200,  276.  The  organisation  of  the  provinces  is  briefly  described  on  pp.  271-277  of  the  present
work.

'  This  war  is  represented  at  Karnak,  and  Eamses  II.  figures  there  among  the  children  of  Seti  I.
Champollion,  Monuments,  pi.  ccxcvii.  2;  Roseluni,  Monumenli  Storici,  pi.  liv. ;  cf  Brcgsch,
Itecueil  de  Monuments  I'.gyptlens,  vol.  i.  pi.  xlvii.  J).


THE  RESTORATION  OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  EMPIRE.


373


■were  incorporated  into  the  royal  guard.'  Seti,  however,  does  not  appear  to
have  had  a  confirmed  taste  for  war.  He  showed  energy  when  occasion  required
it,  and  he  knew  how  to  lead  his  soldiers,  as  the  expedition  of  his  first  year
amply  proved ;  but  when  the  necessity  was  over,  he  remained  on  the  defensive,
and  made  no  further  attempt  at  conquest.  By  his  own  choice  he  was  "the
jackal  who  prowls  about  the  country  to  protect   it,"  rather  than  "the  wizard


HEPUE6ENTATI0X    OF   SETI   I.  VANQUISHING   THE    LIBYANS    AND    ASIATICS   ON    THE    WALLS,    KABNAK."

lion  marauding  abroad   by  hidden  paths,"  ^  and   Kgypt  enjoyed  a  profound
peace  in  consequence  of  his  ceaseless  vigilance.

A  peaceful  policy  of  this  kind  did  not,  of  course,  produce  the  amount  of
spoil  and  the  endless  relays  of  captives  which  had  enabled  his  predecessors  to
raise  temples  and  live  in  great  luxury  without  overburdening  their  subjects
with  taxes.  Seti  was,  therefore,  the  more  anxious  to  do  all  in  his  power  to
develop  the  internal  wealth  of  the  country.  The  mining  colonies  of  tbe
Sinaitic  Peninsula  had  never  ceased  working  since  operations  had  been  resumed

'  Wu  gather  this,  as  E.  de  Kouge  points  out  (Extrait  il'im  Me'mnire  sur  le»  (ittnques  dirigOis  par  les
pcuples  de  la  mer,  |ip.  '23,  24),  from  ijassagcs  iu  tlic  insf-riptioiia  from  the  year  V.  onwards,  in  wliich
Ramses  II.  boasts  tliat  lie  has  a  number  of  Shardaua  i)risr)ner9  iu  liis  guard;  Rouge  was,  perhaps,
mistaken  in  magnifying  these  piratical  raids  into  a  war  of  invasion.

°  Drawn  by  Koiidier,  from  a  photograph  by  Emit  iirugaeli-Bey.

^  These  phrases  are  taken  direet  from  the  inscriptions  of  Seti  I.  (BuUGScir,  Recuetl  d<:  Monuments,
vol.  i.  pi.  xlv.  c,  n.  U,  12,  cf  xlvi.  d,  II.  I,  2;  of.  Giieysse,  La  Campaf/ne  de  SM  I'',  in  the  Recueil
de  Travaux,  vol.  xi,  pp.  70,  71,  72;.


374  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

there  under  Hatsbopbitu  aud  Thiitmosis  III.,  but  tbe  output  liad  lessened
(luring  tbe  troubles  under  tbe  beretic  kings.^  Seti  sent  inspectors  thither,  and
endeavoured  to  stimulate  the  workmen  to  tbeir  former  activity,  but  apparently
with  no  great  success.^  We  are  not  able  to  ascertain  if  he  continued  the
revival  of  trade  with  Puanit  inaugurated  by  Harmhabi ;  ^  but  at  any  rate  he
concentrated  bis  attention  on  the  regions  bordering  the  Eed  Sea  and  tlie  gold-
mines which  they  contained.  Those  of  Etbai,  which  bad  been  worked  as  early
as  the  XII"'  dynasty,  did  not  yield  as  much  as  they  had  done  formerly ;  not
that  they  were  exhausted,  but  owing  to  tbe  lack  of  water  in  their  neighbour-
hood and  along  tbe  routes  leading  to  them,  they  were  nearly  deserted.     It


A    FUllTIFlED    STATION    UX    THE    IIOl'TE
I'.ETWEEN    THE  NILE    AKD   TBE    BED    SEA.'


was  well  known  that  they  contained  great  wealth,  but  operations  could  not  be
carried  on,  as  the  workmen  were  in  danger  of  dying  of  thirst.  Seti  despatched
engineers  to  tbe  spot  to  explore  the  surrounding  wadys,  to  clear  the  ancient
cisterns  or  cut  others,  and  to  establish  victualling  stations  at  regular  intervals
for  the  use  of  merchants  supplying  the  gangs  of  miners  with  commodities.
These  stations  generally  consisted  of  square  or  rectangular  enclosures,  built
of  stones  without  mortar,  and  capable  of  resisting  a  prolonged  attack.  The
entrance  was  by  a  narrow  doorway  of  stone  slabs,  and  in  tbe  interior  were  a  few
huts  and  one  or  two  reservoirs  for  catching  ruin  or  storing  the  water  of
neighbouring  springs.  Sometimes  a  chapel  was  built  close  at  hand,  consecrated
to  the  divinities  of  tbe  desert,  or  to  tbeir  compeers,  Minu  of  Coptos,  Horus,
Maut,  or  Isis.  One  of  these,  founded  by  Seti,  still  exists  near  tbe  modern
town  of  Eedesieh,  at  tbe  entrance  to  one  of  the  valleys  which  furrosv  this  gold
region.     It  is  built  against,  and  partly  excavated  in,  a  wall  of  rock,  the  face

'  Cf.,  as  to  the  resumption  of  these  works,  what  is  said  on  pp.  253,  251,  supra.

^  Inscriptions  at  Sarbut  el-Khadem,  one  dated  the  year  VII.,  iu  Lottin  de  Laval,  Voyage  dans
la  re'ninsule  Arahiqite  du  Sinai,  pi.  iv.  6,  xiii.  1 ;  cf.  Survey  of  Sinai,  pi.  iv.

2  Cf.  what  is  taid  iu  regard  to  these  journeys  to  Pttanit  on  pp.  319,  350,  supra.

*  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Bocli ;  plans  of  a  certain  number  of  these
fortified  stations  will  be  found  in  Cailliaud,  Voyage  a  I'Oai'is  de  Thebes,  pis.  ii.-vii.,  and  pp.  3-10  ;
and  more  especially  in  Golenischefp,  Excursion  a  Biriiiice,  iu  the  liecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.
pp.  79,  SO,  82,  83,  85.  Cf.,  in  regard  to  other  similar  forts,  the  remarks  of  Du  Bois-Avme,  HUmoire
SUT  la  ville  de  Qo;^i/r  et  sur  ses  environs,  in  the  Description  de  VEgypte,  vol.  xi.  p.  398.


THE    WORKING    OF   THE    GOLD-MINES.


375


.^'-


of  which  has  beeu  roughly  squared,  aud  it  is  entered  through  a  four-columned
portico,  giving  access  to  two  dark  chambers,  whose  walls  are  covered  with
scenes  of  adoration  and  a  lengthy  inscription.     In  this  latter  tlie  sovereign

relates  how,  in  the  IX"'  .  —        ^ ,        , —

year  of  his  reign,  he  was       ,'    s^^.i^;"  -    ;,!    -   -      "_       -  -    —     \  /  ^'~'..
moved    to     inspect    the        .^!:^T'  ^''-    '  ~r'-^^^^^^^~^
roads  of  the  desert;    he       "^^aPom-        -  -    -^       '  V"*'^
completed    the   work   in       Ji^^A^  '  /'f,

honour  of  Amon-Ra,  of
Phtah  of  ^Memphis,  and
of  Harmakhis,  and  he
states  that  travellers  were
at  a  loss  to  express  their
gratitude  and  thanks  for

what  he  had  done.  "  They

repeated  from  mouth  to

mouth  :  '  3Iay  Amon  give

him  an  endless  existence,

and  may  he  prolong  for

him  the  length  of  eter-
nity ! '      O    ye    gods    of

fountains,     attribute     to

rendered  back  to  us  ac-

opened   that    which    was

we  can  take  our  wav  in


THE  TEMPLE  OP  SETI  1.
AT  ItEDESIEH.'


liim  your  life,  for  he  has
cessible  roads,  and  he  Las
closed  to  us.  Henceforth
peace,  and  reach  our  desti-
nation alive;  now  that  the  difficult  paths  are  open  and  the  road  has  become
good,  gold  can  be  brought  back,  as  our  lord  and  master  has  commanded."  '-^
Plans  were  drawn  on  papyrus  of  the  configuration  of  the  district,  of  the  beds
of  precious  metal,  and  of  the  position  of  the  stations.  One  of  these  plans
has  come  down  to  us,  in  which  the  districts  are  coloured  bright  red,  the
mountains  dull  ochre,  the  roads  dotted  over  with  footmarks  to  show  the  direc-
tion to  be  taken,  while  the  superscriptions  give  tlie  local  names,  and  inform

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Golenischeff;  of.  tljo  drawing  of  the  temple
and  its  plan  given  in  Cailliaud,  Voyage  a  VOasis  de  Thihes,  pi.  ii.,  and  the  plan  of  the  temple  in
Lepsics,  Denkm.,  i.  101.

'  The  inscriptions  in  the  temple  at  Redesieh  have  been  published  by  Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  139-
141,  afterwards  more  correctly  by  Golenischeff,  Excursion  h  Berenice,  in  the  Becneil  de  Travax,
vol.  xiii.  pp.  77,  7S,  pla.  i.,  ii.  They  have  beeu  annotated  and  translated  by  Chabas,  Tine  Inscription
hislorique  du,  regue  de  Siii  /'■'',  and  Leg  Inscripliona  des  Minen  d'or,  pp.  5,  0  ;  by  Lauth,  Die  zweiitlteste
Landharle,  in  the  Silzunysherichte  of  the  Munich  Academy  of  Scieucee,  1871,  vol.  ii.  pp.  204-210;  by
BiiiCH,  Inecriptitine  of  the  Gold  Mines  at  RItedesieh  and  Kulan,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  series,
vol.  viii.  pp.  09-75;  by  Brugscu,  Geschichle  JCgijptciis,  pp.  470-477;  and  liiuilly  by  Scuiapakelm,
La  Catena  Urientale  delV  Eijitto,  pp.  82-85.


376


THE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


us  that  the  map  represents  the  Bukhni  mountain  and  a  fortress  and  stele
of  Seti.  The  whole  thing  is  executed  in  a  rough  and  naive  manner,  with  an
almost  childish  minuteness  whioh  provokes  a  smile ;  we  should,  however,  not
despise  it,  for  it  is  the  oldest  map  in  the  world.^

The  gold  extracted  from  these  regions,  together  with  that  brought  from


F]:agmext  of  the  .mat  ov  thk  gold-mini:;


Ethiopia,  and,  better  still,  the  regular  payment  of  taxes  and  custom-house  duties,,
went  to  make  up  for  the  lack  of  foreign  spoil  all  the  more  opportunely,  for,
although  the  sovereign  did  not  share  the  military  enthusiasm  of  Thutmosis  III.,
he  had  inherited  from  him  the  passion  for  expensive  temple-building.  He
did  not  neglect  Nubia  in  this  respect,  but  repaired  several  of  the  monuments
at     which    the    XYIII"'    dynasty   had    worked — among    others,   Kalabsheh,^

'  It  bus  been  published  by  Lepsius,  Aiisicalil  der  iciclitiijs(en  Vrliunden,  pi.  xxii.  (ef.  Bibch,  Upon
a  Historical  Tahht  of  Bamses  II..  p.  26);  by  Chabas,  Les  Inscriptions  des  Mints  d'or.  pp.  30-32,  and
pi.  ii. ;  filially  by  Laith,  Die  alftste  Landkarte  nuhischer  Goldminen,  in  the  Sitzungsherichte  of  the
Munich  Academy  of  Sciences,  1S70,  vol.  ii.  pp.  337-372.  The  fragments  of  a  second  map  are  to  be
found  in  Lieblein-Chabas,  Deux  Pajtyrus  higratiques,  pp.  41-13,  and  pi.  v. ;  and  in  Lauth,  Die
zweialteste  Landkarte  nebst  Grdberpliinen,  in  the  Sitzungsherichte  of  the  Munich  Academy  of  Sciences,
1871,  vol.  i.  pp.  190-238.

'  Facsimile  by  Faucher-Gudin  of  coloured  chalk-drawiug  by  Ciiabas,  Les  Inscriptions  des  Mine»
d'or,  pi.  ii.

'  Gau,  AntiquiUt  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  13/.


THE  BUILDINGS  ERECTED   BY  SETI  II.


2,77


Dakkeh/  and  Amada,^  besides  founding  a  temple  at  Sesebi,  of  which  three
columns  are  still  standing.^  The  outline  of  these  columns  is  not  graceful,  and
the  decoration  of  them  is  very  poor,  for  art  degenerated  rapidly  in  these  distant
provinces  of  the  empire,  and  only  succeeded  in  maiataining  its  vigour  and
spirit  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Pharaoh,  as  at  Abydos,  Memphis,
and  above  all  at  Thebes.    Seti's  predecessor  Eamses,  desirous  of  obliterating  all


TUE  tui;ee  staxI-UNG  lulumns  of  the  teju'Le  of  SESEi:!."


traces  of  the  misfortunes  lately  brought  about  by  the  changes  effected  by  the
heretic  kings,  had  contemplated  building  at  Karnak,  in  front  of  the  pylon  of
Amenothes  III.,  an  enormous  hall  for  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  cult  of
Amon,  where  tlie  immense  numbers  of  priests  and  worshippers  at  festival
times  could  be  accommodated  without  inconvenience.  It  devolved  on  Seti  to
carry  out  what  had  been  merely  an  ambitious  dream  of  his  father's.''  We  long
to  know  who  was  the  architect  possessed  of  such  confidence  in  his  powers  that  he

'  Lepsius,  Brief e  aas  ^gyplen  und  JElhiopien,  p.  113.

'  CHAMroi.LioN,  MonmnenU,  pi.  xlv.  .5,  and  vol.  i.  p.  101 ;  Rosellini.  Monumenti  Slorici,  vol.  iii.
pt.  1,  p.  311.

'  Lepsius,  Briefe  aas  jE(jypten  und  JEthiopien,  p.  25G.  In  Lep;ius's  time  tliere  were  still  four
columns  standing;  Insinger  shows  us  only  three.

*  Drawn  by  Boudior,  from  apliotograph  by  lusiuger,  taken  in  1881,  duringone  of  the  last  journeys
whicli  he  wag  able  to  take  i>rior  to  the  Malidist  invasion,

''  As  to  the  construction  and  decoration  of  the  great  hypostyle  hall,  cf.  the  researches  of  Mauiette,
Karnal:,  Texle,  pp.  23-27.  It  was  cleared,  and  the  columns  were  strengthened  in  the  winter  of
1895-6,  as  far,  at  Ita>t,  as  it  was  possible  to  carry  out  the  work  of  restoration  without  impeiilling.
the  stability  of  the  whole.


378


TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


ventured  to  design,  and  was  able  to  carry  out,  this  almost  superhuman  under-
taking. His  name  would  be  held  up  to  almost  universal  admiration  beside
those  of  the  greatest  masters  that  we  are  familiar  with,  for  no  one  in  Greece  or
Italy  has  left  us  any  work  which  surpasses  it,  or  which  with  such  simple  means

could  produce  a  similar


impression  of  boldness
and  immensity.  It  is
almost  impossible  to
convey  by  words  to  those
who  have  not  seen  it
the  impression  which  it
makes  on  the  spectator.
Failing  description,  the
dimensions  speak  for
themselves.  The  hall
measures  one  hundred
and  sixty  -  two  feet  in
length,  by  three  hundred
and  twenty  -  five  in
breadth.  A  row  of  twelve
columns,  the  largest  ever
placed  inside  a  building,
runsupthe  centre,  having
capitals  in  the  form  of
inverted  bells.  One
hundred  and  twenty-two
columns  with  lotiform
capitals  fill  the  aisles,  in
rows  of  nine  each.  The  roof  of  the  central  bay  is  seventy-four  feet  above  the
ground,  and  the  cornice  of  the  two  towers  rises  sixty-three  feet  higher.  The
building  was  dimly  lighted  from  the  roof  of  the  central  colonnade  by  means
of  stone  gratings,  through  which  the  air  and  the  sun's  rays  entered  sparingly.
The  daylight,  as  it  penetrated  into  the  hall,  was  rendered  more  and  more
obscure  by  the  rows  of  columns ;  indeed,  at  the  further  end  a  perpetual  twilight
must  have  reigned,  pierced  by  narrow  shafts  of  light  falling  from  the  ventilation
holes  which  were  placed  at  intervals  in  the  roof.  The  whole  building  now  lies
open  to  the  sky,  and  the  sunshine  which  floods  it,  pitilessly  reveals  the  mutilations


AJJ    AVENUE   OP   ONE   OF   THE   AISLES  OF   THE   HYPOSTYLE    HALL
.Vr   KARNAK.'


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.     Cf.  the  general  view  of  the  hypostyle
hall  at  the  heading  to  the  present  chapter,  p.  341.


TEE   JJYFOSTYLE   HALLS    OF  KARNAK  AND   LUXOR.


:57;)


wliich  it  has  suffered  in  the  course  of  ages ;  but  the  general  eifect,  though  less
mysterious,  is  none  the  less  overwhelming.  It  is  the  only  monument  in  vvhicli
the  first  coup  d'uiil  surpasses  the  expectations  of  tlie  spectator  instead  of  dis-
appointing him.  The
size  is  immense,  and  we
realise  its  immensity
the  more  fully  as  we
search  our  memory  in
vain  to  find  anything
with  which  to  compare
it.  Seti  may  have  en-
tertained tlie  project  of
building  a  replica  of  this
hall  in  Southern  Thebes.
Amenothes  III.  had  left
I  lis  temple  at  Luxor
unfinished.  The  sanc-
tuaiy  and  its  surround-
ing buildings  were  used
for  purposes  of  worship,
but  the  court  of  the
customary  pylon  was
wanting,  and  merely  a
thin  wall  concealed  the
mysteries  from  the  sight
of  the  vulgar.  Seti  re-
solved to  extend  the
building  in  a  northerly
direction,  without  iu-
terfering  with  the  thin  screen  which  had  satisfied  his  predecessors.
Starting  from  the  entrance  in  this  wall,  he  planned  an  avenue  of  giant
columns  rivalling  those  of  Karnak,  which  he  destined  to  become  the  central
colonnade  of  a  hypostyle  hall  as  vast  as  that  of  the  sister  temple.  Either
money  or  time  was  lacking  to  carry  out  his  intention.  He  died  before  the
aisles  on  either  side  were  even  begun.^  At  Abydos,  however,  he  was  more
successful.     We  do  not  know  the  reason  of  Seti's  particular  afiection  for  this

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato ;  iu  the  background,  on  the  right,  may
be  seen  a  column  which  for  several  centuries  has  been  retained  in  a  half-fallen  position  by  the  weight
of  its  architrave.

'  As  to  this  colonnade  at  Luxor,  cf.  I'EUUOT-tJuiPiEZ.fliisioiVe  de  I'AH  dans  rAntiqiiitg,  vol.  i.  p.  378  ;
in  regard  to  the  building  of  the  temple,  see  what  is  said  on  pp.  .S06-308,  stqira.


THE  i.iHAllM.


OF  ']UE  CENTRAL  COLONNADE  IN  THE  IIYl'O^^TYLE
UALL  AT  KARNAK.'


:380


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


town  ;  it  is  possible  that  liis  family  held  some  fief  there,  or  it  may  be  that  he
desired  to  show  the  peculiar  estimation  in  which  he  held  its  local  god,  and
intended,  by  the  homage  that  he  lavished  on  him,  to  cause  the  fact  to  be
forgotten  that  he  bore  the  name  of  Sit  the  accursed.  The  king  selected  a
favourable  site  for  his  temple  to  the  south  of  the  town,  on  the  slope  of  a  sand-
hill bordering  the  canal,  and  he  marked  out  in  the  hardened  soil  a  ground  plan


ONE    OF    THE    COLONNADES    OF    THE    BYl'OSTVLE    HALL    IN    THE    TEMPLE    OV   SETI    I.    AT    AliVDOS.'

of  considerable  originality.^  The  building  was  approached  through  two  pylons,,
the  remains  of  which  are  now  hidden  under  the  houses  of  Aarabat  el-
Madfuneh.  A  fairly  large  courtyard,  bordered  by  two  crumbling  walls,  lies
between  the  second  pylon  and  the  temple  facade,  which  was  composed  of
a  portico  resting  on  square  pillars.  Passing  between  these,  we  reach  two
halls  supported  by  columns  of  graceful  outline,  beyond  which  are  eight  chapels
arranged  in  a  line,  side  by  side,  in  front  of  two  chambers  built  in  to  the  hill-
side, and  destined  for  the  reception  of  Osiris.  The  holy  of  holies  in  ordinary
temples  is  surrounded  by  chambers  of  lesser  importance,  but  here  it  is  con-
cealed behind  them.  The  building-material  mainly  employed  here  was  the
white  limestone  of  Turah,  but  of  a  most  beautiful  quality,  which  lent  itself  to

•  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

=  In  regard  to  the  temple  of  Seti  I.   at  Abydos,   see  JIakiette,  Alyilo?,  vol.  i.  p.  6,  et  seq. ;  cf.
PEBKOT-Cmi'iEZ,  Eistoire  de  rArt,vo\.  i.  pp.  301-396,  and  Masfero,  Arcliioloijie  Egiji>tienne,  pp.  83,  84.


382  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

the  execution  of  bas-reliefs  of  great  delicacy,  perhaps  the  finest  in  ancient  Egypt.
The  artists  who  carved  and   painted  them    belonged   to  the  Theban  school,
and  while  their  subjects  betray  a  remarkable  similarity  to  those  of  the  monuments
dedicated  by  Amenothes  III.,  the  execution  surpasses  them  in  freedom  and  per-
fection of  modelling;  we  can,  in  fact,  trace  in  them  the  influence  of  the  artists  who
furnished  the  drawings  for  the  scenes  at  Tel  el-Amarna.   They  have  represented
tlie  gods  and  goddesses  with  the  same  type  of  profile  as  that  of  the  king — a
type  of  face  of  much  purity  and  gentleness,  with  its  aquiline  nose,  its  decided
mouth,  almond-shaped  eyes,  and  melancholy  smile.     When  the  decoration  of
the  temple  was  completed,  Seti  regarded  the  building  as  too  small  for   its
divine  inmate,  and  accordingly  added  to  it  a  new  wing,  which  he  built  along
tlie  whole  length  of  the  soutliern  wall ;  but  he  was  unable  to  finish  it  com-
pletely.   Several  parts  of  it  are  lined  with  religious  representations,  but  in  others
the  subjects  have  been  mei'ely  sketched  out  in  black  ink  with  corrections  in
red,  while  elsewhere  the  walls  are  bare,  except  for  a  few  inscriptions,  scribbled
over  them  after  an  interval  of  twenty  centuries  by  the  monks  who  turned  the
temple  chambers  into   a   convent.     This  new  wing  was  connected  with  the
second    hypostyle   hall   of  the    original    building   by  a  passage,   on    one   of
the  walls   of  which  is  a   list  of  seventy-five  royal  names,  representing  the
ancestors  of  the  sovereign  traced  back  to  Mini.     The  whole  temple  must  be
regarded  as  a  vast  funerary  chapel,  and  no  one  who  has  studied  the  religion
of  Egypt  can  entertain  a  doubt  as  to  its  purpose.     Abydos  was  the  place
where  the  dead  assembled  before  passing  into  the  other  world.     It  was  here,
at  the  mouth  of  the  "  Cleft,"  that  they  received  the  provisions  and  ofierings
of  their  relatives  and  friends  who  remained  on  this  earth.     As  the  dead  flocked
hither  from  all  quarters  of  the  world,  they  collected  round  the  tomb  of  Osiris,
and  there  waited  till  the  moment  came  to  embark  on  the  Boat  of  the  Sun.'
Seti  did  not  wish  his  soul  to  associate  with  those  of  the  common  crowd  of  his
vassals,  and  prepared  this  temple  for  himself,  as  a  separate  resting-place,  close
to  the  mouth  of  Hades.     After  having  dwelt  within  it  for  a  short  time  sub-
sequent to  his   funeral,  his   soul   could  repair   thither  whenever   it   desired,
certain  of  always  finding  within  it  the  incense  and  the  nourishment  of  which
it  stood  in  need.

Thebes  possessed  this  king's  actual  tomb.  The  chapel  was  at  Qurnali,
a  little  to  the  north  of  the  group  of  pyramids  in  which  the  Pharaohs  of  the
Xr"  dynasty  lay  side  by  side  with  those  of  the  XIII'"  and  XVII'".  Ramses
had  begun  to  build  it,  and  Seti  continued  the  work,  dedicating  it  to  the
cult  of  his  father  and  of  himself  Its  pylon  has  altogether  disappeared,  but
the  fapade  with  lotus-bud  columns  is  nearly  perfect,  together  with  several
'  Cf.  what  is  said  of  the  "  Ckft"  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  lOG-lOS,  232.


TEE   VALLEY  OF   THE   KINGS   AT  THEBES.


383


of  the  chambers  in  front  of  the  sanctuary.  The  decoration  is  as  carefully
carried  out  and  the  execution  as  delicate  as  that  in  the  work  at  Abydos  ;
we  are  tempted  to  believe  from  one  or  two  examples  of  it  that  the  same  hands
have  worked  at  both  buildings.^  The  rock-cut  tomb  is  some  distance  away
up  in  the  mountain,  but  not  in  the  same  ravine  as  that  in  which  Amenothes  III.,
Ai,  and  probably  Tiitankhamon  and  Harmhabi,  are  buried.^     There  then  existed.


behind  the  rock  amphitheatre  of
Deir  el-Bahari,  a  kind  of  enclosed
basin,  which  could  be  reached
from  the  plain  only  by  dangerous  paths  above  the  temple  of  Hatshopsitu.
This  basin  is  divided  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  runs  in  a  south-
easterly direction,  while  the  other  trends  to  the  south-west,  and  is  sub-
divided into  minor  branches.  To  tlie  east  rises  a  barren  peak,  the  outline
of  whicii  is  not  unlike  that  of  the  step-pyramid  of  Saqqara,  reproduced  on
a  colossal  scale.  No  spot  could  be  more  appropriate  to  serve  as  a  cemetery  for
a  family  of  kings.  The  difficulty  of  reaching  it  and  of  conveying  thither  the
heavy  accessories  and  of  providing  for  the  endless  processions  of  the  Pharaonic
funerals,  prevented  any  attempt  being  made  to  cut  tombs  in  it  during  the

'  The  temple  at  Qurnah  has  been  described  by  Champollion,  Monumentu,  vol.  i.  pp.  296-313.
692-708;  of.  Perhot-Chipiez,  Hisloire  de  I'Arl,  vol.  i.  pp.  396-401.  The  inscriptions  which  refer
to  it  as  tlie  funerary  chapel  of  Ramses  I.  and  of  Seti  I.  have  been  collected  in  CHAJiroLl.loN,  Monu-
ment, pi.  cli.  2-5,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  290,  306,  307,  704-707.

'  There  are,  in  fact,  close  to  those  of  Ai  and  Amenothes  III.,  throe  other  tombs,  two  at  least  of
which  have  been  decorated  with  paintings,  now  completely  obliterated,  and  which  may  have  served  as
the  burying-placea  of  Tfltankhamon  and  Harmhabi;  the  earlier  Egyptologists  believed  them  to  have
been  dug  by  the  first  kings  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  (Ciiami'uli.ion,  Leltrt-s  icrites  d'Egi/pte,  2nd  edit.,
p.  247;  \ViLKl.N.sON,  Topography  of  Thebes  and  General  View  of  Egypt,  pp.  122,  123).

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.


384  TEE  B FACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

Ancient  and  Middle  Empires.  About  the  beginning  of  the  XIX'"  dynasty,  how-
ever, some  engineers,  in  search  of  suitable  burial  sites,  at  length  noticed  that  this
"basin  was  only  separated  from  the  wady  issuing  to  the  north  of  Qurnah  by  a  rocky
barrier  barely  five  hundred  cubits  in  width.  This  presented  no  formidable  obstacle
to  such  skilful  engineers  as  the  Egyptians.  They  cut  a  trench  into  the  living
■rock  some  fifty  or  sixty  cubits  in  depth,  at  the  bottom  of  whicli  they  tunnelled
a  narrow  passage  giving  access  to  the  valley.^  It  is  not  known  whether  this
herculean  work  was  accomplished  during  the  reign  of  Harmhabi  or  in  that  of
Eamses  I.  The  latter  was  the  first  of  the  Pharaohs  to  honour  the  spot  by  his
presence.  His  tomb  is  simple,  almost  coarse  in  its  workmanship,  and  comprises
.a  gently  inclined  passage,  a  vault  and  a  sarcophagus  of  rough  stone.^  That  of
Seti,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  veritable  palace,  extending  to  a  distance  of  325  feet
into  the  mountain-side.  It  is  entered  by  a  wide  and  lofty  door,  which  opens
on  to  a  staircase  of  twenty-seven  steps,  leading  to  an  inclined  corridor ;  other
staircases  of  shallow  steps  follow  with  their  landings ;  then  come  successively
a  hypostyle  hall,  and,  at  the  extreme  end,  a  vaulted  chamber,  all  of  which  are
decorated  with  mysterious  scenes  and  covered  with  inscriptions.  This  is,  how-
■ever,  but  the  first  storey,  containing  the  antechambers  of  the  dead,  but  not  their
living-rooms.  A  passage  and  steps,  concealed  under  a  slab  to  the  left  of  the
hall,  lead  to  the  real  vault,  which  held  the  mummy  and  its  funerary  furniture.
As  we  penetrate  further  and  further  by  the  light  of  torches  into  this  sub-
terranean abode,  we  see  that  the  walls  are  covered  with  pictures  and
formula,  setting  forth  the  voyages  of  the  soul  through  the  twelve  hours  of  the
night,  its  trials,  its  judgment,  its  reception  by  the  departed,  and  its  apotheosis —
all  depicted  on  the  rock  with  the  same  perfection  as  that  which  characterises  the
bas-reliefs  on  the  finest  slabs  of  Turah  stone  at  Qurnah  and  Abydos.  A  gallery
leading  out  of  the  last  of  these  chambers  extends  a  few  feet  further  and  then
stops  abruptly ;  the  engineers  had  contemplated  the  excavation  of  a  third  storey
to  the  tomb,  when  the  death  of  their  master  obliged  them  to  suspend  their
task.^  The  king's  sarcophagus  consists  of  a  block  of  alabaster,  hollowed  out,
polished,  and  carved  with  figures  and  hieroglyphs,  with  all  the  minuteness
which  we  associate  with  the  cutting  of  a  gem."*     It  contained  a  wooden  coffin,

'  French  scholars  recognised  from  the  beginning  of  this  century  that  the  passage  in  question  bad
been  made  by  human  agency  (CosT.^z,  Descri-ption  des  Tombeaux  des  Hois,  in  the  Description  d'£gi/pte,
Tol.  iii.  pp.  ISO,  100).  I  attribute  tlie  execution  of  this  work  to  Ramses  I.,  as  I  believe  Harmhabi  to
have  been  buried  in  the  eastern  valley,  near  Amenuthes  III.

-  t/HAMPOLLio.v.  Niinumentf,  vol.  i.  pp.  424-426;  chalk-drawings  of  tlie  paintings  were  on  view
for  a  long  time  in  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  the  Louvre.

^  The  tomb  was  discovered  in  ISIS  by  Belzoxi,  Oijeralions  and  Discoreries  icilhin  the  Fyramids ;
it  was  afterwards  described  and  the  greater  part  of  it  copied  by  CH.\MPOH,ioif,  Monunteiiis,  vol.  i.
pp.  42G-440,  7oS-S02,  and  by  Rosellisi,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  447,  44S,  and  com-
pletely by  Lefebuke,  Lcs  Ilypog^es  Eoyaux  de  Thebes,  I^'  partie  :  le  tombeau  de  Siti  I"  ,  in  the
M^inoires  de  la  Mission  Fnmraise  du  Caire,  vol.  ii.

'  The  sarcophagus  was  brought  to  Loudon,  and  has  been  reproduced  by  SHAKrE-Boxoiii,  The


THE   CHlLDnOOD    OF  RAMSES  II.


.385


/      I-


shaped  to  the  human  figure  and  painted  white,  the  features  picked  out  iu  bhick,
and  enamel  eyes  inserted  iu  a  mounting  of  bronze.  The  mummy  is  that  of  a  thin
elderly  man,    well    preserved  ;

the  face  was  covered  by  a  mask  ,,,.|,|gj^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  ..hjIjJ)^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
made  of  linen  smeared  with  ,;  ^
pitch,  but  when  this  was  raised  '
by  means  of  a  chisel,  the  fine  :.-  ^^^.
kingly  head  was  exposed  to
view.  It  was  a  masterpiece  of
the  art  of  the  embalmer,  and
the  expression  of  the  face  was
that  of  one  who  had  only  a  few
hours  previously  breathed  his
last.  Death  had  slightly  drawn
the  nostrils  and  contracted  the
lips,  the  pressure  of  the  ban-
dages had  flattened  the  nose
a  little,  and  the  skin  was
darkened  by  the  pitch ;  but  a
calm  and  gentle  smile  still
played  over  the  mouth,  and
the  half-opened  eyelids  allowed
a  glimpse  to  be  seen  from
under  their  lashes  of  an  ap-
parently moist  and   glistening     i. -                                '    ~    "-

line, — the  reflection   from    the      r^^^z::;:::::.

white  porcelain  eyes  let  in  to  ^'        -^  - ,    .  ■  <-,

~~  —  — K  "

the  orbit  at  the  time  of  burial.-  ,  ^ ' , ,, ii!!iiiiii:is!|]i!!;:|i|jj;i.;j£;j^^^^^^^^^^  1'"

Seti  had  had  several  chil-
dren by  bis  wife  Tuia,  and  the
eldest  had  already  reached  manhood  wjien  his  father  ascended  the  throne,  for
he  had  accompanied  him  on  his  Syrian  campaign.^     The  young  prince  died,

AlahaslcT  Sarcophariug  of  Oimenephlah ;  cf.  Pir.itUKi',  t'Aude  mr  le  Sarcopliage  Sili  I'"-  in  tlio  Revue
ArcMuh(ji(iKe,  1870,  vol.  x\\.  p.  28t,  et  seq.,  aud  I.hfebuuk,  Tlie  Book  of  Hades,  in  the  }itcor<h  of  the
Past,  1st  aeries,  vol.  x.  pp.  70-i:U,  ami  vol.  .\ii.  pp.  1-35.

'   Drawu  by  lioudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Iiisinger,  taken  in  1881.

'  Maspeuo,  7^68  Momies  Royules  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  Ngmoins  de  la  Mission  Franraisn,  vol.  i.
pp.  553-55G;  cf.  the  frontispiece  of  tliis  volnme,  which  repiodiices  the  head  of  the  mummy  of
Seti  I.

^  As  to  this  persi'nage,  whoso  name  has  been  mutilated,  cf.  Wiedemann,  On  a  Forgollen  Vriwe,
in  the  Proceedings  of  tlie  Society  of  Biblical  Arcliseology,  1889-90,  vol.  xii.  pp.  2,')8-2tJl,  and  Remarque*
et  Notes,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  121,  122;  us  also  Lefeeuue,  Le  Xom  du  frere  de
Ramses  II.,  in  the  Proceedings,  vol.  xii.  pp.  416-449.

2  (;


OXi;    OF    THE    I'lLLAIlS    OK    THE    TOMl!    OF    SEl'i    I.'


386  TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

however,  soon  after  his  return,  and  his  right  to  the  crown  devolved  on  his  younger
brother,  who,  like  his  grandfatiier,  bore  the  name  of  Ramses.  This  prince  was
still  very  yoiing,i  but  Seti  did  not  on  that  account  delay  enthroning  with  great
pomp  this  son  who  had  a  better  right  to  the  throne  than  himself.  "  From  the
time  that  I  was  in  the  egg,"  Ramses  writes  later  on,  "  the  great  ones  sniffed  the
earth  before  me  ;  when  I  attained  to  the  rank  of  eldest  son  and  heir  upon  the
throne  of  Sibu,  I  dealt  with  affairs,  I  commanded  as  chief  the  foot-soldiers  and
the  chai'iots.  My  father  having  appeared  before  the  people,  when  I  was  but  a
very  little  boy  in  his  arms,  said  to  me  :  '  I  shall  have  him  crowned  king,  that  I
may  see  him  in  all  his  splendour  while  I  am  still  on  this  earth ! '  The  nobles
of  the  court  having  drawn  near  to  place  the  pschent  upon  my  head  :  '  Place  the
diadem  upon  his  forehead  ! '  said  he."  ^  As  Ramses  increased  in  years,  Seti
delighted  to  confer  upon  him,  one  after  the  other,  the  principal  attributes  of
power ;  "  while  he  was  still  upon  this  earth,  regulating  everything  in  the  land,
defending  its  frontiers,  and  watching  over  the  welfare  of  its  inhabitants,  he
cried  :  '  Let  him  reign  ! '  because  of  the  love  he  had  for  me."  Seti  also  chose  for
him  wives,  beautiful  "  as  are  those  of  his  palace,"  ^  and  he  gave  him  in  marriage
his  sisters  Nofritari  II.  Mimut  and  Isitnofiit,*  who,  like  Ramses  himself,  had
claims  to  the  throne.  Ramses  was  allowed  to  attend  the  State  councils  at  the
age  often  ;  he  commanded  armies,  and  he  administered  justice  under  the  direction
of  his  father  and  his  viziei"s.^  Seti,  however,  although  making  use  of  his  son's
youth  and  activity,  did  not  in  any  sense  retire  in  his  favour  ;  if  he  permitted
Ramses  to  adopt  the  insignia  of  royalty — the  cartouches,  the  pschent,  the
bulbous-shaped  helmet,  and  the  various  sceptres — he  still  remained  to  the  day
of  his  death  the  principal  State  ofScial,  and  he  reckoned  all  the  years  of  this
dual  sovereignty  as  those  of  his  sole  reign.^     Ramses  repulsed  the  incursions  of

'  The  history  of  the  youth  and  the  accession  of  Ramses  II.  is  known  to  ns  from  the  narrative
given  by  himself  in  the  temple  of  Seti  I.  at  Abydos,  which  has  been  published  by  Mariette,
Ahydos,  vol.  i.  pis.  5-9;  it  has  been  e.\amined,  and  the  inscription  translated  by  Maspbro,  Essai
sur  r Inscription  dedicaluire  du  Temple  d' Abydos  et  la  jetmesse  de  S^sostris,  1867;  afterwards  by
Lacth,  Der  grosse  Sesostriatext  aus  Abydos,  in  the  Zeitschrift  der  D.  Morgenl.  Gesellschaft,  vol.  xxix.
p.  456,  et  seq.,  and  by  Brvgsoh,  Geschichle  jEgyptem,  pp.  479-490,  who  has,  for  the  most  part,  adopted
the  opinions  of  his  predecessors  (Geschiclite  Jigyptens,  pp.  469-471).  Wiedemann  (_^gyptische
Geschichte,  pp.  418-420)  has  corrected  some  of  the  exaggerations  of  which  previous  historians  were
guilty,  but  the  bulk  of  the  narrative  is  confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  the  Kuban  inscription  (11.  16, 17 ;
cf.  Chabas,  Leg  Inscriptions  dcs  Alines  d'or,  pp.  24,  25),  especially  as  to  the  extreme  youth  of  Ramses
at  the  time  when  he  was  first  associated  with  the  crown.

'  Great  Dedicatory  Inscription  at  Abydos,  11.  44-46,  where  the  passage  has  been  somewhat  mutilated.

'  Great  Inscription  at  Abydos,  11.  47,  48.

*  The  evidence  in  regard  to  these  two  princesses,  and  the  monuments  of  them  which  have  come
down  to  us,  have  been  collected  in  an  almost  complete  form  by  Wiedemann,  Mjypt.  Gesch.,  ])p.  463, 464.

'  Kuban  Inscription,  11.  16, 17,  which  contain  the  address  presented  to  Ramses  himself  by  the  royal
councillors.

^  iirugsch  is  wrong  in  reckoning  the  reign  of  Ramses  II.  from  the  time  of  his  association  in  the
crown  (Geschichte  JEgyptens,  p.  471) ;  the  great  inscription  of  Abydos,  which  has  been  translated  by
Brugsch  himself,  dates  events  which  immediately  followed  the  death  of  Seti  I.  as  belonging  to  the
first  year  of  Ramses  II.  (11.  22,  26,  72  ;  cf.  Maspero,  La  Grande  Inscription  d' Abydos  et  lajeunesse  de
S^sostris,  pp.  14,  17,  48).


JOINT  REIGN   OF  SETI  AND    RAMSES.


387


the  Tihonu,!  and  put  to  the  sword  such  of  their  hordes  as  had  ventured  to
invade  Egyptian  territory.-  He  exercised  the  functions  of  viceroy  of  Ethiopia,
and  had  on  several  occasions  to  chastise  the  pillaging  negroes.  We  see  him  at
Beit-Wally  and  at  Abu  Simbel  charging  them  in  his  chariot :  in  vain  they  flee  in


■1-1  ■     II      1  i    1~    THE    NEGROES   TO   FLIGHT.^

confusion  before  liim ;  their  flight,  however  swift,  cannot  save  them  from  captivity
and  destruction.*  He  was  engaged  in  Ethiopia  when  the  death  of  Seti  recalled
him  to  Thebes.^  He  at  once  returned  to  the  capital,  celebrated  the  king's
funeral  obsequies  with  suitable  pomp,  and  after  keeping  the  festival  of  Amon,
set  out  for  the  north  in  order  to  make  his  authority  felt  in  that  part  of  his
domains.     He  stopped  on  his  way  at  Abydos  to  give  the  necessary  orders  for

'  Mariette,  Ahydos,  vol.  ii.  pp.  13,  15.

'  RosELLixi,  MonumenU  Storici,  pis.  Ixix.-lxx.

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudin,  from  a  pbotograpb  taken  by  Insinger  at  Beit-Wally;  cf.  Champollion,
Monuments,  pis.  Ixxi.,  Ixxii.,  and  vol.  i.  p.  14G;  Rosellini,  Monument)  Storici,  pis.  Ixxiv.,  Ixxv.  ;
Akundale-Bonomi-Birch,  Gallery  af  Antiijuities,  pl.  38,  fig.  155.

*  CuAMiOLLiON, -l/oHumenfs,  pis.  xii.-xvi.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  64;  'Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,
pis.  ixiv.,  ixx.-lxxv.

'  Maspero,  Essai  »ur  I'inscription  didicatmre.  du  temple  d'Ahydus,  pp.  78,  79.  We  do  not  know
how  long  Seti  I.  reigned  ;  the  last  date  is  that  of  his  IX""  year  at  Redesieli  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  140  6,
1.  1)  and  at  Aswan  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  141  »'),  and  that  of  the  year  XXVII.  sometimes  attributed
to  him  (Wiedemann,  jEgyptische  Geschichle,  ]).  421,  corrected  in  the  SuppUment ;  Spiegelberg,
Bechnungen  aus  der  Zeit  Seii's  I.,  Text,  p.  67)  belongs  to  one  of  the  later  EamessidoB.  I  had  at  first
supposed  bis  reign  to  have  been  a  long  one,  merely  on  the  evidence  afforded  by  Miinetlio's  lists
(Revue  Critique,  1870,  vol.  ii.  p.  41),  but  the  presence  of  Ramses  II.  as  a  stripling,  in  tlio  campaign
of  Seti's  I"'  year,  forces  us  to  limit  its  duration  to  fifteen  or  twenty  years  at  most,  possibly  to  only
twelve  or  fifteen.


388  THE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

completing  the  decoratiou  of  the  principal  chambers  of  the  resting-place  built
by  his  father,  and  chose  a  site  some  320  feet  to  the  north-west  of  it  for  a  similar
Memnonium  for  himself.  He  granted  cultivated  fields  and  meadows  in  the
Thinite  nome  for  the  maintenance  of  these  two  mausolea,  founded  a  college  of
priests  and  soothsayers  in  connexion  with  them,  for  which  he  provided  endow-
ments, and  also  assigned  them  considerable  fiefs  in  all  parts  of  the  valley  of
theNile.^  The  Delta  next  occupied  his  attention.  The  increasing  importance
of  the  Syrian  provinces  in  the  eyes  of  Egypt,  the  growth  of  the  Hittite  mon-
archy, and  the  migrations  of  the  peoples  of  the  Mediterranean,  had  obliged
the  last  princes  of  the  preceding  dynasty  to  reside  more  frequently  at  Memphis
than  Amenothes  I.  or  Thutmosis  III.  had  done.  Amenothes  III.  had  set  to  work
to  restore  certain  cities  which  had  been  abandoned  since  the  days  of  the  Shep-
herds, and  Bubastis,  Athribis,  and  perhaps  Tanis,  had,  thanks  to  his  efforts,
revived  from  their  decayed  condition.-  The  Pharaohs,  indeed,  felt  that  at
Thebes  they  were  too  far  removed  from  the  battle-fields  of  Asia  ;  distance  made
it  difficult  for  them  to  counteract  the  intrigues  in  which  their  vassals  in  Khaiii
and  the  lords  of  Naharaim  were  perpetually  implicated,  and  a  revolt  which
might  have  been  easily  anticipated  or  crushed  had  they  been  advised  of  it
within  a  few  days,  gained  time  to  increase  and  extend  during  the  interval
occupied  by  the  couriers  in  travelling  to  and  from  the  capital.  Ramses  felt  the
importance  of  possessing  a  town  close  to  the  Isthmus  where  he  could  reside  in
security,  and  he  therefore  built  close  to  Zalu,  in  a  fertile  and  healthy  locality,  a
stronghold  to  which  he  gave  his  own  name,''  and  of  which  the  poets  of  the  time
have  left  us  an  enthusiastic  description.  "  It  extend.*,"  they  say,  "  between  Zahi
and  Egypt — and  is  filled  with  provisions  and  victuals. — It  resembles  Hermon-
this, — it  is  strong  like  Memphis, — and  the  sun  rises — and  sets  in  it — so  that  men
quit  their  villages  and  establish  themselves  in  its  territory."^ — "The  duellers  on
the  coasts  bring  conger  eels  and  fish  in  homage, — they  pay  it  the  tribute  of
their  marshes. — The  inhabitants  don  their  festal  garments  every  day, — perfumed
oil  is  on  their  heads  and  new  wigs  ; — they  stand  at  their  door.-J,  their  hands  full  of
bunches  of  flowers,- — green  branches  from  the  village  of  Pibathor, — -garlands
of  Pahuru, — on  the  day  when  Pharaoh  makes  his  entry. — Joy  then  reigns  and
spreads,  and  nothing  can  stay  it, — O  Usirmaii-sotpuniri,  thou  who  art  Montii

'  Dedicatory  Inscription  in  the  Temple  at  Abydon,  11.  69-75,  81-89 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Essai  sur  I'imcrip-
tion  d^dicatoire  d'Abydos  tt  lajeunesse  de  Se'sostrin,  pp.  47—19,  53-57.

"  Cf.  what  is  taid  in  regard  to  the  revival  in  the  Delta  on  pp.  304,  305,  supra.

'  All  allusion  to  the  foundation  of  this  residence  oceurs  in  an  inscription  at  Ahu  Simbel,  dated  in
his  XXV"  year  (11.  16-18 ;  cf.  Naville,  Le  De'cret  de  Phtah  Totunen,  in  the  Transactio7is  of  the
Society  of  Biblical  Arohseology,  vol.  vii.  p.  124.

'  Papyrus  Aiiastasi  II.,  pi.  i.  11.  2-5^  Papyrus  Anastasi  II".,  pi.  vi.  11.  2-4;  cf.  Chabas,  Melanges
£gyptologiques,  2nd  series,  p.  151.  and  Etudes  sur  V Antiquiti Historiiue,  2nd  edit.,  p.  277;  JIaspero,
Du  Genre  Epistolaire  chez  les  Aiiciens  Egyptiens  de  Vgpoque  Fharaonique,  p.  102;  Ebman,  .Kgypten
und  .Egyplisches  Lehen  im  Alterthum,  p.  242.


HAMSES  11.    BUILDS   HIMSELF  A    RESIDENCE  IN   TEE  DELTA.      389

in  the  t«o  lands, — Eamses-Miamun,  the  god."'  The  town  acted  as  an  advance
post,  from  whence  the  king  could  keep  w\atch  against  all  intriguing  adversaries,
whether  on  the  banks  of  the  Orontes  or  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean.

Nothing  appeared  for  the  moment  to  threaten  the  peace  of  the  empire.
The  Asiatic  vassals  had  raised  no  disturbance  on  hearing  of  the  king's  accession,
and  Mautallu  continued  to  observe  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  which  he  had
signed  with  Seti.  Two  military  expeditions  undertaken  beyond  the  isthmus  in
the  II"''  and  IV"'  years  of  the  new  sovereign  were  accomplished  almost  without
fighting.  He  repressed  by  the  way  the  marauding  Shausu,  and  on  reaching  the
Nahr  el-Kelb,  which  then  formed  the  northern  frontier  of  his  empire,  he  inscribed
at  the  turn  of  the  road,  on  the  rocks  which  overhang  the  mouth  of  the  river,
two  triumphal  stelaj  in  which  he  related  his  successes.^  Towards  the  end  ot
liis  IV*  year  a  rebellion  broke  out  among  the  Khati,  which  caused  a  rupture
of  relations  between  the  two  kingdoms  and  led  to  some  irregular  fighting.
Khatusaru,  a  younger  brother  of  Maurusaru,  murdered  the  latter  and  made  him-
self king  in  his  stead.^  It  is  not  certain  whether  the  Egyptians  took  up  arms
against  him,  or  whether  he  judged  it  wise  to  oppose  them  in  order  to  divert  the
attention  of  his  subjects  from  his  crime.  At  all  events,  he  convoked  liis  Syrian
vassals  and  collected  his  mercenaries;  the  whole  of  Naharaim,  Khalupu,
Carchemish,  and  Arvad  sent  their  quota,  while  bands  of  Dardanians,  Mysians,
Trojans,  and  Lycians,  together  with  the  people  of  Pedasos  and  Girgasha,*
furnished  further  contingents,  drawn  from  an  area  extending  from  the  most  dis-
tant coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  mountains  of  Cilicia.    Ramses,  informed

'  Anasiasi  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  iii.  11.  1-9;  cf.  Chauas,  Melanges  L'gijptnlogiques,  2nd  series,  pp.  132-
134  ;  Mabpero,  Dit  Genre  £piatolaire,  pp.  105,  106 ;  Brkgscu,  Geschichte  ^-Egyptens,  p.  548.

'  The  stelse  have  been  published  by  Lepsibs,  Denkm.,  iii.  197  a-c,  and  are  all  of  them  in  a  very
bad  condition  ;  in  the  last  of  them  the  date  is  no  longer  legible,  .and  Lepsius  is  doubtful  whether  the
first  is  dated  in  the  II'"'  or  X"'  year  {Briefe  aus  .Kgypteii  unil  ^Kthioineii,  p.  403).

'  Treaty  of  Rarmes  II.  with  the  Prince  of  Khali,  11.  7,  S,  where  the  writer  is  content  to  use  a
discreet  euphemism,  and  .states  that  Mautallu  succumbed  "to  his  destiny."  The  name  of  the
Prince  of  the  Khati  is  found  later  on  under  the  form  Khatusharu,  in  that  of  a  chief  defeated  by
Tiglath-pileaer  I.  in  the  country  of  Kummukh,  though  this  name  has  generally  been  read  Khatukhi
(WiNCKLER,  Gi'schichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  135,  note  2).

'  The  name  of  this  nation  is  written  Karkisha,  KalkishH,  or  Kashkisha  {Raifcl  Papyrus,  1.  6,  and
Sallier  Papyrus  III.,  \A.  i.  1.  10;  and  Bklgscu,  Recueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  pi.  liii. ;  Naville,
Buhaslis,  pi.  xxxvi.),  by  one  of  those  changes  of  sh  into  r-l  which  occur  so  frequently  in  Assyro-
Chaldsean  before  a  dental ;  the  two  different  spellings  seem  to  show  that  the  writers  of  the  inscrip-
tions bearing  on  tliis  war  had  before  them  a  list  of  the  allies  of  Kliatusaru,  written  in  cuneiform
characters  (cf.  W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  unci  Europa,  p.  355).  If  we  may  identify  the  n.ition,  not  with
the  CiliciaiiB,  as  \V.  Max  Miiller  wishes  to  do  (ibid.,  pp.  352-355),  but  with  the  Kashki  or  Kashku  of
the  Assyrian  texts,  the  ancestors  of  the  people  of  Colchis  of  classical  times,  the  termination  -isha
of  the  Egyiitian  word  would  bo  the  inflexion  -ash  or  -ush  of  the  Easteru-Asiatiu  tongues  which  wo
find  in  so  many  race-names,  e.g.  Adaush,  Saradaush,  Ammaush.  Koiige  {Extrall  d'uu  m^nioire  sur  les
atlaques  dee  peuples  de  la  mer,  p.  4)  and  Brugach  {Gefchichte  JEgyplens,  p.  492)  identified  them  with
the  Girgashites  of  tlie  Bible.  Brugsch,  adopting  the  spilling  Kashki,  endeavoured  to  connect  them
with  Casiotis  {Geotjraph.  Insch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  23,  note  2);  later  on  he  identified  them  with  the  people
of  Gergis  in  Troas  (Schi.iemann's  liios,  p.  747).  Kamsay  recognises  in  them  the  Kiskiaos  of  Cilicia
(The  Citien  and  Bishoprics  of  Phrijgia,  p.  xiii.,  note  2).


390  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EOTPT.

of  the  enemy's  movemeut  by  his  generals  and  the  governors  of  places  on  the
frontier,  resolved  to  anticipate  the  attack.  He  assembled  an  army  almost  as  in-
congruous in  its  component  elements  as  that  of  his  adversary ;  besides  Egyptians
of  unmixed  race,  divided  into  four  corps  bearing  the  names  of  Amon,  Phtah,
Harmakhis  and  Siitkhu,  it  contained  Ethiopian  auxiliaries,  Libyans,  Mazaiii,
and  Shardana.1  When  preparations  were  completed,  the  force  crossed  the
canal  at  Zalu,  on  the  9th  of  Payni  in  his  V"  year,  marched  rapidly  across
Canaan  till  they  reached  the  valley  of  the  Litany,  along  which  they  took
their  way,  and  then  followed  up  that  of  the  Orontes.^  They  encamped  for  a  few
days  at  Shabtuna,  to  the  south-west  of  Qodshu,^  in  the  midst  of  the  Amorite
country,  sending  out  scouts  and  endeavouring  to  discover  the  position  of  the
enemy,  of  whose  movements  they  possessed  but  vague  information.  Khatusaru
lay  concealed  in  the  wooded  valleys  of  the  Lebanon ;  he  was  kept  well  posted
by  his  spies,  and  only  waited  an  opportunity  to  take  the  field ;  as  an  occasion
did  not  immediately  present  itself,  he  had  recourse  to  a  ruse  with  which  the
generals  of  the  time  were  familiar.  Eamses,  at  length  uneasy  at  not  falling  in
with  the  enemy,  advanced  to  the  south  of  Shabtuna,  where  he  endeavoured  to
obtain  information  from  two  Bedawin.     "  Our  brethren,"  said  they,  "  who  are

'  In  the  account  of  tlie  campaign  the  Shardana  only  are  mentioned  ;  but  we  learn  from  a  list  in
the  Anastati  Papyrus  l,  pi.  xvii.  1. 2,  that  the  army  of  Eamses  II.  included,  in  ordinary  circumstances,
in  addition  to  the  Shardana,  a  contingent  of  Mashauaslia,  Kahaka,  and  other  Libyan  and  negro
mercenaries  (Chabas,  Voijage  d'un  Egijptieu,  pp.  51-72).

'  The  history  of  these  events  has  beeu  preservtd  to  us  in  two  documents  of  widely  different
character :  1st,  that  which  E.  de  Kouge  described  as  the  Bulletin  de  la  Campagtie  (or  Despatch)  (RoBioc,
Sesostria  d'apres  les  nouveaux  documents,  in  the  Bevue  Gontemporaine,  2nd  series,  1S6S,  vol.  Ixv.'
pp.  i83-488)  ;  2nd,  the  poem  of  Pentauirit  on  the  battle  of  Qodsha.  Here  I  follow  the  Bulletin  and  the
pictures  which  accompany  it.  Texts  of  it  aie  still  in  existence  at  Abu  Simbel  (Champollion,  Monuments,
pis.  xxvii.-ix.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  64,  65 ;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  c.-cii. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,
ill.  1S7),  at  Luxor  (Brugsch,  Becueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  pi.  lii.  1),  at  the  Eamesseum  (Lepsius,
Denkm.,  iii.  153 ;  Shabpe,  Egyptian  Inscriptions,  2nd  series,  pi.  52) ;  it  has  been  critically  examined'
by  Charles  and  Frangois  Lenormant  (Les  Litres  clicz  les  l!gyptiens,  pp.  28-38),  translated  by  Chabas
(^Traduction  et  Analyse  de  Vinscription  lii^roglyphique  d'Ibsamboul,  in  tlie  Bevue  Arcli^ologique,  1859,
vol.  XV.  pp.  573-588,  701-736),  critically  restored  from  the  various  copies,  and  translated  by  Guieysse
(JTexles  historiques  d'Ipsamboul,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viii.  pp.  126-132).  The  pictures  and
their  inscriptions  have  also  been  collected;  those  at  Abu  Simbel  by  Champollion  (Monuments,  pis.
x.-xxxvii.)  and  by  Eosellini  (Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  Ixxxvii.-ciii.) ;  those  in  the  Eamesseum  by
Champollion  (pis.  cccxxii.-cccxxxi.),  Eosellini  (pis.  cviii.-cx.),  and  Lepsius  (Denkm.,  iii.  153-155,
157-161,  164-166) ;  those  at  Luxor  by  Eosellini  (pis.  civ.-cvii.) ;  those  at  Karuak  by  Champollion
(Monuments,  vol.  ii.  pp.  119-125).  The  whole  has  been  studied  by  E.  de  Rouge  (Kouiou,  Sisostris
d'apres  les  nouveaux  documents,  in  the  Beoue  Contemporaine,  2nd  series,  1868,  vol.  Ixv.  pp.  482-493),  by
Brugsch  (Geschichte  .Egyptens,  pp.  493-500),  by  Pleyte  (De  Veldslag  van  Bamses  tegen  de  Cheta,
Leyden,  1878),  by  Tomkins  (On  the  Campaign  of  Bamses  the  Second  in  his  V"'  year  against  Kadesh  on
the  Orontes,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  390-406,  and  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  same  Society,  1881-82,  vol.  iv.  pp.  6-9),  lastly  by  Guieysse  (Textes  historiques  d'Ipsamboul,  in  the
Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viii.  pp.  120-143).

=  Shabtuna  had  been  placed  on  the  Nahr  es-Sebta,  on  the  site  now  occupied  by  Kalaat  el-Hosn
(Blanche,  Note  sur  le  Kalaat  el-Hossen,  in  the  Bulletin  de  I'lnstitut  Egyptien,  Ist  series,  1874,  vol.  xiii.
pp.  115,  116,  128-143),  a  conjecture  approved  by  Mariette ;  it  was  more  probably  a  town  situated  in
the  plain,  to  the  south  of  Bahr  el-Kades,  a  little  to  the  south-west  of  Tell  Neby  Mindoh  which
represents  Qodshu,  and  close  to  some  forests  which  at  that  time  covered  the  slopes  of  Lebanon,  and,
extending  as  they  did  to  tlie  bottom  of  the  valley,  concealed  the  position  of  the  Khati  from  the
Egyptians.


THE  CAMPAIGN  OF   THE    TEAR    V.   AGAINST   THE  KHATI.        391

the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  united  under  the  vile  Prince  of  Khati,  send  us  to  give
information  to  your  Majesty  :  We  desire  to  serve  the  Pharaoh.  We  are  deserting
the  vile  Prince  of  the  Khati ;  he  is  close  to  Khalupu  (Aleppo),  to  the  north  of  the
city  of  Tunipa,  whither  he  has  rapidly  retired  from  fear  of  the  Pharaoh."  ^  This
story  had  every  appearance  of  probability ;  and  the  distance — Khalupu  was  at
least    forty    leagues   away — explained  why  the  reconnoitring   parties    of  the


THE    SHARLIANA   GVAIID    UF    IIAMSES    11."


Egyptians  had  not  fallen  in  with  any  of  the  enemy.  The  Pharaoh,  with  this
information,  could  not  decide  whether  to  lay  siege  to  Qodshu  and  wait  until  the
Hittites  were  forced  to  succour  the  town,  or  to  push  on  towards  the  Euphrates
and  there  seek  the  engagement  which  his  adversary  seemed  anxious  to  avoid.
He  chose  the  latter  of  the  two  alternatives.  He  sent  forward  the  legions  of
Amon,  Phra,  Phtah,  and  Siitkhu,  which  constituted  the  main  body  of  his  troops,
and  prepared  to  follow  them  with  his  household  chariotry.  At  the  very
moment  when  this  division  was  being  effected,  the  Hittites,  who  had  been
represented  by  the  spies  as  being  far  distant,  were  secretly  massing  their
forces  to  the  north-east  of  Qodshu,  ready  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  Pharaoh's
flank  as  soon  as  he  should  set  out  on  his  march  towards  Khalupu.     The  enemy

'  GtllETSSE,  Textei  Historiques  d'lptamlmuJ,  in  the  Itecucil  de  Tramux,  vol.  viii.  [i.  127,  11.  4-9,
and  p.  131.

'  Diawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger,  taken  at  the  tomplo  of  liamses  II.
at  Abydos ;  cf.  Mabiettk,  Voyage  de  la  Haule-£gypte,  vol.  i.  pi.  31.


392


TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


had  considerable  forces  at  their  disposal,  and  on  the  day  of  the  engagement
they  pkced  18,000  to  20,000  picked  soldiers  in  the  field.^  Besides  a  well-
disciplined  infantry,  they  possessed  2500  to  3000  chariots,  containing,  as  was
tlie  Asiastic  custom,  three  men  in  eacli.^

The  Egyptian  camp  was  not  entirely  broken  up,  when  the  scouts  brought
in  two  spies  whom  they  had  seized — Asiatics  in   long   blue    robes   arranged


TWU    HITTITK    Sl'IKS    BEATKN    BY    TUl:    EGVl'IIAX    SOLlULlij.'


diagonally  over  one  shoulder,  leaving  the  other  bare.  Tbe  king,  who  was
seated  on  his  throne  delivering  his  final  commands,  ordered  them  to  be  beaten
till  the  truth  should  be  extracted  from  them.  They  at  last  confessed  that
they  had  been  despatched  to  watch  tbe  departure  of  the  Egyptians,  and
admitted  that  the  enemy  was  concealed  in  ambush  behind  the  town.  Eamses
hastily  called  a  council  of  war  and  laid  the  situation  before  his  generals,  not
without  severely  reprimanding  them  for  the  bad  organisation  of  tbe  intelligence
department.  The  offii-ers  excused  themselves  as  best  they  could,  and  threw
the  blame  on  tlie  provincial  governors,  who  had  not  been  able  to  discover  what
was  going  on.     The  king  cut  short  these  useless  recriminations,  sent   swift

'  An  army  corps  is  reckoued  as  containing  9000  men  on  the  wall  scenes  at  Luxor,  and  8000  at  the
Ramesseum  (GriETSSE,  Textes  historiques  d'lpsamljoul,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  viii.  p.  138) ;  the
3000  chariots  were  manned  by  9000  men  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  136).  In  allowing  four  to  iive  thousand  men
for  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  engaged,  we  are  not  likely  to  be  far  wrong,  and  shall  thus  obtain  the
modest  total  mentioned  in  the  text,  contrary  to  the  opinion  current  among  historians.  In  regard  to
tlie  strength  of  the  Egyptian  army,  cf.  what  is  said  on  p.  212,  supra.

'  The  mercenaries  are  included  in  these  figures,  as  is  shown  by  the  reckoning  oftheLycian,
Dardanian,  and  Pedasian  chiefs  who  were  in  command  of  the  chariots  during  the  charges  against
Kamses  II.  (E.  and  J.  deEouge,  Le  Poeine  de  Pentaour,  in  the  Eevue  £(iyptol.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  128-130).

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  picture  in  the  temple  at  Abu  Simhel;  cf.  Champolliok,
Monuments,  pi.  x. ;  Kosellixi,  ilontimenti  Storici,  pis.  Ixsxvii.,  cii. ;  Lepsics,  Denlim.,  iii.  153.


THE  SURPRISE  ATTACK   ON   QODSEU.


393


messengei-s  to  recall  the  divisions  which  had  started  early  that  morning,*  and
gave  orders  that  all  those  remaining  in  camp  should  hold  themselves  in
readiness    to    attack.     The    council    were    still    deliberating    when    news    was


'P.


r-c-iii^^-:'r^---


TUi:    LGVPTIAN    CAMP    AND    THE    COUNCIL    ur    "  M;    "S     llll.    .M'JU.MNG    Ul      1111      11 A 1  TLB    OF    IJODShO."

brought  that  the  Hittites  were  in  sight.  Their  first  onslaught  was  so  violent
that  they  threw  down  one  side  of  the  camp  wall,  and  penetrated  into  the
enclosure.  Kamses  charged  them  at  the  head  of  his  household  troops.
Eight  times  he  engaged  the  chariotry  which  threatened  to  surround  him,  and
each  time  he  broke  their  ranks,  (^nce  he  found  himself  alone  with  Manna,  his
shield-bearer,  in  the  midst  of  a  knot  of  warriors  who  were  bent  on  his  destruc-
tion, and  he  escaped  solely  by  his  coolness  and  bravery.  The  tame  lion  which
accompanied  him  on  his  expeditions  did  terrible  work  by  his  side,  and  felled
many  an  Asiatic  with  his  teeth  and  claws.^     The  soldiers,  fired  by  the  king's


'  CuAMPOLLToy,  JHonuniewin  de  VEgijple  el  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  i.  pi.  xviii.,  and  p.  6G;  R08LLLINI,
Monumtmti  Slorici,  pi.  xcv.,  when;  the  messenijcr  is  seen  galloping  on  horseback  across  the  plain.

'  Drawn  by  Bouiiier,  from  a  i)liotograph  taken  by  Beato  of  the  west  front  of  the  Ramesseum  ;  cf.
CuAlii'OLUON,  Mon.  de  Vltgijple  el  de  la  Nubie,  pis.  xxvii.-xxix.,  cccxxvii.  bis;  Lepsid.s,  Denkm.,  iii.
ICO;  and  for  the  same  scene  at  Luxor,  Rosei.uni,  Manumenti  Storici,  pi.  cvi.

'  The  lion  is  represented  anil  named  in  the  battle-scenes  at  Abn  Simbel  (Cuampollion,  Mon.  de
I'ligiipte  el  de  la  Nubie,  pis.  xv.,  xxv. ;  Roskllini,  Mon.  Slurici,  pi.  Ixxxvii.),  at  Derr  (I.EPSitJS,
JJenhm.,  iii.  183  b,  181  a),  and  at  Luxor,  where  we  see  it  in  camp  on  the  eve  of  the  battle,  with  its
two  front  paws  tied,  and  its  keeper  threatening  it  (Cdampolliox,  Monuments  de  I'^ijypte  el  de  la
Nulie,  pi.  ccexvii. ;  Roskluni,  Monumeiili  Slorici,  pi.  cvii.).


394


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EQYPl.


example,  stood  their  ground  resolutely  during  the  long  hours  of  the  afternoon;
at  length,  as  night  was  drawing  on,  the  legions  of  Phra  and  Siitkhu,  who  had
hastily  retraced  their  steps,  arrived  on  the  scene  of  action.  A  large  body  of
Khati,  who  were  hemmed  in  in  that  part  of  the  camp  which  they  had  taken  in
the  morning,  were  at  once  killed  or  made  prisoners,  not  a  man  of  them  escaping.

Khatusaru,  disconcerted  by
this  sudden  reinforcement  of
the  enemy,  beat  a  retreat,
and  nightfall  suspended  the
struggle.  It  was  recom-
menced at  dawn  the  fol-
lowing morning  with  un-
abated fury,  and  terminated
in  the  rout  of  the  con-
federates. Garbatusa,  the
shield-bearer  of  the  Hittite
prince,  the  generals  in  com-
mand of  his  iniantry  and
chariotry,  and  Khalupsaru,
the  "  writer  of  books,"  fell
during  the  action.  The
chariots,  driven  back  to  the
Orontes,  rushed  into  the
river  in  the  hope  of  fording
it,  but  in  so  doing  many
lives  were  lost.  Mazraima,
the  Prince  of  Khati's  brother,
reached  the  opposite  bank  in  safety,  but  the  Chief  of  Tonisa  was  drowned,  and
the  lord  of  Khalupu  was  dragged  out  of  the  water  more  dead  than  alive,  and
had  to  be  held  head  downwards  to  disgorge  the  water  he  had  swallowed  before
he  could  be  restored  to  consciousness.  Khatusaru  himself  was  on  the  point  of
perishing,  when  the  troops  which  had  been  shut  up  in  Qodshu,  together  with
the  inhabitants,  made  a  general  sortie ;  the  Egyptians  were  for  a  moment  held
in  check,  and  the  fugitives  meanwhile  were  able  to  enter  the  town.  Either
there  was  insufiScient  provision  for  so  many  mouths,  or  the  enemy  had  lost  all
heart  from  the  disaster ;  at  any  rate,  further  resistance  appeared  useless.  The
next  morning  Khatusaru  sent  to  propose  a  truce  or  peace  to  the  victorious
Pharaoh.     The  Egyptians  had  probably  suffered  at  least   as  much  as  their

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,   from   a   photograph   by    Beato;    cf.  Champollion,  Monuments  de
I'Egypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cccxxix. ;  Kosellini,  Monnmenli  Storici,  pi.  ex. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  in.  164.


THE    bHUiiVLd    WELCOMED    BY    THE    GAUKIsUN    UF    gUDSUC.


THE  VICTORY  OF  RAMSES  II.  AND  HIS  TRUCE  WITH  THE  KHATI.      395

adversaries,  and  perhaps  regarded  tbo  eventuality  of  a  siege  with  no  small
distaste ;  Ramses,  therefore,  accepted  the  offers  made  to  him  and  prepared  to
return  to  Egypt.  The  fame  of  his  exploits  had  gone  before  him,  and  he  himself
was  not  a  little  proud  of  the  energy  he  had  displayed  on  the  day  of  battle.
His  predecessors  had  always  shown  themselves  to  be  skilful  generals  and  brave
soldiers,  but  none  of  them  had  ever  before  borne,  or  all  but  borne,  single-handed
the  brunt  of  an  attack.  Ramses  loaded  his  shield-bearer  Manna  with  rewards
for  having  stood  by  him  in  the  hour  of  danger,  and  ordered  abundant  provender
and  sumptuous  harness  for  the  good  horses — "  Strengtli-in-Thebaid "'  and  "  Niirit


THE   GARRISON   OP    QODSuC    ISSCINCi    FORTH    TO    HELP  THE    riilN'CE    UF    KHATI.'

the  satisfied  " — who  had  drawn  his  chariot.'-^  He  determined  that  the  most  charac-
teristic episodes  of  the  campaign — the  beating  of  the  spies,  the  surprise  of  the
camp,  the  king's  repeated  charges,  the  arrival  of  his  veterans,  the  flight  of  the
Syrians,  and  the  surrender  of  Qodshu — should  be  represented  on  the  walls  and
pylons  of  the  temples.  A  poem  in  rhymed  strophes  in  every  case  accompanies
these  records  of  his  glory,  whether  at  Luxor,  at  the  Ramesseum,  at  the  Mem-
nonium  of  Abydos,  or  in  the  heart  of  Nubia  at  Abu  Simbel.  The  author  of  the
poem  must  have  been  present  during  the  campaign,  or  must  have  had  the  account
of  it  from  the  lips  of  his  sovereign,  for  his  work  bears  no  traces  of  the  coldness  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Be'ne'dite;  cf.  Champollion,  Monuments  de
I'Egypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  cccxxiv.,  and  Koseli.ini,  ^[o7mmenti  Storici,  pi.  civ.

'  Sallier  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  8,  11.  7,  8.  A  gold  ring  in  the  Louvre  bears  in  relief  on  lt8  b«zel  two
little  horses,  which  are  probably  "  SIrength-in-Thebaid  "  and  "  Narit  satistiud  "  (E.  UE  Rqcqe,  Notice
des  principaux  Moimmenl»,  1855,  p.  G3;  I'ikuuet,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle  hiHorique  de  la  Galerie
Hgyplienne,  p.  UG,  No.  IsG);  it  was  published  by  Maspero,  UArchiTologie  £'gyptienne,  p.  313,  and  is
also  inserted  as  the  tail-piece  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  on  p.  450.


396  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

official  reports,  and  a  warlike  strain  runs  through  it  from  one  end  to  the  other,
so  as  still  to  invest  it  witli  life  after  a  lapse  of  more  than  thirty  centuries.^

But  little  pains  are  bestowed  on  the  introduction,  and  the  poet  does  not  give
free  vent  to  his  enthusiasm  until  the  moment  when  he  describes  his  hero,  left
almost  alone,  charging  the  enemy  in  the  sight  of  his  followers.  The  Pharaoh
was  surrounded  by  two  thousand  five  hundred  chariots,  and  his  retreat  was  cut
off  by  the  warriors  of  the  "  perverse "  Khati  and  of  the  other  nations  who
accompanied  them — the  peoples  of  Arvad,  Mysia,  and  Pedasos  ;  each  of  their
chariots  contained  three  men,  and  the  ranks  were  so  serried  that  they  formed
but  one  dense  mass.  "No  other  prince  was  with  me,  no  general  officers,
no  one  in  command  of  the  archers  or  chariots.  My  foot-soldiers  deserted  me,
my  cliarioteers  fled  before  the  foe,  and  not  one  of  them  stood  firm  beside  me
to  fight  against  them."  Then  said  His  Majesty:  "Who  art  thou,  then,  my
father  Amon  ?  A  father  who  forgets  his  son  ?  Or  have  I  committed  aught
against  thee  ?  Have  I  not  marched  and  halted  according  to  thy  command  ?
When  he  does  not  violate  thy  orders,  the  lord  of  Egypt  is  indeed  great,  and
he  overthrows  the  barbarians  in  his  path !  What  are  these  Asiatics  to  thy
heart  ?  Amon  will  humiliate  those  who  know  not  the  god.  Have  I  not
consecrated  innumerable  offerings  to  thee  ?  Filling  thy  holy  dwelling-place
with  my  prisoners,  I  build  thee  a  temple  for  millions  of  years,  I  lavish  all  my
goods  on  thy  storehouses,  I  offer  thee  the  whole  world  to  enrich  thy  domains.
...  A  miserable  fate  indeed  awaits  him  who  sets  himself  against  thy  will,
but  happy  is  he  who  finds  favour  with  thee  by  deeds  done  for  thee  with  a

'  The  author  is  unknown:  Pentaur,  or  rather  Pentauirit,  to  whom  E.  de  Kouge  attributed  the
poem  (Le  Poeme  de  Pen-ta-our,  pp.  ti,  7,  30).  is  merely  the  transcriber  of  the  copy  we  possess  on
papyrus  (Eruan,  Keuagi/ijtische  Grammatik,  pp.  6,  7).  The  poem  of  Qodshd  was  disoorered  at  Aix
ill  Provence  by  Cliampollion  (Lettres  Antes  d'Etjypte,  2nd  edit.,  p.  21),  who  at  once  made  a  prefcig  of  the
contents,  and  it  was  edited  later  on  by  Salvolini  (^Campagne  de  Bamses-le-Grand  centre  les  Seli^la,  Paris,
1835);  tlie  manuscript,  acquired  by  the  Brit.  Museum,  was  published  in  facsimile  in  Select  Papyri,  vol.  i.
pis.  xxiv.-sxxiv.,  with  a  notice  by  Birch  {ibid.,  text,  pp.  3, 4).  Tiie  poem  was  translated,  just  as  it  was
found  in  the  papyrus,  by  E.  de  Rouge  (Le  Poeme  de  Pen-ia-oui;  1850),  and  it  is  from  this  masterly
work  that  the  analyses  and  translations  of  Goodwin  (On  the  Hieratic  Papyri,  in  the  Cambridge  Etsays,
1858,  pp.  239-243),  of  Brugsch  (Hist.  d'Egypte,  pp.  140-145,  and  Gesch.  JEgyptens,  pp.  501-513),  and
of  Lushington  (27te  Tliird  Saltier  Papyrus,  the  War  of  Barneses  II.  with  the  Khila,  of  Pentaur,  in  the
Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  65-78)  are  derived.  A  new  fragment  discovered  at  M.
Raifet's,  and  given  by  liim  to  the  Louvre,  enabled  E.  de  Rouge  to  correct  his  first  translation  {Le
Poeme  de  Pentaour,  nouvelle  traduction,  in  the  Rec.  de  Travaux,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-9)  while  preparing  a
critical  edition  of  the  text,  in  which  were  inserted  the  fragments  found  at  Karnak  (Champollion,
Monuments  de  VEijyple  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  ii.  p.  124  ;  Brugscu,  Recueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  pis.
xxix.-xxsii. ;  Mariette,  Karnah,  pis.  48-51 ;  E.  and  J.  de  Rouge,  Inscriptions  hi€roghjphiques,  pis.
covi.-ccxxxi.),  at  Luxor  (Brugsch,  Recueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pis.  xl.-xlii. ;  E.  and  J.  de  Rougk,
Inscriptions  recueillies  en  Egyple,  pis.  ccxxxii.-ccxlviii.),  and  in  tlie  temple  at  Abydos  (Mariette,
Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pis.  4, 5).  The  two  principal  versions  of  the  poem  have  been  fully  treated  of  by  E.  de
Rouge',  in  his  Lectures  at  the  College  de  France  from  186S  to  1870;  a  part  of  this  work  has  appeared,
thanks  to  the  labours  of  J.  de  Rouge'  {Le  Poeme  de  Pentaour,  in  the  Revue  Egyptologique,  vol.  iii.  pp.
149-161 ;  vol.  iv.  pp.  89-94,  124-131  ;  vol.  v.  pp.  15-23,  157-164;  vol.  vi.  pp.  36-42,  81-89,  105-112  ;
vol.  vii.  pp.  21-28).


THE  POEM   OF  PENTAUIRir.  397

loving  heart.  I  invoke  thee,  0  my  father  Anion  !  Here  am  I  iu  the  midst
of  people  so  numerous  that  it  cannot  be  known  who  are  the  nations  joined
together  against  me,  and  I  am  alone  among  them,  none  other  is  with  me.  My
many  soldiers  have  forsaken  me,  none  of  my  charioteers  looked  towards  me
when  I  called  them,  not  one  of  them  heard  my  voice  when  I  cried  to  them.
But  I  find  that  Amon  is  more  to  me  than  a  million  soldiers,  than  a  hundred
thousand  charioteers,  than  a  myriad  of  brothers  or  young  sons,  joined  all
together,  for  the  number  of  men  is  as  nothing,  Amon  is  greater  than  all  of
them.  Each  time  I  have  accomplished  these  things,  Amon,  by  the  counsel  of
thy  mouth,  as  I  do  not  transgress  thy  orders,  I  rendered  thee  glory  even  to  the
ends  of  the  earth."  ^  So  calm  an  invocation  in  the  tiiick  of  the  battle  would
appear  misplaced  in  the  mouth  of  an  ordinary  man,  but  Pharaoh  was  a  god,
and  the  son  of  a  god,  and  his  actions  and  speeches  cannot  be  measured  by  the
same  standard  as  that  of  a  common  mortal.  He  was  possessed  by  the  religious
spirit  in  the  hour  of  danger,  and  while  his  body  continued  to  fight,  his  soul
took  wing  to  the  throne  of  Amon.  He  contemplates  the  lord  of  heaven  face  to
face,  reminds  him  of  the  benefits  which  he  had  received  from  him,  and  sum-
mons him  to  his  aid  with  an  imperiousness  which  betrays  the  sense  of  his  own
divine  origin.  The  expected  help  was  not  delayed.  "  While  the  voice  resounds
in  Hermonthis,  Amon  arises  at  my  behest,  he  stretches  out  his  hand  to  me,  and
I  cry  out  with  joy  when  he  hails  me  from  behind  :  '  Face  to  face  with  thee,
face  to  face  with  thee,  Ramses  Miamuu,  I  am  with  thee !  It  is  I,  thy  father  I
My  hand  is  with  thee,  and  I  am  worth  more  to  thee  than  hundreds  of  thousands.
I  am  the  strong  one  who  loves  valour  ;  I  have  beheld  in  thee  a  courageous  heart,
and  my  heart  is  satisfied  ;  my  will  is  about  to  be  accomplished  ! '  1  am  like
Montu;  from  the  right  I  shoot  with  the  dart,  from  the  left  I  seize  the  enemy.
I  am  like  Baal  in  his  hour,  before  them  ;  I  have  encountered  two  thousand  five
hundred  chariots,  and  as  soon  as  I  am  in  their  midst,  they  are  overthrown
before  my  mares.  Not  one  of  all  these  people  has  found  a  hand  wherewith  to
fight ;  their  hearts  sink  within  their  breasts,  fear  paralyses  their  limbs  ;  they
know  not  how  to  throw  their  darts,  they  have  no  strength  to  hold  their  hmces.
I  precipitate  them  into  the  water  like  as  the  crocodile  plunges  therein  ;  they
are  prostrate  face  to  the  earth,  one  upon  the  other,  and  I  slay  iu  the
midst  of  them,  for  I  have  willed  that  not  one  should  look  behind  him,  nor
that  one  should  return ;  he  who  falls  rises  not  again."  ^  This  sudden
descent  of  the   god  has,  even  at  the  present  day,  an  effect  upon  the  reader,

'  Sallier  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  i.  1.  8-pl.  iii.  1.  5;  cf.  E.  de  Rouoi;,  Le  Voime  de  I'eiUaiur,  iu  the
Revue  liguptolvrjique,  vol.  iv.  pp.  128-131 ;  vol.  v.  pp.  15-23,  157.

'  Saltier  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  iii.  1.  5-pl.  iv.  1.  2;  cf.  E.  de  Rolge,  Lc  Po'eme  de  Pentaour,  iu  the
Revue  £gyptologique,  vol.  v.  ip.  158-103.


398  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

prepared  though  he  is  by  his  education  to  consider  it  as  a  literar)'  artifice ;  but
on  the  Egyptian,  brought  up  to  regard  Anion  with  boundless  reverence,  its
influence  was  irresistible.  The  Prince  of  the  Khati,  repulsed  at  the  very
moment  when  he  was  certain  of  victory,  "  recoiled  with  terror.  He  sends
against  the  enemy  the  various  chiefs,  followed  by  their  chariots  and  skilled
warriors, — the  chiefs  of  Arvad,  Lycia,  and  Ilion,  the  leaders  of  the  Lycians
and  Dardanians,  the  lords  of  Carchemish,  of  the  Girgashites,  and  of
Khalupu  ;  these  allies  of  the  Khati,  all  together,  comprised  three  thousand
chariots."  Their  efforts,  however,  were  in  vain.  "  I  fell  upon  them  like  Montii,
mv  hand  devoured  them  in  the  space  of  a  moment,  in  the  midst  of  them  I
hewed  down  and  slew.  They  said  one  to  another :  This  is  no  man  who  is
amongst  us  ;  it  is  Siitkhu  the  great  warrior,  it  is  Baal  incarnate  !  These  are
not  human  actions  which  he  accomplishes :  alone,  by  himself,  he  repulses
hundreds  of  thousands,  without  leaders  or  men.  Up,  let  us  flee  before  him,  let
us  seek  to  save  our  lives,  and  let  us  breathe  again !  "  When  at  last,  towards
evening,  the  army  again  rallies  round  the  king,  and  finds  the  enemy  completely
defeated,  the  men  hang  their  heads  with  mingled  shame  and  admiration  as  the
Pharaoh  reproaches  them :  "  What  will  the  whole  earth  say  when  it  is  known
that  you  left  me  alone,  and  without  any  to  succour  me  ?  that  not  a  prince,
not  a  cliarioteer,  not  a  captain  of  archers,  was  found  to  place  his  hand  in
mine  ?  I  fought,  I  repulsed  millions  of  people  by  myself  alone.  '  Victory-in-
Thebes  '  and  '  Nurit  satisfied  '  were  my  glorious  horses ;  it  was  they  that  I  found
under  my  hand  when  I  was  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  quaking  foe.  I  myself
will  cause  them  to  take  their  food  before  me,  each  day,  when  I  shall  be  in  my
palace,  for  I  was  with  them  wlieu  I  was  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  along  with
the  Prince  Manna  my  shield-bearer,  and  with  the  officers  of  my  house  who
accompanied  me,  and  who  are  my  witnesses  for  the  combat ;  these  are  those
whom  I  was  with.  I  have  returned  after  a  victorious  struggle,  and  I  have
smitten  with  my  sword  the  assembled  multitudes."  ^

The  ordeal  was  a  terrible  oue  for  the  Khati ;  but  when  the  first  moment
of  defeat  was  over,  they  again  took  courage  and  resumed  the  campaign.  This
single  effort  had  not  exhausted  their  resources,  and  they  rapidly  filled  up  the
gaps  which  had  been  made  in  their  ranks.  The  plains  of  Xaharaim  and  the
mountains  of  Cilicia  supplied  them  with  fresh  chariots  and  foot-soldiers  in
the  place  of  those  they  iuid  lost,  and  bands  of  mercenaries  were  furnished  from
the  table-lands  of  Asia  Minor,  so  that  when  Eamses  II.  reappeared  in  Syria,
he  found  himself  confronted  by  a  completely  fresh  army.  Khatusaru,  having
profited  by  experience,  did    not   again  attempt  a  general   engagement,  but

'  Sallier  Papyrus  III.,  pi.  viii.  1.  6,  et  scq. ;  E.  de  Kouge,  Le  Poeme  de  Pentaour,  iu  the  Eevue
igyptoloyiqut,  vol.  vii.  pp.  27,  2S.


^   -S

■^    o

a  a


31


400  TEE  SE ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

contented  himself  with  disputing  step  by  step  the  upper  valleys  of  the
Litany  and  Orontes.  Meantime  his  emissaries  spread  themselves  over  PhcB-
nicia  and  Kbaru,  sowing  the  seeds  of  rebellion,  often  only  too  successfully.  In
the  king's  VIII"'  year  there  was  a  general  rising  in  (xalilee,  and  its  towns —
Galaput  in  the  hill-country  of  Bit-Aniti,  Merom,  Shalama,  Dapur,  and
Anaiiiaim  ^ — had  to  be  reduced  one  after  another.  Dapur  was  the  hardest  to
carry.  It  crowned  the  top  of  a  rocky  eminence,  and  was  protected  by  a  double
wall,  which  followed  the  irregularities  of  the  hillside.  It  formed  a  rallyiug-
point  for  a  large  force,  which  had  to  be  overcome  in  the  open  country  before  the
investment  of  the  town  could  be  attempted.  The  siege  was  at  last  brouglit  to
a  conclusion,  after  a  series  of  skirmishes,  and  the  town  taken  by  scaling,  four
Egyptian  princes  having  been  employed  in  conducting  the  attack.  In  the
Pharaoh's  IX'"  year  a  revolt  broke  out  on  the  Egyptian  frontier,  in  the  Shephelah,
and  the  king  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops  to  crush  it.  Ascalon,  in
which  the  peasantry  and  their  families  had  found,  as  they  hoped,  a  safe  refuge,
opened  its  gates  to  the  Pharaoh,  and  its  fall  brought  about  the  submission  of
several  neighbouring  places.^  This,  it  appears,  was  the  first  time  since  the
beginning  of  the  conquests  in  Syria  that  the  inhabitants  of  these  regions
attempted  to  take  up  arms,  and  we  may  well  ask  what  could  have  induced
them  thus  to  renounce  their  ancient  loyalty.  Their  defection  reduced  Egypt
for  the  moment  almost  to  her  natural  frontiers.  Peace  had  scarcely  been
resumed  when  war  again  broke  out  with  fresh  violence  in  Coele-Syria,  and  one
year  it  reached  even  to  Naharaim,  and  raged  around  Tuuipa  as  in  the
days  of  Thutmosis  III.  "  Pharaoh  assembled  his  foot-soldiers  and  chariots,
and  he  commanded  his  foot-soldiers  and  his  chariots  to  attack  the  perverse
Khati  who  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tunipa,  and  he  put  on  his  armour
and  mounted  his  chariot,  and  he  waged  battle  against  the  town  of  the  perverse
Khati  at  the  head  of  his  foot-soldiers  and  his  chariots,  covered  with  his
armour ;  "  the  fortress,  however,  did  not  yield  till  the  second  attack.-^     Ramses

'  Episodes  from  this  war  are  represented  at  Karnal;,  and  the  existing  scenes  have  been  reproduced
more  or  less  completely  by  Burton  {Excerpta  lueroglyphica,  pi.  xvi.),  by  Cailllaud  (^Voyage  a  ileroe.
Atlas,  vol.  ii.  pi.  73),  by  Champollion  (il/bn.  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Xubie,  pi.  occxxxi.,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.
S80-881),  by  Lepsius  (Denkm.,  iii.  156),  and  by  Mariette  {lti)i€raire  de  la  Haute  Sgijpte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  59,
and  p.  221).  Brugscli  identified  Bit-Aniti  with  the  Betlj-Anath  of  Nephtali,  and  Shalama  with  Shalem,
near  to  Bethshan  {Ge»ch.  ^Egyptens,  p.  515) ;  W.  Max  Miiller  prefers  to  connect  the  latter  place  with
S.  lamis-Selimeh  to  the  south-west  of  Hazor  (Asien  arid  Europa,  p.  220).  He  places  the  Dapur  here
mentioned  in  (he  neiglibourhood  of  Qodshu  (ibid.,  pp.  221,  222);  I  believe  it  to  bo  Dapur-Thabor  of
Galileo  (cf.  p.  128  of  the  present  work).  The  site  of  Anamuim  is  unknown,  but  it  must  be  sought  iu
Galilee  ;  the  list  of  the  towns  taken,  now  much  mutilated,  comprised  tw  enty-four  names,  which  proves
the  importance  of  the  revolt.

'  Champollion,  Monuments  de  V£gypte,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  194,  195 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  145  c.

'  Champollion,  ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  88S ;  Brugscu,  Recueil  de  Monumetits.  vol.  ii.  pi.  liv.  2,  and  Texte.
pp.  65,  66;  Ge»cli.  .Egyptens,  p.  514  ;  cf.  Guieysse,  Textes  historiques  d' Ipsamboul,  in  the  Eecueil  de
Traraux,  vol.  xiv.  p.  143.


^


THE   TREATY   WITH   THE  KEaTI   OF   THE    YEAR   XXI.  401

carried  his  arms  still  further  afield,  and  with  such  results,  that,  to  judge  merely
from  the  triumphal  lists  engraved  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  of  Karuak,  tlie
inhabitants  on  tlie    banks  of  the  Euphrates,  those  in  Carchemish,  Mitanni,
Singar,  Assyria,  and  Mannus  found  themselves  once  more  at  the  mercy  of  the
Egyptian  battalions.^     These  victories,  however  brilliant,  were  not  decisive ;
if  after  any  one  of  them  the  princes  of  Assyria  and  Singar  may  have  sent
presents  to  the  Pliaraoh,  the  Hittites,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  consider  them-
selves beaten,  and  it  was  only  after  fifteen  campaigns  that  they  were  at  length
sufficiently  subdued  to  propose  a  treaty.    At  last,  in  the  Egyptian  king's  XXP'
year,  on  the  21st  of  the  month  Tybi,  when  the  Pharaoh,  then  residing  in  his
good  town  of  Anakhitii,  was  returning  from  the  temple  where  he  had  been
offering  prayers  to  his  father  Amon-Ka,  to  Harmakhis  of  Heliopolis,  to  Phtah,
and  to  Sutkhu  the  valiant  sou  of  Ntiit,  Eamses,  one  of  the  "  messengers  "  who
lilled  the  office  of  lieutenant  for  the  king  in  Asia,  arrived  at  the  palace  and
presented  to  him  Tartisubu,  who  was  authorised  to  make  peace  with  Egypt  in
tlie  name  of  Kliatusaru.^     Tartisubu  carried  in  his  hand  a  tablet  of  silver,  on
which  his  muster  had  prescribed  the  conditions  which  appeared  to  him  just
and  equitable.     A  short  preamble  recalling  the  alliances  made  between  the
ancestors  of  botli  parties,  was  followed  by  a  declaration  of  friendsliip,  and  a
reciprocal  obligation  to  avoid  in  future  all  grounds  of  hostility.     Not  only  was
a  perpetual  truce  declared  between  both  peoples,  but  they  agreed  to  help
each   other  at  the  first  demand.     "  Should   some    euemy  march  against  the
countries  subject  to  the  great  King  of  Egypt,  and  should  he  send  to  the
great  Prince  of  the  Khati,  saying :   '  Come,  bring  me   forces  against  them,'
the  great  Prince  of  the  Khati  shall  do  as  he  is  asked  by  the  great  King  of
lOgypt,  and  the  great  Prince  of  tlie  Khati  shall  destroy  his  enemies.     And  if
the  great  Prince  of  the  Khati  shall  prefer  not  to  come  himself,  he  shall  send
his  archers  and  his  chariots  to  the  great  King  of  Egypt  to  destroy  his  enemies."  •'
A    similar  clause    ensured   aid    in    return    from    llamses  to   Khiltusaru,  "  his

'  Lepsil-s,  Denlcm.,  iii.  11.5  a,  17G;  Mauiette,  Karnak,  pi.  3.S  /,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  p.  13,  where  these
nuiues  an;  mentioned  in  the  varions  lists  of  tlie  conquests  of  Ramses  II.

'  The  treaty  of  Kamses  II.  with  the  Prince  of  the  Khati  was  sculptured  at  Karnak  (Burton,
Excerpla  Hieroglyphioa,  pi.  xvii. ;  (Juampollion,  Mon.  de  VEgyyte  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  195-20-t;
ItosELLixi,  Monumenti  tilorici,  pi.  cxvi. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  14();  Brkjsch,  lieeneil  de  ilonumeiits,
vol.  i.  pi.  xxviii. ;  Buiuiant,  Notes  de  Voyage,  in  the  liecueil  de  Travanx,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  153-l(i0)  and
in  the  Kamcsseuni  (Chami'OLLIuN,  MonuiuenU  de  I'Egypte  et  de  la  A'ttbia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  585,  5S(J ;  Bulriant,
Nvlea  de  Vnyuge,  in  the  liecueil,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  G7-70) :  it  has  been  partly  translated  by  Kosellini  (^Mon.
liturici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  3,  [ip.  2(jS-'282),  by  Brugach (iJt'ue/)cr!c/i(«  aus  .Kgypten,  pp.  117-llil,  and  Hittoire
d'Egypte,  pp.  l-tU-HS),  and  in  exteiim  by  E.  du  Koujje  (in  Eguek,  Etude  sur  le»  Iraite'i  pulilicf,  pp.  2-13-
252  ;  of.  llecue  Arclufdloijiqiie,  2nd  series,  vol.  xiii.  p.  2GS,  et  seq.),  by  Chabas  (Ac  Voynge  d'un  Egyptien,
pp.  322-340J,  by  (iooilwiu  (Treaty  of  Peace  between  Ilamaes  11.  and  the  Hittites,  in  tne  liecordu  (if  the
I'att,  Ist  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  25-32),  by  Brugsch  (Geschichte  .k'gyptens,  pp.  51S-525),  and  by  Wiedemann
(.  Kgypliiche  Getcldchle,  pp.  438-140).

'   Treaty  iif  Itainses  with  the  I'rince  of  the  Klidti,  1.  15.

2    D


402  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

brother,"  while  two  articles  couched  in  identical  terms  made  provision  against
the  possibility  of  any  town  or  tribe  dependent  on  either  of  the  two  sovereigns
withdrawing  its  allegiance  and  placing  it  in  the  liands  of  the  other  party.  In
this  case  the  Egyptians  as  well  as  the  Hittites  engaged  not  to  receive,  or  at
least  not  to  accept,  such  offers,  but  to  refer  them  at  once  to  the  legitimate
lord.  The  whole  treaty  was  placed  under  the  guarantee  of  the  gods  both  of
Egypt  and  of  the  Khati,  whose  names  were  given  at  length :  "  Whoever  shall
fail  to  observe  the  stipulations,  let  the  thousand  gods  of  Khati  and  the  thousand
gods  of  Egypt  strike  his  house,  his  laud,  and  his  servants.  But  he  who  shall
observe  the  stipulations  engraved  on  the  tablet  of  silver,  whether  he  belong
to  the  Hittite  people  or  whether  he  belong  to  the  people  of  Egypt,  as  he
has  not  neglected  them,  may  the  thousand  gods  of  Khati  and  the  thousand
gods  of  Egypt  give  him  health,  and  grant  that  he  may  prosper,  himself,  the
people  of  his  house,  and  also  his  land  and  his  servants."  ^  The  treaty  itself
ends  by  a  description  of  the  plaque  of  silver  on  which  it  was  engraved.  It  was,
in  fact,  a  facsimile  in  metal  of  one  of  those  clay  tablets  on  which  the  Chaklseaus
inscribed  their  contracts.  The  preliminary  articles  occupied  the  upper  part  in
closely  written  lines  of  cuneiform  characters,  while  in  the  middle,  in  a  space
left  free  for  the  purpose,  was  the  impress  of  two  seals,  that  of  the  Prince  of
the  Khati  and  of  his  wife  Puiikhipa.  Khatusaru  was  represented  on  them  as
standing  upright  in  the  arms  of  Sutkhu,  while  around  the  two  figures  ran  the
inscription,  "  Seal  of  Sutkhu,  the  sovereign  of  heaven."  Puukhipa  leaned  on
the  breast  of  a  god,  the  patron  of  her  native  town  of  Aranna  in  Qazauadana,
and  the  legend  stated  that  this  was  the  seal  of  the  Sun  of  the  town  of  Aranna,
the  regent  of  the  earth.^  The  text  of  the  treaty  was  continued  beneath,
and  probably  extended  to  the  other  side  of  the  tablet.^  The  original  draft
had  terminated  after  the  description  of  the  seals,  but,  to  satisfy  the  Pharaoh,
certain  additional  articles  were  appended  for  the  protection  of  the  commerce
and  industry  of  the  two  countries,  for  the  prevention  of  the  emigration  of
artisans,  and  for  ensuring  that  steps  taken  against  them  should  be  more  effec-
tual and  less  cruel.  Any  criminal  attempting  to  evade  the  laws  of  his  country,
and  taking  refuge  in  that  of  the  other  party  to  the  agreement,  was  to  be
expelled  without  delay  and  consigned  to  the  officers  of  his  lord ;  any  fugitive

'   Treaty  of  Bamses  II.  with  the  Prince  of  the  Klidti,  11.  32-34.

-  The  text  of  these  last  lines  has  beeu  restored  by  Bouriant  from  the  debris  of  the  copy  at  the
Kamesseum  (A'btes  de  Voyage,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  68-70 ;  cf.  C.  Di  Cara,  Soch-
Carvings  at  Tasili-Kaia,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  vol.  xiii.,  1890-91,
pp.  196-198).

'  The  monument  reproduced  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,i>p.  690, 691, representing  the  Chaldseau
Hell,  furnishes  an  example  of  a  metal  tablet  similar  to  that  on  which  the  treaty  was  engraved.
A  clay  tablet,  inscribed  in  the  manner  noted  in  the  text,  is  shown  in  the  Daion  of  Oivitization,
p.  733.


THE  BALANCE   OF  POWER   IN  SYRIA.  403

not  a  criminal,  any  subject  carried  off  or  detained  by  force,  any  able  artisan
quitting  either  territory  to  take  up  permanent  residence  in  the  other,  was
to  be  conducted  to  the  frontier,  but  his  act  of  folly  was  not  to  expose
him  to  judicial  condemnation.  "  He  who  shall  thus  act,  his  fault  shall  not
be  brought  up  against  him ;  his  house  shall  not  be  touched,  nor  his  wife,  nor
his  children;  he  shall  not  have  his  throat  cut,  nor  shall  his  eyes  be  touched,
nor  his  mouth,  nor  his  feet;  no  criminal  accusation  sliall  be  made  against
him."i

This  treaty  is  the  most  ancient  of  all  those  of  which  the  text  has  come  down
to  us ;  its  principal  conditions  were — -perfect  equality  and  reciprocity  between
the  contracting  sovereigns,  an  offensive  and  defeusive  alliance,  and  the  extradi-
tion of  criminals  and  refugees.  The  original  was  drawn  up  in  Chaldsean  script  by
the  scribes  of  Khatusaru,  probably  on  the  model  of  former  conventions  between
the  Pharaohs  and  the  Asiatic  courts,^  and  to  this  the  Egyptian  ministers  had
added  a  few  clauses  relative  to  the  pardon  of  emigrants  delivered  up  by  one  or
other  of  the  contracting  parties.  When,  therefore,  Tartisubu  arrived  in  the
city  of  Eamses,  the  acceptance  of  the  treaty  was  merely  a  matter  of  form,
and  peace  was  virtually  concluded.  It  did  not  coufer  on  the  conqueror  the
advantages  which  we  might  have  expected  from  his  successful  campaigns:
it  enjoined,  on  the  contrar}',  the  definite  renunciation  of  those  countries,
I\Iitanni,  Naharaim,  Alasia,  and  Amurru,  over  which  Thutmosis  III.  and  his
immediate  successors  had  formerly  exercised  an  effective  sovereignty.  Sixteen
years  of  victories  had  left  matters  in  the  same  state  as  they  were  after  the
expedition  of  Harmliabi,  and,  like  his  predecessor,  Eamses  was  able  to  retain
merely  those  Asiatic  provinces  which  were  within  the  immediate  influence  of
Egypt,  such  as  the  Phoenician  coast  proper,  Kharii,  Peraea  beyond  Jordan,  the
oases  of  the  Arabian  desert,  and  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.*  This  apparently  unsatis-
factory result,  after  such  supreme  efforts,  was,  however,  upon  closer  examination,
not  so  disappointing.  For  more  than  half  a  century  at  least,  since  the  Hittite
kingdom  had  been  developed  and  established  under  the  impulse  given  to  it  by
Sapalulu,  everything  had  been  in  its  favour.    The  campaign  of  Seti  had  opposed

'  Treaty  of  Ramses  II.,  11.  31,  32.  Cf.  what  is  said  on  tlie  subject  on  pp.  277-288  of  the  preseut
work.

'  Cf.,  for  the  existence  of  analogous  treaties  coucluded  between  Egypt  and  Asiatic  powers  under
the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  what  is  8;iid  on  p.  288  of  the  present  volume.

'  Vi.  Max  IICllee,  Asien  iind  Europa,  pp.  222-224,  276.  Tlie  Anastasi  Fujiijius  I,  pi.  xviii.  1.  8,
mentions  a  phice  called  Zaru  of  ScsoKtrh,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aleppo  (Cuabas,  Voyage  d'un
Egyptien,  pp.  00,  100),  in  a  part  of  Syria  which  was  not  in  Egyptian  territory;  the  frontier  in  this
locality  must  have  passed  between  Arvad  and  Byblos  on  the  coast,  and  between  Qodshu  and  Hazor
from  Merom  inland.  Egyptian  rule  on  tlie  other  bide  of  the  Jordan  seems  to  bo  proved  by  the
monument  discovered  a  few  years  ago  in  tlie  Hauran,  and  known  under  the  name  of  the  "Stone  of
Job"  by  the  Bedawln  of  the  neighbourhood  {Zeittu-Urift  des  Palastina  Vereins,  vol.  xiv.  p.  M2,  et
eeq.;  cf.  Ekjian,  Ber  Hiolslein,  ibid.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  210,  211).


404  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

merely  a  passing  obstacle  to  its  expansion,  and  had  not  succeeded  in  discouraging^
its  ambitions,  for  its  rulers  still  nursed  the  hope  of  being  able  one  day  to  conquer
Syria  as  far  as  the  isthmus.     The  check   receiyed  at  Qodshii,  the    abortive
attempts  to  foment  rebellion  in  Galilee  and  the  Shephelah,  the  obstinate  per-
sistence with  which  Eamses  and  his  army  returned  year  after  year  to  the  attack,
the  presence  of  the  enemy  at  Tunipa,  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  and  in  the
provinces  then  forming  the  very  centre  of  the  Hittite  kingdom — in  short,  all  the
incidents  of  this  long  struggle — at  length  convinced  Khatusaru  that  he  was
powerless  to  extend  his  rule  in  this  direction  at  the  expense  of  Egypt.     More-
over, we  have  no  knowledge  of  the  events  which  occupied  him  on  the  other
frontiers  of  his  kingdom,  where  he  may  have  been  engaged  at  the  same  time  in
a  conflict  with  Assyria,  or  in  repelling  an  incursion  of  the  tribes  on  the  Black
Sea.     The  treaty  with  Pharaoh,  if  made  in  good  faitli  and  likely  to  be  last-
ing, would  protect  the  southern  extremities  of  his  kingdom,  and  allow  of  his
removing  the  main  body  of  his  forces  to  the  north  and  east  in  case  of  attack
from  either  of  these  quarters.    The  security  which  such  an  alliance  would  ensure
made  it,  therefore,  worth  his  while  to  sue  for  peace,  even  if  the  Egyptians
should  construe  his  overtures  as   an  acknowledgment  of  exhausted  supplies
or  of  inferiority  of  strength.     Eamses  doubtless  took  it  as  such,  and  openly
displayed  on  the  walls  at  Kai-nak  and  in  the  Eamesseum  a  copy  of  the  treaty
so    flattering   to   his   pride,   but   the    indomitable    resistance   which   he   had
encountered    had    doubtless    given    rise   to   reflections    resembling   those   of
Khatusaru,  and   he  had  come  to  realise  that  it  was  his  own  interest  not  to
lightly  forego  the  good  will  of  the  Khati.     Egypt  had  neighbours  in  Africa
who  were  troublesome   though  not  dangerous :  the  Timihu,  the  Tihonu,  the
Mashuasha,  the  negroes  of  Kush  and  of  Puanit,  might  be  a  continual  source
of  annoyance  and  disturbance,  even  though  they  were  incapable  of  disturbing
her  supremacy.     The  coast  of  the  Delta,  it  is  true,  was  exposed  to  the  piracy
of  northern  nations,  but    up   to    that   time   this    had    been  merely  a  local
trouble,  easy  to  meet  if  not  to  obviate  altogether.      The  only  real  danger
was  on  the  Asiatic  side,  arising  from  empires  of  ancient  constitution  like
Chaldsea,  or  from  hordes  who,  arriving  at  irregular  intervals  from  the  north,
and  carrying  all  before  them,  threatened,  after  the  example  of  the  Hyksos,  to
enter  the  Delta.     The  Hittite  kingdom  acted  as  a  kind  of  buffer  between  the
Nile  valley  and  these  nations,  both  civilized  and  barbarous;  it  was  a  strono-ly
armed  force  on  the  route  of  the  invaders,  and  would  henceforth  serve  as  a  pro-
tecting barrier,  through  which  if  the  enemy  were  able  to  pass  it  would  only  be
with  his  strength  broken  or  weakened  by  a  previous  encounter.    The  sovereio-us
loyally  observed  the  peace  which  they  had  sworn  to  each  other,  and  in  hi?-
XXXIV""  year  the  marriage  of  Kamses  with  the  eldest  daughter  of  Khatusaru


THE  MAItniAGE   OF  BAMSES   II.    WITH  A    EITTITE  PRINCESS.      405


■streugtiiened  their  friendly  relations.  Pharaoh  was  not  a  little  proud  of
this  union,  and  he  has  left  us  a  naive  record  of  the  manner  in  which  it  came
about.  The  inscription  is  engraved  on  the  face  of  the  rock  at  Abu  Simbel
in  Nubia;  and  Ramses  begins  by  boasting,  in  a  heroic  strain,  of  his  own  energy
and  exploits,  of  the  fear  with  which  his  victories  inspired  the  whole  world,
and  of  the  anxiety  of  the  Syrian  kinglets  to  fulfil  his  least  wishes.  The
Prince  of  the  Ivhiiti  had  sent  him  sumptuous  presents  at  every  opportunity,
and,  not  knowing  how  further  to  make  himself  agreeable  to  the  Pharaoh,
had     finally     addressed


the  great  lords  of  his
court,  and  reminded
them  how  their  country
had  formerly  been  ruined
by  war,  how  their  master
Sutkhu  had  taken  part
against  them,  and  how
they  had  been  delivered
from    their    ills    by    the


J  ^^


KHATCSARU,   TEINCE   OF    KHATI,    AND    HIS    DAUGHTER.'


clemency  of  the  Sun  of  Egypt.  "  Let  us  therefore  take  our  goods,  and
placing  my  eldest  daughter  at  the  head  of  them,  let  us  repair  to  the  domains
of  the  great  god,  so  that  the  King  Sesostris  may  recognise  us."  He  accord-
ingly did  as  he  had  proposed,  and  the  embassy  set  out  with  gold  and  silver,
valuable  horses,  and  an  escort  of  soldiers,  together  with  cattle  and  provisions
to  supply  them  with  food  by  the  way.  When  they  reached  the  borders  of
Kharu,  the  governor  wrote  immediately  to  the  Pharaoh  as  follows:  "  Here  is  the
Prince  of  the  Kbati,  who  brings  his  eldest  daughter  with  a  number  of  presents
of  every  kind ;  and  now  this  princess  and  the  chief  of  the  country  of  the  Khati,
after  having  crossed  many  mountains  and  undertaken  a  difficult  journey  from
distant  parts,  have  arrived  at  the  frontiers  of  His  Majesty.  May  we  be
instructed  how  we  ought  to  act  with  regard  to  them."  The  king  was  then  in
residence  at  llamses.  When  the  news  reached  him,  he  officially  expressed  his
great  joy  at  the  event,  since  it  was  a  thing  unheard  of  in  the  annals  of  the
country  that  so  powerful  a  prince  should  go  to  such  personal  inconvenience  in
■order  to  marry  his  daughter  to  an  ally.  The  Pharaoh,  therefore,  despatched  his
nobles  and  an  army  to  receive  them,  but  he  was  careful  to  conceal  the  anxiety
wliich  he  felt  all  the  while,  and,  according  to  custom,  took  counsel  of  liis  patron
god  Sutkhu :  "  Who  are  these  people  who  come  with  a  message  at  this  time

'  iJrawu  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  tho  plate  iu  LEi'aiUd,  Dcnhm.,  iii.  100  a ;  tho  triaJ  worshipped
by  Khitusuru  aud  his  daughter  is  composed  of  Eamses  II.,  seated  between  Amon-Hu  and  Phtah-
Totancii.


40G  TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

to  the  country  of  Zahi  ?  "  The  oracle,  however,  reassured  him  as  to  their
intentions,  and  he  thereuijou  hastened  to  prepare  for  their  proper  reception.
The  embassy  made  a  triumphal  entry  into  the  city,  the  princess  at  its  head,
escorted  by  the  Egyptian  troops  told  off  for  the  purpose,  together  with  the
foot-soldiers  and  charioteers  of  the  Khati,  comprising  the  flower  of  their
army  and  militia.  A  solemn  festival  was  held  in  their  honour,  in  which
food  and  drink  were  served  without  stint,  and  was  concluded  by  the  celebration
of  the  marriage  iu  the  presence  of  the  Egyptian  lords  and  of  the  princes  of  the
whole  earth.i  Kamses,  unwilling  to  relegate  a  princess  of  such  noble  birth  to
the  companionship  of  his  ordinary  concubines,  granted  her  the  title  of  queen,
as  if  she  were  of  solar  blood,  and  with  the  cartouche  gave  her  the  new  name
of  Uirimaunofiruri — "  She  who  sees  the  beauties  of  the  Sun."  She  figures
henceforth  in  the  ceremonies  and  on  the  monuments  in  the  place  usually
occupied  by  women  of  Egyptian  race  oul)^,  and  these  unusual  honours  may
have  compensated,  in  the  eyes  of  the  young  princess,  for  the  disproportion  in
age  between  herself  and  a  veteran  more  than  sixty  years  old.'-*  The  friendly
relations  between  the  two  courts  became  so  intimate  that  the  Pharaoh
invited  his  father-in-law  to  visit  him  iu  his  own  country.  "  The  great  Prince
of  Khati  informed  the  Prince  of  Qodi :  '  Prepare  thyself  that  we  may  go  down
into  Egypt.  The  word  of  the  king  has  gone  forth,  let  us  obey  Sesostris.  He
gives  the  breath  of  life  to  those  who  love  him ;  hence  all  the  earth  loves  him,
and  Jihati  forms  but  one  with  him.' "  They  were  received  with  pomp  at
Kamses-Anakhitu,  and  perhaps  at  Thebes.  It  was  with  a  mixture  of  joy  and
astonishment  that  Egypt  beheld  her  bitterest  foe  become  her  most  faithful
ally,  "  and  the  men  of  Qimit  having  but  one  heart  with  the  chiefs  of  the  Khati,
a  thing  which  had  not  happened  since  tlie  ages  of  Ra."  ^

'  The  fact  of  the  marriage  is  known  to  us  by  the  decree  of  Phtah-Tot&uen  at  Abu  Simbel  in  the
XXX\'"'  year  of  the  king's  reign  (I.  25  ;  of.  Naville,  Le  Decrel  de  Flak-Totunen,  in  the  Transactions  of
the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Archaeology,  vol.  vii.  p.  126).  The  account  of  it  in  the  text  is  taken  from  the  stele  at
Abu  Simbel,  imperfectly  published  in  the  Denkm.,  iii.  196  a.  The  last  lines,  which  had  escaped  the
notice  of  Lepsius,  were  copied  by  Bouriaut  (Notes  de  Voyafje,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.
pp.  164-166) ;  they  are  so  mutilated  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  paraphrase  them.  The  stele  of  the
Princess  of  Bakhtan  has  preserved  the  romantic  version  of  this  marriage,  such  as  was  current  about
the  Saite  period.  The  King  of  the  Khati  must  have  taken  advantage  of  the  expedition  which  the
Pharaoh  made  into  Asia  to  send  him  presents  by  an  embassy,  at  the  head  of  which  he  placed  his
eldest  daughter :  the  princess  found  favour  witli  Ramses,  who  married  her  (11.  4-6 ;  cf.  E.  de  Kougk,
Etude  sur  une  stele  egyptienne  apparlenanl  a  la  Bibliotheque  Impgriale,  pp.  35-54).

'  This  princess  is  mentioned  on  the  monuments  at  Tanis  (Makiette,  Fragments  et  Documents
relatifs  aux  fouilles  de  San,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ix.  p.  13 ;  E.  and  J.  de  Rouge,  Inscriptions^
IMroglyphiques  capites  en  Egypte,  pi.  Ixxiv. ;  Petkie,  Tanis,  vol.  i.  pi.  v.  36  B,  and  p.  24),  and  also  at
Abu  Simbel  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  196  a).

^  Anastasi  Papyrus  II.,  pi.  ii.  11.  1-5,  and  Anastasi  Papyrus  IV.,  pi.  vi.  11.  7-9.  The  connexion
between  this  document  and  the  visit  of  the  year  XXXIV.  was  pointed  out  by  Maspebo,  Du  Genre
€pistolaire,  p.  102;  cf.  Chaeas,  Mdunges  ^gyptologiques,  2nd  series,  pp.  151,  152;  Ekman,  JEgypten
und  JEgyptisches  Leben,  p.  707.


COMMERCE    WITH  SYRIA.


407


The  half-centviry  following  the  conclusion  of  this  alliance  was  a  period  of
world-wide  prosperity.  Syria  was  once  more  able  to  Lreathe  freely,  her  com-
merce being  under  the  combined  protection  of  the  two  powers  who  shared
her  territory.  Not  only  caravans,  but  isolated  travellers,  were  able  to  pass
through  the  country  from  north  to  south  without  incurring  any  risks  beyond
those  occasioned  by  an  untrustworthy  guide  or  a  few  highwaymen.  It  became
in  time  a  common  task  in  the  schools  of  Thebes  to  describe  the  typical  Syrian
tour  of  some  soldier  or  functionary,  and  we  still  possess  one  of  these  imaginative


PH(EN1CX\N  BOATS  LANDING  AT  THEBES.'

stories  in  which  the  scribe  takes  his  hero  from  Qodshii  across  the  Lebanon  to
Byblos,  Berytus,  Tyre,  and  Sidon,  "  the  fish  "  of  which  latter  place  "  are  more
numerous  than  the  grains  of  sand  ;  "  he  then  makes  him  cross  Galilee  and  the
forest  of  oaks  to  Jaffa,  climb  the  mountains  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  following  the
maritime  route  by  Kapliia,  reach  Pelusium.-  The  Egyptian  galleys  thronged
tlie  Phoenician  ports,  while  those  of  Phosnicia  visited  Egypt.  The  latter  drew
so  little  water  that  they  had  no  difficulty  in  coming  up  the  Nile,^  and  the  paint-
ings in  one  of  the  tombs  represent  them  at  the  moment  of  their  reaching  Thebes.
The  hull  of  these  vessels  was  similar  to  that  of  the  Nile  boats,  but  the  bow  and
stern  were  terminated  by  structures  which  rose  at  right  angles,  and  respectively
gave  support  to  a  sort  of  small  platform.      Upon  this  the  pilot  maintained


'  Drawn  by  Bniuiier,  from  the  photograpli  piiblialied  by  Daressy  in  tlie  Revue  Archdhlngique.

'  This  is  the  Auaslasi  Papjrus  I.  publisliciil  in  the  Select  Papyri,  vol.  i.  pis.  xxxv  -Ixii ,  u.scd  by
Hinckn  and  Birch  in  several  of  their  early  works,  and  completely  translated  by  CuAUAS-fioonwiN,
Le  Voyaije  d'un  JEgyptien.  180*J;  and  since  then  by  BiHGScn,  Le  Voyarje  d'un  Egyplien,  in  the  lievuc
Critique,  1807,  V(d.  i.  pp. 'J7-105,  U.5-154,  and  Gedc/jicWe  ^i/yjjtois,  pp.  551-561  ;  cf.  Ebman,  /EgypUn
und  .Kgyplisclies  Lelien  im  Alterlhum,  pp.  508-513.

'  The  Great  Dedicatory  Inscription  of  Abydos,  11.  83,  84.


408  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

his  position  by  one  of  those  wondrous  feats  of  equilibrium  of  which  the
Orientals  were  masters.  An  open  rail  ran  round  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  so  as
to  prevent  goods  stowed  upon  the  deck  from  falling  into  the  sea  when  the
vessel  lurched.^  Voyages  to  Puanit  were  undertaken  more  frequently  in  quest
of  incense  and  precious  metals.  The  working  of  the  mines  of  Akiti  had  been
the  source  of  considerable  outlay  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign.  The  measures
taken  by  Seti  to  render  the  approaches  to  them  practicable  at  all  seasons  had
not  produced  the  desired  results ;  -  as  far  back  as  the  III"'  year  of  Ramses  the
overseers  of  the  south  had  been  forced  to  acknowledge  that  the  managers  of  the
convoys  could  no  longer  use  any  of  the  cisterns  which  had  been  hewn  and  built
at  such  great  expense.  "  Half  of  them  die  of  thirst,  together  with  their  asses,
for  they  have  no  means  of  carrying  a  sufficient  number  of  skins  of  water  to
last  during  the  journey  there  and  back."  The  friends  and  officers  whose
advice  had  been  called  in,  did  not  doubt  for  a  moment  that  the  king  would  be
willing  to  complete  the  work  which  his  father  had  merely  initiated.  "  If  thou
sayest  to  the  water,  '  Come  upon  the  mountain,'  the  heavenly  waters  will
spring  out  at  the  word  of  thy  mouth,  for  thou  art  Ea  incarnate,  Khopri  visibly
created,  thou  art  the  living  image  of  thy  father  Tumu,  the  Heliopolitan." —
"  If  thou  thyself  sayest  to  thy  father  the  Nile,  father  of  the  gods,"  added  the
Viceroy  of  Ethiopia,  " '  Raise  the  water  up  to  the  mountain,'  he  will  do  all  that
thou  hast  said,  for  so  it  has  been  with  all  thj'  projects  which  have  been  accom-
plished in  our  presence,  of  which  the  like  has  never  been  heard,  even  in  the
songs  of  the  poets."  The  cisterns  and  wells  were  thereupon  put  into  such  a
condition  that  the  transport  of  gold  was  rendered  easy  for  years  to  come.'  The
war  with  the  Khati  had  not  suspended  building  and  other  works  of  public
utility ;  and  now,  owing  to  the  establishment  of  peace,  the  sovereign  was  able
to  devote  himself  entirely  to  them.  He  deepened  the  canal  at  Zalu ;  ^  he
repaired  the  walls  and  the  fortified  places  which  protected  the  frontier  on  the

'  Daresst,  XJiie  Flotlille  pli^nicienne  (Tapres  une  peinture  igyptienne,  in  tbe  Revue  Arch^ologique,
1896,  vol.  xxTii.  pp.  286-292.

-  Cf.  what  is  said  ou  the  subject  of  the  works  of  Seti  I.  on  pp.  373-376  of  this  volume.

'  Stele  of  Kubban,  discovered  and  published  by  Pr.isSE  d'Avejjnes,  Monuments  de  I'Egypte.  pi.  xxi.,
translated  and  commented  on  by  Bikoh,  Upon  oh  Historical  TaUet  of  Ramses  II.,  in  the  Archseologia,
vol.  xxxiv.  pp.  357-399  (cf.  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  76-80) ;  by  Chabas,  Les  Inscrip-
tions des  Nines  d'or,  pp.  13-39 ;  by  Lacth,  Die  zweialteste  Landkarte  nehst  Graberpldnen,  in  the  Sitz-
unqsberichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Munich,  1871,  vol  i.  pp.  198-201;  by  Brugsch,  Geschiclite
.Egyptens,  pp.  531-537;  by  Viket,  The  Stele  of  Ktdian,  in  the  Records  of  the  Pa^t,  2ud  series,  vol.  v.
pp.  1-16,  and  Notes  sur  quelqiies  2>assages  de  la  Stele  de  Konhan,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiv.
pp.  96-99 ;  and  finally  by  Schiaparelli,  La  Catena  Orientale  deW  Egitto,  pp.  86-88.  Cf.  Ehman,
^Egypten  iind  .Egyptisches  Lthen,  pp.  617-019.

*  Classical  authors  say  that  he  wished  to  establish  communication  between  tbe  Nile  and  the  Red
Sea  (Aristotle,  Meteorol,  I.  xiv. ;  Strabo,  I.  i.  §  31,  p.  38,  XVII.  i.  §  25,  p.  804;  Tliny,  Nat.  Hist.,
vi.  29,  §  165) :  all  aifirm  that  this  canal  of  Sesostris  was  never  completed ;  a  similar  fate  befell  that  of
Pharaoh  Necho  (Herod.,  ii.  158).


PUBLIC    WOUES    UNDER   EAVSES   II.


409


side  of  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula,'  and  he  built  or  enlarged  the  strongholds  along
the  Nile  at  those  points  most  frequently  threatened  by  the  incursions  of  nomad
tribes.  Ramses  was  the  royal  builder  par  excellence,  and  we  may  say  without
fear  of  contradiction  that,  from  the  second  cataract  to  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,
there  is  scarcely  an  edifice  on  whose  ruins  we  do  not  find  his  name.     In  Nubia,


lllE    1-ItUJLUTIXu    COLUMNS    UF    Till;    slXUi    uF    GEKF-llOSSlilN.-


where  the  desert  approaches  close  to  the  Nile,  he  confined  himself  to  cutting
in  the  solid  rock  the  monuments  which,  for  want  of  space,  he  could  not  build
in  the  open.  The  idea  of  the  cave-temple  must  have  occurred  very  early  to
the  Egyptians ;  they  were  accustomed  to  house  their  dead  in  the  mountain-
side, why  then  should  they  not  house  their  gods  in  the  same  manner?  The
oldest  forms  of  specs,  those  near  to  Beni-Hasan,  at  Deir  el-Bahari,  at  El-Kab,
and  at  Gebel  Silsileh,"  however,  do  not  date  further  back  than  the  time  of
tho  XVIII"'  dynasty.     All  the  forms  of  architectural  plan  observed  in  isolated

'  For  this  line  of  fortifications,  cf.  what  is  saiil  in  the  Daxm  of  Civilization,  pp.  351,  3.5-J,  469,  and
also  p..  122  of  this  volume.  Some  writers  of  the  classical  period  attribute  its  fouudiitiou  to  Riimses  II.,
and  speak  of  it  as  "  The  Wall  of  Sesostris  "  (Diodoiu-.s  Sicvli'.s,  i.  .".7).

"  Urawu  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  1881  by  lusinger.

'  Upon  the  speos  of  Deir  cl-Uahari  and  that  of  Gebel  Silsilch,  see  pp.  240-242,  348-3.-)0  of  this
volume:  the  Speos  Artemidos,  at  Beni-Hasan,  is  of  the  date  of  Queen  Hatshopsitu,  but  it  was
restored  by  Seti  I.  (GoLii.NiscHEFF,  Notic-  s„r  uu  lextt  hi^nyhjphiqni-  du  .Stahl  Aiitar.  in  the  llecueil
<U  Tramux,  vol.  iii.  pp.  1-3);  that  of  El-Kab  goes  back  to  the  reign  of  Ainenotlies  111.


410


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


temples  were  utilised  by  Eamses  and  applied  to  rock-cut  buildings  with  more
or  less  modification,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  stratum  in  wliich  he  had

to  work.  Where  space
permitted,  a  part  only
of  the  temple  was  cut
in  the  rock,  and  the
approaches  to  it  were
built  in  the  open  air
with  blocks  brought  to
the  spot,  so  that  the
completed  speos  be-
came only  in  part  a
grotto — a  henii-speos
of  varied  construction.
It  was  in  this  manner
that  the  architects  of
Ramses  arranged  the
court  and  pylon  at  Beit-
Wally,^  the  hypostyle
hall,  rectangular  court
and  pylon  at  Gerf-Hos-
seiD,^  and  the  avenue
of  sphinxes  at  Wady
es-Sebuah,  where  the
entrance  to  the  avenue
was  guarded  by  t^o
statues  overlooking  the
river.^  The  pylon  at
Gerf-Hossein  has  been
demolished,  and  merely  a  few  traces  of  the  foundations  appear  here  and  there
above  the  soil,  but  a  portion  of  the  portico  which  surrounded  the  court  is
still  standing,  together  with  its  massive  architraves  and  statues,  which  stand

'  The  description  of  tlie  temple  of  Beit-Wally  is  given  by  Gau,  Monuments  de  la  Ntihie,  pis.  12,
14-16;  by  Ch.vmpollion,  Ldtres  ecrites  d'Egi/pte,  "Jud  edit.  pp.  159,  ItJO,  and  Monuments  de  l'£gypte  it
de  la  Nubie,  vol.  i.  pp.  14.')-150,  and  pis.  Ixi.  1,  Ixii.-lxxiv.,  xcii.  4;  by  Kosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pl.-^.
Ixv.-lxxv. :  for  the  battle-scenes,  cf.  ARrND.\LE-BoNO.'»ii-BiRCH,  The  Galleri/  of  Eiji/ptian  Antiquilits.
pi.  38,  and  pp.  92-102,  and  also  Lepsius,  Detikm.,  iii.  176,  177.

'  Gau,  Monuments  de  In  Nubie,  pis.  28-32 ;  Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'Egypte  et  de  la  Nubit,
vol.  i.  pp.  129-137,  and  pi.  Ivii.  3 ;  Lepsius,  Benkm.,  iii.  178  a-e ;  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Hist,  de  I'Arl
£gijptien.  Text,  s.  379,  380.

^  Gau,  Mon.  de  la  Nubie,  pis.  45-47 ;  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nubie.  vol.  i.
pp.  107-109,  and  pis.  1. 1,  cxii.  bis  1 ;  Kosellisi,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  Ixxviii. ;  Lepsics,  Denhm.,  iii.  179-182.

*  Drawn  by  Faueber-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  1881  by  Insinger  and  Daniel  Heron.


THE    CARYATIDES    OF   GEEF-HOSSEIN.*


TUE   GREAT  SPEOS    OF  ABU  SIMBEL.


41T


with  their  backs  against  the  pillars.  The  sanctuary  itself  comprised  an
antechaijiber,  supported  by  two  columns  and  flanked  by  two  oblong  recesses  ;
this  led  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  which  was  a  narrow  niche  with  a  low  ceiling,


THE   TWO   COLOSSI    OP   ABU    SIMBEL   TO   THE    SOCTH   OF    THE    DOORWAY.'

placed  between  two  lateral  chapels.  A  hall,  nearly  square  in  shape,  connected
these  mysterious  chambers  with  the  propylaja,  which  were  open  to  the  sky
and  faced  with  Osiride  caryatides.  These  appear  to  keep  rigid  and  solemn
watch  over  the  approaches  to  the  tabernacle,  and  their  faces,  half  hidden
m  the  shadow,  still  present  such  a  stern  appearance  that  the  semi-barbaric
Nubians  of  the  neighbouring  villages  believe  them  to  be  possessed  by  implac-
able genii.  They  are  supposed  to  move  from  their  places  during  the  hours
of  night,  and  the  fire  which  flashes  from  their  eyes  destroys  or  fascinates
whoever  is  rash  enough  to  watch  them.

Other  kings  before  Ramses  had  constructed  buildings  in  these  spots,  and
their  memory  would  naturally  become  associated  with  his  in  the  future ;  he
wished,  therefore,  to  find  a  site  where  he  would  be  without  a  rival,  and  to  this
end  he  transformed  the  cliff  at  Abu  Simbel  into  a  monunient  of  his  greatness.
Tlie  rocks  here  project  into  the  Nile  and  form  a  gigantic  conical  promontory,.

'  Dnnvn  by  FaucUor-Gudin,  from  u  photograph  taken  iu  1881  by  Iiiainscr  ami  Daniel  Heron.


412


THE  REACTION   AGAINST  EGYPT.


the  face  of  which  was  covered  with  triumphal  stela3,  on  which  the  sailors  or
troops  going  up  or  down  the  river  could  spell  out  as  they  passed  the  praises
of  tlie  king  and  his  exploits.'  A  few  feet  of  shore  on  the  northern  side,  covered
witli  dry  and  knotty  bushes,  affords  in  winter  a  landing-place  for  tourists.

At  the  spot  where  the
beach  ends  near  the
point  of  the  promon-
tory, sit  four  colossi,
with  their  feet  nearly
touching  the  water,
their  backs  leaning
against  a  sloping  wall
of  rock,  which  takes
the  likeness  of  :i
pylon,  A  band  of
hieroglyphs  runs  above
their  heads  underneath
the  usual  cornice,  over
which  again  is  a  row  of
crouching  cynocephali
looking  straight  before
them,  their  hands  rest-
ing upon  their  knees,
and  above  this  line  of
sacred  images  rises  the
steep  and  naked  rock.
One  of  the  colossi  is
broken,  and  tlie  bust  of
the  statue,  which  must
have  been  detached  by  ■
some  great  sliock,  has  fallen  to  the  ground ;  the  others  rise  to  the  height  of  60
feet,  and  appear  to  look  across  the  Nile  as  if  watching  the  wadys  leading  to  the
gold-mines.  The  pschent  crown  surmounts  their  foreheads,  and  the  two  ends  of
the  head-dress  fall  behind  their  ears;  their  features  are  of  a  noble  type,  calm
and  serious ;  the  nose  slightly  aquiline,  the  under  lip  projecting  above  a  square,
but  rather  heavy,  chin.  Of  such  a  type  we  may  picture  Eamses,  after  the
conclusion  of  the  peace  with  the  Khati,  in  the  full  vigour  of  his  manhood  and

'  Champollion,  Monuments  dc  rii'ijtjpte  ct  de  la  Nidiie,  vol.  i.  pp.  77-70,  aud  pis.  vii.  4,  ix.  1,  1*,  x.,
xxxviii. ;  Eosellini,  Mon.  Storicl,  vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  177-190.  The  general  outliue  of  these  stelai  may
be  distinguished  in  the  illustration  on  the  opposite  page.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  iu  1881  by  Insinger  aud  Daniel  Heron.


THE    INTEUKJK   OF    THE    SIEUS    OF    ABU    SIMBEL."


414


TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


at  the  height  of  his  power.  The  doorway  of  the  temjile  is  in  the  centre  of  the
facade,  and  rises  nearly  to  a  level  with  the  elbows  of  the  colossi ;  above  the  lintel,
and  facing  the  river,  stands  a  figure  of  the  god  Ea,  represented  with  a  human
body  and  the  head  of  a  sparrow-hawk,  while  two  images  of  the  king  in  profile,
one  on  each  side  of  the  god,  ofler  him  a  figure  of  Truth.  Tiie  fii'st  hall,  130  feet
long  by  58  feet  broad,  takes  the  place  of  the  court  surrounded  by  a  colonnade

which  in  other  temples
usually  follows  the
pylon.  Here  eight  Osi-
ride  figures,  standing
against  as  many  square
pillars,  appear  to  support
the  weight  of  the  super-
incumbent rock.  Their
profile  catches  the  light
as  it  enters  through  the
open  doorway,  and  in
the  early  morning,  when
the  rising  sun  casts  a
ruddy  ray  over  their
features,  their  faces  be-
come marvellously  life-
like. We  are  almost
tempted  to  think  that  a  smile  plays  over  their  lips  as  the  first  beams  touch
them.  The  remaining  chambers  consist  of  a  hypostyle  hall  nearly  square  in
shape,  the  sanctuary  itself  being  between  two  smaller  apartments,  and  of  eight
subterranean  chambers  excavated  at  a  lower  level  than  the  rest  of  the  temple.
The  whole  measures  178  feet  from  the  threshold  to  the  far  end  of  the  Holy  of
Holies.^  The  walls  ar.e  covered  with  bas-reliefs  in  which  the  Pharaoh  has
vividly  depicted  the  wars  which  he  carried  on  in  the  four  corners  of  his
kingdom ;  here  we  see  raids  against  the  negroes,  there  the  war  with  the  Khati,
and  further  on  an  encounter  with  some  Libyan  tribe.  Kamses,  flushed
by  the  heat  of  victory,  is  seen  attacking  two  Timihu  chiefs :  one  has
already  fallen  to  the  ground  and  is  being  trodden  underfoot ;  the  other,  after
vainly  letting  fly  his  arrows,  is  about  to  perish  from  a  blow  of  the  conqueror.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Mons.  de  Book;  of.  Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,
pi.  xvii. ;  EosELLiNi,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  Ixxxiii.,  in  which  the  colours  are  represented  as  tliey  still
appeared  in  the  first  half  of  the  present  century.

'  Gad,  Monuments  de  la  Nnhie,  pis.  55,  57-61;  Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  56-77;
KoSELLiNi,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  85-165;  Lepsius,  Denlim.,  iii.  185-191;  cf.  Dijmiohek,  Der
^Egyptische  Felsentempel  von  Abu-Simhel,  1869.


JiAMSES   II.    PIERCES    A    LIBYAN    CHIEF    WITH    HIS    LANCE.'


THE  BAS-RELIEFS   OF   THE   TEMPLE   OF  ABU  8IMBEL.


415


His  knees  give  way  beneath  him,  his  head  falls  heavily  backwards,  and  the
features  are  contracted  in  his  death-agony.  Pharaoh  with  his  left  hand  has
seized  him  by  the  arm,  while  with  his  right  he  points  his  lance  against  his
enemy's  breast,  and  is  about
to  pierce  him  through  tlie
heart.  As  a  rule,  this  type
of  bas-relief  is  executed
with  a  conventional  grace
which  leaves  the  spectator
unmoved,  and  free  to  con-
sider the  scene  merely  from
its  historical  point  of  view,
forgetful  of  the  artist.  An
examination  of  most  of  the
other  wall  -  decorations  of
the  speos  will  furnish
several  examples  of  this
type:  we  see  Kamses  with
a  suitable  gesture  brandish-
ing his  weapon  above  a
group  of  prisoners,  and  the
composition  furnishes  us
with  a  fair  example  of
official  sculpture,  correct,
conventional,  but  devoid  of
interest.  Hei'e,  on  the  con-
trary, the  drawing  is  so
full  of  energy  that  it  carries  the  imagination  back  to  the  time  and  scene
of  those  far-off  battles.  The  indistinct  light  in  which  it  is  seen  helps  the
illusion,  and  we  almost  forget  that  it  is  a  picture  we  are  beholding,  and
not  the  action  itself  as  it  took  place  some  three  thousand  years  ago.  A  small
speos,  situated  at  some  hundred  feet  further  north,  is  decorated  with  standing
colossi  of  smaller  size,  four  of  which  represent  Eamses,  and  two  of  them
his  wife,  Isit  Nofritari.^  This  speos  possesses  neither  peristyle  nor  crypt,
and  the  chapels  are  placed  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  transverse  passage,
instead  of  being  in  a  parallel  line  with  the  sanctuary ;    on  the  other  hand,

•  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  by  Insinger  in  1881  ;  cf.  Champolliost,  Monuments
de  VEgijpte  el  dc  la  Nubie,  pi.  xi.,  and  Roselwni,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  l.xxix.

'  Gau,  Monuments  de  la  Nuhic,  pis.  o4-r)C ;  Champolhon,  Mon.  de  VUgypte,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  13-55,
and  plB.  v.-ix.,  xxxvii.  lis;  Roskllin-i,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  KJa-lTO;  Lepsils,  Denkm,
iii.  192,  I'Xi.  '  '


RAMSES    II.    STRIKES   A    GROCP   OP   PRISONERS.


410


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


the  hypostyle  hall  rests  on  six  pillars  with  Hathor-headed  capitals  of  fine
proportions.  A  third  excavated  grotto  of  modest  <limensions  served  as  an
accessory  chamber  to  tiie  tvvo  others.^  An  inexhaustible  stream  of  yellow  sand
poured  over  the  great  temple  from  the  summit  of  the  cliff,  and  partially  covered
it  every  year.     No  sooner  were  the  efforts  to  remove  it  relaxed,  tlian  it  spreads


THE    FACADE    OF    THE    LITTLE    SPEOS  OP    UAIIU'K    Al    ALL    ^liibLL."

iuto  the  chambers,  concealing  the  feet  of  the  colossi,  and  slowly  creeping
upwards  to  their  knees,  breasts,  and  necks  ;  at  the  beginning  of  this  century
they  were  entirely  hidden.  In  spite  of  all  that  was  done  to  divert  it,  it  cease-
lessly reappeared,  and  in  a  lew  summers  regained  all  the  ground  which  bad
been  previously  cleared.  It  would  seem  a?  if  the  desert,  powerless  to  destroy
the  work  of  the  conqueror,  was  seeking  nevertheless  to  hide  it  from  the
admiration  of  posterity.*

Seti  had  worked  iudefatigably  at  Thebes,  but  the  shortness  of  his  reign
prevented  him  from  completing  the  buildings  he  had  begun  there.  There
existed  everywhere,  at  Luxor,  at  Karnak,  and  ou  the  left  bank  of  the  Nile,  the
remains  of  his  unfinished  works;  sanctuaries  partially  roofed  in,  porticoes  incom-
plete, columns  raised  to  merely  half  their  height,  halls  as  yet  imperfect  with
blank  walls,  here  and  there  covered  with  only  the  outlines  in  red  and  black

'  It  was  discovered  in  1873,  and  an  account  of  it  published  by  Miss  Ameli.\  B.  KDW.\nDS,  in
A  Thousand  Miles  up  tin'  Nile,  pp.  470-480.

'  Drawn  by  Faucht'r-Gudin,froiu  the  \AsiteamVHAiiFOLi,io:s,Monumi:nlsdel']i(ii/2ileetdelaNnhie,
pi.  ix.  1,  and  Pklsse  h'Avenkes,  Hist,  de  I' Art  Eijyptien,  vol.  ii.,  and  Text,  p.  412.

*  Tlie  English  engineers  have  succeeded  iu  hairing  out  the  sand,  and  have  prevented  it  from
pouring  over  the  cliif  any  more. — Ed.


THE  BUILDINGS   OF  EAMSES  II.   AT  LUXOR.


417


ink  of  tlipir  future  bas-reliefs,  and  statues  hardly  blocked  out,  ur  awaiting  the
final  touch  of  the  polisher.'  Ramses  took  up  the  work  where  his  father  had
relinquished  it.  At  Luxor  there  was  not  enough  space  to  give  to  the  hypostyle
iiall  the  extension  which  the  original  plans  proposed,  and  the  great  colonnade


THE    CUAI'EL    UV    lIllTMOblS    HI.    AND    ONE    UF    TUli    I'YLONS   OF    RAM8E3   II.    AT    LUXOU.^

has  an  unfinished  appearance.  The  Nile,  in  one  of  its  capricious  floods,  had
carried  away  the  land  upon  which  the  architects  had  intended  to  erect  the
side  aisles ;  and  if  they  wished  to  add  to  the  existing  structure  a  great
court  and  a  pylon,  without  which  no  temple  was  considered  complete,  it
was  necessary  to  turn  the  axis  of  the  building  towards  the  east.  In  their
operations  the  architects  came  upon  a  beautiful  little  edifice  of  rose  granite,
which  had  been  either  erected  or  restored  by  Thiitmosis  III.  at  a  time  when
the  town  was  an  independent  municipality  and  was  only  beginning  to  extend
its  suburban  dwellings  to  meet  those  of  Karnak.  They  took  care  to  make
no  change  in  this  structure,  but  set  to  work  to  incorporate  it  into  their  final

'  This  is  the  description  which  Eaniees  gave  of  tlic  conditiou  in  which  he  found  tlie  Memnouiuin
of  Abydos  {Great  Inscription  of  Alnjdos,  11.  32,  33) ;  an  examination  of  the  inscriptions  existing  in  tho
Theban  temples  which  Seli  I.  liad  constructed,  shows  that  it  must  have  applied  also  to  tho  appearance
of  certain  portions  of  Quriieb,  Luxor,  and  Karnak  in  the  time  of  Itamses  II.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  iu  1SS6  by  lieato.

2   E


418  TEE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

plans.  It  still  stands  at  the  north-west  corner  of  the  court,  and  the  elegance
of  its  somewhat  slender  little  columns  contrasts  happily  with  the  heaviness
of  the  structure  to  which  it  is  attached.  A  portion  of  its  portico  is  hidden
by  the  brickwork  of  the  mosque  of  Abu'l  Haggag :  the  part  brought  to  light
in  the  course  of  the  excavations  contains  between  each  row  of  columns  a  colossal
statue  of  Ramses  II.  We  are  accustomed  to  hear  on  all  sides  of  the  degeneracy
of  the  sculptor's  art  at  this  time,  and  of  its  having  fallen  into  irreparable
neglect.  Nothing  can  be  further  from  the  truth  than  this  sweeping  statement.
There  are  doubtless  many  statues  and  bas-reliefs  of  this  epoch  which  shock
us  by  their  crudity  and  ugliness,  but  these  owed  their  origin  for  the  most  part
to  provincial  workshops  which  had  been  at  all  times  of  mediocre  repute,  and
where  the  artists  did  not  receive  orders  enough  to  enable  them  to  correct  by
practice  the  defects  of  their  education.  We  find  but  few  productions  of  the
Theban  school  exhibiting  bad  technique,  and  if  we  had  only  this  one  monument
of  Luxor  from  which  to  form  our  opinion  of  its  merits,  it  would  be  sutficient  to
prove  that  the  sculptors  of  Kamses  II.  were  not  a  whit  behind  those  of  Hai"m-
habi  or  Seti  I.  Adroitness  in  cutting  the  granite  or  hard  sandstone  had  in  no
wise  been  lost,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  skill  in  bringing  out  the
contour  and  life-like  action  of  the  figure,  and  of  tlie  art  of  infusing  into
the  features  and  demeanour  of  the  Pharaoh  something  of  the  superhuman
majesty  with  which  the  Egyptian  people  were  accustomed  to  invest  their
monarchs.  If  the  statues  of  Eamses  II.  in  the  portico  are  not  perfect
models  of  sculpture,  they  have  many  good  points,  and  their  bold  treatment
makes  them  effectively  decorative.^  Eight  other  statues  of  Ramses  are
arranged  along  the  base  of  the  facade,  and  two  obelisks — one  of  which  has
been  at  Paris  for  half  a  century  "^ — stood  on  either  side  of  the  entrance.  The
whole  structure  lacks  unity,  and  there  is  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in
this  respect  anywhere  else  in  Egypt.  The  northern  half  does  not  join  on  to
the  southern,  but  seems  to  belong  to  quite  a  distinct  structure,  or  the  two-
parts  might  be  regarded  as  having  once  formed  a  single  edifice  which  had
become  divided  by  an  accident,  which  the  architect  had  endeavoured
to  unite  together  again  by  a  line  of  columns  running  between  two  walls.
The  masonry  of  the  hypostyle  hall  at  Karnak  was  squared  and  dressed,^
but  the  walls  had  been  left  undecorated,  as  was  also  the  case  with  the
majority  of  the  shafts  of  the  columns  and  the   surface  of  the   architraves.

'  Three  of  these  colossal  figures,  one  of  them  seated,  are  represented  ou'p.  419;  and  another  is
given  in  Maspeko,  Arch€ologie  Egypiiemie,  p.  223,  fig.  196.

=  The  colonnade  and  the  little  temple  of  Thiltmosis  III.  were  concealed  under  the  houses  of  the
village  ;  they  were  first  brought  to  light  iu  the  excavations  of  1881-86.  The  transportation  of  the
obelisk  to  Paris  was  the  occasion  of  a  flood  of  literature,  of  which  'NViedemaun  gives  an  account  in
.Egyptisdie  Geschi'chte,  p.  US,  n.  5.


COMPLETION   OF   THE   HYPOSTYLE  HALL    AT  KARNAK.


419


Ramses  covered  the  whole  with  a  series  of  sculptured  and  painted  scenes
which  had  a  rich  ornamental  effect;  he  then  decorated  the  pylon,  and
inscribed  on  the  outer  wall  to  the  south  the  list  of  cities  which  he  had
captured.'  The  temple  of  Anion  then  assumed  the  aspect  which  it  preserved
lienceforward   for  centuries.      The   Ramessides  and   tlieir  successors  occupied


THE    COLONNADE    OF    SETI    I.    AND    THE    THREE    COLOSSAL    STATUES    OP    RAMSES    IL    AT    LUXOR.=

themselves  in  filling  it  with  i'urniture,  and  in  taking  steps  for  the  repair  of
any  damage  that  might  accrue  to  the  hail  or  pillars;  they  had  their  car-
touches or  inscriptions  placed  in  vacant  spaces,  but  they  did  not  dare  to
modify  its  arrangement.  It  was  reserved  for  the  Ethiopian  and  Greek
riiaraohs,  in  presence  of  the  hypostyle  and  pylon  of  the  XIX'"  dynasty,
to  conceive  of  others  on  a  still  vaster  scale.  Ramses,  having  completed  the
funerary  chapel  of  Seti  at  Qurneh  upon  the  left  bank  of  the  river,^  then  began
to  think  of  preparing  the  edifice  destined  for  the  cult  of  his  "double" — that
Rame.=seum  whose  majestic  ruins  still  stand  at  a  short  distance  to  the  north

'  Mariette,  Karnah,  Tcxte,  pp.  21,  23-25,  60,  Gl.  The  list  of  the  captured  cities  i.s  found  in
Champollion,  il/on«mcn<«  de  VJ^gyptc,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  119-123;  in  JlosEi.Li}ii,  Monumenti  Sloriei,
vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  2r)l)-263 ;  and  in  I-epsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  14G  d.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograpli  by  Beato.

'  Chajipollion,  Monuments  de  V&jijpU-,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  290;  Rosellint,  Monumenti  Stortci,  vol.  iii.
pt.  2,  pp.  282,  283.     See  pp.  3S2,  3S3  of  tlie  present  work  for  what  ia  Icnown  about  tliia  chapel.


420


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


of  the  giants  of  Amenothes.  Did  these  colossal  statues  stimulate  his  spirit  of
emulation  to  do  something  yet  more  marvellous  ?  He  erected  here,  at  any  rate,
a  still  more  colossal  figure.  The  earthquake  which  shattered  Memnon  brought
it  to  the  ground,  and  fragments  of  it  still  strew  the  soil  where  they  fell  some
nineteen  centuries  ago.  There  are  so  many  of  them  that  the  spectator  would
think  himself  in  tlie  middle  of  a  granite  quarry.^     The  portions  forming  the

breast,  arms,  and  thighs  are
in  detached  pieces,  but  they
are  still  recognisable  where
they  lie  close  to  each  other.
The  head  has  lost  nothing
of  its  characteristic  expres-


THE   REMAIKS  OF   THE    COLOSSAL    STATUE   OP   RAMSES    11.    AT   THE   RAMESSEOM.'

sion,  and  its  proportions  are  so  enormous,  that  a  man  could  sleep  crouched
up  in  the  hollow  of  one  of  its  ears  as  if  on  a  sofa.  Behind  the  court
overlooked  by  this  colo.ssal  statue  lay  a  second  court,  surrounded  by  a  row  of
square  pillars,  each  having  a  figure  of  Osiris  attached  to  it.  The  god  is
represented  as  a  mummy,  the  swathings  throwing  the  body  and  limbs  into
relief.  His  hands  are  freed  from  the  bandages  and  are  crossed  on  the  breast,
ixnd  hold  respectively  the  flail  and  crook ;  the  smiling  face  is  surmounted  by  an
■enormous  head-dress.  The  sanctuary  with  the  buildings  attached  to  it  has
perished,  but  enormous  brick  structures  extend  round  the  ruins,  forming  an
enclosure  of  storehouses.  Here  the  priests  of  the  "  double  "  were  accustomed
to  dwell  with  their  wives  and  slaves,  aud  here  they  stored  up  the  products  of

'  This  is  the  actual  expreasion  employed  by  Jollois-Devilliers,  Descripiicn  du  tcmheau  d'Osymati-
■dyas,  (l€sitjne  par  quelques  royageurs  sons  la  denomination  de  Palais  de  Memnon,  in  the  Description
de  V£gypte.  vol.  ii.  p.  243.  The  ear  measures  3  feet  4  inches  iu  length  ;  the  statue  is  58  feet  high  from
the  top  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  and  the  weight  of  the  whole  has  beeu  estimated  at  over  a
thousand  tons  (Id.,  ibid.,  p.  246).

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.


THE  RAMESSEUM  AT   THEBES.


421


their  domains — meat,  vegetables,  corn,  fowls  dried  or  preserved  in  fat,  and
wines  procured  from  all  the  vineyards  of  Egypt.

These  were  merely  the  principal  monuments  put  up  by  Eamses  II.  at
Thebes  during  the  sixty-seven  years  of  his  rule.  There  would  be  no  end  to
the  enumeration  of  his  works  if  we  were  to  mention  all  the  other  edifices  which


he  constructed  in  the  necropolis  '--  .;__-^;?-  .    -

or  among  tlie  dwellings  of  the  living,  all  those  which  he  restored,  or  those
which  he  merely  repaired  or  inscribed  with  his  cartouches.  These  are  often
cut  over  the  name  of  the  original  founder,  and  bis  usurpations  of  monuments
are  so  numerous  that  he  might  be  justly  accused  of  having  striven  to  blot  out
the  memory  of  his  predecessors,  and  of  claiming  for  himself  the  entire  work
of  the  whole  line  of  Pharaohs.  It  would  seem  as  if,  in  his  opinion,  the  glory
of  Egypt  began  with  him,  or  at  least  with  his  father,  and  that  no  victorious
campaigns  had  been  ever  heard  of  before  those  which  he  conducted  against
the  Libyans  and  the  Hittites.

The  battle  of  Qodsiiu,  with  its  attendant  episodes — the  flogging  of  the  spies,
the  assault  upon  the  camp,  the  charge  of  the  chariots,  the  flight  of  the  Syrians
— is  the  favourite  subject  of  his  "inscriptions ;  and  the  poem  of  Pentauiiit
adds  to  the  bas-reliefs  a  description  worthy  of  the  acts  represented.  This
Epic  reappears  everywhere,  in  Nubia  and  in  the  Said,  at  Abu  Simbel,  at  Beit-
Wally,  at  Derr,  at  Luxor,  at  Karnak,  and  on  the  Ramesseum,  and  the  .«ame
battle-scunos,  with  the  same  accompanying  texts,  reappear  in  the  Memnonium,

'  Drawn  by  Boudicr,  from  a  photogriipU  by  lieato  ;  the  great  blocks  iu  the  foreground  are  the
fragments  of  tlie  colossal  statue  of  Kamses  II.


422


THE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


whose  half-ruined  walls  still  crown  the  necropolis  of  Abydos.^  He  had  decided
upon  the  erection  of  this  latter  monument  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  reign,
and  the  artisans  who  had  worked  at  the  similar  structure  of  Seti  I.  were  em-
ployed to  cover  its  walls  with  admirable  bas-reliefs.     Kamses  also  laid  claim  to


I


THE    RUINS   or   THE   MEMNONlfJI    OF    KAMSES   II.    AT    ABYDOS."

have  his  own  resting-place  at  "the  Cleft;"  iu  this  privilege  he  associated
all  the  Pharaohs,  from  whom  he  imagined  himself  to  be  descended,  and  the
same  list  of  their  names,  which  we  find  engraved  in  the  chapel  of  his  father,
appears  on  his  building  also.^  Some  ruins,  lying  beyond  Abydos,  are  too
formless  to  do  more  than  indicate  the  site  of  some  of  his  structures.  He
enlarged  the  temple  of  Harshafitu  and  that  of  Osiris  at  Heracleopolis,  and,  to
accomplish  these  works  the  more  promptly,  his  workmen  had  recourse  for
material  to  the  royal  towns  of  the  IV"'  and  XII""  dynasties;  the  pyramids
of  Usirtasen  II.  and  Snofrui  at  Sledum  suffered  accordingly  the  loss  of  the  best
part  of  their  covering.*  He  finished  the  mausoleum  at  Memphis,^  and  dedi-
cated the  statue  which  Seti  had  merely  blocked  out ;  he  then  set  to  work
to  fill  the  city  with  buildings  of  his  own  device — granite  and  sandstone
chambers  to   the   east  of  the   Sacred  Lake,®   monumental   gateways   to  the

'  Mariette,  Ahijdos,  vol,  ii.  pp.  8-12,  and  pla.  4,  5.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Eniil  Brugach-Bey.

'  This  is  the  list  now  in  the  British  Museum  ;  see  p.  220  of  the  Dawn  of  Civilization  for  informa-
tion on  thfse  two  tables.

'  Naville,  Ahnas  el-Mcdineh,  pp.  2,  9-11,  and  pis.  i.  AC,  ii.  AC,  v.,  vi. ;  ef.  Petrie,  Medum,  pp.  5-!),
iiud  lllahun,  Kahun  and  Gurob,  p.  22.  [For  the  nature  of  this  "  resting-place,"  which  was  not  his
tjmb,  see  supra,  p.  382. — Tk.]

'  The  Great  Inscription  of  Abydos,  1.  22.

"  Partly  excavated  and  published  by  Mariette  (Monuments  divers,  pi.  31 ;  of.  Brugsch,  An  den


THE  BUILDINGS    OF  RAMSES    ON   THE  DELTA.


423


southland  before  one  of  them  a  fine  colossal  figure  in  granite.-  It  lay  not  long
ago  at  the  bottom  of  a  hole  among  the  palm  trees,  and  was  covered  by  the
inundation  every  year ;  it  has  now  been  so  raised  as  to  be  safe  from  the  waters,
llamses  could  hardly  infuse  new  life  into  all  the  provinces  which  had  been  devas-
tated years  before  by  the  Shep-
herd-kings ;  ^  but  Heliopolis/
Bubastes,^  Athribis,*'  Patumu,'
Mendis,8    Tell    Moqdam,^  and


THE   COLOSSAL    STATUE   OP   EAMSE3   II.    AT   JIITKAHINEH."

all  the  cities  of  the  eastern  corner  of  the  Delta,  constitute  a  museum  of  his  monu-
ments, every  object  within  them  testifying  to  his  activity.  He  colonised  these
towns  with  his  prisoners,  rebuilt  them,  and  set  to  work  to  rouse  them  from  the

Eerauigeher,  in  the  Zeilschrifl,  1869,  p.  2),  and  partly  by  M.  de  Morgan.  This  is  probably  the  temple
mentioned  in  tlie  Great  Inscription  of  Aha  Simbel,  11.  31-86  (Cbampollion,  Monuments  de  I'Sgypte,  etc.,
)j1.  xxxviii. ;  Rosellini,  il/o»iUjtte«(4Stonci,  pl.ciii. ;  Lepsius,  X*c7i/im.,  iii.  194),  translated  byNAViLLE,
The  Decree  of  I'hlah-Totunen  in  favour  of  Ramses  II.,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  117-138;  cf.  Bki'gsch,  Geschichte  ^gyptem,  pp.  537-540.

'  These  are  probably  those  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (II.  cvii.,  ex.),  when  he  says  that  Sesostris  cou-
fltmotedapropylon  in  the  temple  of  Hepliaistos;  cf.WiEDEMANN,iIerci(Zot's  2(oeiiesi?Mc7i,  pp. 418,426, 427.

'  This  is  the  Abu-l-hol  of  the  Arabs.  It  was  raised  in  1888  by  Major  Bagxold,  Account  of  the
Manner  in  which  Two  Colossal  Statues  of  Ramses  II.  at  Memphis  were  raised,  in  the  Proceedings  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc.,  1887-88,  vol.  x.  pp.  452-463.

'  Compare  on  this  subject  BnuGscH,  Die  JUgyptologie,  pp.  289,  290,  where,  although  the  alleged
facts  are  indisputable,  the  author  seems  to  me  to  go  too  far  in  assuming  the  existence  of  a  foreign
power  which  prevented  Kamses  II.  from  bearing  rule  in  this  part  of  the  country.

'  Kuins  of  the  temple  of  Ra.  bearing  the  cartouche  of  Ramses  II. ;  see  Maspero,  Notes  sur  quelques
points  de  Graminaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1881,  p.  Ill,  and  Griffith,  Tlte  Antiquities  of  Tell  el-
Yiihildiyeh,  pp.  64-66.  "Cleopatra's  Needle,"  transported  to  Alexandria  by  one  of  the  I'tolemies,
had  been  .sot  up  by  Ramses  at  Heliopolis ;  it  is  probably  one  of  the  four  obelisks  which  the  traditional
Sesostris  is  said  to  have  erected  in  that  city,  according  to  Pliny,  H.  Nat.,  XXXVI.  viii.  14.

'  Naville,  Ruhaatis,  pp.  9,  11,  13,  14,  16-19,  34-51,  and  pis.  xvii.,  xxi.,  xxxvi.-xxxviii.

'  BiiUGScu,  Recueil  de  Monuments  Egyptiens,  vol.  i.  pi.  x.  1,  2.

'  Naville,  The  Store-City  of  Fithom,  pp.  1-4,  11,  13,  and  pi.  iii.  A. ;  cf.  Maspebo,  Sur  Deux  Monu-
ments nouveaux  du  rigni:  de  Ramses  II,  in  the  Revue  Archgologique,  2nd  series,  vol.  xxxiv.  pp.  319-325.

»  Naville,  Ahnas  el-Medineh,  p.  18.  •  lu.,  ibid.,  p.  31,  and  pi.  iv.  o.  1,  2.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  brought  back  by  B^nijdite.


424  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

torpor  into  which  tliey  had  fallen  after  their  capture  by  Ahmosis.  He  made  a
third  capital  of  Tanis,  which  rivalled  both  Memphis  and  Thebes.^  Before
this  it  had  been  little  more  than  a  deserted  ruin :  he  cleared  out  the  debris,
brought  a  population  to  the  place ;  rebuilt  the  temple,  enlarging  it  by  aisles
which  extended  its  area  threefold ;  and  here  he  enthroned,  along  with  the
local  divinities,  a  triad,  in  which  Amonra  and  Sutkhii  sat  side  by  side  with
his  own  deified  "  double."  The  ruined  walls,  the  overturned  stelae,  the  obelisks
recumbent  in  the  dust,  and  the  statues  of  his  usurped  predecessors,  all  bear
his  name.  His  colossal  figure  of  statuary  sandstone,  in  a  sitting  attitude  like
that  at  the  Kamesseum,  projected  from  the  chief  court,  and  seemed  to  look
down  upon  the  confused  ruin  of  his  works.^

We  do  not  know  how  many  wives  he  had  in  his  harem,  but  one  of  the  lists
of  his  children  which  has  come  down  to  us  enumerates,  although  mutilated  at
the  end,  one  hundred  and  eleven  sons,  while  of  his  daughteis  we  know  of
fifty-five.^  The  majority  of  these  were  the  offspring  of  mere  concubines  or
foreign  princesses,  and  possessed  but  a  secondary  rank  in  comparison  with
himself;  but  by  his  union  with  his  sisters  Nofiitari  Maritmiit  and  Isitno-
frit,  he  had  at  least  half  a  dozen  sons  and  daughteis  who  might  aspire  to  the
throne.  Death  robbed  him  of  several  of  these  before  an  opportunity  was  open
to  them  to  succeed  him,  and  among  them  Ainenhikhopshuf,  Amenhiunamif,
and  Kamses,  who  had  distinguished  themselves  in  the  campaign  against  the
Khati ;  *  and  some  of  his  daughters — Bitaniti,  Maritamon,  Kibittaui — by
becoming  his  wives  lost  their  right  to  the  throne.^  About  the  XXX'"
year  of  his  reign,  when  he  was  close  upon  sixty,  he  began  to  think  of  an
associate,  and  his  choice  rested  on  the  eldest  surviving  son  of  his  queen
Isitnofiit,  who  was  called  Khamoisit.'^  This  prince  was  born  before  the  suc-
cession of  his  father,  and  had  exhibited  distinguished  bravery  under  the  walls
of  Qodshvi  and  at  Ascalon.''      When    he  was  still  very  young   he  had  been

'  Mabiette,  Letlres  a  M.  le  Vicomte  de  Rougfmr  Us  fouilles  de  Tauis,  in  the  Revue  Archgolorjiqne,
2nd  series,  1860,  vol.  iv.  pp.  97-111,  207-215,  and  Fragments  et  Documents  relalifs  auxfouiiles  de  San,
in  the  Jiecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  x.  pp.  1-20.  The  results  of  the  excavations  of  the  Egypt  Exploration
Fund  are  recorded  in  Petkie,  Tanis,  i.,  ii.,  1885-88.

'  Petbie,  Tanis,  pp.  13,  11,  22-24.  The  fragmeuts  of  the  colossus  were  employed  in  the  Gra3co-
Boman  period  as  building  material,  and  used  in  the  masonry  of  a  boundary  wall.

^  Thelistof  Abyilos  enumerates  thirty-three  of  hia  sonsaud  thirty-two  of  his  daughters  (Makiette,
Abydos,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,  and  p.  10),  that  of  Wady-Subua  one  hundred  and  eleven  of  hia  sons  and  fifty-one
of  his  daughters  (Lepsius,  Den/.-m.,  iii.  179  b-d);  both  lists  are  mutilated.  The  remaining  lists  for
the  most  part  record  only  .some  of  the  children  living  at  the  time  they  were  drawn  up,  at  Derr  (Cham-
POLLION,  Monuments,  pi.  xl. ;  Leisius,  Denhm.,  iii.  183  h,  184  a),  at  the  Eamesseum,  and  at  Abu  Simbel
(Lepsios,  Denhm.,  iii.  168,  186).

*  Wiedemann  (_Ai(jypt.  Gesch.,  p.  464)  has  put  together  the  little  that  is  known  of  these  individuals.

'  See  "Wiedemann,  JEgijptische  Getchichte,  pp.  466,  467.  The  marriage  of  Ramses  II.  with  his
daughters  was  pointed  out  by  E.  do  Rouge',  in  his  lectures  at  the  College  de  France.

"  Wiedemann  (.Egypiische  Geschiclite,  pp.  464-466)  has  collected  all  that  is  known  of  Khamiitit,
son  of  Bamses  H.

'  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  145  c,  156  ;  for  the  siege  of  these  towns,  ste  pp.  3I9-4C0  of  the  present  work.


THE  LEGEND    OF  KHAMOISIT  AND    MINEPRTAH.


425


!!»,»^!.!!fl"!8|P-j''


invested  with  the  office  of  high  priest  of  the  Mempbite  Phtah,  and  thus  had
secured  to  him  the  revenues  of  the  possessions  of  the  got),  which  were  the
hirgest  in  all  Egypt  after  those  of  the  Theban  Amon.  He  had  a  great
reputation  for  his  knowledge  of  abstruse  theological  questions  and  of  the
science  of  magic — a  later  age  attributing  to  him  the
composition  of  several  books  on  magic  giving  direc-
tions for  the  invocation  of  spirits  belonging  to  this
world  and  the  world  beyond.^  He  became  the  hero
also  of  fantastic  romances,  in  which  it  was  related  of
iiim  how,  in  consequence  of  his
having  stolen  from  the  mummy
of  an  old  wizard  the  books  of
Thot,  he  became  the  victim  of
possession  by  a  sort  of  lascivious
and  sanguinary  ghoul.      Kamses  the  chapel  of  the  apis  op  amenothes  m.'

relieved  himself  of  the  cares  of

state  by  handing  over  to  Khamoisit  the  government  of  the  country,  without,
however,  conferring  upon  him  the  titles  and  insignia  of  royalty.  The  chief
concern  of  KLamoii-it  was  to  secure  the  scrupulous  observance  of  the  divine
laws.  He  celebrated  at  Silsilis  *  the  festivals  of  the  inundation ;  he  presided
at  the  commemoration  of  his  father's  apotheosis,^  and  at  the  funeral  rites  of
the  Apis  who  died  in  the  XXX"*  year  of  the  king's  reign.*"  Before  his  time
each  sacred  bull  had  its  separate  tomb  in  a  quarter  of  the  Memphite
Necropolis  known  to  the  Greeks  as  the  Serapeion.  The  tomb  was  a  small  cone-
roofed  building  erected  on  a  square  base,  and  containing  only  one  chamber.
Khamoisit  substituted  for  this  a  rock-tomb  similar  to  those  used  by  ordinary
individuals.  He  had  a  tunnel  cut  in  the  solid  rock  to  a  depth  of  about  a
hundred  yards,  and  on  either  side  of  this  a  chamber  was  prepared  for  each  Apis

'  One  of  the  works  attributed  (o  him  ia  found  iu  the  Louvru  Papvrua  324S;  it  wus  pointed  out
by  Devebia,  Catalogue  dee  Munuecrits  Egyptiens  que  eont  conserves  au  Musge  du  Louvre,  p.  107;  of.
Kevili.ult,  Le  lioman  de  Setnu,  in  the  Reoue  Archeohyjiijue,  2ud  series,  vol.  xxxvii.  pp.  337,  338,  and
PleY'ie,  Chapilrta  xuppli'inenldires  du  Here  des  Marts,  pp.  67-69.

'  This  is  thi;  romance  of  Satni-Khamoisit,  discovered  by  Makiette,  Les  Papi/rus  Egypliem  du,
Muse'c  de  Jloulaq,  vol.  i.  pis.  29-32 ;  translated  for  the  first  time  by  Brugscu,  Le  Roman  d^motique  de
Selnau,  iu  tlie  Revue  ArehAilogique,  2nd  series,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  161-179;  of.  the  translation  and  biblio-
graphy of  the  subject  by  Masi'eko,  fjes  Contea  populaiTeg  de  I'uncienne  Egijpte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  161-208.

'  Drawn  by  Kaucher-Guilin,  fiom  a  sketch  by  JI.^uiette,  Renteignemeuti  snr  Its  eoixanie-quatre
Apis,  in  the  JiuUeliii  Arehi'ologiijUe  de  V Ailiiaxuin  Fraurais,  18.j5,  p.  47.

'  Festivals  of  the  years  XXX.,  XXXIV.,  XXXVII.,  and  XL.  at  Gebel  Silsileh  (Champollion,
Moimments  de  VKgyple,  etc.,  pis.  cxv.-c.tvi. ;  Lep.sius,  Deuhiu.,  iii.  175  f ;  Brigsch,  Recueil  de  Monu-
ments Kgi/jjtiens,  vol.  ii.  pi.  ixxxiii.  1,  2).

'  Feslivala  of  the  years  XXX.,  XXX  [V.,  and  XXXIX.  at  Biggoh(('HAMPOLLiON',  Monuments,  etc.,
vol.  i.  p.  162;  liiii  (iscii,  Recutil  de  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  pi.  Ixxxiii.  2),  of  the  years  XXXIV.  and  XL.
at  Sehel  (liiiLuscn,  Reeueil,  vol.  ii.  pi.  Ixxxii.  5;  Mauietie,  .^fonuments  dicers,  pi.  71,  N'od.  32,  33).

'  Maiuette,  Choix  de  Monuments  et  de  destins  da  S^rap^um  de  MimpUis,  pp.  8,  9,  and  Renseigne-
ments  sur  les  soixante-quatre  Apis,  iu  the  liulletin  ArchMogique,  1855,  pp.  66-68 ;  cf.  BuUGSCii,  Recueil,
vol.  i.  pi.  viii.,  No.  1,  and  pp.  1;"),  16.


426


THE  REACTION  AGAIN  SI   EGYPT.


on  its  death,  the  masons  closing  up  the  wall  after  the  installation  of  the  niummy.^
His  regency  had  lasted  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century,  when,  the  burden  of
government  becoming  too  much  for  him,  he  was  succeeded  in  the  LV""  year  of
Eamses  by  his  younger  brother  Miaephtah,  who  was  like  himself  a  son  of
Isitnofrit.^  Minephtah  acted,  during  the  first  twelve  years  of  his
rule,  for  his_ father,  who,  having  now  almost  attained  the  age  of
a  hundred,  passed  peacefully  away  at  Thebes  in  the  LXVII"'
year  of  his  reign,  full  of  days  and  sated  with  glory .^  He  became
the  subject  of  legend  almost  before  he  had  closed  his  eyes  upon
the  world.  He  had  obtained  brilliant  successes  during  his
life,  and  the  scenes  describing  them  were  depicted  in  scores
of  places.  Popular  fancy  believed  everything  which  he  had
related  of  himself,  and  added  to  this  all  that  it  knew  of
other  kings,  thus  making  him  the  Pharaoh  of  Pharaohs — the
embodiment  of  all  preceding  monarchs.  Legend  preferred
to  recall  him  by  the  name  Sesiisu,  Sesusturi — a  designation
which  had  been  applied  to  him  by  his  contemporaries,
and  he  thus  became  better  known  to  moderns  as  Sesostris
than  by  his  proper  name  Eamses  Miamun.^  According
to  tradition,  he  was  at  first  sent  to  Ethiopia  with  a
fleet  of  four  hundred  ships,  by  which  he  succeeded
in  conquering  the  coasts  of  the  Red  Sea  as  far  as
the  Indus.  In  later  times  several  stelae  in  the
cinnamon  country  were  ascribed  to  him.  He  is
credited  after  this  with  having  led  into  the  east  a
.great  army,  with  which  he  conquered  Syria,
Media,  Persia,  Bactriana,  and  India  as  far  as  the  ocean ;  and  with  having
on  his  return  journey  through  the  deserts  of  Scythia  reached  the  Don  [Tanais],

'  Mariette,  Eenseignements  sur  les  soixante-qiiatre  Apis,  in  the  Bulletin  Archdblogique,  1S55,  pp.
47,  48;  cf.  Le  Se'rap^um  de  Memphis,  ed.  Maspero,  pp.  138-146.  Khamoislt  was  not  buried  in  one
of  the  Apis  chambers,  as  Mariette  thought  (op.  cit.,  pp.  66-68,  86  ;  cf.  Bhugsch,  Eisloire  d'£gypte,
pp.  166,  167;  ■Wiedemann,  ^-Egyptische  GeschicJite,  pp.  465,  466);  following  the  hints  of  VassaUi,  we
found  the  remains  of  his  tomb  at  Kafr  el-Batran,  near  the  great  pyramid  of  Gizeh.

'  Jlinephtah  was  in  the  order  of  birth  the  thirteenth  sou  of  Eamses  II.  (LEPsirs,  Dejthn.,  iii.
168  a,  6).

'  A  passage  on  a  stele  of  Eamses  IV.  formally  attributes  to  him  a  reign  of  sixty-seven  years
(Mariette,  Abydos,  vol.  ii.  pis.  31,  35;  cf.  Pierret,  £tude  stir  une  Stele  de  Ramses  IV.,  in  the  Revue
Arche'ologique,  2nd  series,  vol.  xix.  p.  273).  I  procured  at  Koptos  a  stele  of  his  year  LX  VI.  (Boukiant,
Peiits  Monuments  et  petits  Tezies,  §  77,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ix.  p.  100).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  statue  in  the  British  Museum.

=  This  designation,  which  is  met  with  at  Medinet-Habu  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  208  c)  and  in  the
Anastasi  Papyrus  I.,  pi.  xii.  1.  3,  pi.  xviii.  1.  S,  pi.  xxvii.  1.  3,  was  showu  by  E.  de  Kouge'  iAlMnxum
Fran^ais,  1S54,  p.  1128)  to  refer  to  Eamses  II. ;  the  various  readings  Sesil,  Sesilsii,  Sesustiiri,  explain
the  diflerent  forms  Sesosis,  Sesoosis,  Sesostris  (Maspero,  Noui-eau  Fragment  d'un  commentaire  sur  le
Here  II.  d' H^rodote,  in  the  Annuaire  de  VAssocialioyi  dts  Etudes  Grecques,  \ol.x.  pp.  191-193).  AViede-
mann  saw  in  this  name  the  mention  of  a  king  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  not  yet  classified  (.£gyptisc}ie
■Gischichte,  pp.  407,  408  ;  cf.  Herodot's  zwdtes  Buch,  pp.  403,  404).


STATUE    OF   KHAMOISIT.''


THE  LEGEND    OF  SESOSTRIS.


427


where,  on  the  shore  of  the  Maeotie  Sea,  he  left  a  number  of  his  soldiers,
whose  descendants  afterwards  peopled  Colchis.  It  was  even  alleged  that  he
had  ventured  into  Europe,  but  that  the  lack  of  provisions  and  the  inclemency
of  the  climate  had  prevented  him  from  advancing  further  than  Thrace.  He
returned  to  Egypt  after  an  absence  of  nine  years,  and  after  having  set  up  on
his  homeward  journey  statues  and  steliB  everywhere  in  commemoration  of
his  victories.^  Herodotus  asserts  that  he
himself  had  seen  several  of  these  monu-
ments in  his  travels  in  Syria  and  Ionia.
Some  of  these  are  of  genuine  Egyptian
manufacture,  and  are  to  be  attributed  to
our  Ramses;  they  are  to  be  found  near  Tyre,
and  on  the  banks  of  the  Nahr  el-Kelb,"
where  they  mark  the  frontier  to  which  his
empire  extended  in  this  direction.  Others
have  but  little  resemblance  to  Egyptian
monuments,  and  were  really  the  work  of
the  Asiatic  peoples  among  whom  they
were  found.  The  two  figures  referred  to
long  ago  by  Herodotus,^  which  have  been
discovered  near  Ninfi  between  Sardis  and
Smyrna,  are  instances  of  the  latter.  The
shoes  of  the  figures  are  turned  up  at  the
toe,  and  the  head-dress  has  more  resemblance  to  the  high  hats  of  the  people
of  Asia  Minor  than  to  the  double  crown  of  Egypt,  while  the  lower  garment
is  striped  horizontally  in  place  of  vertically.  The  inscription,  moreover,  is
in  an  Asiatic  form  of  writing,  and  has  nothing  Egyptian  about  it.

Eamses  II.  in  his  youth  was  the  handsomest  man  of  his  time.  He  was  tall
and  straight ;  his  figure  was  well  moulded — the  shoulders  broad,  the  arms  full
and  vigorous,  the  legs  muscular ;  the  face  was  oval,  with  a  firm  and  smiling
mouth,  a  thin  aquiline  nose,  and  large  open  eyes.^     Old  age  and  death  did

'  Hekodotvs,  II.  cii.-cvii. ;  Diouomis  Sicllus,  i.  53-57 :  cf.  oa  the  legend  of  Sesostris  tho  material
collected  by  Wieuemann,  Uerodot's  zweites  Buck,  p.  404,  et  aeq.

'  Upon  the  frontier  stelio  of  the  Nahr  el-Kelb,  see  p.  278  of  the  present  work ;  the  stele  of  Adluu,
near  Tyre,  was  pointed  out  by  Renan  {illusion  de  Pli^niciu,  pp.  GGl,  G62),  whose  testimony  is  ehiiUeuged
by  F.  do  Saulcy  {Vvijiujc  in  Terre  Saiide,  18G5,  vol.  ii.  p.  282).

'  Heuodotcs,  II.  ci.  The  first  of  the  two  figures  was  discovered  by  Charles  Texieii,  Asie  Mineure,
vol.  ii.  p.  304,  and  pi.  132;  the  second  by  Beddoe  in  185G.  Sayce  was  the  first  to  recognise  the
nature  of  the  inscription  on  one  of  them  (Mouuvunia  uf  the  Hittites,  in  Trans.  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soc,  vol.  viii.
pp.  2G5-2G8 ;  cf.  PEiiiiOT-CiiiriEZ, Uifl.  dc  I' Art,  vol.  iv.  pp.  742-759).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.  This  is  tlio  stele  of  the  year  II. ;  cf.  Lepsius,
Venhn.,  iii.  197  c.

'  The  black  granite  statue  at  Turin,  for  instance,  presents  him  thus  (Ohcurti,  Caialogo  illustralo
del  MoHiimrnti  Eijizii  dd  It.  Musm  di  Torimi,  vol.  i.  pp.  GO,  Gl,  No.  G),  of  which  tho  head  ia  reproduced
on  p.  340  of  the  present  work.


STELE   01?    THE    NAUR   EL-KELB.'


428


THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


not  succeed  iu  marring  the  face  sufficiently  to  disfigure  it.     The  coffin  con-
taining his  body  is  not  the  same  as  that  in  which  his  children  placed  him  on

the  day  of  his  obsequies  ;
it  is  another  substituted
for  it  by  one  of  the
Eamessides,  and  the
mask  upon  it  has  but  a
distant  resemblance  to
the  face  of  the  victorious
Pharaoh.  The  mummy
is  thin,  much  shrunken,
and  light ;  the  bones  are
brittle,  and  the  muscles
atrophied,  as  one  would
expect  in  the  case  of  a
man  who  had  attained
the  age  of  a  hundred ;
but  the  figure  is  still
tall  and  of  perfect  pro-
portions.^ The  head,
which  is  bald  on  the  top,
is  somewhat  long,  and
small  in  relation  to  the
bulk  of  the  body  ;  there
is  but  little  hair  on  the
forehead,  but  at  the  back
of  the  head  it  is  thick,  and  in  smooth  stiff  locks,  still  preserving  its  white
colour  beneath  the  yellow  balsams  of  his  last  toilet.  The  forehead  is  low,
the  supra-orbital  ridges  accentuated,  the  eyebrows  thick,  the  eyes  small  and
set  close  to  the  nose,  the  temples  hollow,  the  cheek-bones  prominent ;  the
ears,  finely  moulded,  stand  out  from  the  head,  and  are  pierced,  like  those  of  a
woman,  for  the  usual  ornaments  pendant  from  the  lobe.  A  strong  jaw  and
square  chin,  together  with  a  large  thick-lipped  mouth,  which  reveals  through
the  black  paste  withiu  it  a  few  much-worn  but  sound  teeth,  make  up  the
features  of  the  mummied  king.  His  moustache  and  beard,  which  were  closely
shaven  in  his  lifetime,  had  grown  somewhat  in  his  last  sickness  or  after  his


THE    BAS-RELIEF    OP    NINFI.''


'  Even  after  the  coalescence  of  the  vertebrre  and  the  shrinkage  produced  by  mummifiealion,
the  body  of  Ramses  II.  still  measures  over  5  feet  S  inches  (Masfeko,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Viir  el-
Biihari,  in  the  Nd'moires  de  hi  Mission  Fntiiriiinr  du  Caire,  vol.  1.  pp.  556-5G3).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph.


^a


THE    COFFIN  AND    MUMMY   OF  RAMSES   II.  429

death ;  the  coarse  and  thick  hairs  in  them,  white  like  those  of  the  head  and
eyebrows,  attain  a  length  of  two  or  three  millimetres.  The  skin  shows  an
ochreous  yellow  colour  under  the  black  bituminous  plaster.     The  mask  of  tlie

mummy,  in    fact,  gives  a  fair    idea    of

that  of  the  living  king;    the  some-
what    unintelligent      expression,

slightly    brutish    perhaps,    but

haughty  aud  firm  of  purpose,

displays  itself  with  an  air  of

royal  majesty  beneath  the

sombre    materials     used

by  the  erabiilmer.     The

disappearance     of    the

old    hero    did  not  pro-
duce many   changes  in

the    position    of    affairs

in    Egypt:     Miuephtah

from    this     time    forth

possessed  as  Pharaoh  the       i -^

power  wdiich  he  had  pre-
viously wielded   as  regent.

He  was  now  no  longer  young.

Born    somewhere   about   the

ginning  of  the  reign  of   Ramses

II.,  he  was  now  sixty,  possibly
seventy,  years  old  ;  thus  an  old  man  succeeded  another  old  man  at  a  moment
when  Egypt  must  have  needed  more  than  ever  an  active  aud  vigorous  ruler.
The  danger  to  the  country  did  not  on  this  occasion  rise  from  the  side  of  Asia,
for  the  relations  of  the  Pharaoh  with  his  Ivharu  ^  subjects  continued  friendly,
and,  during  a  famine  which  desolated  Syria,  he  sent  wheat  to  his  Hittite


\i


COFFIN    UF    ICAM^KS    U.'


RAMSES  II.'


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-GudiD,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Briigsch-Bey,  taken  iu  18S1.  Thero
may  be  seen  below  the  cartouche  the  lines  of  the  official  report  of  inspection  written  during  the
XXI"'  <lynasty.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  1886  from  the  mummy  itself,  by  Emil  Brugsch-
Bey ;  of.  Masfero,  Les  Monties  royales  de  D^r  el-Bahari,  in  the  Memoiree  de  la  Mission  Fran^-aise,
vol.  i.  pis.  xiv.-xvi.

'  A  document  preserved  in  the  Anadaii  Vapyrm  III.  (pis.  v.,  vi.,  verso)  shows  how  regular  the
relations  witli  Syria  had  become.  It  is  the  journal  of  a  custom-house  officer,  or  of  a  scribe  placed  at
one  of  the  frontier  posts,  who  notes  from  day  today  the  letters,  messengers, officers,  and  troops  which
passed  from  the  lolli  to  the  25th  of  Pachoiis,  iu  the  III"'  year  of  the  reign  (CiiAUAS,  Reckerclu-s  pour
I'hittoire  de  la  XIX'  dymiKtie,  pp.  I).")  -97  ;  Lauth,  A'jjyjditichc  Textc  uus  der  Zeit  des  Pluirao  Mvuoplitah,
in  the  ZeiUchrift  der  1).  MorijinL  GetcU»ch.,  vol.  xx.xi.  p.  (j.")2,  et  seq. ;  BuUGSCn,  Gefch.  jEgyplenx,  pp,
579-581 ;  Euman,  Tarjehuch  eines  Gremvidieamles,  iu  the  ZHtschrij'l,  1879,  pp.  29-32,  and  ^EgypUn  und
.Kijyptiiirlu:*  Lehen  im  AlUrlhum,  p.  709).


430  THE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

allies.^  The  Deal  ions,  however,  to  the  north  and  east,  in  Libya  and  in  the  Medi-
terranean islands,  had  for  some  time  past  been  in  a  restless  condition,  which  boded
little  good  to  the  empires  of  the  old  world.  TheTimihu,  some  of  them  tributaries
from  the  XII'",  and  others  from  the  first  years  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  had
always  been  troublesome,  but  never  really  dangerous  neighbours.  From  time
to  time  it  was  necessary  to  send  light  troops  against  them,  who,  sailing  along
the  coast  or  following  the  caravan  routes,  would  enter  their  territory,  force
them  from  their  retreats,  destroy  their  palm  groves,  carry  off  their  cattle,  and
place  garrisons  in  the  principal  oases — even  in  Siwah  itself.  For  more  than  a
century,  however,  it  would  seem  that  more  active  and  numerically  stronger
populations  had  entered  upon  the  stage.  A  current  of  invasion,  having  its
origin  in  the  region  of  the  Atlas,  or  possibly  even  in  Europe,  was  setting
towards  the  Nile,  forcing  before  it  the  scattered  tribes  of  the  Sudan.  Who
were  these  invaders  ?  Were  they  connected  with  tlie  race  which  had  planted
its  dolmens  over  the  plains  of  the  Maghreb  ?  ^  Whatever  the  answer  to  this
question  may  be,  we  know  that  a  certain  number  of  Berber  tribes  ^ — the  Labii
and  Mashauasha — who  had  occupied  a  middle  position  between  Egypt  and
the  people  behind  them,  and  wlio  had  only  irregular  communications  with  the
Nile  valley,  were  now  pushed  to  the  front  and  forced  to  descend  upon  it.*
They  were  men  tali  of  stature  and  large  of  limb,  with  fair  skins,  light  hair,  and
blue  eyes ;  everything,  in  fact,  indicating  their  northern  origin.  They  took
pleasure  in  tattooing  the  skin,  just  as  the  Tuaregs  and  Kabyles  are  now  accus-
tomed to  do,  and  some,  if  not  all,  of  them  practised  circumcision,  like  a  portion
of  the  Egyptians  and  Semites.^  In  the  arrangement  of  the  hair,  a  curl  fell
upon  the  shoulder,  while  the  remainder  was  arranged  in  small  frizzled  locks.
Their  chiefs  and  braves  wore  on  their  heads  two  flowering  plumes.  A  loin-
cloth, a  wild-beast's  skin  thrown  over  the  back,  a  mantle,  or  rather  a  covering
of  woollen  or  dyed  cloth,  fringed  and  ornamented  witli  many-coloured  needle-
work, falling  from  the  left  shoulder  with  no  attacliment  in  front,  so  as
to  leave   the   body  unimpeded  in   walking, — these  constituted    the   ordinary

1  Triumphal  Inscription  of  Minephtah,  1.  24;  cf.  Makiette,  Karnal;,  pi.  53.

'  DiivEKiA,  La  Sace  suppo/teii  proio-celtique  est-elle  figur^e  sur  les  monuments  igyptienei  In  the  iJei'ue
Arch^oJogiijue,  2ud  series,  vol.  ix.  pp.  38-43.

'  The  nationality  of  these  tribes  is  evidenced  by  the  names  of  their  chiefs,  which  recall  exactly
those  of  the  Numidiana — Massyla,  Massinissa,  Massiva  (Ch.\bas,  £tudes  sur  VAniiquitg  historique,  2ud
edit.,  pp.  2,?6,  237) ;  for  IJbyan  names  preserved  on  the  Egyptian  monuments,  see  Halevt,  j^tudes
Berheres  I.;  Essai  d'^pigraphie  Lihyque,  pp.  1(;7-170.

*  The  Labfi,  LaubO,  Lobd,  are  mentioned  for  the  first  time  under  Ramses  II.  {Anastasi  Papyrus  II.,
pi.  ill.  1.  2;  cf.  Chabas,  i'tudes  sur  V Antiquity  hislorique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  1S4);  these  are  the  Libyans  of
classical  geographers  (Brugsch,  Giiigr.  his.y  vol.  ii.  pp.  79,  80).  The  Mashaftasha  answer  to  the
Maxyes  of  Herodotus  (III.  cxci.)  ;  they  furnislied  mercenaries  to  the  armies  of  Eamses  II.  {Anastasi
Papyrus  /.,  pi.  xvii.  1.  4).

'  W.  Max  MtLLER,  Notes  on  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea  of  Merenphtah,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  1887-88,  vol.  x.  pp.  147-154,  287-280.


THE  LIBYAN  KIXGDOM  AND    THE   PEOPLE    OF   THE   SEA.         431


costume  of  the  people.^  Their  arms  were  similar  to  those  of  the  Egyp-
tians, consisting  of  the  lance,  the  mace,  the  iron  or  copper  dagger,  the
boomerang,  the  bow  and
arrow,  and  the  sling.  They
also  employed  horses  and
chariots.-  Their  bravery
made  them  a  foe  not  to
be  despised,  in  spite  of
their  ignorance  of  tactics
and  their  want  of  discipline.
When  they  were  afterwards
formed  into  regiments  and
conducted  by  experienced
generals,  they  became  the
best  auxiliary  troops  wliich
Egypt  could  boast  of.  The
Labu  from  this  time  forward
were  the  most  energetic  of
the  tribes,  and  their  chiefs
prided  themselves  upon
possessing  the  leadership
over  all  the  other  clans  in  ^  ,ii,,A,

this  region  of  the  world.*

The  Labu  might  very  well  have  gained  the  mastery  over  the  other  inhabi-
tants of  the  desert  at  this  period,  who  had  become  enfeebled  by  the  frequent
defeats  which  they  had  sustained  at  the  hands  of  the  Egyptians.  At  the
moment  when  Minephtah  ascended  tlie  tlirone,  their  king,  Maraiii,  son  of  Didi,''

'  For  the  costume  of  the  Libyans,  see  the  representiitions  on  tlie  royal  tombs  (Champollion,  Monu-
ments de  VEt/ypte,  etc.,  pis.  ccl.  1,  2,  cclxxiii.  1 ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Stnrici,  pis.  clvi.,  clviii.,  clix.,.
clx.  4,  clix.  5 ;  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  120,  204)  auil  the  bas-relief  reproduced  ou  p.  414  of  the  present
work,  where  Ramses  II.  is  seen  transfixing  with  his  spear  a  chief  of  the  Timiliil.

'  Chabas,  litudes  sur  I'AnliijuM  historique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  243.  244.

"  Drawn  by  Fiiuoher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  ;  cf.  Rosellini,  ;l/oHMmflH/»5/or/f(',  pis.  clix.,  clx.  4.

'  This  was  tlie  casu  in  the  wars  of  Minephtah  and  Ramses  III.,  in  which  the  T.ahCi  and  their  kin^s
took  the  command  of  the  confederate  armies  assembled  against  Egypt  {Trivrnphnl  Iiiscriplion  of
Minephtah,  11.  4,  13,  37,  etc. ;  Inscription  of  A'u«i.s?.«  ///..  in  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storiri,  p\.  cxxxii.
11.  47,  48;  cf.  DiJMiciiEN,  Ilistorische  Inschriften,  pi.  .xlvii.).

'  This  name  was  at  first  read  JIarmaifl,  son  of  Didi,  by  E.  do  Rouge'  (Exfrait  d'nn  miinoire,  etc.,
pp.  0,7;  cf. Chabas,  Jitudes nur  I' A7itiqnil^,2n<\eiiit.,Y'AH9),  according  to  the  copy  published  by  Brugsch
(Geoij.  Inschr.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xxv.  1.  '>).  Diimichen  {ItiA.  Tnschr.,  vol.  i.  pi.  ii.  I.  \',i)  had  read  it  Maraiu-
Badidi,  making  one  name  out  of  the  two  words;  and  Gooilwin  compared  Badidi,  Batita,  with  Batfos,
wliich  in  the  Libyan  language  (Heuodotcs,  IV.  civ.)  meant  "king"  (On  the  Name  of  a  Kinij  of  the  liahu-
Lihyans,  in  Zeitschrift,  1808,  p.  S'J)  ;  Bailidi-Batita  would  tlius  be  a ''  Batlos,"  to  whom  one  would  assign
the  title  of  '•  First,"  and  who  would  have  lived  a  long  time  before  the  Baltos  of  C'yrene,  of  whom
Herodotus  has  preserved  the  semi-legendary  history.  Tho  name  ought  to  bo  read  Miiraii'l,  son  of
Didi  (BitCGSCii,  Gesdi.  J-'gypt,  p.  509;  Wiedemann,  Aiipjpt.  Gesch.,p.  474);  Halevy  thought  ho  had
discovered  Maraiii  and  Didi  in  the  Libyan  inscriptions  which  he  has  deciphered  (litndes  Berheres  I.,
Kitiai  d'^piijr.  Libyqnej  p.  lOS).


432  TEE  REACTION  AOAINST  EGYPT.

ruled  over   the  immense   territory   lying  between  tbe   Fajum  and  the  two
Syrtes :    the  Timihu,  the  Kahaka,  and   the   Mashauasha    rendered   him  the
same  obedience  as  liis  own  people.     A  revolution  had  thus  occurred  in  Africa
similar  to  that  wliich  had  taken  place  a  century  previously  in  Naharaini,
when  Sapalulu   founded  the  Hittite  empire.      A   great   kingdom   rose  into
being  where   no   state  capable   of  disturbing  Egyptian  control  had  existed
before.       The  danger  was   serious.      The   Hittites,  separated    from  the  Nile
by   the  whole    breadth    of  Kharu,  could  not   directly   threaten   any   of  the
Egyptian    cities;    but  the    Libyans,   lords   of    the  desert,   were   in  contact
with  the  Delta,  and  could  in  a  few  days  fall  upon  any  point  in  the  valley
they   chose.      Minephtah,  therefore,  hastened    to    resist   the   assault   of  the
westerns,    as    his    father    had    formerly    done    that    of    the    easterns,   and,
strange  as  it  may  seem,  he  found  among  the  troops  of  his  new  enemies  some
of  the  adversaries  with  wliom  the  Egyptians  had  fought  under  the  walls  of
Qodshu  sixty   years   before.      The    Shardana,    Lycians,   and    others,   having
left  the    coasts    of    the   Delta    and  the   Phoenician   seaports   owing   to   the
vigilant  watch  kept  by  the  Egyptians  over  their  waters,  had  betaken  them-
selves to  the  Libyan  littoral,  where  they  met  with  a  favourable  reception.
Whether  they  had  settled  in  some  places,  and  formed  there  those  colonies  of
which  a  Greek  tradition  of  a  recent  age  speaks,  we  cannot  say.^    They  certainly
followed  the  occupation  of  mercenary  soldiers,  and  many  of  them  hired  out
their  services  to  the  native  princes,  while  others  were  enrolled  among  the
troops  of  the  King  of  the  Khati  or  of  the  Pliaraoli  himself.      Maraiu  brought
with  him  Achasans,  Shardana,  Turslia,  Shagalasha,"  and  Lycians  in  consider-
able numbers  when  he  resolved  to  begin  the  strife.^      This  was  not  one   of
those  conventional  little  wars  which  aimed  at  nothing  further  than  the  im-
position of  the  payment  of  a  tribute  upon  the  conquered,  or  the  conquest  of
one  of  their  provinces.     Maraiu  had  nothing  less  in  view  than  tlie  transport
of  his  whole  people  into  the  Nile  valley,  to  settle  permanently  there  as  the
Hyksos  had  done  before  him.^     He  set  out  on  his  march  towards  the  end  of

'  For  these  traditions,  Eee  Theigge,  Ties  Cyrenensium,  a  primordiis  inde  Civitatis  usque  ad  letaiem
qnd  in  provincial  formam  a  Homanis  est  redacta,  pp.  64-79.

2  The  Shakalasha,  Shagalasha.identified  with  the  Sicilians  by  E.  do  Rouge' (£a:<ra«7  d'un  m^moire,
etc,  pp.  24,  25;  cf.  Lauth,  Homer  und  Jijgypten,  pp.  13,  14,  17,  and  Chabas,  Etudes  sur  V Antiquity
hislorique,  2nd  edit.,  p.  292,  Secherdies  pour  Vhistoire  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  35-39),  were  a  people
of  Asia  Minor  whose  position  there  is  approximately  indicated  by  the  site  of  tlie  town  Sagalassoe,
named  after  them  (Maspero,  lierue  Critique,  1S80,  vol.  i.  pp.  109,  110).

'  The  Inscription  of  Minephtah  (II.  13,  14)  distinguishes  the  Libyans  of  Maraiu  from  "  the  people
oflhe  Sea."

*  Triumphal  Inscription  of  Minephtah,  11.  22,  23.  The  war  was  described  in  an  inscription  now  lost
which  Minephtah  had  had  engraved  in  the  temple  of  Phtah  at  Memphis.  A  copy  exists  at  Karnak,
and  the  remains  of  it,  pointed  out  by  ChampuUion  (Monuments,  vol.  ii.  p.  193;,  were  summarised  by
Lejisius  (DcjiTrm.,  iii.  199  a)  and  by  Bru^scli  (Geog.  luschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xxxv.),  published  in  a
fomplete  form  by  Diimiohen  {Hist.  Inschr.,  vol.  i.  pis.  ii.-vi.),  by  Mariette  (Karnak;  pis.  52-55),  and  by
E.  do  Rouge'  (Inscriptions  recueillies  en  Egypte,  pi.  clxxi.\.-csfviii.),  who  also  annotated  and  translated


TEE  FIRST  LIBTAN  INVASION.  433'

tlie  IV"  year  of  the  Pharaoh's  reign,  or  the  beginuiug  of  his  V",  surrounded
by  the  elite  of  his  troops,  "  the  first  choice  from  among  all  the  soldiers  and  all
the  heroes  in  eaoh  land."  The  announcement  of  their  approach  spread  terror
among  the  Egyptians.  The  peace  which  they  had  enjoyed  for  fifty  years  bad
cooled  their  warlike  ardour,  and  the  machinery  of  their  military  organisation,
had  become  somewhat  rusty.  The  standing  army  had  almost  melted  away  ;
the  regiments  of  archers  and  charioteers  were  no  longer  effective,  and  th&
neglected  fortresses  were  not  strong  enough  to  protect  the  frontier.  As-
a  consequence,  the  oases  of  Farafrab  and  of  the  Natron  lakes  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  enemy  at  the  first  attack,  and  the  eastern  provinces  of  the  Delta
became  the  possession  of  the  invader  before  any  steps  could  be  taken  for  their
defence.  Memphis,  which  realised  the  imminent  danger,  broke  out  into  open
murmurs  against  the  negligent  rulers  who  had  given  no  heed  to  the  country's-
ramparts,  and  had  allowed  the  garrisons  of  its  fortresses  to  dwindle  away.
Fortunately  Syria  remained  quiet.  The  Khati,  in  return  for  the  aid  afforded
them  by  Miuephtah  during  tiie  famine,  observed  a  friendly  attitude,  and  the
Pharaoh  was  thus  enabled  to  withdraw  the  troops  from  his  Asiatic  provinces.
He  could  with  perfect  security  take  the  necessary  measures  for  ensuring
"  Heliopolis,  the  city  of  Turnu,"  against  surprise,  "  for  arming  Memphis,  the
citadel  of  Phtah-Tonen,  and  for  restoring  all  things  which  were  in  disorder :
he  fortified  Pibalisit,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Shakana  canal,  on  a  branch
of  that  of  Heliopolis,"  and  he  rapidly  concentrated  his  forces  behind  these
quickly  organised  lines.^  Maraiu,  however,  continued  to  advance ;  in  the
early  montiis  of  the  summer  he  had  crossed  the  Canopic  branch  of  the  Nile,
and  was  now  about  to  encamp  not  far  from  the  town  of  Piriii.  When  the
king  heard  of  this  "  he  became  furious  against  them  as  a  lion  that  fascinates
its  victim  ;  he  called  his  officers  together  and  addressed  them  :  '  I  am  about  to
make  you  hear  the  words  of  your  master,  and  to  teach  you  this :  I  am  the
sovereign  shepherd  who  feeds  you ;  1  pass  my  days  in  seeking  out  that  which
is  useful  for  you  :  I  am  your  father;  is  there  among  you  a  father  like  me  who
makes  his  children  live?  You  are  trembling  like  geese,  you  do  not  know  what
is  good  to  do :  no  one  gives  an  answer  to  the  enemy,  and  our  desolated  land  is

it  (^Exlrail  d'unM^mmresurlesattaquet,  pp.  6-13),  by  I.auth  {Jigypliiche  Texte  aus der Zeit  Menephtah^
in  the  ZeiUchri/t  d.  D.  Morrj.  Geeellech.,  1807,  vol.  .\xi.  pp.  652-f;'j9),  by  Bircli  (The  Invaniun  of  Fgijpt
hij  the  Greeks,  in  Ilecords  of  the  Past,  Igt  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  ;!7, 3S),  by  Cliabas  {PAudef  fur  I'Anliqtiili',
2iiile<lit.,  pp.  11)1-201,  and  Jli'cherclies pour  V hint .  dela  XIX'  dynantie,  pp.  84-92),  and  iastly  by  IJrnf;aeU
(Gench.  JEijyjiteriK,  pp.  ."i(i7-577).  There  arc  extracts  from  it  ou  a  i-olumn  at  Meinphi.-j  (Ma-spkuo,  hiults
Kur  diffgrenh  points  de  (Irmnmaire,  etc.,  in  the  '/.eitsclirift.  1881,  p.  118),  which  bears  tlie  (lute  of  the  year
V.jthelird  of  Epipbi,  and  upon  astele  at  Atbribis(MASPEitn,  op.cif.,  in  the  Zei Inch ri/l.iiiS'.i,  pp.  05-07).
'  With  regard  to  these  localities,  see  Biu^Gscu,  Diet.  Gt%grapliique,  pp.  70,  77,  Ul7,  797,  ami
Naville,  Gnshm  and  the  Shrine  of  Saft  cl-IIenneli,  pp.  19, 20,  and  The  Mnntid  of  the  ,/em  and  the  Cilij
of  Oniar,  pp.  22,  23.  Chabas  wonld  identify  Pibali-it  witli  Bubiistis  (Jiltules  sur  r.Udiqnitt',  jip.  201-
203 ;  Ueeherclien  pour  I'histoire  de  la  XIX'  dijnastii;  p.  9 1) ;  [  agree  with  Brngsch  in  placing  it  at  liclbeis.

2    F


434  THE  HE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

,'ibandoned  to  the  incursions  of  all  nations.  Tlie  barbarians  harass  the  frontier,
rebels  violate  it  every  day,  every  one  robs  it,  enemies  devastate  our  seaports,
they  penetrate  into  the  fields  of  Egypt;  if  there  is  an  arm  of  a  river  they  halt
there,  they  stay  for  days,  for  months;  .  .  .  they  come  as  numerous  as  reptiles,
and  no  one  is  able  to  sweep  them  back,  these  wretches  who  love  deatli  and
hate  life,  whose  hearts  meditate  the  consummation  of  our  ruin.  Behold,  they
arrive  with  their  chief;  they  pass  their  time  on  the  land  which  they  attack  in
filling  their  stomachs  every  day ;  this  is  the  reason  why  they  come  to  the  land
of  Egypt,  to  seek  their  sustenance,  and  their  intention  is  to  install  themselves
there  ;  mine  is  to  catch  them  like  fish  upon  their  bellies.  Tiieir  chief  is  a  dog,
a  poor  devil,  a  madman;  he  shall  never  sit  down  again  in  his  place.'" ^  He
then  announced  that  on  the  14th  of  Epiphi  he  would  himself  conduct  the
troops  against  the  enemy.

These  were  brave  words,  but  we  may  fancy  the  figure  that  this  king  of  more
than  sixty  years  of  age  would  have  presented  in  a  chariot  in  the  middle  of  the
fray,  and  his  competence  to  lead  an  effective  charge  against  the  enemy.  On  the
other  hand,  his  absence  in  such  a  critical  position  of  affairs  would  have  endangered
the  morale  of  his  soldiers  and  possibly  compromised  the  issue  of  the  battle.  A
dream  settled  the  whole  question.^  While  Minephtah  was  asleep  one  night,
he  saw  a  gigantic  figure  of  Phtah  standing  before  him,  and  forbidding  him
to  advance.  "'Stay,'  cried  the  god  to  liim,  while  handing  him  the  curved
khopesh  :  '  put  away  discouragement  from  tliee  ! '  His  Majesty  said  to  him  :
'  But  wliat  am  I  to  do  then  ?  '  And  Phtah  answered  him :  '  Despatch  thy  infantry,
and  send  before  it  numerous  chariots  to  tlie  confines  of  the  territory  of  Piriu.' "  ^
The  Pharaoh  obeyed  the  command,  and  did  not  stir  from  his  position.  Maraiii
had,  m  the  mean  time,  arranged  his  attack  for  the  1st  of  Epiphi,  at  the  rising
of  the  sun  :  it  did  not  take  place,  however,  until  the  3rd.  "  Tlie  archers  of  His
Majesty  made  havoc  of  the  barbarians  for  six  hours ;  they  were  cut  off  by  the
edge  of  the  sword."  When  Maraiu  saw  the  carnage,  "  he  was  afraid,  his  heart
failed  him  ;  he  betook  himself  to  flight  as  fast  as  his  feet  could  bear  him  to  save
his  life,  so  successfully  that  his  bow  and  arrows  remained  behind  him  in  his
precipitation,  as  well  as  everything  else  he  had  upon  him."  His  treasure,  his
arras,  his  wife,  together  witli  the  cattle  which  he  had  brought  with  him  fof  his

'   Triumphal  Inscriptiuii  of  Minephtah,  II.  IG-l'.t,  21,  24;  of.  Mariette,  Karnak,  pis.  ni,  53.

^  Triumphal  Inscription  of  Minephtah,  U.  28-30  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Karnak,  pi.  53.  El.  Meyer  sees
in  this  nothing  but  a  customary  rhetoricul  expression,  and  thinks  tliat  the  god  spoke  iu  order  to
encourage  the  king  to  defend  himself  vigorously  (Geschichle  JEijyptens,  p.  307,  u   2).

'  Tliis  name  was  read  Pa-ariby  E.  de  liouge  {Exlrait  d'an  Memoire  siir  lex  altaqiies,  pp.  7,  8),  Pa-
ali  by  Lauth  {Homer  und  JEgijpten,  p.  15),  and  was  transcribed  Pa-ari-shop  by  Brugacb,  who  identified
with  Proaopitis  (in  the  Zeilschrifl,  1867,  p.  98).  The  orthograpliy  of  the  text  at  Atbribia  (uerso,  1.  9)
shows  that  we  ought  to  read  Piri,  PirQ,  Piriii  (W.  M.  Muller,  Asien  xmd  Europa,  p.  357,  No.  3) ;
possibly  the  name  is  ideutical  with  that  of  laru  which  is  mentioned  ia  the  Pyramid-texts  {Mirniri.
1.  182,  Tepil.,  1.  H5).


THE    VICTORY   OF   TUE  EOTPTIANS   AT  TIRIU.  435

use,  became  the  prey  of  the  conqueror ;  "  he  tore  out  the  feathers  from  his  head-
dress, and  took  flight  with  such  of  those  wretched  Libyans  as  escaped  the
massacre,  but  the  ofBcers  who  had  the  care  of  His  Majesty's  team  of  horses
followed  in  their  steps  "  and   put   most  of  them  to  the  sword.     Maraiu  suc-
•ceeded,  however,  in  escaping  in  the  darkness,  and  regained  his  own  country
without   water   or   provisions,  and  almost  without   escort.      The   conquering
troops  returned  to  the  camp  laden  with  booty,  and  driving  before  them  asses
carrying,  as  bloody  tokens  of  victory,  quantities  of  hands  and  phalli  cut  from
the  dead  bodies  of  the  slain.     The  bodies  of  six  generals  and  of  6359  Libyan
soldiers  were  found  upon  the  field  of  battle,  together  with  '222  Shagalasha,  724
Tursha,  and  some  hundreds  of  Shardana  and  Achteans :  several  thousands  of
•prisoners  passed  in  procession  before  the  Pharaoh,  and  were  distributed  among
such  of  his  soldiers  as  had  distinguished  themselves.'     These  numbers  show
the  gravity  of  tiie  danger  from  which  Egypt  had  escaped  :  the  announcement
■of  the  victory  filled  the  country  with  enthusiasm,  all  the  mote  sincere  because
■of  the  reality  of  the  panic  which  had  preceded  it.     The  fellahiu,  intoxicated
with  joy,  addressed  each  other :  "  '  Come,  and  let  us  go  a  long  distance  on  the
road,  for  there  is  cow  no  fear  in  the  hearts  of  men.'     The  fortified  posts  may
at  last  be  left ;  the  citadels  are  now  open  ;  messengers  stand  at  the  foot  of  the
walls  and  wait  in  the  shade  for  the  guard  to  awake  after  their  siesta,  to  give
them  entrance.     The  military  police  sleep  on  tlieir  accustomed  rounds,  and  the
people  of  the  marshes  once  more  drive  their  herds  to  pasture  without  i'ear  of
raids,  for  there  are  no  longer  marauders  near  at  hand  to  cross  the  river;  the  cry
of  the  sentinels  is  heard  no  more  in  the  night :  '  Halt,  thou  that  comest,  thou
that  comest  under  a  name  which  is  not  thineown — sheer  off  !'and  men  no  longer
exclaim  on  the  following  morning  :  '  Such  or  such  a  tiung  has  been  stolen ; '
but  the  towns  fall  once  more  into  their  usual  daily  routine,  and  he  who  works
in  the  hope  of  the  harvest,  will  nourish  himself  upon  that  which  he  shall
have  reaped."  ^     The  return  from  Memphis  to  Thebes  was  a  triumphal  march,
""  He  is  very  strong,  Binri  ifinephtah,"  sang  the  court  poets,  "  very  wise  are  his
projects — his  words  have  as  beneficial  effect  as  those  of  Thot — everything  which
he  does  is  completed  to  the  end. — When  lie  is  like  a  guide  at  the  head  of  his
<irmies — his  voice  penetrates  the  fortress  walls.— Very  friendly  to  those  who  bow
their  backs — before  Miamun — his  valiant  soldiers  spare  him  who  humbles  him-
self— before  ids  courage  and  before  his  strength  ; — they  fall  upon  the  Libyans
—they    consume  the   Syrian; — the   Shardana  whom   thou  hast  brought  back

'  The  numbers  ari^  imrtly  mutilated  in  the  Triumphal  Interiplion,  11.  511-01  ;  and  do  not  entirely
coincide  with  those  on  the  Athribis  inscription  (Masi'EUq,  Notes  mr  quelques  points  de  Urammaire,
■§  XXXV.,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  1«83,  iijj.  (Jo-CV),

Triumphal  Inicriiition  of  the  Ameiuqihium,  in  Petkie,  E<jypl  and  Lrael (Contemporary  Review,  No.
-305,  p.  G22) ;  I  have  given  n  paraphrase  of  the  Egyptian  text  from  the  Etiglisli  translation  of  Griffith.


436


TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EQTPT.


STATUE    OF   m!nEPUTAH.'


by  thy  sword — mike  prisoners  of  tlieir  own  tribes. — Very
happy  thy  return  to  Thebes — victorious !  Thy  chariot  is
drawn  by  hand — the  conquered  chiefs  march
backwards  before  thee — whilst  thou  leadest
them  to  thy  venerable  father — Amon,  husband
of  his  mother."  ^  And  the  poets  amuse  them-
selves with  summoning  3Iaraiii  to  appear  in
Egypt,  pursued  as  he  was  by  his  own  people  and
obliged  to  hide  himself  from  them.  "He  is
nothing  any  longer  hut  a  beaten  man,  and  has
become  a  proverb  among  theLabu.and  his  chiefs
repeat  to  themselves :  '  Nothing  of  the  kind  has
occurred  since  the  time  of  Ka.'  The  old  men  say
each  one  to  his  children  :  '  Misfortune  to  the
Labu !  it  is  all  over  with  them  !  No  one  can  any
longer  pass  peacefully  across  the  country  ;  but
the  power  of  going  out  of  our  land  has  been
taken  from  us  in  a  single  day,  and  the  TihoniV
have  been  withered  up  in  a  single  year;  Siitkhu  has  ceased  to  be  their  chief,
and  he  devastates  their  "duars;  "  there  is  nothing  left  but  to  conceal  oneself,,
and  one  feels  nowhere  secure  except  in  a  fortress.' "  The  news  of  the  victory
was  carried  throughout  Asia,  and  served  to  discourage  the  tendencies  to  revolt
which  were  beginning  to  make  themselves  manifest  there.  "  The  chiefs  gave
there  their  salutations  of  peace,  and  none  among  the  nomads  raised  his  head
after  the  crushing  defeat  of  the  Libyans ;  Khilti  is  at  peace,  Canaan  is  a
prisoner  as  far  as  the  disaffected  are  concerned,  the  inhabitant  of  Ascalon  is
led  away,  Gezer  is  carried  into  captivity,  lanuamim  is  brought  to  nothing,  the
Israilu  are  destroyed  and  have  no  longer  seed,  Kharu  is  like  a  widow  of  the  laud
of  Egypt."  ^  Minephtah  ought  to  have  followed  up  his  opportunity  to  the  end,
but  he  had  no  such  intention,  and  his  inaction  gave  JMaraiii  time  to  breathe.
Perhajis  the  effort  which  he  had  made  had  exhausted  his  resources,  perhaps

'  Anastaei  Papyrus  II.,  pi.  iv.  1.  i,  pi.  v.  1.  4  ;  translated  by  Maspero  (Dit  Genre  Epietulaire,  pp.
82,  83)  and  by  Cliabas  (Pecherches  pour  Vhiilolre  de  la  XIX'  dijnastie,  pp.  93,  91).  Tbe  text  was
referred  to  Minephtab  by  E.  de  Rouge  {Exlrait  d'un  ilgmoire  $ur  les  aUaques,  p.  31) ;  cf.  a  passage  of  a
more  general  cbaracter  in  the  Anasta«i  Papyrus  HI,  pi.  vi.  1. 11,  pi.  vii.  1. 105  (cf.  MiSPERO,  Du  Genre
Epistolaire,  pp.  77,  78;   Chabas,  litudes  sur  VAntiquM,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  219,  220).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograph  by  Dereria;  tbe  statue  is  at  Gizeb.

'  Tbis  passage  is  taken  from  a  stele  discovered  by  Petrie  in  1896,  on  tbe  site  of  tbe  Amenopliium  ut
Tbebes  ;  cf.  Flinders  Petrie,  in  tbe  Contemporary  Revieic,  No.  365,  p.  622.  Tbe  mention  of  tbe  Israilu
immediately  calls  to  mind  the  place-names  Yusbapb-ilu,  Yakob-ilu,  on  tbe  lists  of  Tbutmosis  HI.
(Mariette,  Karnali,  pis.  17,  IS,  20,  Nos.  78,  102)  which  have  been  compared  with  the  names  Jacob
and  Joseph  (GrOff,  Lettre  a  M.  Pivillout  sur  le  noiit  de  Jacob  ef  de  Joseph  en  i-'gypte,  and  Une  Question
deprioritg,  in  the  lievue  Egyptologiqur,  vol.  iv.  pp.  95-101.  146-151,  and  DUerses  Etudes,  pp.  5-8,  by
Ed.  Meyer,  in  tbe  Zeitschri/t  fiir  alttestamentliche  Wissenschaft,  1886,  pp.  1-16).


THE    TRIUMPH    OF  MfNEPBTAE.


437


Tr-^


UU;    UHATELS    UK    KAMSl.S    II.    AND    MIXEPHTAH    AT    SILSILEH.'


old  age  prevented  him  from  prosecuting  his  success ;  he  was  content,  in  any
case,  to  station  bodies  of  pickets  on  the  frontier,  and  to  fortify  a  few  new  posi-
tions to  the  east  of  the  Delta.  The  Libyan  kiugdom  was  now  in  the  same
position  as  that  in  which  the  Hittite  had  been  after  the  campaign  of  Seti  I. :
its  power  had  been  checked  for  the  moment,  but  it  remained  intact  on  the
Egyptian  frontier,  awaiting  its  opportunity.

Minephtah  lived  for  some  time  after  this  memorable  year  V.,^  and  the
number  of  monuments  which  belong  to  this  period  show  that  he  reigned  in
peace.  We  can  see  that  he  carried  out  works  in  the  same  places  as  his
father  l)efore  him  ;  at  Tanis  as  well  as  Thebes,  in  Nubia  as  well  as  in  the
Delta.''  He  worked  the  sandstone  quarries  for  his  building  materials,  and
■continued  the  custom  of  celebrating  the  feasts  of  the  inundation  at  Silsileh.
One  at  least  of  the  stelaj  which  he  set  up  on  the  occasion  of  these  feasts
is  really  a  chapel,  with    its   architraves  and  columns,  and   still  excites  the

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

-  The  last  known  year  of  his  reign  is  the  year  VIII.  (Bolvrjna  Pap.,  No.  109-1 ;  of.  Lincke,  Korre-
epoudeiizen  aua  der  Zeil  der  Eameuideii,  pp.  2,  l!9).  The  lists  of  JIauetho  assign  to  him  a  roigu  of  from
twenty  to  forty  yours  (MuLLER-DiD0T,i^ra7.  Hist.  GViec,  vol.  ii.  pp.  .'tV-l.ST.J,  .OTS,  .'jSl)  ;  Brugscli  makes
it  out  to  have  been  thirty-four  years,  from  1300  to  120()  u.c.  (deach.  Jligijp.,  pp.  5G0,  ."iSS),  whicli  is  evi-
dently too  much,  but  wo  may  attrilnite  to  liiin  without  riskof  serious  error  a  reign  of  about  twenty  years.

'  ^Monuments  of  Minephtah  at  Tanis,  see  I'ETRit',  Tunis,  i.  pp.  5,  U,  7,  8,  11,  1.5,  and  pis.  i.,  ii.,  iv. :
■vol.  ii.  pp.  11,  l.")-20, 28,  21),  pi.  viii.;  for  i^uh\a, BeohiiPsica, Brie/e aus  JEgypten  und  /Ii(liiupieii,i>.  "''•


438


TEE  BE  ACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.


admiration  of  tlie  traveller  on  account  botli  of  its  form  and  of  its  picturesque-
appearance.     The   last  years  of   his  life  were  troubled  by  the
"*"^      intrigues  of  princes    who  aspired  to  the  throne,  and  by  the
ambition  of  the  ministers  to  whom  he  was  obliged  to  delegate
his  authority.      One   of  the   latter,  a   man  of  Semite   origin,
named  Ben-Azana,  of  Zor-bisana,  who  had  assumed  the  appel-
lation of  his  first  patron,  Eamsesiipirniri,  appears-
to  have  acted  for  him  as  regent.^     Minephtali  was-
succeeded,  apparently,  by  one  of  his  sons,  called
Set!,  after   bis   great-grandfather.^     Seti  II.  had
doubtless  reached  middle  ao;e  at  the  time  of  his
accession,  but  his  portraits  represent  him,  never-
theless, with  the  face  and  figure  of  a  young  man.*
The   expression    in    these    is    gentle,   refined,
haughty,  and  somewhat  melancholic.    It  is  the
type  of  Seti  I.  and  Eamses  II.,  but  enfeebled
and,  as  it  were,  saddened.     An  inscrip-
tion of  his  second  year  attributes  to
him  victories   in   Asia,*  but.  others  of
the  same  period  indicate  the  existence
of  disturbances  similar  to  those  which
had  troubled  the  last  years  of  his  father.
These    were    occasioned    by    a    certaiui
Aiari,  who   was   high    priest   of  Phtali,  and  who  had   usurped  titles  which
belonf^ed  ordinarily  to  the  Pharaoh   or  his  eldest  son,  '•  iieir  in  the  house  of
Sibu,  and  hereditary  prince  of  the  two  lands." "    Seti  died,  it  would  seem,  without

'  This  is  wliat  Mariette  coiK-ludes,  with  great  probability,  from  the  titles  given  to  this  individual,
on  a  stele  at  Abydos  (Notice  d-!S  principaux  Monuments,  18Gt,  p.  156;  cf.  Ahydof,  vol.  ii.  pi.  M,  and.
Catalogue  g^iKTral  des  Monuments  d'Abijdos,  No.  113G,  p.  422).

-  E.  de  Kou"e  introduced  Amenmeses  and  Siphtah  between  Minephtah  and  Sett  II.  (h'lude  sur  une
stele  de  la  Bibliolheque  Impn-i(de,  pp.  lS."i-lS8),  and  I  had  up  to  the  present  followed  his  example
( Hist.  Ancienne,  5tli  edit.,  pp.  25S,  259) ;  I  have  come  back  to  the  position  of  Chabas,  making  Seti  I[.
the  immediate  successor  of  Minephtah  (_Ilecl,erches  pour  I'liistoire  de  la  XIX'  dijnas'ie,  pp.  114-120),
which  is  also  the  view  of  Brugsch  (Gescli.  Mgiipten^,  p.  585),\Viedemann  (.F.gijptische  Geschichte,  p.  481 ),
and  Ed.  Meyer  (Gesch.  d  •«  alien  .-Egijptens,  p.  308).  The  succession  as  it  is  now  given  does  not  seem  to
me  to  be  frte  from  difticultics;  the  solution  generally  adopted  has  only  the  merit  of  being  preferable
to  that  of  E.  de  Eougc,  which  I  previously  supported.

'  Thelast  date  knoivn  of  his  reign  is  the  year  II.  (Ch.\mpoll:on.  Monuments  de  VEgypte,  etc.,
vol.  i.  p.  258)  which  is  found  at  Silsilis ;  Cliab.is  was,  nevertheless,  of  the  opinion  that  he  reigned  a
considerable  time  (Itecherches  pour  Vhistoire  de  1 1  XIX  dynastic,  p.  125).

'  ('-HAMPOLLION,  Monuments,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  78;  Lepsivs,  Denl.m.,  iii.  204  a.  Tlie  expressions
employed  in  this  document  do  not  vary  much  from  the  usual  protocol  of  all  kings  of  this  period.
The  triumphal  chant  of  Seti  II.  preserved  in  the  Anaslasi  I'apyrusIV.,  pi.  v.,  11.  0-12,  is  a  copy  of  the
triumphal  chant  of  Blineplitah  (see  p.  436,  note  1,  of  the  present  woik),  which  is  in  the  same  Papyrus
(iii.  pi.  vi.  1.  11,  pi.  vii.  1.  10;  cf.  Maspeko,  Du  Genre  Apistolaire,  p.  81).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.  The  original  is  in  Ihi;  liritish  JInsenm ;  cf.
Arundale-Bonomi-Birch,  Gallery  of  Egyptian  Antiquities,  pi.  43.

«  E.  DE  RODQE,  Notice  des  monuments.  3rd  edit.,  pp.  3/,  38,  after  the  statue  A  71  in  the  Louvre.


SETJ  II.,    AMENMESIS,    SIPHTAH.


439


Imvini^  had  time  to  finish  his  toinb.^  We  do  not  know  whether  he  left  any
legitimate  children,  but  two  sove-
reigns succeeded  him  who  were  m  it
directly  connected  with  him,  but
were  probably  the  grandsons  of
the  Amenmesis  and  tlie  Siphtah,
whom  we  meet  with  among  the
ciiildren  of  Ramses.^  The  first
of  these  was  also  called  Amen-
mesis, and  he  held  sway  for  several
years  over  the  whole  of  Egyjit,
and  over  its  foreign  possessions.^
The  second,  who  was  named
Siphtah  -  Miiipphtah,  ascended
"  the  throne  of  his  father  "  thanks
to  the  devotion  of  his  minister
Bai,^  but  in  a  greater  degree  to  his
marriage  with  a  certain  princess
called  Tausirit.''  He  maintained
himself   in    this    position    for    at

'  Chamtolliox,  Monuments  de  I'l^ijypte,

etc.,  vol.  i.   pp.   4.5a-462,  807,  808  ;  LisFii-
m'BE,  Les  Hypogees  royanx  de  Thebes,  in  the

.\Umoires  de  la  Mission  Franyaise,  vol.  ii.,

■Jnd  book.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pUotograpU

by  Emil   Brugsch-Bey,  taken   at    Bab   el-

Moluk,  in  tUe  tomb  of  the  sovereign.

^  Maspebo,  Lettre  a  M.  Gustave  d' l-'.ich-  seti  ii.'

thai,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  I'Acail^mie

des  Inscriptions  it    Belles-LHtres,   1873,    pp.   41-43;    Wiedemann   {^Eyyjjtischi/   deschiclite,    p.   484)

disputes  this  hypothesis.

*  GraHiti  of  this  sovereign  have  been  found  at  the  second  cataract  (Sayoe,  (lleaniugs  from  the  Land

of  Egypt,  in  the  liecueil  de  Trarau.r,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  102,  163).     Certain  expressions   have  induced

E.  de  Bouge  to  believe  (Elude  sur  unestele  ilr  la  Bibliolheque  Inip^riale,  pp.  ISil,  187)  that  he,  as  well

as  Siphtah,  came  originally  from  Kliibit  in  the  Aphroditopolite  norae  (cf.  Elsenlohii,  On  the  Political

Condition  of  Egypt,  in  Trans.oi  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,vol.  i.pp.  377,  378;  Wiedemann,  .Egyptischc  Gesch..
p.  484).  This  was  an  allusion,  as  Chabas  had  seen  (Uer.herches  sur  Vhistoire  de  la  XIX'  dijnastie,  pU.
132,  133;  cf.  El).  Meyer,  Oeseh.  des  Allen  JEgyptens,  p.  308,  n.  3),  to  the  myth  of  Horns,  similar  to  that
which  I  pointed  out  further  back  (p.  '.^54,  u.  2)  relating  to  Thiitmosis  III.,  and  which  we  more  usually
meet  with  in  the  cases  of  those  kings  who  were  not  marked  out  from  their  birth  onwards  for  the  throne.
'  Bai  has  left  two  inscriptions  behind  him,  one  at  Silsilis  (Champollion',  Monument',  eta.,  pi.  cxx.  4  ;
I.EPsas,  Denkm.,  iii.  202  a;  cf.  the  translation  of  the  text  in  Bkugsch,  Gexchiclde  .Kgyptens,  pp.
587,  588)  and  tlje  other  at  Sehcl  (LErsir,s,  Denhnt.,  iii.  20G  h;  Makiette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  71,
No.  44),  and  the  titles  he  assumes  on  both  monuments  show  the  position  ho  occupied  at  the  Theban
court  during  the  reign  of  Siphtah-Minejihtah.  His  oiriee  was  descrilied  by  E.  de  Rougtf  (Elude  sur
une  stele  de  la  mijiiolheque  Im/i^riale,  pp.  180,  187);  cf.  Chabas,  Ueeherehes  pour  rkistoire  de  la
XIX'  dynastir,  pp.  1'27-129,  who  thought  that  liai  had  succeeded  in  maintaining  his  rights  to  the
crown  against  the  claims  of  Amennjesis.

"  The  tomb  of  this  queen,  which  she  probably  occupied  in  common  with  her  husband,  was  described


440  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

least  six  years/  dnriug  which  he  made  an  expedition  into  Ethiopia,  and
received  in  audience  at  Thebes  messengers  from  all  foreign  nations.^  He
'kept  up  so  zealously  the  appearance  of  universal  dominion,  that  to  judge  from
his  inscriptions  he  miist  have  been  the  equal  of  the  most  powerful  of  his
predecessors  at  Thebes.

Egypt,  nevertheless,  was  proceeding  at  a  quick  pace  towards  its  downfall.
No  sooner  had  this  monarch  disappeared  than  it  began  to  break  up.^  There
were  no  doubt  many  claimants  for  the  crown,  but  none  of  them  succeeded  in
<lisposing  of  the  claims  of  his  rivals,  and  anarchy  reigned  supreme  from  one
■end  of  the  Xile  valley  to  the  other.  •'  The  land  of  Qimit  began  to  drift  away,
and  the  people  within  it  had  no  longer  a  sovereign,  and  this,  too,  for  many  years,
until  other  times  came ;  for  the  land  of  Qimit  was  in  the  hands  of  the  princes
ruling  over  the  nomes,  and  they  put  each  other  to  death,  both  great  and  small.
Other  times  came  afterwards,  during  years  of  nothingness,  in  which  Arisu,  a
Syrian,*  was  chief  among  them,  and  the  whole  country  paid  tribute  before  him ;
■every  one  plotted  with  his  neighbour  to  steal  the  goods  of  otiiers,  and  it  was  the
same  with  regard  to  the  gods  as  with  regard  to  men,  offerings  were  no  longer
made  in  the  temples."  ^  This  was  in  truth  the  revenge  of  the  feudal  system  upon
Pharaoh.  The  barons,  kept  in  clieck  by  Ahmosis  and  Amenotbes  I,  restricted  by
the  successors  of  these  sovereigns  to  the  position  of  simj^le  officers  of  the  king,
profited  by  the  general  laxity  to  recover  as  many  as  possible  of  their  ancient
privileges.  For  half  a  century  and  more,  fortune  had  given  them  as  masters
only  aged  princes,  not  capable  of  maintaining  continuous  vigilance  and  firmness.

by  CuAMPOLLiON,  3/oH«mp»fs, etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  4-18-459,  S06-S0S  ;  with  regard  to  the  usurpations  of  it.
see  EiSEXLOBR,  On  the  I'olitical  Condition  of  Uiji/pi,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.
vol.  i.  pp.  o75-o78 ;  Aus  einem  Briefe  an  D'  Ludioig  Stern,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1SS3,  p.  o5,  and
Nachtrayliche  Eennerliunijcn,  ibid.,  1886,  pp.  4l>,  41,  who  thinks  he  can  distinguish  the  cartouche  of
Seti  II.  in  the  places  wliere  Lefe'biire  and  Champollion  saw  that  of  Nakht^sit  {Bemarques  sur  differents
■>iaestions  hidoriquts,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1885,  pp.  121-123).

'  Graffiti  of  the  years  I.,  III.,  and  VI.,  at  Wady  Haifa,  in  Satce,  Gleanings  from  the  Land  of  Egypt,
in  the  Rccueilde  Travaux,  vol.  svii.  pp.  161-163).

^  Bas-relief  at  Silsilis,  in  Lepsics,  Den/.- in.,  iii.  201  d;  cf.  Chaisas,  Recherches,  etc.,  sous  la  XIX
<liinastie,  pp.  130,  131.

'  The  little  that  we  know  about  this  period  of  anarchy  has  been  obtained  from  the  Harris  Papyrus
pi.  76,  11.  2-10;  cf.  EisENLOHR-BiitCH,  The  Annals  of  Ramses  III.,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  aeries,
vol.  viii.  pp.  46,  47.     The  information  afforded  by  it  was  collected  for  the  first  time  by  Eisenlohr
Der  Grosse  Papyrus  Harris,  pp.  13-26  (cf.  On  the  Political  Condition  of  Egypt  before  the  Reign  of
Ramses  III.,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  i.  pp.  355-3S4),  and  by  Chabas, Recherches
pour  I'histoire  de  I'Egypte  sous  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  6-23,  135,  137.

*  The  name  of  this  indiridual,  which  was  wrongly  read  by  Eisenlohr  (^Der  Grosse  Papyrus  Harris,
p.  3),  was  deciphered  by  C\aha.s (^Recherches,  etc.,  sous  la  XIX'  dynastie,  p.  17)  ;  Lauth  (Siphfhao  und
Amenmeses,  p.  63),  and  after  him  Krall  (Maiietlto  und  Diodor,  pp.  41-43),  were  inclined  to  read  it  as
Ket,  Ketesh,  in  order  to  identify  it  with  the  Ketes  of  Diodorus  Siculus  (i.  62).  A  form  of  the  name
-Vrisai  in  the  Bible  (Esther  ix.  9)  may  be  its  original,  or  that  of  Arish  which  is  found  in  Plicenician
•especially  Punic,  inscriptions  (Noldeke,  Phonizische  Inschrift,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fUr  Assyrioloqie
vol.  ix.  pp.  403,  404).

°  Tlie  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  by  Birch,  pi.  75,  II.  2-6 ;  Chaisas,  Recherches,  etc.,  sous  la  XX'
dynastie,  pp.  6-23 ;  Eisexlohr-Birch,  Annals  of  Ramses  III.,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past  1st  teries
vol.  viii.  p.  46,  and  Brugsch,  Geschichte  JEgyptcns,  p.  589.


FOREIGN   CAPTIVES   IN  EGYPT.


441


The  invasions  of  tlie  peoples  of  the  sea,  the  rivalry  of  the  claimants  to  the
throne,  and  tiie  intrigues  of  ministers  had,  one  after  the  other,  served  to  break  the
bonds  which  fettered  them,  and  in  one  generation  they  were  able  to  regain  that
liberty  of  action  of  which  they  had  been  deprived  for  centuries.  To  this  state
of  things  Egypt  had  been  diiftiug  from  the  earliest  times.  Unity  could  be
maintained  only  by  a  continuous  effort,  and  once  this  became  relaxed,  the  ties
which  bound  tlie  whole  country  together
were  soon  broken.  There  was  another
danger  threatening  the  country  beside  that
arising  from  the  weakening  of  tlie  hands  of
tiie  sovereign,  and  the  turbulence  of  the
barons.  For  some  three  centuries  the  Theban
Pharaohs  were  accustomed  to  bring  into
the  country  after  each  victorious  campaign
many  thousands  of  captives.  The  number
of  foreigners  around  them  had,  therefore,  in-
creased in  a  striking  manner.  The  majority
of  these  strangers  either  died  without
issue,  or  their  posterity  became  assimilated
to  the  indigenous  inhabitants.  In  many  places,  however,  they  had  accumulated
in  such  proportions  that  they  were  able  to  retain  among  themselves  the  remem-
brance of  their  origin,  their  religion,  and  tlieir  customs,  and  with  these  the
natural  desire  to  leave  the  country  of  their  exile  for  their  former  fatherland.
As  long  as  a  strict  watch  was  kept  over  them  they  remained  peaceful  subjects,
but  as  soon  as  this  vigilance  was  relaxed  rebellion  was  likely  to  break  out,
especially  amongst  those  who  worked  in  the  quarries.  Traditions  of  the  Greek
period  contain  certain  romantic  episodes  in  the  history  of  these  captives.  Some
Babylonian  prisoners  brought  back  by  Sesostris,  these  traditions  tell  us,
unable  to  endure  any  longer  the  fatiguing  work  to  which  they  were  condemned,
broke  out  into  open  revolt.  Tliey  made  themselves  masters  of  a  position  almost
opposite  Memphis,  and  commanding  the  river,  and  held  tlieir  ground  there
with  such  obstinacy  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  give  up  to  them  the  province
which  they  occupied :  they  built  here  a  town,  which  they  afterwards  called
Babylon.  A  similar  legend  attributes  the  building  of  the  neighbouring  village
of  Troiu  to  caiitives  from  Troy.^     The  scattered  barbarian  tribes  of  the  Delta,


AMENMESIS


'   Drawn  by  Kiiuclini-Gudin,  after  a  picture  in  Rosellini's  Monwmenti  Siorici,  pi.  ix.,  No.  35.

^  UlODOiti's  SioCLUS,  i.  5G.  Tlic  name  IJabylon  comes  probably  from  Bnnhonn,  Barhonu,  Bahonu —
a  term  which,  under  tlie  form  Eut-Banhonu,  served  to  deeignate  a  quarter  of  Holiopolis,  or  rather  a
suburban  village  of  that  city  (Buugsch,  Dictioimaire  (j^n(iraphique,  pp.  11)1,  1'.),")).  Troja  was,  as  we
have  seen  (p.  383,  n.  2,  of  Dawn  of  Oivilhallon),  the  ancient  city  of  Troiu,  now  Tiirah,  celebrated
for  its  quarries  of  fine  limestone.     The  narratives  collected  by  the  historians  whom  Diodorus  had


442  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

whether  Hebrews  or  the  remnant  of  the  Hyksos,^  had  endured  there  a  miserable
lot  ever  since  the  accession  of  the  Eamessides.  The  rebuilding  of  the  cities
which  had  been  destroyed  there  during  the  wars  with  the  Hyksos  had  restricted
the  extent  of  territory  on  which  they  could  pasture  their  herds.  Ramses  II.
treated  them  as  slaves  of  the  treasury,^  and  the  Hebrews  were  not  long  under  his
rule  before  they  began  to  look  back  with  regret  on  the  time  of  the  monarchs
"  who  knew  Joseph."  "  The  Egyptians  set  over  them  taskmasters  to  afflict
them  with  their  burdens.  And  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure  cities,  Pithom
and  Raamses.  But  the  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they  multiplied  and
grew.  And  they  were  grieved  because  of  the  children  of  Israel."  -^  Further
details  on  their  condition  are  supplied  in  the  following  verses  of  the  Biblical
narrative :  "  They  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  bondage,  in  mortar  and  in
brick,  and  in  all  manner  of  service  in  the  field."  ^  The  unfortunate  slaves
awaited  only  an  opportunity  to  escape  from  the  cruelty  of  their  persecutors.

The  national  traditions  of  the  Hebrews  inform  us  that  the  king,  in  dis-
pleasure at  seeing  them  increase  so  mightily  notwithstanding  his  repression,
commanded  the  midwives  to  strangle  henceforward  their  male  children  at
their  birth.  A  woman  of  the  house  of  Levi,  after  having  concealed  her
infant  for  three  months,  put  him  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes  and  consigned  him
to  the  Nile,  at  a  place  where  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  was  accustomed  to
bathe.  The  princess  on  perceiving  the  cliild  had  compassion  on  him,  adopted
him,  called  him  Moses — saved  from  the  waters — and  had  him  instructed  in
all  the  knowledge  of  the  Egyptians.  Moses  had  already  attained  forty  years
of  age,  when  he  one  day  encountered  an  Egyptian  smiting  a  Hebrew,  and
slew  him  in  his  anger,  shortly  afterwards  fleeing  into  the  land  of  Midian,
Here  he  found  an  asylum,  and  Jethro  the  priest  gave  him  one  of  his  daughters
in  marriage.  After  forty  years  of  exile,  God,  appearing  to  him  in  a  burning
bush,  sent  him  to  deliver  His  people.  The  old  Pharaoh  was  dead,  but  Moses
and  his  brother  Aaron  betook  themselves  to  the  court  of  the  new  Pharaoh,.

consulted  were  products  of  the  Saite  period,  and  intended  to  explain  to  Greeks  the  existence  on
Egyptian  territory  of  names  recalling  those  of  Babylon  in  Chaldsea  and  of  Homeric  Troy.

'  See  pp.  88,  89  of  the  present  work  for  further  information  on  these  captives.

'  A  very  ancient  tradition  identiBes  Ramses  II.  with  tlie  Pharaoh  "  who  knew  not  Joseph  "  (Exod.
i.  8).  Eecent  excavations  showing  that  the  great  works  in  the  east  of  the  Delta  began  under  this-
king,  or  under  Seti  II.  at  the  earliest,  confirm  in  a  general  way  the  accuracy  of  the  traditional  view:
I  have,  therefore,  accepted  it  in  part,  and  placed  the  Exodus  after  the  death  of  Kamses  II.  Other
authorities  ploce  it  further  back,  and  Lieblein  in  1863  was  inclined  to  put  it  under  Amenothes  III.
(.Kgypiifclie  Chronoloijie,  pp.  116-125).

=  Exod.  i.  11,  12.  Excavations  made  by  Naville  have  brought  to  light  near  Tel  el-Maskhutah
the  ruins  of  one  of  the  towns  which  the  Hebrews  of  the  Alexandrine  period  identified  with  the  cities-
constructed  by  their  ancestors  in  Egypt :  the  town  excavated  by  Naville  is  Pitumii,  and  consequently
the  Pithom  ol  the  Biblical  account,  and  at  the  same  time  also  the  Succoth  of  Exod.  xii.  37,  xiii.  20,
the  fir.st  station  of  the  Bne-Israel  after  leaving  Kamses  (Navii.lk,  The  Store-City  of  Pithom  and  the-
linnte  of  the  Exodus,  pp.  1-13).

'  Exod.  i.  13,  14.


THE  EXODUS    OF   THE   HEBREWS.  443-

and  demanded  from  him  permission  for  the  Hebrews  to  sacrifice  in  the  desert
of  Arabin.     They  obtained  it,  as  we  know,  only  after  the  infliction  of  the  ten
plagues,  and  after  the  firstborn  of  the  Egyptians  had  been  stricken.^     The
emigrants  started  from  Ramses;  as  they  were  pursued  by  a  body  of  troops,  the
Sea  parted  its  waters  to  give  them  passage  over  the  dry  ground,  and  closing  up
afterwards  on  the  Egyptian  hosts,  overwhelmed  them  to  a  man.     Thereupon.
Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  sang  this  song  unto  Jab  veil,  saying:  "  Jahveh
is  my  strength  and  song — and  He  has  become  my  salvation. — This  is  my  God,
and  I  will  praise  Him, — my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  Him. — ^The  Lord  is
a  man  of  war, — and  Jahveh  is  His  name. — Pharaoh's  chariots  and  his  hosts
hath  He  cast  into  the  sea, — and  his  chosen  captains  are  sunk  in  the  sea  of
weeds. — The    deeps    cover    them— they   went    down   into    the    depths    like   a
stone.  .  .  .  The  enemy  said  :  '  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake — I  will  divide  th&
spoil — my  lust  shall  be  satiated  upon  them — I  will  draw  my  sword — my  hand
shall  destroy  them.' — Thou  didst  blow  with  'J'hy  wind — the  sea  covered  them —
they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters."  '■'     From  this  narrative  we  see  that
the  Hebrews,  or  at  least  those  of  them  who  dwelt  in  the  Delta,  made  their
escape  from    their  opj^ressors,  and   took   refuge    iu  the  solitudes  of  Arabia.*
According  to  the  opinion  of  accredited  historians,  this  Exodus  took  place  in  the
reign  of  Minephtah,^  and  the  evidence  of  the  triumphal  inscription,  lately  dis-
covered by  Prof  Petrie,  seems  to  confirm  tliis  view,  in  relating  that  the  people
of  Israilu  were  destroyed,  and  had  no  longer  a  seed.^     The  context  indicates
pretty  clearly  that  these  ill-treated  Israilu  were  then  somewhere  south  of  Syria,
possibly  in  the   neighbourhood  of  Ascalon  and  Gezer.     If  it  is  the  Biblical

'  Exod.  ii.-xiii.      I  have  limited  myself  here  to  a  summary  gf  tlic  Biblical  narrative,  without
eiuering  into  a  criticism  of  the  text,  which  I  leave  to  others.

=  Exod.  XV.  1-10  (R.V.).

"  Chabas  proposed  to  identify  wilh  the  Hebrews  the  ApuriCi  who  are  mentioned  on  several  occisions
iu  several  texts  of  the  Ramesside  period  {Melanges  Egyptoloijiqms,  1st  series,  pp.  42-51,  and  2nd  series,
pp.  108-104 ;  of.  EecJierclies pour  servir  a  I'histoire  de  I'Jtgypte  aii.r  tempi  de  VExode,  p.  99,  et  acq.).  His
opinion,  adopted  without  hesitatiou  by  E.  de  Rouge  {Moise  et  les  Hd'breu.r,  in  the  Aiinales  de  Philosophie
Clir^tienne,  Ibt  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  170, 173)  and  by  Lautli  {Der  Uohepriester  und  Oberbaumeister  Buhen-
cltmis,  pp.  25-27 ;  Moses  der  Hehrder,  pp.  1,  2),  was  disputed  by  Eisenlohr  (tin  the  Politicid  Condition
of  Egypt,  etc.,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soe.,  vol.  i.  pp.  355-357),  theu  by  Maspero,  and
by  Brugsch  himself  (Eine  neue  Ranisesslndt,  in  the  '/.eitschrift,  1870,  p.  71),  who,  however,  had  pre-
viously defended  it  (La  Sortie  des  llebreux  d*Egypte  et  les  Monuments  Egyptiens,  1874,  jip.  8-10,  41).
It  was  maintained  by  (Joodwiu  ('/Vans/u^iuu  of  a.  Fragment  relating  to  the  Hi'ignof  Totlnnes  III.,  iu  the
Transactions  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  341),  and  by  Ebeis  (.Egypten  und  die  Biicher  Moses,  p.  310,
et  seq.,  and  Durcli  Gosen  zum  Sinai,  p.  494).  It  is  rejected  at  prestnt  by  the  majority  of  Egyptologists
— Wiedemann  (.Egyptische  (Jeschichte,  pp.  491,  492),  Ermau  (.Egypten,  etc.,  im  Alterthum,  pp-OSl,  632,
714,  715,  721),  Brugsch  (Gesch.  ^Egyptens,  pp.  582,  583,  Diet,  geographigue,  p.  113,  et  seij.,  aud  with
more  reserve  in  Die  ^Egyptologie,  p.  38),  Ed.  Meyer  (Gesclt.  des  Alterlhums,  vol.  i.  pp.  288,  289,  and
Geschichte  des  Alten  .Egyjitens,  p.  297,  n.  2).

*  E.  DE  RoucK,  Examen  critii/ue  de  I'oiivrage  de  M.  le  citemlier  de  Hansen,  ii.  p.  74,  aud  .MoUe  et  les-
Monuments  Egyptiens,  in  the  Annales  de  I'hilosnphio  ChrMenne,  0th  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  105-173  ;  Cuabas,
Iteclierches,  etr.,  sons  la  XIX    dynastie,  p.  139,  et  seq. ;  Bia'cscH,  Geschichte  .Egyptens,  pp.  581-584  ;
EuEKS,  hurch  Gosen  zunt  .Si/iat,  p.  139,  et  seq.,  not  to  mention  more  antliorities.
^  See  the  passage  from  the  iuscriptiou  given  on  p.  430  of  the  present  work.


■444  TEE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

Israelites  who  are  liere  mentioned  for  the  first  time  on  an  Egyptian  monument,
one  might  suppose  that  they  had  just  quitted  the  land  of  slavery  to  begin  their
wanderings  through  the  desert.  Although  the  peoples  of  the  sea  and  the
Libyans  did  not  succeed  in  reacliing  their  settlements  in  the  land  of  Goshen,
tlie  Israelites  must  have  profited  both  by  the  disorder  into  which  the  Egyp-
tians were  thrown  by  the  invaders,  and  by  the  consequent  withdrawal  to
Memphis  of  the  troops  previously  stationed  on  the  east  of  the  Delta,  to
break  away  from  their  servitude  and  cross  the  frontier.  If,  on  the  other
'hand,  the  Israilu  of  Minephtah  are  regarded  as  a  tribe  still  dwelling  among
the  mountains  of  Canaan,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  race  had  emigrated
to  the  banks  of  the  Nile,^  there  is  no  need  to  seek  long  after  Minephtah  for
-a  date  suiting  the  circumstances  of  the  Exodus.  The  years  following  the
reign  of  Seti  II.  offer  favourable  conditions  for  such  a  dangerous  enterprise :
the  break-up  of  the  monarcliy,  the  discords  of  the  barous,  the  revolts  among
the  captives,  and  the  supremacy  of  a  Semite  over  tiie  other  chiefs,^  must  have
minimised  the  risk.  We  can  readily  understand  how,  in  the  midst  of  national
disorders,  a  tribe  of  foreigners  weary  of  its  lot  might  escape  from  its  settle-
ments and  betake  itself  towards  Asia  without  meeting  with  strenuous  opposition
from  the  Pharaoh,  who  would  naturally  be  too  much  preoccupied  with  his
own  pressing  necessities  to  trouble  himself  mucli  over  the  escape  of  a  band
■of  serfs.

Having  crossed  the  Red  Sea,  the  Israelites  pursued  their  course  to  the
■north-east  on  tiie  usual  road  leading  into  Syria,  and  then  turning  towards
•the  south,  at  length  arrived  at  Sinai.  It  was  a  moment  when  the  nations
of  Asia  were  stirring.  To  proceed  straight  to  Canaan  by  the  beaten  track  would
have  been  to  run  tiie  risk  of  encountering  their  moving  hordes,  or  of  jostling
against  the  Egyptian  troops,  who  still  garrisoned  the  strongholds  of  the  She-
phelah.  The  fugitives  had,  therefore,  to  shuu  the  great  military  roads  if  they
were  to  avoid  coming  into  murderous  conflict  with  the  barbarians,  or  running  into
4he  teeth  of  Pharaoh's  pursuing  army.  The  desert  offered  au  approijriate  asylum
to  people  of  nomadic  inclinations  like  themselves ;  they  betook  themselves
to  it  as  if  by  instinct,  and  spent  there  a  wandering  life  for  several  generations.'*

'  This  ia  tho  opinion  adopted  by  Petrie,  after  mature  consideration,  in  an  article  in  wliich  lie  has
published  on  tlie  Triumphal  Inscription  of  Minephtah  {Egypt  and  Israel,  in  the  Contemporary  lieview.
No.  365,  pp.  625-627).  [Spiegelberg,  i>it>  ersle  Erivahnung  Israels  in  einem  Mgyptischcn  Texte,  in  the
ISitzuugsherichtc  d.  K.  Preussischen  Akad.  d.Wissenschaften  zu  Berlin,  xxv.,  gives  no  opinion,  and  Prof.
Sayce,  Academy,  July,  1890,  disputes  tho  view  that  the  Israelites  were  in  Palestine  at  tho  time. — Tr.]

-  I  have  given  my  reasons  for  assigning  the  Exodus  to  this  period  iu  a  Lettre  !i  M.  G.  Eichthal
siir  Ics  conditions  de  I'histoire  d'Egijptc,  qui  peueent  servir  li  expliquer  Vhistoire  da  peuple  H^breu,  in  the
Ci'inples  Bendux  de  VAeade'mie  des  Inscriptions,  1873,  pp.  54-57.  They  have  been  accepted  only  by
Wiedemann,  JEgyptische  Geschichte,  p.  493.

'  This  explanation  of  the  wanderings  of  the  Israelites  has  been  doubted  by  most  historians:  it
■lias  a  cogency,  once  we  admit  the  reality  of  the  sojourn  iu  Egypt  and  the  Exodus.


THE  EXODUS    OF   THE  HEBREWS.  445-

The  Biblical  narrative  describes  at  length  their  marches  and  their  halting-
places,  the  great  sufferings  they  endured,  and  the  striking  miracles  which
God  performed  on  their  behalf.^  Moses  conducted  them  through  all  these
experiences,  continually  troubled  by  their  murmurings  and  seditions,  but
always  ready  to  help  them  out  of  the  difficulties  into  which  they  were  led,
on  every  occasion,  by  their  want  of  faith.  He  taught  them,  under  God's
direction,  how  to  correct  the  bitterness  of  brackish  waters  by  applying  to
them  the  wood  of  a  certain  tree.^  When  they  began  to  look  back  with
regret  to  the  "  fleshpots  of  Egypt "  and  the  abundance  of  food  there,
another  signal  miracle  was  performed  for  them.  "At  even  the  quails  came
up  and  covered  the  camp,  and  in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about  the
host;  and  when  the  dew  that  lay  was  gone  up,  behold,  upon  the  face  of
the  wilderness  there  lay  a  small  round  thing,  as  small  as  the  hoar  frost  on.
the  ground.  And  when  the  children  of  Israel  saw  it,  they  said  one  to
another,  '  What  is  it  ? '  for  they  wist  not  what  it  was.  And  Moses  said  unto
them,  ' It  is  the  bread  whicli  the  Lord  hath  given  you  to  eat.'"'  "And  the
house  of  Israel  called  the  name  thereof  '  manna : '  and  it  was  like  coriander
seed,  white  ;  and  the  taste  of  it  was  like  wafers  made  with  honey."  *  "  And  the
children  of  Israel  did  eat  the  manna  forty  years,  until  they  came  to  a  land,
inhabited ;  they  did  eat  the  manna  until  they  came  unto  the  borders  of  the
land  of  Canaan."^  Further  on,  at  Eephidim,  the  water  failed  :  Moses  struck
the  rocks  at  Horeb,  and  a  spring  gushed  ouf.*^  The  Amalekites,  in  tlie  mean,
time,  began  to  oppose  their  passage ;  and  one  might  naturally  doubt  the  power
of  a  rabble  of  slaves,  unaccustomed  to  war,  to  break  through  such  an  obstacle.
Joshua  was  made  their  general,  "and  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Hur  went  up  to  the-
top  of  the  hill :  and  it  came  to  pass!,  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  that  Israel
prevailed,  and  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Amalek  prevailed.     But  Moses''

'  Tlie  itinerary  of  tlie  Hebrew  people  through  the  desert  contains  a  very  small  number  of  names
which  were  not  actually  in  use.  They  represent  possibly  either  the  stations  at  which  the  caravans
of  the  merchants  put  up,  or  the  localities  where  the  Bedawin  and  their  herds  were  accustomed  to
sojourn.  The  majority  of  tliem  cannot  be  identified,  but  enough  can  still  be  made  out  to  give  us  a
general  idea  of  tlie  march  of  the  emigrants  (Redss,  L'Histoire  Saintc  et  la  Lot,  vol.  ii.  p.  273,  n.  4,  in
connexion  with  Numb.  x.\xiii.).

'  Exiid.  XV.  23-25.  The  station  Marah,  "  the  bitter  waters,"  is  identified  by  modern  tr.adilion
with  Ain  Howarah.  For  a  similar  way  of  rendering  waters  pot,ible— still  in  use  among  the  Bedawin.
of  these  regions— see  F.  de  Lesseps,  L'lsthme  <le  Sutz,  p.  10.

'  Exnd.  xvi.  13-15.

*  Kxod.  xvi.  31.  From  early  times  tlie  manna  of  the  Hebrews  has  been  identified  with  the  mann-
ee-sama,  "the  gift  of  heaven,"  of  the  Aralw,  which  exudes  in  small  quantities  from  tlie  leaves  of  the
tamarisk  after  being  pricked  by  insects:  the  question,  however,  is  still  under  discussion  whether
another  species  of  vegetable  manna  may  not  bo  meant.

^  ExwI.  xvi.  35.

«  Exiid.  xvii.  1-7.  There  is  a  general  agreement  as  to  the  identification  of  Eephidim  with  the
Wady  Feirfin,  the  village  of  Pharan  of  the  Grajco-Eoman  geographers  (Ebehs,  Diireh  Oosen  zum  Sinai,.
p.  189,  el  seq.).


44(!  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

bauds  were  heavy ;  and  they  took  a  stone,  and  put  it  under  him,  and  he  sat
thereon ;  and  Aaron  and  Hur  stayed  up  his  hands,  tlie  one  on  the  one  side,
•and  the  other  on  the  other  side,  and  his  hands  were  steady  until  the  going
down  of  the  sun.  And  Joshua  discomfited  Amalek  and  his  people  with  the
-edge  of  the  sword." '  Three  months  after  the  departure  of  the  Israelites  from
Egypt  they  encamped  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  and  "  the  Lord  called  unto  Moses
■out  of  the  mountain,  saying,  '  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  house  of  Jacob,  and
tell  the  children  of  Israel:  Ye  have  seen  wl)at  I  did  unto  the  Egyptians,
and  liow  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings,  and  bi'ought  you  unto  Myself.  Now
therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  My  voice  indeed,  and  keep  Jly  covenant,  then  ye
-shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  Me  from  among  all  peoples :  for  all  the  earth
is  Mine :  and  ye  shall  be  unto  Me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation.'
The  people  answered  together  and  said,  '  All  tliat  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we
will  do.'  And  the  I^ord  said  unto  Moses, '  Lo,  I  come  unto  thee  in  a  thick
■cloud,  that  the  people  may  hear  when  I  speak  with  thee,  and  may  also  believe
thee  for  ever.'  "  "  On  the  third  day,  when  it  was  morning,  there  were  thunders
and  lightnings,  and  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and  the  voice  of  a  trumpet
exceeding  loud ;  and  all  the  people  that  were  in  the  camp  trembled.  And
Moses  brought  forth  the  people  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  God  ;  and  they  stood
at  the  nether  part  of  the  mountain.  And  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on
smoke,  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it  in  fire :  and  the  smoke  thereof
ascended  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace,  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly.
And  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  waxed  louder  and  louder,  Moses  spake,
and  God  answered  hira  by  a  voice."  ^  Then  followed  the  giving  of  the  supreme
law,  the  conditions  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  Himself  deigned  to  pro-
mulgate directly  to  His  people.  It  was  engraved  on  two  tables  of  stone,
and  contained,  in  ten  concise  statements,  the  commandments  which  the  Creator
•of  the  Universe  imposed  upon  the  people  of  His  choice.

"  I.  I  am  Jahveh,  whicli  brought  thee  out  of  the  hind  of  Egypt.     Thou
shalt  have  none  otiier  gods  before  3[e.
II.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  a  graven  image,  etc.

III.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  Jahveh  thy  God  in  vain.

IV.  Kemember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy.
V.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.

VI.  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder.
VII.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.
YIIL  Thou  shalt  not  steal.

'  Exod.  svii.  S-13.

'  Exod.  xix.  3-6,  9,  16-19.


TEE  MARCH   OF   THE   HEBREWS    TO    SIN  AT.  447

IX.  Thou  shalt  uot  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour.
X.  Thou  shalt  not  covet."  ^
"  And  all  the  people  saw  the  thunderings,  and  the  lightnings,  and  the  voice
of  the  trumpet,  and  the  mountain  smoking  :  and  when  the  people  saw  it,  they
trembled,  and  stood  afar  off.     And  they  said  unto  Moses,  '  Speak  thou  with  us,
and  we  will  hear :  but  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die.' "  ^    God  gave  His
commandments  to  Moses  in  instalments  as  the  circumstances  required  them :
on   one   occasion    the   rites  of  sacrifice,    the   details   of  the    sacerdotal  vest-
ments, the  mode  of  consecrating  the  priests,  the  composition  of  the  oil  and
the  incense    for  the   altar;    later   on,  the   observance   of  the   tliree   annual
festivals,  and  the  orders  as  to  absolute  rest  on  the  seventh  day,  as  to  the
distinctions  between  clean  and  unclean  animals,  as  to  drink,  as  to  the  puri-
fication of  women,  and  lawful  and  unlawful  marriages.^     The  people  waited
from  week  to  week  until  Jahveh  had  completed  the  revelation  of  His  com-
mands, and  in  their  impatience  broke  the  new  law  more  than  once.     On  one
occasion,  when  "  Moses  delayed  to   come  out  of  the  mount,"  they  believed
themselves  abandoned    by  heaven,   and   obliged   Aaron,  the   high  priest,  to
make  for  them  a  golden  calf,  before  which  they  offered  burnt  offerings.     The
sojourn  of  the  people  at  the  foot  of  Sinai  lasted  eleven  months.     At  the  end
of  this  period  they  set  out  once  more  on  their  slow  marches  to  the  Promised
Land,  guided  during  the  day  by  a  cloud,  and  during  the  niglit  by  a  pillar  of
fire,  which  moved  before  them.     This  is  a  general  summary  of  what  we  find
in  the  sacred  writings.

The  Israelites,  when  they  set  out  from  Egypt,  were  not  yet  a  nation.''  They
were  but  a  confused  horde,  flying  with  their  herds  from  their  pursuers ;  with
no  resources,  badly  armed,  and  unfit  to  sustain  the  attack  of  regular  troops.
After  leaving  Sinai,  they  wandered  for  some  time  among  the  solitudes  of  Arabia
Petrsea  in  search  of  some  uninhabited  country  where  they  could  fix  their  tents,
and  at  length  settled  on  the  borders  of  Idumasa,  in  the  mountainous  region
surrounding  Kadesh-Barnea.^     Kadesh  had  from  ancient  times  a  reputation  for

'  We  have  two  forms  of  the  Decalogue — one  in  Exod.  xx.  2-17,  and  the  otiier  in  Deul.  v.  O-IS.

■••  Exod.  XX.  18,  19.

'  This  legislatioQ  and  the  history  of  the  circumstances  on  whicli  it  was  promulgated  are
o.imtained  in  four  of  the  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  viz.  Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numhen,  and  Deutero-
iinmy.  Varir)U8  works  have  appeared  of  late  dealing  with  these  books  from  a  critical  point  of
view.  I  coniine  myself  here  and  afterwards  only  to  such  results  as  may  fitly  be  used  in  a  general
history.

*  A  hasty  reconstruction  of  the  liistory  of  the  Exodus  was  attempted  by  Welluausen,  Ahriss  der
Geschichte  Israels,  in  the  Skizzen  and  Vorarlititen,  vol.  i.  pp.  (i-14  ;  and  in  a  much  more  conbervative
fashion  by  Kenan,  llistoire  du  peu/ile  d'Jsrael,  vol.  i.  pp.  165-210.

'  The  site  of  Kadcsh-liaruea  appears  to  have  been  fixed  with  certainty  at  .\in-Qadi8  by  0.
'I'laMBULL,  .4  Visit  ti>  Ain  Qadis,  tlie  supposi'd  Site  iif  Kadesh-JSantin,  in  the  Quarterly  Statement  of
the  Palestini;  Explurdtiuit  i'und,  1.S8I,  pp.  208-212.


448  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

sanctity  among  the  Bedawiii  of  tlie  neighbourhood  :  it  rejoiced  in  the  posses-
sion of  a  wonderful  well— the  Well  of  Judgment — to  which  visits  were  made
for  the  purpose  of  worship,  and  for  obtaining  the  "judgment"  of  God.^  Tlie
country  is  a  poor  one,  arid  and  burnt  up,  but  it  contains  wells  which  never
fail,  and  wadys  suitable  for  the  culture  of  wheat  and  for  tlie  rearing  of  cattle.
The  tribe  which  became  possessed  of  a  region  in  which  there  was  a  perennial
supply  of  water  was  fortunate  indeed,  and  a  fragment  of  the  psalmody  of  Israel
at  the  time  of  their  sojourn  here  still  echoes  in  a  measure  the  transports  of  joy
which  the  people  gave  way  to  at  the  discovery  of  a  new  spring:  "  Spring  up,
0  well ;  sing  ye  unto  it :  the  well  which  the  princes  digged,  which  the  nobles
of  the  people  delved  with  the  sceptre  and  with  their  staves."  ^  The  wanderers
took  possession  of  this  region  alter  some  successful  brushes  with  the  enemy,
and  settled  there,  without  being  further  troubled  by  their  neighbours  or  by
their  former  masters.  The  Egyptians,  indeed,  absorbed  in  their  civil  discords,,
or  in  wars  with  foreign  nations,  soon  forgot  their  escaped  slaves,  and  never
troubled  themselves  for  centuries  over  what  had  become  of  the  poor  wretches,
until  in  the  reign  of  the  Ptolemies,  when  they  had  learned  from  the  Bible
something  of  the  people  of  God,  they  began  to  seek  in  their  own  annals  foi'
traces  of  their  sojourn  in  Egypt  and  of  their  departure  from  the  country.  A
new  version  of  the  Exodus  was  tlie  result,  in  which  Hebrew  tradition  was-
clumsily  blended  with  the  materials  of  a  semi-historical  romance,  of  which
Amenothes  III.  was  the  hero.  His  minister  and  namesake,  Amenothes,  son
of  Hapii,  left  ineffaceable  impressions  on  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants  of
Thebes :  he  not  only  erected  the  colossal  figures  in  the  Amenophium,  but  he
constructed  the  chapel  at  Deir  el-Medineh,  which  was  afterwards  restored  in
Ptolemaic  times,  and  where  he  continued  to  be  worshipped  as  long  as  the
Egyptian  religion  lasted.^  Profound  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  magic  were
attributed  to  him,  as  in  later  times  to  Prince  Khamoisit,  son  of  Eamses  II.*
On  this  subject  he  wrote  certain  works  which  maintained  their  reputation  for

'  Gen.  xiv.  7  mentions  this  "  Well  of  Judgment.  En-Mishpat, — which  is  Kadesh."  S.  Jebome,
however,  Unomasticon,  s.v.  Puteus  Jiidicu.  distinguishes  En-Mishpat  from  Kadesh-Barnea,  and
places  the  former  in  a  locality  which  lie  calls  Beer-dan,  in  the  valley  of  Gerar.

-  Numb.  xxi.  17,  18.  The  context  makes  it  certain  that  this  song  was  sung  at  Beer,
beyond  the  Arnon,  in  tlie  land  of  lloab.  It  has  long  been  recognised  that  it  had  a
special  reference,  and  that  it  refers  to  an  incident  in  the  wanderings  of  the  people  through  the
desert.

'  With  regard  to  Amenothes,  son  of  Hiipa,  see  pp.  299,  301  of  the  present  work.  On  the
worship  given  to  him  in  the  temple  of  Deir  el-Medineh,  cf.  Ekm.'N.  Amenophis,  Sohn  des  Paapis,
in  the  Zeitschri/I,  1877,  pp.  147,  US.  The  stele  of  its  foundation  is  in  the  Briti>h  Museum,,
and  a  translation  was  made  of  it  by  Birch  (cf.  Chabas,  Melanges  Hgyp'ologiques,  2ud  series,  pp.
314-343).

'  See,  for  a  notice  of  Khamoisit — son  of  Eamses  II.  and  Kegent  of  Egypt  during  part  of  his  father's-
reign — and  of  his  knowledge  of  magic,  pp.  424,  42j  of  the  present  work.


AN  EGYPTIAN  ROMANCE   OF  TEE  EXODUS.  449

more  than  a  thousand  years  after  his  death,^  and  all  that  was  known  about
him  marked  him  out  for  the  important  part  he  came  to  play  in  those
romantic  stories  so  popular  among  the  Egyptians.  The  Pharaoh  in  whose
good  graces  he  lived  had  a  desire,  we  are  informed,  to  behold  the  gods,  after
the  example  of  his  ancestor  Horus.^  The  son  of  Hapu,  or  Pa- Apis,  informed
him  that  he  could  not  succeed  in  his  design  until  he  had  expelled  from  the
country  all  the  lepers  and  unclean  persons  who  contaminated  it.  Acting
on  this  information,  he  brought  together  all  those  who  suffered  from  physical
defects,  and  confined  them,  to  the  number  of  eighty  thousand,  in  the  quarries
of  Turah.  There  were  priests  among  them,  and  the  gods  became  wrathful
at  the  treatment  to  which  their  servants  were  exposed ;  the  soothsayer,
therefore,  fearing  the  divine  anger,  predicted  that  certain  people  would
shortly  arise  who,  forming  an  alliance  with  the  Unclean,  would,  together
with  them,  hold  sway  in  Egypt  for  thirteen  years.  He  then  committed
suicide,  but  the  king  nevertheless  had  compassion  on  the  outcasts,  and
granted  to  them,  for  their  exclusive  use,  the  town  of  Avaris,  which  had  been
deserted  since  the  time  of  Ahmosis.  The  outcasts  formed  themselves  into
a  nation  under  the  rule  of  a  Heliopolitan  priest  called  Osarsyph,  or  Moses,
who  gave  them  laws,  mobilised  them,  and  joined  his  forces  with  the  de-
scendants of  the  Shepherds  at  Jerusalem.  The  Pharaoh  Amenophis,  taken  by
surprise  at  this  revolt,  and  remembering  the  words  of  his  minister  Amenothes,
took  flight  into  Ethiopia.  The  shepherds,  in  league  with  the  Unclean,  burned
the  towns,  sacked  the  temples,  and  broke  in  pieces  the  statues  of  the  gods :
they  forced  the  Egyptian  priests  to  slaughter  even  their  sacred  animals,  to
cut  tliem  up  and  cook  them  for  their  foes,  who  ate  them  derisively  in  tlieir
accustomed  feasts.  Amenophis  returned  from  Ethiopia,  together  with  his  son
Eamses,  at  the  end  of  thirteen  years,  defeated  the  enemy,  driving  them  back
into  Svria,  where  the  remainder  of  tliem  became  later  on  the  Jewish  nation.^

'  One  of  these  books,  which  U  mentioned  in  several  religious  texts,  is  preserved  in  the  Louvre
I'apijrui,  No.  3248 ;  cf.  Maspeho,  Mi'moire  sur  quejqucs  Papyrus  du  Louvre,  pp.  23,  58,  59.

'  Manetho,  in  MI'Ller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Bist.  Orxcorum,  \o\.  ii.  pp.  578-581;  cf.  the  analogous
narratives  by  Alexandrine  writers  collected  by  T.  Eeinach,  Textes  d'mtteurs  Grecs  et  Jiomains  relatifs
nu  Judaisme,  pp.  13-20,  57,  115-120,  125-128,  253,  254,  303,  304.  The  cliief  features  of  the  story  are
taken  from  the  persecution  of  Okhos,  of  which  there  was  a  lively  remembrance  in  the  time  of  Manetho.

'  A  list  of  the  Pharaohs  after  AI,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  to  make  them  out,  is  here  given :

ZosiRKaopineiiJ-soTpONiEl  HarmhabI  MIamon.       Bakir?  MIamon  MiNEPHTAH  HotpChimUt


MANPAHtTiR!  EAMsisu  I.
ManmaItr?  SIti  1.  MJamon.

tlSIBMAlTKl   EaMSIsC    II.    MfAMON.


■OsiUKnOPjKC'R}   MiAMON    SlTI    II.  MiNEPHTAU.
MANMIKl-SOTPUNlRi   AMENMEStsO    HAQ-otslT.
KHtNIRi-SOTpONIKI    SlPHTAU   MInBPHTAH.


Harmhabi  himself  belonged  to  the  XVIH""  dynasty,  for  he  modelled  the  form  of  his  cartouclies  on  those
of  the  Ahmcsside  Pharaohs ;  the  XIX"'  dynasty  began  only,  in  all  probability,  with  Ramses  I.,  but  the
course  of  the  liistory  has  compelled  me  to  separate  llarudiabt  from  his  predecessors.  Not  knowing
the  length  of  the  reigns,  we  cannot  determine  tlie  total  duration  of  the  dynasty  :  we  shall  not,  how-
cvor,  be  far  wrong  in  assigning  to  it  a  length  of  130  years  or  thereabouts,  i.e.  from  1350  to  somewhere
near  1220  B.C.

2   G


450  THE  REACTION  AGAINST  EGYPT.

This  is  but  a  romance,  in  which  a  very  little  history  is  mingled  with
a  great  deal  of  fable :  the  scribes  as  well  as  the  people  were  acquainted
with  the  fact  that  Egypt  had  been  in  danger  of  dissolution  at  the  time
when  the  Hebrews  left  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  but  they  were  ignorant  of
the  details,  of  the  precise  date  and  of  the  name  of  the  reigning  Pharaoh.  A
certain  similarity  in  souud  suggested  to  them  the  idea  of  assimilating  the
prince  whom  the  Chroniclers  called  Menepthes  or  Amenepthes  with  Amenothes,
i.e.  Amenophis  III. ;  and  they  gave  to  the  Pharaoh  of  the  XIX"'  dynasty  the
minister  who  had  served  under  a  king  of  the  XVIII"' :  they  metamorphosed
at  the  same  time  the  Hebrews  into  lepers  allied  with  the  Shepherds.  From
this  strange  combination  there  resulted  a  narrative  which  at  once  fell  in  with
the  tastes  of  the  lovers  of  the  marvellous,  and  was  a  sufficient  substitute
for  the  truth  which  had  long  since  been  forgotten.  As  in  the  case  of  the
Egyptians  of  the  Greek  period,  we  can  see  only  through  a  fog  what  took
place  after  the  deaths  of  Miuephtah  and  Seti  II.  We  know  only  for  certain
that  the  chiefs  of  the  nomes  were  in  perpetual  strife  with  each  other,
and  that  a  foreign  power  was  dominant  in  the  country  as  in  the  time  of
Apophis.  The  days  of  the  empire  would  have  been  numbered  if  a  deliverer
had  not  promptly  made  his  appearance.  The  direct  line  of  Ramses  II.
was  extinct,  but  his  innumerable  sous  by  innumerable  concubines  had  left  a
posterity  out  of  which  some  at  least  might  have  the  requisite  ability  and  zeal,
if  not  to  save  the  empire,  at  least  to  lengthen  its  duration,  and  once  more  give
to  Thebes  days  of  glorious  prosperity.  Egypt  had  set  out  some  five  centuries
before  this  for  the  conquest  of  the  world,  and  fortune  had  at  first  smiled  upon
her  enterprise.  Thutmosis  I.,  Thutmosis  III.,  and  the  several  Pharaohs  bearing
the  name  of  Amenothes  had  marched  with  their  armies  from  the  upper  waters
of  the  Nile  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  and  no  power  had  been  able  to  with-
stand them.  New  nations,  however,  soon  rose  up  to  oppose  her,  and  the  Hittites
in  Asia  and  the  Libyans  of  the  Sudan  together  curbed  her  ambition.  Neither
the  triumphs  of  Eamses  II.  nor  the  victory  of  Miuephtah  had  been  able  to
restore  her  prestige,  or  the  lands  of  which  her  rivals  had  robbed  her  beyond
her  ancient  frontier.  Now  her  owu  territory  itself  was  threatened,  and  her
own  well-being  was  in  question ;  she  was  compelled  to  consider,  not  how  to
rule  other  tribes,  great  or  small,  but  how  to  keep  her  own  possessions  intact
and  independent :  in  short,  her  very  existence  was  at  stake.


THE    CLOSE    OF    THE    THEBAN
EMPIRE.


RAMSES     III. — THE     THEBAN     CITY     UNDER     THE     KA.MESSIDES — MANNERS     AND     CUSTOMS  —
POPULATION THE     PREDOMINANCE    OF     AMON     AND     HIS     HIGH     PRIESTS.

Nakht'AsU  and  Ramses  III.  :  the  decline  uf  Ike  miVitary  spirit  in  Etjypt — The  reorganisa-
tion of  Hie  armti  and  fleet  by  Ramses — The  second  Libyan  invasion — Tlie  Asiatic  peoples,
the  Pulasati,  the  Zakkala,  and  the  Tijrseni :  their  incursions  into  Syria  and  their  defeat
— The  campaign  of  the  year  XI.  and  the  fall  of  the  Libyan  kingdom — Cmisiny  on  the
Red  Sea — The  buildings  at  Medinet-HabA — The  conspiracy  of  PentaiUrit — Tlie  mummy  of
Ramses  III.

The  sons  ami  immediate  svxcessurs  of  Ramses  III. — Thebes  and  the  Egyptian  jHipiilaiion :
the  transformation  of  the  people  and  of  the  great  lords:  the  feudal  system  from  bein.g  miiitarg
becomes  religious — Tlie  wealth  of  precious  metals,  jewellerg,  fnrnitnri',  costume — Literary
education,  and  the  influence  of  the  Semitic  language  on  the  Egyptian:  romantic  stories,  the
historical  novel,  fables,  caricatures  and  satires,  collections  o/  maxims  and  moral  dialogues,
lore-poems.

The  Theban  necropolis:  mummies— The  funeral  of  a  rich  Theban :  the  procession  of  the
offerings  aruJ  the  funerary  furniture,  the  crossing  of  the  Nile,  the  tomb,  the  faretvell  to  the
dead,  tlie  sacrifice,  the  coffins,  the  repast  of  the  dead,  the  song  of  the  Harper — The  common
ditch — The  living  inhabitants  of  the  necropolis :  draughtsmen,  sculptors,  painters — The  has-


(     452     )

reliefs  of  the  temples  and  the  tombs,  tcoodeu  statuettes,  the  smeltintj  of  metals,  bronze — The
religiotu  of  the  necropolis  :  the  immorality  and  want  of  discipline  among  the  people;  workmen's
strikes.

Amxyn  and  the  beliefs  concerning  him :  his  kingdom  over  the  living  and  the  dead,  the  sotil's
destiny  according  to  the  teaching  of  Ammi — KlionsA  and  his  temple ;  the  temple  of  Amon  at
Karnak,  its  revenue,  its  priesthood — Hie  growing  influence  of  the  high  priests  of  Anion  uiider
the  sons  of  Ramses  III.  :  Ramsesnakhiti,  Amenothes ;  the  violation  of  the  royal  burying-places
— Hrihor  and  the  last  of  the  Ramses,  Smendes  and  the  accessio^i  to  power  of  ike  XXI"  diinasty  :
the  division  of  Egypt  into  two  States — Tlie  priest-kings  of  Amon  masters  of  Tliebes  under  tlie
suzerainty  of  the  Tanite  Pharanhs — The  close  of  tlie  Hieban  empire.


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  RATS  AND  THE  CATS,  A  PARODY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  WARS.'


CHAPTEK  V.


THE  CLOSE  OF  THE  THEBAN   EMPIRE.


Kamses  III. — The  Tlieban  city  uuder  the  Eamessides — Manners  and  customs — Population-
The  pretlomiuauce  of  Amon  and  his  high  priests.


I'


S  in  a  former  crisis,  Egypt  once  more  owed  her  salvation
to  a  scion  of  the  old  Theban  race.     A  descendant  of
Seti  I.  or  Ramses  II.,  named  Nakhtusit,  rallied  round  him
the  forces  of  the  southern  nomes,  and  succeeded,  though  not
without  difficulty,  in  dispossessing  the  Syrian  Arisu.     "  When
he  arose,  he  was  like  Siitkhu,  providing  for  all  the  necessities
of  the   country  which,  for  feebleness,  could    not  stand,
killing   the  rebels  which  were  in  the  Delta,  purifying
the    great   throne   of  Egypt;    he  was   regent    of   the
two    lands   in   the  place  of  Tumu,  setting  himself  to
reorganise  that  which  had   been   overthrown,   to    such
good  purpose,  that    each  one   recognised   as   brethren
those  who  had  been  separated  from  him  as  by  a  wall
for   so    long    a    time,    strengthening   the    temples  by
pious    gifts,    so   that   the    traditional   rites   could    be
celebrated    at   the    divine    cycles."  ^     Many  were   the
difficulties  that  he  had  to  encounter  before  he  could  restore  to  his  country

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  facsimile  in  Lepsius,  Auswahl,  etc.,  pi.  xxiii.  n.  The  vifjnette,
executed  by  Faucher-Gudiu  from  a  photograph  by  Lanzone,  represents  a  functionary  of  the  Theban
necropolis  named  Panbiii — "servant  of  the  True  Place" — whose  wooden  statuette  is  preserved  in  tlie
Turin  Museum  (Maspeuo,  Itap/jort  sur  una  mission  en  Italie,m  the  Becucilde  Trai)aux,vol.ii.  p.  176,
No.  xxxi.,  and  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ill,  112).

°  Tlie  Great  Harris  Papijrm,  pi.  75,  11.  8-10:  cf.  Eisenlohk,  On  the  Political  Condition  of  Egypt,
in  the  Transactions  of  the  liibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  i.  jip.  ilGit,  3G4;  Chabas,  liecherches  pour  ei-rvir  a


454  THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   TffEBAN  EMPIRE.

that  peace  and  wealth  which  she  had  enjoyed  under  the  long  reign  of  Sesostris.
It  seems  probable  that  his  advancing  years  made  him  feel  unequal  to  the
task,  or  that  he  desired  to  guard  against  tlie  possibility  of  disturbances  in
the  event  of  his  sudden  death ;  at  all  events,  he  associated  with  himself  on  the
throne  his  eldest  son  Kamses — not,  however,  as  a  Pharaoh  who  had  full  rights
to  the  crown,  like  the  coadjutors  of  the  Amenemhaits  and  Usirtasens,  but  as
a  prince  invested  with  extraordinary  powers,  after  the  example  of  the  sons  of  the
Pharaohs  Thutmosis  and  Seti  I.    Kamses  recalls  witli  pride,  towards  the  close  of
his  life,  how  his  father  "  had  promoted  him  to  the  dignity  of  heir-presumptive
to  the  throne  of  Sibu,"  and  how  he  had  been  acclaimed  as  "  the  supreme  head
of  Qimit  for  the  administration  of  the  whole  earth  united  together."  ^     This
constituted  the  rise  of  a  new  dynasty  on  the  ruins  of  the  old— the  last,  how-
ever, which  was  able  to  retain  the  supremacy  of  Egypt  over  the  Oriental  world.
We  are  unable  to  ascertain  how  long  this  double  reign  lasted.     Nakhtusit,
fully  occupied  bv  enemies  within  the  country,  had  no  leisure  either  to  build  or
to  restore  any  monuments ;  ^  on  his  death,  as  no  tomb  had  been  prepared  for  him,
his  mummy  was  buried  in  that  of  the  usurper  Siphtah  and  the  Queen  Tausirit.^
He  was  soon  forgotten,  and  but  few  traces  of  his  services  survived  him  ;   his
name  was  subsequently  removed  from  the  official  list  of  the  kings,  while  others
not  so  deserving  as  he — as,  for  instance,  Siphtah-Minephtah  and  Amenmesis —
were  honourably  inscribed  in  it.*     The  memory  of  his  son  overshadowed  his
own,  and  the  series  of  the  legitimate  kings  who  formed  the  XX""  dynasty  did
not  include  him.     Kamses  III.  took  for  his  hero  his  namesake,  Kamses  the
Great,  and  endeavoured  to  rival  him  in  everything.     This  spirit  of  imitation
was  at  times  the  means  of  leading  him  to  commit  somewhat  puerile  acts,  as,
for  example,  when  lie  copied  certain  triumphal  inscriptions  word   for  word,

I'histoire  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  23-27 ;  Eisenlohk-Bircu,  The  Annals  of  Rameees  III.,  in  the  Records
of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  46, 47.  The  exact  relationship  between  Nakhtusit  and  Kamses  11.
is  not  known  ;  he  was  probably  the  grandson  or  great-grandson  of  that  sovereign,  though  Ed.  Meyer
thinks  he  was  perhaps  the  son  of  Seti  11.  (Ge.cft.  des  Alien  JEgyptens,  p.  310).  The  name  should
he  read  either  Nakhltsit,  with  the  singular  of  the  first  word  composing  it,  or  Nakhitusit,  Nakhtiisit,
with  the  plural,  as  in  the  analogous  name  of  the  king  of  the  XXX'"  dynasty,  Nectanebo.

'  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  75, 11. 10-76, 1. 1 ;  the  only  certain  monument  tliat  we  as  yet  possess
of  this  double  reign  is  a  large  stele  cut  on  the  rock  behind  Medinet-Habii  (Lepsics.  Dejifcm.,  iii.  206  d).

-  'Wiedemann  {^gyplische  Gesch.,  p.  490)  attributes  to  him  the  construction  of  one  of  the  doors  of
the  temple  of  Miit  at  Karnak ;  it  would  appear  that  there  is  a  confusion  in  liis  notes  between  the
prenomen  of  this  sovereign  and  that  of  Seti  II.,  who  actually  did  decorate  one  of  the  doorways  of  that
temple  (Champollion,  Mmi.  de  V^gypte,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  263).  Nakliusit  must  have  also  worked  on  the
temple  of  Phtah  at  Memphis  CWiedemann,  ^Egyptische  Gesch.,  p.  490).  His  cartouche  is  met  with
on  a  statue  originally  dedicated  by  a  Pharaoh  of  the  XII'"  dynasty,  discovered  at  Tell-Nebesheh
(Peteie,  Tanis  II.,  Tell-Nebesheh,  pp.  11,  29,  31,  pi.  x.  6  li).

»  Champolltox,  Moil,  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  448,  459,  606-608 ;  cf.  LEFEBrEE,  Les  Hypogfes
royaux  de  Thebes,  in  the  M€moires  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  ii.  pt.  1,  pp.  123-145,  and  pis.  66-68.
For  further  details,  cf.  the  bibliographical  information  given  on  p.  439.  note  5,  of  this  volume.

*  Maspero,  Leiire  a  M.  Gustave  d'Eichthal  sur  les  circonstances  de  VHistoire  d'Egyple,  in  the
Comptei  rendus  de  I'Acadi'mie  des  Inscriptiuns  et  Belles-Lettres,  1S73,  pp.  51-53.


NAEETUSIT  AND   RAMSES   HI.


455


merely  cbauging  tlie  dates  and  the  cartouches,^  or  when  he  assumed  the
prenomen  of  Usirmari,  and  distributed  among  his  male  children  the  names  and
dignities  of  the  sons  of  Sesostris.  We  see,  moreover,  at  his  court  another  high
priest  of  Phtah  at  Memphis  bearing  the  name  of  Khamoisit,  and  Maritiimu,
another  supreme  pontiif  of  Ea  in  Heliopolis.^  However,  this  ambition  to
resemble  his  ancestor  at  once  instigated  him  to  noble  deeds,  and  gave  him  the
necessary  determination  to  accomplish  them.
He  began  by  restoring  order  in  the  admini-
stration of  affairs;  "he  established  truth,
crushed  error,  purified  the  temple  from  all
crime,"  ^  and  made  his  authority  felt  not
only  in  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  Nile
valley,  but  in  what  was  still  left  of  the
Asiatic  provinces.  The  disturbances  of  the
preceding  years  had  weakened  the  prestige
of  Amon-Ra,  and  the  king's  supremacy
would  have  been  seriously  endangered,  had
any  one  arisen  in  Syria  of  sufficient  energy  to
take  advantage  of  the  existing  state  of  affairs.

But  since  the  death  of  Khatusaru,  the  power  of  the  Khati  had  considerably
declined,  and  they  retained  their  position  merely  through  their  former  prestige ;
they  were  in  as  much  need  of  peace,  or  even  more  so,  than  the  Egyptians,  for
the  same  discords  whicli  had  harassed  the  reigns  of  Seti  II.  and  liis  successors
had  doubtless  brought  trouble  to  their  own  sovereigns.  They  had  made  no
serious  efforts  to  extend  their  dominion  over  any  of  those  countries  which  had
been  the  objects  of  the  cupidity  of  their  forefathers,  while  the  peoples  of
Kharu  and  Phoenicia,  thrown  back  on  their  own  resources,  had  not  ventured
to  take  up  arms  against  the  Pharaoh.  The  yoke  lay  lightly  upon  them,  and
in  no  way  hampered  their  internal  liberty  ;  they  governed  as  they  liked,  tiiey
exchanged  one  prince  or  chief  for  another,  they  waged  petty  wars  as  of  old,
without,  as  a  rule,  exposing  themselves  to  interference  from  the  Egyptian  troops
occupying  the  country,  or  from  the  "  royal  messengers."    These  vassal  provinces


NAKHTUSIT.


\ '  Thua  the  great  decree  of  Plitali-Totunen,  carved  by  Ramses  II.  in  the  year  XXXV.  ou  the
rocks  of  Abu  Simbel  (cf.  p.  406  of  this  volume),  was  copied  by  Kamsea  III.  at  Medinet-Habii  iu  the
year  XII.  (Dlmichen,  HistorUche  Iiischri/tcit,  vol.  i.  pis.  vii.-x. ;  E.  and  J.  de  Kouge,  IiisBriptiom
hiirughjphiques  copi^es  en  tirjijpte,  pis.  cxxxi.-cxxxviii. ;  cf.  BnrGSCH,  Gesch.  JEgyplcns,  pp.  .'538-540,
and  Ed.  Naville,  Le  DA-ret  de  I'htah  Tviunen  en  faveur  de  Eamsh  II.  el  de  Bamses  III.,  in  the
TTamacUom  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soi'.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  119-138).

-  Ebman,  Die  Sohne  Ramses  III.,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  1883,  pp.  GO,  61,  whose  conclusions  have  been
accepted  by  most  recent  Egyptologists.

'  Historical  stele  broken  during  the  Roman  period,  the  fragments  of  which  are  now  built  into  the
quay  at  Elephantine  (E.  and  J.  he  Rougi:,  Inscriptions  hidroglyphiques  capites  en  ligypte,  pi.  cclviii.
11.  5,  7  ;  cf.  J.  DE  JIORGAN,  De  la  Fronliire  de  Nuhie  u  Kom-Ombos,  p.  119).


456  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE   TEE  BAN  EMPIRE.

had  probably  ceased  to  pay  tribute,  or  had  doue  so  irregularly,  during  the
years  of  anarchy  following  the  death  of  Siphtah,  but  they  had  taken  no
concerted  action,  nor  attempted  any  revolt,  so  that  when  Ramses  III.  ascended
the  throne  he  was  spared  the  trouble  of  reconquering  them.  He  had  merely
to  claim  allegiance  to  have  it  at  once  rendered  him — an  allesriance  which
included  the  populations  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Qodshii  and  on  the  banks  of
the  Nahr  el-Kelb.^  The  empire,  which  had  threatened  to  fall  to  pieces  amid
the  civil  wars,  and  which  would  indeed  have  succumbed  had  they  continued
a  few  years  longer,  again  revived  now  that  an  energetic  priuce  had  been  found
to  resume  the  direction  of  affairs,  and  to  weld  together  those  elements  which
had  been  on  the  point  of  disintegration.^

One  state  alone  appeared  to  regret  the  revival  of  the  Imperial  power  ;  this
was  the  kingdom  of  Libya.  It  had  continued  to  increase  in  size  since  the
days  of  Minephtah,  and  its  population  had  been  swelled  by  the  annexation  of
several  strange  tribes  inhabiting  the  vast  area  of  the  Sahara.  One  of  these,
the  Mashauasha,  acquired  the  ascendency  among  these  desert  races  owing  to
their  numbers  and  valour,  and  together  with  the  other  tribes — the  Sabati,
the  Kaiakasha,  the  Shaiu,  the  Hasa,  the  Bikana,  and  the  Qahaka  ^ — formed
a  confederacy,  which  now  threatened  Egypt  on  the  west.  This  federation
was  conducted  by  Didi,  Mashaknu,  and  Maraiu,  all  children  of  that  Maraiii
who  had  led  the  first  Libyan  invasion,  and  also  by  Zamaru  and  Zautmaru,
two  princes  of  less  important  tribes.^  Their  combined  forces  had  attacked
Egypt  for  the  second  time  during  the  years  of  anarchy,  and  had  gained
possession  one  after  another  of  all  the  towns  in  the  west  of  the  Delta,
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis  to  the  town  of  Qarbina :  the  Canopic
branch  of  the  Nile  now  formed  the  limit  of  their  dominion,  and  they  often
crossed  it  to  devastate  the  central  provinces.^     Nakhtusiti  had  been  unable

'  To  AV.  Max  Mcllek,  Jigypten  und  Europa,  p.  270,  is  due  the  merit  of  haviug  pointed  out,  in
opposition  to  the  general  opinion,  the  fact  that  Bamses  III.  had  not  to  reconquer  the  Asiatic
provinces.

'  The  general  outline  of  the  reign  is  furnished  in  the  discourse  of  Eamses  III.  himself  in  the
Great  Harris  Papyrus,  Birch's  edit.,  pis.  7G-79  ;  cf.  Eisenlohb,  Der  Grosse  Papyrus  Harris,  pp.  27-38,
and  particularly  Chabas,  Pecherches  pour  servir  a  Vhistoire  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  0-74.

'  This  enumeration  is  furnished  by  the  summary  of  the  campaigns  of  Ramses  III.  in  The  Great
Harris  Papyrus,  Bikch's  edit.,  pi.  77, 11.  2, 3 ;  cf.  Chabas,  Becherches,  etc.,  pp.  54-50 ;  and  Eisenlohb-
BlKCH,  The  Annals  of  Barneses  III.,  iu  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  p.  48.  The  Sabati
of  this  text  are  probably  identical  with  the  people  of  the  Sapudiu  or  Spudi  (Asbytse),  mentioned  on
one  of  the  pylons  of  Medinet-Habu.

*  DuMiCHEN,  Historische  Inschriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvu.  1.  47.  The  relationship  is  nowhere
stated,  but  it  is  thought  to  be  probable  from  the  names  of  Didi  and  Maraiii,  repeated  iu  both  series
of  inscriptions.     [For  the  first  Libyan  invasion,  see  supra,  pp.  432,  433. — Tr.]

'  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  77,  11.  1,  2.  The  town  of  Qarbina  has  been  identified  with  the
Canopus  of  the  Greeks,  and  also  with  the  modern  Korbani,  by  Brugscu,  Dictiunnaire  Ge'ogr.,  pp.  854,
850,  1340-1342 ;  and  the  district  of  Gautu,  which  adjoined  it,  with  the  territory  of  the  modern  town
of  Edko  {Diet.  G€ogr.,  pp.  819-823, 1340-1343).  Spiegelberg  {Das  Geschdflsjournul  eines  JSyyptischne
Beamten,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travanx,  vol.  xvii.  p.  100)  throws  doubt  on  the  identitication  of  Qarbu  or


TEE  DECLINE   OF   TEE  MILITARY  SPIRIT  IN  EGYPT.  457

to  drive  them  out,  and  Eamses  had  not  ventured  on  the  task  immediately
after  liis  accession.      The  military  institutions  of  the   country  had    become
totally  disorganised  after  the  death  of  Minephtah,  and  that  part  of  the  com-
munity  responsible    for    furnishing    the    army  with    recruits    had    been   so
weakened  by  the  late  troubles,  that  they  were  in  a  worse  condition  than  before
the  first  Libyan  invasion.     The  losses  they  had  suffered  since  Egypt  began  its
foreign  conquests  had  not  been  repaired  by  the  introduction  of  fresh  elements,
and  the  hope  of  spoil  was  now  insufficient  to  induce  members  of  the  upper  classes
to  enter  the  army.     There  was  no  difficulty  in  filling  the  ranks  from  the  fellahin,
but  the  middle  class  and  the  aristocracy,  accustomed  to  ease  and  wealth,  no
longer  came  forward  in  large  numbers,  and  disdained  the  military  profession.
It  was  the  fashion  in  the  schools  to  contrast  the  calling  of  a  scribe  with  that
of  a  foot-soldier  or  a  charioteer,  and  to  make  as  merry  over  the  discomforts
of  a  military  occupation  as  it  had  formerly  been  the  fashion  to  extol  its  glory
and  profitableness.     These  scholastic  exercises  represented  the  future  officer
dragged  as  a  child  to  the  barracks,  "  the  side-lock  over  his  ear. — He  is  beaten
and  his  sides  are  covered  with  scars, — he  is  beaten   and    his  two  eyebrows
are  marked  with  wounds, — he  is  beaten  and  his  head  is  broken  by  a  badly
aimed  blow ; — he  is  stretched  on  the  ground  "  for  the  slightest  fault,  "  and
blows  fall  on  him  as  on  a  papyrus, — and  he  is  broken  by  the  stick."     His
education  finished,  he  is  sent  away  to  a  distance,  to  Syria  or  Ethiopia,  and  fresh
troubles  overtake  him.     "  His  victuals  and  his  supply  of  water  are  about  his
neck  like  the  burden  of  an  ass, — and  his  neck  and  throat  suffer  like  those
of  an  ass, — so  that  the  joints  of  his  spine  are   broken. — He   drinks   putrid
water,  keeping  perpetual  guard  the  while."     His  fatigues  soon  tell  upon  his
health   and   vigour  :   "  Should  he    reach  the  enemy, — he  is  like  a  bird  which
trembles. — Should  he  return  to  Egypt, — he  is  like  a  piece  of  old  worm-eaten
wood. — He  is  sick  and  must  lie  down,  he  is  carried  on  an  ass, — while  thieves
steal   his   linen, — and   his   slaves   escape." '      The   charioteer    is   not   spared
either.      He,  doubtles.*,  has  a  moment  of  vain-glory  and  of  flattered  vanity
when  he  receives,  according  to  regulations,  a  new  chariot  and  two  horses,
with  which  he  drives  at  a  gallop  before  his  parents  and  his  fellow-villagers ;
but  once  having  joined  his  regiment,  he  is  perhaps  worse  off  than  the  foot-
soldier.     "He  is  thrown  to  the  ground  among  thorns  : — a  scorpion  wounds  him
in  the  foot,  and  his  heel  is  pierced  by  its  sting. — When  his  kit  is  examined, —

Qarblim,  with  Canopus.     KeviUuut  (^(Juelquca  I'exles  trailuits  u  men  cours,  p.  xix.  uote  2)  prufurs  to
coiiucot  Qurbiua  with  Heracloojiolis  Parva  in  Lower  Egypt.

'  Anastusi  I'api/rus  111.,  pi.  v.  1.  5-pl.  vi.  1.  2,  and  Anastasi  Papyrus  IV.,  pi.  ix..  1.  1-pl.  x.  1.  1  ;
of.  E.  HE  Rouge,  biscoun  d'ouveriuie,  pp.  34,  35 ;  Maspeuo,  Du  Genre  Epislulaire  chez  les  ancient
Egypliene,  pp.  41,  42 ;  Eiiman,  yh'ijyplen  und  ^'ijyptuches  Lehen,  p.  722.  For  another  piece  of  a  similar
tendency,  cf.  Ebman,  UUratiaclie  Uelraka,  iu  tlio  Zeiischrift,  1880,  pp.  90,  97.


458  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    TEEBAN  EMPIRE.

his  misery  is  at  its  height."  No  sooner  has  the  fact  been  notified  that  his
arms  are  in  a  bad  condition,  or  that  some  article  has  disappeared,  than  "  he  is
stretched  on  the  ground— and  overpowered  with  blows  from  a  stick."  i  This
decliue  of  the  warlike  spirit  in  all  classes  of  society  had  entailed  serious  modifica-
tions in  the  organisation  of  both  army  and  navy.  The  native  element  no  longer
predominated  in  most  battalions  and  on  the  majority  of  vessels,  as  it  had  done
under  the  XVIII'*  dynasty;  it  still  furnished  those  formidable  companies
of  archers— the  terror  of  both  Africans  and  Asiatics— and  also  the  most  im-
portant part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  chariotry,  but  the  main  body  of  the  infantry
was  composed  almost  exclusively  of  mercenaries,  particularly  of  the  Shardana
and  the  Qahaka.  Eamses  began  his  reforms  by  rebuilding  the  fleet,  which,  in  a
country  like  Egypt,  was  always  an  artificial  creation,  liable  to  fall  into  decay,
unless  a  strong  and  persistent  effort  were  made  to  keep  it  in  an  efficient  con-
dition. Shipbuilding  had  made  considerable  progress  in  the  last  few  centuries,
perhaps  from  the  impulse  received  through  Phoenicia,  and  the  vessels  turned
out  of  the  dockyards  were  far  superior  to  those  constructed  under  Hatshopsitu.-
The  general  outlines  of  the  hull  remained  the  same,  but  the  stem  and  stern  were
finer,  and  not  so  high  out  of  the  water  ;  the  bow  ended,  moreover,  in  a  lion's  head
of  metal,  which  rose  above  the  cut- water.  A  wooden  structure  running  between
the  forecastle  and  quarter-deck  protected  the  rowers  during  the  fio-ht,  their
heads  alone  being  exposed.  The  mast  had  only  one  curved  yard,  to  which  the
sail  was  fastened ;  this  was  run  up  from  the  deck  by  halyards  when  the  sailors
wanted  to  make  sail,  and  thus  differed  from  the  Egyptian  arrangement,  where
the  sail  was  fastened  to  a  fixed  upper  yard.^  At  least  Iialf  of  the  crews  consisted
of  Libyan  prisoners,  who  were  branded  with  a  hot  iron  like  cattle,  to  prevent
desertion ;  ■*  the  remaining  half  was  drawn  from  the  Syrian  or  Asiatic  coast,
or  else  were  natives  of  Egypt.  In  order  to  bring  the  army  into  better  con-
dition, Kamses  revived  the  system  of  classes,  which  empowered  him  to  compel
all  Egyptians  of  unmixed  race  to  take  personal  service,  while  he  hired  mer-
cenaries from  Libya,  Phoenicia,  Asia  Minor,  and  wherever  he  could  get  tliem,
and  divided  them  into  regular  regiments,  according  to  their  extraction  and  the

'  Anattasi  Papijrus  III.,  pi.  vi.  1. 10  ;  cf.  Maspeko,  Du  Genre  Epistolaire  chez  les  anciens  Egyptiene
de  I'^poque  pharaonique,  pp.  42,  43,  and  Ermax,  yEgypten  uiul  .Egyptisches  Lehen,  pp.  721,  722.

'  See  the  description  and  representation  of  the  vessels  launched  by  Queen  Hatshopsitu  on  the
Ked  Sea,  on  pp.  197-199.

'  These  facts  are  deduced  from  a  careful  examination  of  the  Egyptian  vessels  represented  at
Medinet-Habu  (Chajipollion,  Monuments  c!e  I'Egypte  et  de  hi  Nuhie,  pi.  ccxxii. ;  Eosellixi,  Monumenli
Storici,  pi.  csxxi..  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  36,  37  ;  Makiette,  Voyage  de  la  Haute  Egypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  55).  The
picture  representing  them  is  reproduced  further  on,  on  p.  469.

*  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  77, 11.  5,  6  ;  ef.  Chabas,  Recherches  pour  servir  a  rinstolre  de  la
XIX'  dynaslie,  pp.  52,  56 ;  Eisenlohr-Bikch,  Ihe' Annals  of  Barneses  III,  in  the  Becords  of  the  Past,
1st  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  48,  49  ;  and  for  the  brand  of  the  redhot  iron,  Bkugsch,46k,  in  the  Zeitschrift
1876,  pp.  35-38.


SAMSES  in.   REORQANISES   THE  ARMY  AND   NAVT.  459

arms  that  they  bove.^  In  the  field,  the  archers  always  headed  the  column,  to
meet  the  advance  of  the  foe  with  their  arrows ;  they  were  followed  by  the
Egyptian  lancers — the  Shardana  and  the  Tyrseni  with  their  short  spears  and
heavy  bronze  swords — while  a  corps  of  veterans,  armed  with  heavy  maces,
brought  up  the  rear.'  In  an  engagement,  these  various  troops  formed  three
lines  of  infantry  disposed  one  behind  the  other — the  light  brigade  in  front  to
engage  the  adversary,  the  swordsmen  and  lancers  who  were  to  come  into
close  quarters  with  the  foe,  and  the  mace-bearers  in  reserve,  ready  to  advance
on  any  threatened  point,  or  to  await  the  critical  moment  when  their  interven-
tion would  decide  tlie  victory  :  as  iu  tlie  times  of  Thutmosis  and  Eamses  II.,
the  chariotry  covered  the  two  wings.

It  was  well  for  Kamses  that  on  ascending  the  throne  he  had  devoted  himself
to  the  task  of  recruiting  the  Egyptian  army,  and  of  personally  and  carefully
superintending  the  instruction  and  equipment  of  his  men  ;  for  it  was  thanks  to
these  precautions  that,  when  the  confederated  Libyans  attacked  the  country  about
the  V"  year  of  his  reign,  he  was  enabled  to  repulse  them  with  complete  success.^
"Didi,  Mashaknii,  Maraiu,  together  with  Zamarii  and  Zautmaru,  had  strongly
urged  them  to  attack  Egypt  and  to  carry  fire  before  them  from  one  end  of  it
to  the  other."* — "Their  warriors  confided  to  each  other  in  their  counsels,  and
their  hearts  were  full:  'We  will  be  drunk!'  and  their  princes  said  within
their  breasts :  '  We  will  fill  our  hearts  with  violence  ! '  But  their  plans  were
overthrown,  thwarted,  broken  against  the  heart  of  the  god,  and  the  prayer  of
their  chief,  which  their  lips  repeated,  was  not  granted  by  the  god."  ^  They
met  the    Egyptians  at  a  place   called  "  Ramsisu-Khasfi-Timihu"   ("Ramses

'  The  Great  Harris  Pupijrm,  pi.  7(1,  U.  5,  U.  Chabas  {Recherehes  jmur  serrir  a  mistoire  de  la
XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  2o-30)  thinks  tliat  the  questiou  here  is  that  of  the  civil  reorganisation  of  Egypt
and  institution  of  castes  (cf.  Wiedemann,  .i'lji/ptische  Gesch.,  p.  505) ;  the  word  ZamiH,  which  he
translates  "family"  or  "caste,"  signifies  "generations,"  i.e.  the  "classes"  of  the  population  submitted
to  the  military  regulations,  as  stated  on  p.  212,  note  3,  of  this  volume  (cf.  Maspebo,  Rap-port  eur  une
Mission  en  Italie,  in  the  Uucue.il  de  Tracaux,  vol.  iv.  pp.  130,  131,  and  Etudes  de  Mylholo<jic,  etc.,  vol.  i.
p.  5G,  note  2  ;  Bbugscii,  Die  Ecjyplologie,  pp.  293,  296).

'  This  is  the  order  of  march  represented  during  the  Syrian  campaign  (Crampollion,  Monuments
de  V^gypte  el  de  la  Nuhie,  pis.  ccxvii.,  ccxxi. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  cxxvi.,  cxxix.,  cxxx.),
as  gathered  from  the  arrangement  observed  in  the  pictures  at  Medinet-IIabu.

^  The  two  Libyan  campaigns  are  confounded  in  tluj  summary  of  the  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  76,
11.  11-77,  1.  67;  cf.  Kisenlomk-Birch,  The  Annals  of  Rameses  III,  in  the  Recordsnfthe  Fast,  1st  series,
vol.  viii.  pp.  4S,  49.  Chabas  disentangled  the  eveuts  belonging  to  each  in  Eludes  sur  l'Antiquit€
hislorique,  1st  edit.,  pp.  230-2.'Jl,  and  Recherches pour  sercir  h  I'Histoire  de  la  XIX'  dynastie,  pp.  52,  56.
The  texts  of  Medlnet-Habu  relating  to  tlie  campaign  of  the  year  V.  were  published  by  Burton
{Exeerpta  Hieroglyphira,  pis.  xliii.-xlv.),  by  ChampoUion  (^Mon.  de  VEgypie  et  de  la  Nubie,  pis.  ccv.-
ocviii.),  by  Roselliui  {Uon.  Storici,  pis.  cxxx.-cxxxii.,  cxxxv.-oxxsvii.,  cxxxix.-cxli.),  and  by  DUmi-
chen  (^Historischc  Inscliriften,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a);  they  were  translated  first  by  Kosellini  (^Mon.
Storici,  vol.  iv.  pp.  S5-01)  and  then  by  Chabas  {fUudes  sur  V Anti<iuite'  Historiiiue,  2nd  edit.,  pp.
227-233).  Bas-reliefs  representing  certain  episodes  are  still  unpublished  ;  they  were  brought  to
light  during  the  excavations  njade  at  Medinet-llabu  by  Muns.  Dare.-sy.

*  DiMicIIEN,  Hislurische  liiseliri/len,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a,  11.  17,  IS.

^  Di'jiiciiE.v,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a,  11.  27,  2S.


460  TEE   CLOSE    OF   THE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.

repulses  the  Timihu"'),  but  their  attack  was  broken  by  the  latter,  who  were
ably  led  and  displayed  considerable  valour.  "  They  bleated  like  goats  surprised
by  a  bull  who  stamps  its  foot,  who  pushes  forward  its  horn  and  shakes  the
mountains,  charging  whoever  seeks  to  annoy  it."  ^  They  fled  afar,  howling
with  fear,  and  many  of  them,  in  endeavouring  to  escape  their  pursuers,
perished  in  the  canals.  "It  is,  said  they,  the  breaking  of  our  spines  which
threatens  us  in  the  laud  of  Egypt,  and  its  lord  destroys  our  souls  for  ever  and
ever.  Woe  be  upon  them  !  for  they  have  seen  their  dances  changed  into
carnage,  Sokhit  is  behind  them,  fear  weighs  upon  them.  '  We  march  no  longer
upon  roads  where  we  can  walk,  but  we  run  across  fields,  all  the  fields !  And
their  soldiers  did  not  even  need  to  measure  arms  with  us  in  the  struggle !
Pharaoh  alone  was  our  destruction,  a  fire  against  us  every  time  that  he  willed
it,  and  no  sooner  did  we  approach  than  the  flame  curled  round  us,  and  no  water
could  quench  it  on  us.'  "  ^  The  victory  was  a  brilliant  one ;  the  victors  counted
12,585  of  the  enemy  killed,*  and  many  more  who  surrendered  at  discretion.  The
latter  were  formed  into  a  brigade,  and  were  distributed  throughout  the  valley  of
the  Nile  in  military  settlements.^  They  submitted  to  their  fate  with  that  resig-
nation which  we  know  to  have  been  a  characteristic  of  the  vanquished  at  that
date.  They  regarded  their  defeat  as  a  judgment  from  God  against  which  there
was  no  appeal ;  when  their  fate  had  been  once  pronounced,  nothing  remained  to
the  condemned  except  to  submit  to  it  humbly,  and  to  accommodate  themselves
to  the  master  to  whom  they  were  now  bound  by  a  decree  from  on  high.  The
prisoners  of  one  day  became  on  the  next  the  devoted  soldiers  of  the  prince
against  whom  they  had  formerly  fought  resolutely,  and  they  were  employed
against  their  own  tribes,  their  employers  having  no  fear  of  their  deserting  to  the
other  side  during  the  engagement.  They  were  lodged  in  the  barracks  at  Thebes,
or  in  the  provinces  under  the  feudal  lords  and  governors  of  the  Pharaoh,  and
were  encouraged  to  retain  their  savage  customs  and  warlike  spirit.  They  inter-
married either  with  the  fellahin  or  with  women  of  their  own  tribes,  and  were
reinforced  at  intervals  by  fresh  prisoners  or  volunteers.  Drafted  principally  into
the  Delta  and  the  cities  of  Middle  Egypt,  they  thus  ended  by  constituting  a

>  Bbugsoh,  GescMchie  ^gyptens,  p.  597.     Unpublished  bas-reliefs  at  Medinet-Habu.

2  DiJwiCHEN,  Hisloriiche  Inschriflen,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a,  1.  32.

'  DiJMiOHEN,  ibiJ.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a,  11.  -12-45.

*  Tlie  number  of  the  dead  is  calculated  from  that  of  the  hands  and  phalli  brought  in  by  the
soldiers  after  the  victory,  the  heaps  of  which  are  represented  at  Medinet-Habu  (CuAJiroLLiON,  Monu-
ments de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  ccxxiv.;  Kosellini,  Munumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxxxv.  ;  cf.  tlie  vignette
which  reproduces  this  scene  on  p.  227  of  this  volume).

'  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  pi.  77,  11.  5,  0 ;  (cf.  Cuabas,  Recherches  pour  servir  a  I'hiatoire  de
I'igypte,  pp.  52,  56,  and  Eisenlohk-Bibou,  Tlte  Annals  of  Barneses  III.,  in  the  Records  of  tlie  Past,
Ist  series,  vol.  viii.   p.  49).


TEE  SECOND   LIBYAN  INVASION.


461


ONE  OP  THE  LIBYAN  CHIEFS  VAN-
QUISHED  BY   BAMSES   111."


semi-foreign  population,  destined  by  nature  and  training  to  the  calling  of  arms,
and  forming  a  sort  of  warrior  caste,  differing  widely  from  the  militia  of  former
times,  and  known  for  many  generations  by  their  national  name  of  Mashaiiasha.
As  early  as  the  Xll'"  dynasty,  the  Pharaohs  had,  in  a  similar  way,  imported  the
Mazaiii  from  Nubia  and  had  used  them  as  a  military  police  ;^  Kaniscs  HI.  toow
resolved  to  naturalise  the  Libyans  for  much  the
same  purpose.  His  victory  did  not  bear  the
immediate  fruits  that  we  might  have  expected
from  his  own  account  of  it ;  the  memory  of
the  exploits  of  Kamses  II.  haunted  him,  and,
stimulated  by  the  example  of  his  ancestor  at
Qodshu,^  he  doubtless  desired  to  have  the  sole
credit  of  the  victory  over  the  Libyans.  He  cer-
tainly did  overcome  their  kings,  and  arrested  their
invasion ;  we  may  go  so  far  as  to  allow  that  he
wrested  from  them  the  provinces  which  they  had
occupied  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Canopic  branch,

from  Marea  to  the  Natron  Lakes,  but  he  did  not  conquer  them,  and  their
power  still  remained  as  formidable  as  ever.  He  had  gained  a  respite  at
the  point  of  the  sword,  but  he  had  not  delivered  Egypt  from  their  future
attacks.

He  might  perhaps  have  been  tempted  to  follow  up  his  success  and  assume
the  offensive,  had  not  affairs  in  Asia  at  this  juncture  demanded  the  whole  of  his
attention.  The  movement  of  great  masses  of  European  tribes  in  a  southerly
and  easterly  direction  was  beginning  to  be  felt  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Balkans,
who  were  forced  to  set  out  in  a  double  stream  of  emigration — one  crossing  the
Bosphorus  and  the  Propontis  towards  the  centre  of  Asia  Minor,  while  the  other
made  for  what  was  later  known  as  Greece  Proper,  by  way  of  the  passes  over
Olympus  and  Pindus.  Tlie  nations  who  had  hitherto  inhabited  these  regions,
now  found  themselves  thrust  forward  by  the  pressure  of  invading  hordes,  and
were  constrained  to  move  towards  the  south  and  east  by  every  avenue
which  presented  itself  It  was  probably  the  irruption  of  the  Phrygians  into
the  high  table-laud  which  gave  rise  to  the  general  exodus  of  these  various


'  Cf.  what  is  said  of  the  Mazaiu  and  tlieir  fuuctious  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  301),
note  3.

'  This  pretension  is  particuhirly  strikinf;  on  liiii;  44  of  the  text  above  quoted  (p.  4G0),  wlierc  the
Libyans  exclaim  that  the  Egyptian  soldiers  "  did  not  even  fight  against  them  in  the  struggle;  Pharaoh
was  their  destruction."     Cf.  pp.  3y(;-3'JS  of  tlie  present  volume.

•  Drawn  by  Kaucher-Gudin,  from  (,'hajipollion,  Monumejits  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pis.  cci.  5,
ccii.  1,  ccxxxiii.  2,  ccxxxiv.  2  ;  Rosei.mni,  ilonuiiu-nti  Storici,  pi.  vii.,  No.  27 ;  and  Lepsr's,  Denlcm.,
iii.  205,  2U9.


462


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    TFIEBAN  EMPIRE.


nations^ — the  Pulasati,  the  Zakkahi,  the  Shagalasha,  the  Danauiui,  and  the
iJashasha — some  of  whom  had  already  made  their  way  into  Syria  and  taken  part
in  campaigns  there,  while  others  had  as  yet  never  measured  strength  with  the
Egyptians.  The  main  body  of  these  migrating  tribes  chose  the  overland
route,  keeping  within  easy  distance  of  the  coast,  from  Pamphylia  as  far  as  the
confines  of  Naharaim.  Tiiey  were  accompanied  by  their  familie-,  who  must
have  been  mercilessly  jolted  in  the  ox-drawn  square  waggons  with  solid  wheels


THE    WAGGONS    OF    THE    PULASATI    AMO    THEIR    CONFEDEliATES.-

in  which  they  travelled.  The  body  of  the  vehicle  was  built  either  of  roughly
squared  planks,  or  else  of  something  resembliog  wicker-work.  The  round
axletree  was  kept  in  its  place  by  means  of  a  rude  pin,  and  four  oxen  were
harnessed  abreast  to  the  whole  structure.  The  children  wore  no  clothes,  and
had,  for  the  most  part,  their  hair  tied  into  a  tuft  on  the  top  of  their  heads ;  the
women  affected  a  closely  fitting  cap,  and  were  wrapped  in  large  blue  or  red
garments  drawn  close  to  the  body.^  The  men's  attire  varied  according  to
the  tribe  to  which  they  belonged.  Tiie  Pulasati  undoubtedly  held  the  chief
place ;  they  were  both  soldiers  and  sailors,  and  we  must  recognise  in  them  the
foremost  of  those  tribes  known  to  the  Greeks  of  classical  times  as  the  Cariaus,
who  infested  the  coasts  of  Asia  Minor  as  well  as  those  of  Greece  and  the


'  This  idea  appears  to  have  been  first  put  forth  by  Maspero,  in  the  lievue  Critique,  1S77,  vol.  i.
p.  320  ;  W.  Max  Miiller  (Agien  und  Euro-pa,  p.  359)  believes  that  the  invasion  was  caused  by  the
famine,  during  which  Minephtah  supplied  the  Khati  with  corn  (cf.  pp.  431,  433  of  this  volume).
The  Shagalasha  and  the  Dauauna  have  been  already  meutioned  on  p.  360,  note  1,  and  p.  432,  note  2,
of  this  volume;  I  may  add,  with  regard  to  the  hitter  name,  that  the  texts  of  Eamses  III.  sometimes
give  the  simple  form  Danau  (Greene,  Fouilles  «  Thebes,  pi.  ii.  1.  18)  in  place  of  the  more  developed
form  Danauna.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Champollion,  Mon.  de  VEgtjpte,  etc.,  pi.  ccxx.,  and  Roseluni,
Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxxviii.

'  These  details  are  talien  from  the  battle-scenes  at  Blediuet-Habu  (Champollion,  Mon.  de  VEgtipie,
etc.,  pis.  ccxx.-ccxx.  his;  Rosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  cxxviii.);  they  were  for  the  first  time  com-
pletely collected  and  made  the  subject  of  study  by  Cuabas,  £(«<!<;«  sur  VAiiliquiti'  historique,  2nd
edit.,  pp.  28G,  294-29(5,  and  again  discussed  and  fresh  comparisons  made  by  M'.  Max  MOllek,  Asien
und  Europa,  etc.,  pp.  361-3(J7.


ASIATIC   TRIBES;    THE  PULASATI,  ZAKKALA,    AND    TTRSENI.     4G3

^gean  islands.'^  Crete  was  at  this  time  the  seat  of  a  maritime  empire,  whose
chiefs  were  perpetually  cruising  the  seas  and  harassing  the  civilized  states  of
the  Eastern  Mediterranean.  These  sea-royers  had  grown  wealthy  through  piracy,
and  contact  with  the  merchants  of  Syria  and  Egypt  had  awakened  in  tliem
a  taste  for  a  certain  luxury  and  refine-
ment, of  which  we  find  no  traces  in  the
remains  of  their  civilization  anterior  to
this  period.  Some  of  the  symbols  in  the  in-
scriptions found  on  their  monuments  recall
certain  of  the  Egyptian  characters,  while
others  present  an  original  aspect  and  seem
to  be  of  >dEgean  origin.  We  find  in  them,  ar-
ranged in  juxtaposition,  signs  representing
flowers,  birds,  fisli,  quadrupeds  of  various
kinds,  members  of  the  human  body,  and
boats  and  household  implements.''  From  the
little  which  is  known  of  this  script  we  are

inclined  to  derive  it  from  a  similar  source  to  that  which  has  furnished  those  we
meet  with  in  several  parts  of  Asia  Minor  and  Northern  Syria.  It  would  appear
that  in  ancient  times,  somewhere  in  the  centre  of  the  Peninsula — but  under  what
influence  or  during  what  period  we  know  not — a  syllabary  was  developed,  of
which  varieties  were  handed  on  from  tribe  to  tribe,  spreading  on  the  one  side
to  the  Hittites,  Cilicians,  and  the  peoples  on  the  borders  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  and
on  the  other  to  the  Trojans,  to  the  people  of  the  Cyclades,  and  into  Crete

'  The  Pulasati  have  been  conneoted  with  the  Philistines  by  Champollion,  in  his  Diclionnaire  Hiero-
qlypldque,  and  subsequently  by  the  early  English  Egyptologists  (Osburn,  Egypt,  her  Testimony  to
the  Truth,  pp.  107,  137,  141 ;  Hinoks,  Oh  the  Number,  Names  and  Power,  p.  47),  who  thought  tlioy
recognised  in  them  the  inhabitants  of  the  Shejihelah :  cf.  Beugsch,  Gcogr.  Ins.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  85,  8(j,  and
Hist.  d'Egyple,  p.  187  ;  E.  de  I{oi;ge,  Notice  de  quelqum  textes  liie'roijlyphiques  ricemmenl  publics  par
M.  Greene,  p.  15.  Chabas  was  the  first  to  identify  them  with  the  Pelasgi  {Etudes  sur  I'Aidiqiiilg  Uist.,
2nd  edit,,  pp.  2S4-2i)l  ;  Recherches  pour  servir  it  I'histoire  de  VEgypte,  pp.  99-101) ;  Ungev  {Manetlio
p.  218)  and  Brugsch  {Gesch.  Aigyptens,  p.  592)  prefer  to  attribute  to  them  a  Libyan  origin,  but  the
latter  finally  returns  to  the  Pelasgic  and  Philistine  hypothesis  {Troie  et  VEgypte,  in  Schliemann,
Troie,  pp.  7S0,  781).  They  were  without  doubt  the  Philistines,  but  in  their  migratory  state,  before
they  settled  on  the  coast  of  Palestine  (Maspero,  in  the  Revue  Critique,  1873,  vol.  ii.  pp.  84,  85,  and  also
Hist,  ancienne  des  peuples  des  V  Orient,  1875;  cf.  Fk.  Lenorjiant,  Les  Antiquit^s  de  la  Troade,  pp.  73,
74;  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Altcrthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  319-321,  and  Gesch.  des  Allen  Aigyptens,  p.  31U;
W.  Max  Mlller,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  3G8,  387-390).  For  the  resemblance  of  their  type  to  that  of
certain  inhabitants  still  to  be  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Gaza,  cf.  the  observations  made  by
Hyacintue  Husson,  La  Lggende  de  Samson  et  les  mythes  solaires,  in  the  Revue  Archd'ologique,  2ud  scries,
vol.  xi.  pp.  345,  346.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato ;  cf.  Eosei.lini,  Monumenti  Slorici,
pi.  clxi.  2;  Mariette,  Voyage  de  la  Haute-Egypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  52;  Petrie,  Racial  Types,  No.  182.

'  A.  J.  Evans,  who  discovered  these  inscriptions,  was  the  first  to  study  and  publish  tliem.  I  must
refer  the  reader  for  the  whole  subject  to  his  book  on  Cretan  Cryptographs  and  Fre-phamician  Script,
1895,  as  well  as  to  the  observations  of  Solomon  Ueinach,  in  his  Chroniques  d' Orient,  particularly  to  No.
xxiv.,  pp.  Gl-t!7,  of  the  separate  printed  matter,  and  liis  Crete  Myci'nienne,  in  L' Anthropologie,  V-''
year,  pp.  407-415.


464  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.

and  Greece.^  It  is  easy  to  distinguish  tlie  Pulasati  by  the  felt  helmet  which
they  wore  fastened  under  the  chin  by  two  straps  and  surmounted  by  a
crest  of  feathers.  The  upper  part  of  their  bodies  was  covered  by  bands  of
leather  or  some  thick  material,  below  whicli  hung  a  simple  loin-cloth,  while
their  feet  were  bare  or  shod  with  short  sandals.  They  carried  each  a  round
buckler  with  two  handles,  and  the  stout  bronze  sword  common  to  the  northern
races,  suspended  by  a  cross  belt  passing  over  the  left  shoulder,  and  were  further
armed  with  two  daggers  and  two  javelins.  They  hurled  the  latter  from  a
short  distance  while  attacking,  and  then  drawing  their  sword  or  daggers,  fell
upon  the  enemy ;  we  find  among  them  a  few  chariots  of  tlie  Hittite  type,  each
manned  by  a  driver  and  two  fighting  men.^  The  Tyrseni  appear  to  have  been
the  most  numerous  after  the  Pulasati,  next  to  whom  came  the  Zakkala.  The
latter  are  thought  to  have  been  a  branch  of  the  Siculo-Pelasgi  whom  Greek
tradition  represents  as  scattered  at  this  period  among  the  Cyclades  and  along
the  coast  of  the  Hellespont ;  ^  they  wore  a  casque  surmounted  with  plumes  like
that  of  the  Pulasati.  The  Tyrseni  may  be  distinguished  by  their  feathered
head-dress,^  but  the  Shagalasha  aifected  a  long  ample  woollen  cap  falling  on  the
neck  behind,  an  article  of  apparel  which  is  still  worn  by  the  sailors  of  the  Archi-
pelago ;  otherwise  they  were  equipped  in  much  the  same  manner  as  their  allies.
The  other  members  of  the  confederation,  the  Shardana,  the  Danauna,  and  the
Uashasha,  each  furnished  an  inconsiderable  contingent,  and,  taken  all  together,
formed  but  a  small  item  of  the  united  force.^     Their  fleet  sailed  along  the  coast

'  Cf.  the  conclusions  which  have  led  Ramsay  {The  Cities  and  Bishoprics  of  Phri/gia,  p.  xv.)  to
place  the  origin  of  the  so-called  Hittite  writing  in  Asia  Minor.  Here  again  I  am  obliged,  for  lack  ot
room,  to  refrain  from  giving  all  the  reasons  which  induce  me  to  derive  the  system  of  Cretan  writing
from  the  central  regions  of  Asia  Minor.

'  These  details  are  taken  from  the  bas-reliefs  of  Medinet-Habu  (Description  de  I'Egypte,  A.,  vol.  ii.
pi.  8,  No.  7 ;  Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'Egypte,  etc.,  pis.  ccxx.-ccxx.  his,  ocxxxi.,  ccxxsii. ;
EosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxxvii. ;  cf.  Chabas,  Bccherches  sur  I' Antiquity  Historique,  2nd
edit.,  pp.  286,  294-296,  and  W.  Max  MiJLLER,  Asien  mid  Europa,  pp.  361-367).

'  The  Zakkara,  or  Zakkala,  have  been  identified  with  the  Teucrians  by  I.auth  {Homer  und  ^gypten,
p.  SI),  Chabas  {Recherches  sur  V Antiquitif  Historique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  286-2SS,  and  ttudes  pour  servir  a
I'Hidoire  sous  la  XIX'  Dynastic,  pp.  47-49),  and  by  Fr.  Lenormant  {Antiquite's  de  la  Troade,  pp.  37-
39);  with  the  ZygritiB  of  Libya  by  Unger  (Manetho,  p.  218)  and  by  Brugsch( Gesc/Mc/s/e  ^gyptens,
p.  592),  who  subsequently  returned  to  the  Teucrian  hypothesis  (Troie  el  I'Egypte,  in  8ohliemann,
Troie,  trans,  by  Egger,  pp.  980,  981) ;  W.  Max  Miiller  (Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  362,  363,  and  386)
regards  them  as  an  Asiatic  nation  probably  of  the  Lydian  family.  The  identification  with  the  Sieulo-
Pelasgi  of  the  Jigean  Sea  was  proposed  by  Maspero  (in  the  Eevue  Critique,  1880,  vol.  i.  p.  110).

*  Their  portraits  are  partially  destroyed  in  the  bas-relief  at  Medinet-Habu  representing  their
captive  chiefs  (cf.  the  group  reproduced  on  p.  471),  but  W.  Max  Miiller  has  been  able  to  restore
their  head-dress  with  tolerable  certainty  (Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  380,  381).

'  Chabas  persisted  in  recognising  in  the  Uashasha  the  Opici,  Obsci,  or  Oscans  of  Roman  history
(Etude  sur  V Antiquity  Historique,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  292-294,  and  Eecherches  pour  servir  a  VHistoire
d'Egypte  sous  la  XX'  Dynastic,  pp.  38,  39),  while  Brugsch  believed  them  to  be  the  Ossetea  of  the
Caucasus  (Gcschichte  Mgyptens,  p.  592),  but  afterwards  came  to  see  in  them  a  people  of  Asia  Minor
related  to  the  Shardana  (Troie  et  I'Egypte,  in  Schliemann,  Troie,  Egger's  translation,  p.  983).  The
form  of  the  word  shows  that  it  is  of  Asiatic  origin,  TJasasos,  Uassos,  which  refers  us  to  Caria  or  Lycia
(Maspeho,  in  the  Bevue  Critique,  1878,  vol.  i.  p.  320  ;  cf.  W.  Jlax  MiIllee,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  326,
363,  379).


ASIATIC  INCURSIONS.


465


A    SHAGALASHA    CHIEF.


ou(l  kept  within  sight  of  the  force  on  laud.     The  squadrons  depicted  on  the

monuments  are  without  doubt  those  of  tiie  two  peoples,  the  Pulasati  and  Zakkala.

Their  ships  resembled  in  many  respects  those  of  Egypt,  except  in  the  fact  that

they  had  no  cut-water.     The  bow  and  stern  rose  up  straight  like  the  neck  of  a

goose  or  swan ;  two  structures

for    fighting   purposes  were

erected  above  the  deck,  while

a  rail  running  round  the  sides

of  the  vessel  protected  the

bodies   of  the   rowers.     An

upper  yard  curved  in  shape

hung  from  the  single  mast,

which  terminated  in  a  top

for    the    look-out   during   a

battle.    The  upper  yard  was

not  made  to  lower,  and  the

top-men  managed  the    sail

in  the  same  manner  as  the

Egyptian  sailors.      The  resemblance  between  this  fleet  and  that  of  Kamses

is  easily  explained.-     The  dwellers  on  the  .Egean,  owing  to  the  knowledge

they  had  acquired  of  the  Phoenician  galleys,  which  were  accustomed  to  cruise

annually  in  their  waters,  became  experts  in  shipbuilding.     They  copied  the

lines  of  the  Phoenician  craft,  imitated  the  rigging,  and  learned  to  manceuvre

their  vessels  so  well,  both  on  ordinary  occasions  and  in  a  battle,  that  they  could

now  oppose  to   the  skilled  eastern  navigators  ships   as   well    fitted  out  and

commanded  by  captains  as  experienced  as  those  of  Egypt  or  Asia.

There  had  been  a  general  movement  among  all  these  peoples  at  the
very  time  when  Ramses  was  repelling  the  attack  of  the  Libyans  ;  "  the  isles
had    quivered,  and  had   vomited  forth    their  people  at   once."^      Tliey   were

'  Drawn  by  Fauolitr-C; udin,  I'rom  n  photograph  by  Petkie,  Racial  Types,  No.  IGO ;  cf.  Champollion,
Monuments  de  I'Egypte,  pi.  cciii. ;  Eosellini,  Monunienti  Siorki,  pi.  cxliii.,  No.  11 ;  Lefsids,  Denkm.,
iii.  209  b  a ;  the  type  is  takeu  from  the  series  given  in  p.  -171  of  the  present  work.  According  to
C'babas  and  W.  llax  Jliiller  (Asieii  und  Jiiiropa.  p.  129),  it  represents  a  Shasu.

'  Description  da  VEijijpte,  Ant.,  ii.  pi.  12  ;  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgyple,  pis.  cciii.  2,  ccxxii.  ;
RosELLLNi,  Monuinenti  Storici,  pi.  oxxxi.  Cf.  the  picture  on  p.  469  of  the  present  work  representing
a  battle  between  the  Egyptian  fleet  and  the  ships  of  the  "  People  of  the  Sea."

GicEENE,  Fuuilles  u  Thihes,  pi.  ii.  1.  JG.  The  inscription  of  Medinet-IIabu  in  which  this  campaign
is  mentioned  was  published  by  Guee.ve,  Fouilles  It  TlU-hes,  pis.  i.-iii. ;  it  was  critically  examined  for
the  first  time  by  E.  ue  EouGii,  Notice  de  (^uelques  iextes  hidrorjhjphiques  rec^mmeid  publitTs  par
M.  Greene,  pp.  5-11 ;  it  was  translated  by  Ciiabas,  Htudes  sur  I'Antir/uile',  2ud  edit.,  pp.  21(;-253,  and
by  Brugscii,  Geschiclde  JEijyptens,  pp.  598-000.  We  find  tome  information  about  the  war  in  the
Great  Harris  Papyrus  (ed.  Biucii,  pi.  70,  11.  U-9 ;  cf.  Ciiabas,  llecherches  poitr  scrvir  li  I'hidoire  de
I'Jigypte  sous  la  XIX  (Jjnusiie,  pp.  aO-50),  also  in  the  inscription  of  Medinet-llabu  which  describes  the
campaign  of  the  jeur  V.  (DCmiciies,  Historisclte  Inschrijten,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvi.  a,  II.  51  59;  and  E.  and

2    H


4GG  TEE   CLOSE   OF   TEE    TEE  BAN  EMPIRE.

subjected  to  one  of  those  irresistible  impulses  such  as  bad  driven  the  Shepherds
into  Egypt ;  or  again,  in  later  times,  had  carried  away  the  Cimmerians  and  the
Scyths  to  the  pillage  of  Asia  Minor  :  "  no  country  could  hold  out  against  their
arras,  neither  Khati,  nor  Qodi,  nor  Carchemish,  nor  Arvad,  nor  Alasia,  witliout
being  brought  to  nothing."  The  ancient  kingdoms  of  Sapalulu  and  Khatusaru,
already  tottering,  crumbled  to  pieces  under  the  shock,  and  were  broken  up  into
their  primitive  elements.  The  barbarians,  unable  to  carry  the  towns  by  assault,
and  too  impatient  to  resort  to  a  lengthened  siege,  spread  over  the  valley  of  the
Orontes,  burning  and  devastating  the  country  everywhere.  Having  reached
the  frontiers  of  the  empire,  in  the  country  of  the  Amorites,  they  came  to  a  halt,
and  constructing  an  entrenched  camp,  installed  within  it  their  women  and  the
booty  they  had  acquired.^  Some  of  their  predatory  bands,  having  ravaged  the
Bekaa,  ended  by  attacking  the  subjects  of  the  Pharaoh  himself,  and  their
chiefs  dreamed  of  an  invasion  of  Egypt.  Eamses,  informed  of  their  design
by  the  despatches  of  his  officers  and  vassals,  resolved  to  prevent  its  accom-
plishment. He  summoned  his  troops  together,  both  indigenous  and  mer-
cenary, in  his  own  person  looked  after  their  armament  and  commissariat,
and  in  the  VIII"'  year^  of  his  reign  crossed  the  frontier  near  Zalu.  He
advanced  by  forced  marches  to  meet  the  enemy,  wliom  he  encountered  somewhere
in  Southern  Syria,  on  the  borders  of  the  Shephelah,^  and  after  a  stubbornly
contested  campaign  obtained  the  victory.  He  carried  off  from  the  field,  in  ad-
dition to  the  treasures  of  the  confederate  tribes,  some  of  the  chariots  which  had
been  used  for  the  transport  of  their  families.  The  survivors  made  their  way  hastily
to  the  north-west,  in  the  direction  of  the  sea,  in  order  to  receive  the  support  of

J.  DE  Rouge,  Inscriptions  hjg'roglyphiques,  pis.  cxlv.  1.  51 ;  cxlvi.  1.  59 ;  cf.  Chabas,  Etudes  sur
VAntiijuil^,  2nd  edit,  pp.  253-256),  and  in  other  shorter  texts  of  the  same  temple  (DiJiriCHEN,  Eist.
Iiisc,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xlvii.  a ;  cf.  I'habas,  iStudes  sur  V Antiquity'.  2nJ  edit.,  pp.  25t5,  257).  The  sequence
of  facts  is  illustrated  by  a  series  of  pictures  of  which  the  value  was  recognised  from  the  first  by
Chasipollion,  Lettres  e'crites  d'JigyjJte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  354-35S,  and  afterwards  more  fully  brought  out
by  RosELLim,  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  iv.  pp.  28-50 ;  they  were  published,  in  whole  or  in  part,  in  the
Description  de  I'Ugypte,  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  9,  Nos.  1,  10-12,  and  afterwards  by  Chajipollion,  Monuments
de  I'Ugypte,  etc.,  pis.  ccxviii.-ccxxiv.,  by  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  cxxv.-cxxxiii.,  and  by
Makiette,  Voyage  de  la  Eaiite-£gypte,  vol.  ii.  pie.  54,  55.

'  Greene,  Fouilles  h  Tliebes,  pi.  2,  II.  16,  17.  E.  de  Rouge  (Notice  de  qwlques  textes,  p.  7,  et  seq.)
thought  at  first  that  the  text  treated  of  a  victory  of  B.amses  HI.  over  the  Khati  and  other  Syrian  popu-
lations; Chahaa  {liludes  sur  V Antiquity,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  258-26S)  was  the  first  to  point  out  the  true
nature  of  the  events  related  in  this  inscription.

^  Champollion  read  the  year  IX.  (Lettres  Sorites  d'£gypte,  2iid  edit.,  p.  329)  ;  the  text  really  gives
the  year  VIII.  (Chabas,  Etudes  sur  VAntiquitf,  2nd  edit.,  p.  246).

'  No  site  is  given  for  these  battles.  E.  de  Rouge  placed  the  theatre  of  war  in  Syria  (Notice  de
quelques  textes,  ^p.  16,  17),  and  his  opinion  was  accepted  by  Brugsch  (Geogr.  Inscr.,  vol.  ii.  p.  85;
Eist.  d'Lgypte,  187,  188 ;  Gesrh.  ^^gyptens,  p.  592).  Chabas  referred  it  to  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  near
Pelusium  (Etudes  sur  l'Antiquit^,2nd  edit.,  pp.  268-283), and  his  authority  has  prevailed  up  to  the
present.  The  remarks  of  W.  Max  Miiller  (Asi'  h  und  Ltiropa,  pp.  177,  178)  have  brought  me  back  to
the  opinion  of  (he  earlier  Egyptologists  ;  but  I  dift'er  from  him  in  looking  for  the  locality  further  south,
and  not  to  the  mouth  of  Nahr  el-Kelb  as  the  site  of  the  naval  battle.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  fact
that  the  Zakkala  were  prisoners  at  Dor,  and  the  Pulasati  in  tlie  Shephelah,  ia  enough  to  assign
the  campaign  to  the  regions  I  have  mentioned  in  the  text.


THE    VICTORY   OF  EAMSES  III.   AT  MAOADIL.


467


their  navy,  but  the  king  followed  them  step  by  step.  It  is  recorded  that  he
occupied  himself  with  lion-hunting  en  route  after  the  example  of  the  victors  of
the  XVIII"'  dynasty,^  and  that  he  killed  three  of  these  animals  in  the  long
grass  on  one  occasion  on  the  banks  of  some  river.  He  rejoined  his  ships,
probably  at  Jaffa,  and  made  straight  for  the  enemy.     The  latter  were  encamped


TUK  ARMY  OF  I'.AMSE.S  III.  ON  THE  MARCH,  AND  THE  MON-llLNT."

on  the  level  shore,  at  the  head  of  a  bay  wide  enough  to  offer  to  their  ships  a
commodious  space  for  naval  evolutions — possibly  the  mouth  of  the  Belos,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Magadil.  The  king  drove  their  foot-soldiers  into  the
water  at  the  same  moment  that  his  admirals  attacked  the  combined  fleet  of
the  Pulasati  and  Zakkala.  Some  of  the  ^gean  galleys  were  capsized  and
sank  when  the  Egyptian  vessels  rammed  them  with  their  sharp  stems,  and  the
crews,  in  endeavouring  to  escape  to  land  by  swimming,  were  picked  off  by  the
arrows  of  the  archers  of  the  guard  who  were  commanded  by  Kamses  and  his
sons ;  they  perished  in  the  waves,  or  only  escaped  through  the  compassion  of
the  victors.^  "  I  had  fortified,"  said  the  Pharaoh,  "  my  frontier  at  Zahi ;  I
had  drawn  up  before  these  people  my  generals,  my  provincial  governors,  the

'  Deter qiHon  de  VJ-'-gypte,  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  9,  No.  1 ;  Champolhon,  Monuments  de  I'liriijjite,  pi.  ccxxi. ;
Ro^iELUNi,  Mimumenti  Slorici,  pi.  cxxix. ;  Mariette,  Voyaije  de  la  Haute-£gypie,  vol.  ii.  pi.  54.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato ;  of.  Description  de  I'Jirjyjjte,  Ant.,  vol.  ii.
pi.  9,  No.  1  ;  CHAiiroLLiON-,  Monuments,  etc.,  pi.  ccxxi. ;  ItosELi.iNi,  Mununienti  Storici,  pi.  cxxix.  ;
Mabiktte,  Viiya(je  de  hi  Ifaule-ligypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  54.

'  Scene  from  Mediuet-llabu,  in  the  llefcription  de  VEgyiite,  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  12;  CnASirOLLioN,
Monuments,  etc.,  pi.  (■cxxii. ;  Kcskllini,  Muniimenti  iilorici,  j)!.  cxxxi. ;  Mariktte,  Voijuge  de  la  Uaute-
£gypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  55 ;  Bce  the  reproducliou  of  it  on  p.  4G9  of  the  present  work.


468  THE   CLOSE   OF   TEE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.

vassal  princes,  and  the  best  of  my  soldiers.     The  mouths  of  the  river  seemed
to    be   a   mighty    rampart   of   galleys,    barques,   and  vessels   of  all    kinds,
equipped  from  the  bow  to  the  stern  with  valiant  armed  men.      The  infantry,
the  flower  of  Egypt,  were  as  lions  roaring  on  the  mountains ;  the  charioteers,
selected  from  among  the    most  rapid   warriors,  had  for  their  captains  only
officers  confident  in  themselves ;  the  horses  quivered  in  all  their  limbs,  and
were  burning  to  trample  the  nations  underfoot.     As  for  me,  I  was  like  the
warlike  Montu :    I  stood  up  before  them  and  they  saw   the   vigour  of  my
arms.     I,  King  Kamses,  I  was  as  a  hero  who  is  conscious  of  his  valonr,  and
who  stretches  his  hands  over  the  people  in  the  day  of  battle.     Those  who  have
violated  my  frontier  will  never  more  gamer  harvests  from  this  earth:  the
period  of  their  soul  has  been  fixed  for  ever.     My  forces  were  drawn  up  before
them  on  the  '  Very  Green,'  a  devouring  flame  approached  them  at  the  river
mouth,  annihilation  embraced  them  on  every  side.     Those  who  were  on  the
.strand  I  laid  low  on  the  seashore,  slaughtered  like  victims  of  the  butcher.     I
made  their  vessels  to  capsize,  and  their  riches  fell  into  the  sea."  ^     Those  who
had  not  fallen  in  the  tight  were  caught,  as  it  were,  in  the  cast  of  a  net.     A
rapid  cruiser  of  the  fleet  carried  the  Egyptian  standard  along  the  coast  as  far
as  the  regions  of  the  Orontes  and  Saros.^     The  land  troops,  on  the  other  hand,
following  on  the  heels  of  the  defeated  enemy,  pushed  through  Ccele-Syria,  and
in  their  first  burst  of  zeal  succeeded  in  reaching  the  plains  of  the  Euphrates.     A
century  had  elapsed  since  a  Pharaoh  had  planted  his  standard  in  this  region,
and  the  country  must  have  seemed  as  novel  to  the  soldiers  of  Kamses  III.  as
to  those  of  his  predecessor  Thutmosis.    The  Khati  were  still  its  masters ;  and  all
enfeebled  as  they  were  by  the  ravages  of  the  invading  barbarians,  were  never-
theless not  slow  in  preparing  to  resist  their  ancient  enemies.     The  majority  of
the  citadels  shut  their  gates  in  the  face  of  Kamses,  who,  wishing  to  lose  no
time,  did  not  attempt  to  besiege  them :   he  treated  their  territory  with  the
usual    severity,   devastating    their    open    towns,    destroying    their    harvests,
breaking  down  their  fruit  trees,  and  cutting  away  their  forests.     He  was  able,
moreover,  without  arresting  liis  march,  to  carry  by  assault  several  of  their
fortified  towns,  Alaza  among  the  number,  the  destruction  of  which  is  repre-
sented in  the  scenes  of  his  victories.^     The  spoils  were  considerable,  and  came
very  opportunely  to  reward  the  soldiers  or  to  provide  funds  for  the  erection
of  monuments.     The  last  battalion  of  troops,  however,  had  hardly  recrossed

■  Greene,  Fouilles  h  Tlwhes,  pi.  ii.  11.  l!)-2-t;  cf.  E.  de  Kouue,  Notice  de  quelques  texles,  pp.  7-9;
C'riABAS,  Mudes  sur  VAntiipiM.  2nd  edit.,  pp.  246-253 ;  Brugsch,  Geschichle  .^gypleus,  pp.  598,  599.

-  Bkxigsch,  Gesch.  .Kgi/ptens,  pp.  002-005,  iu  which  the  greater  part  of  the  identifications,
although  supported' by  F.  Leuormaut  (^Lcs  Origincs  de  I'Hist.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  50,  91,  259-201)  cannot
be  maintained.

=  Scenes  on  the  north  wall  of  Medinet-Habu  ;  cf  (.'iiAMrOLLiON,  Monuments  de  VJigypte,  etc.,  vol.  i.
pp.  369,  370,  and  pis.  ccxxvii.,  ccxxviii. ;  Koseluni,  Monmnenii  Slorici,  vol.  iv.  pp.  5S-00.


OS


3  a

3-       O


470  THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

the  isthmus  when  Lotanu  became  again  its  own  master,  and  Egyptian  rule  was
once  more  limited  to  its  traditional  provinces  of  Kharu  and  Phoenicia.  The
King  of  the  Khati  appears  among  the  prisoners  whom  the  Pharaoh  is  repre-
sented as  bringing  to  his  father  Amon ;  Carchemish,  Tunipa,  Khalabu,  Katna,
Pabukhu,  Arvad,  Jlitanni,  Mannus,  Asi,  and  a  score  of  other  famous  towns  of
this  period  appear  in  the  list  of  the  subjugated  nations,  recalling  the  triumphs
of  Thutmosis  III.  and  Amenothes  11.^  Kamses  did  not  allow  himself  to  be
deceived  into  thinking  that  his  success  was  final.  He  accepted  the  protesta-
tions of  obedience  which  were  spontaneously  offered  him,  but  he  undertook  no
further  expedition  of  importance  either  to  restrain  or  to  provoke  his  enemies  :
the  restricted  rule  which  satisfied  his  exemplar  Eamses  II.  ought,  he  thought,
to  be  sufficient  for  his  own  ambition.

Egypt  breathed  freely  once  more  on  the  announcement  of  the  victory  ;
lienceforward  she  was  "  as  a  bed  without  anguish."  "  Let  each  woman  now  go
to  and  fro  according  to  her  will,"  cried  the  sovereign,  in  describing  the
campaign,  "  her  ornaments  upon  her,  and  directing  her  steps  to  any  place  she
likes!  "  '^  And  in  order  to  provide  still  further  guarantees  of  public  security,
he  converted  his  xYsiatic  captives,  as  he  previously  had  his  African  prisoners,
into  a  bulwark  against  the  barbarians,  and  a  safeguard  of  the  frontier.  The
war  must,  doubtless,  have  decimated  Southern  Syria  ;  and  he  planted  along  its
coast  what  remained  of  the  defeated  tribes — the  Piiilistines  in  the  Shephelah,
and  the  Zakkala  on  the  borders  of  the  great  oak  forest  stretching  from  Carmel
to  Dor.*  Watch-towers  were  erected  for  the  supervision  of  this  region,  and  for
rallying-points  in  case  of  internal  revolts  or  attacks  from  without.  One  of  these,
the  Migdol  of  Kamses  III.,  was  erected,  not  far  from  the  scene  of  the  decisive
battle,  on  the  spot  where  the  spoils  had  been  divided.*  This  living  barrier,
so  to  speak,  stood  between  the  Nile  valley  and  the  dangers  which  threatened
it  from  Asia,  and  it  was  not  long  before  its  value  was  put  to  the  proof  The
Libyans,  who  had  been  saved  from  destruction  by  the  diversion  created  in  their

'  See  the  lists  of  the  conquered  people  eugraved  on  the  walls  of  Medinet-Habu,  published  by
DiJMlCHEN  {Historisclie  Inschri/ten,  vol.  i.  pis.  xi.-xvii. ;  cf.  Birch,  The  Annals  of  Sameses  III.,  in  the
Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  pp.  17-20,  in  which  the  principal  list  is  transcribed  and  trans-
lated as  well  as  the  accompanying  text).  The  Prince  of  the  Khati  figures  among  the  princes  conducted
to  the  Tlieban  Amon  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  pi.  cciv.,  and  vol.  i.  p.  720 ;  Rosellini.
Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  csliii.  7) ;  see  the  reproduction  of  his  figure  on  p.  474  of  the  present  work.

'  E.  and  J.  de  Kouge,  Inscriptions  Hi^roglyphiques  copifes  en  Egypte,  pi.  cxivii.  1.  75  ;  Chabas,
Etudes  sur  V Antiquity,  2nd  edit.,  p.  255.

°  It  is  in  this  region  that  we  find  henceforward  the  Hebrews  in  contact  with  the  Philistines  (see
what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  in  the  last  chapter  of  this  work) :  at  the  end  of  the  XXI"'  Egyptian
dynasty  a  scribe  makes  Dor  a  town  of  the  Zakkala  (Golenisoheff,  Extrait  d'linc  Jettre.  in  the  Recueil
de  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  p.  88  ;  cf.  W.  Max  Mijller,  Asien  und  Europa.  pp.  388,  389).

'  The  scribe  employs  here  an  unusual  spelling,  Magadil-Ramsisu  (Cuampollion,  Monuments  de
V Egypte,  pi.  ccxxv. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxxxiii.).  I  think  that  we  must  see  iu  this
spot  which  adjoined  tlie  field  of  battle  the  Caesarea  of  Roman  times,  which  was  at  first  called  Uvpyos
STpoToij'as,  "  the  tower  {i.e.  Migdol)  of  Strato."


TEE  LAST  LIBYAN  INVASION.


471


favour  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  empire,  having  now  recovered  their  courage,
set  about  collecting  their  Iiordes  together  for  a  fresh  invasion.  They  returned  to
tlie  attack  in  the  XI"'  year  of  Ramses,  under  the  leadership  of  Kapur,  a  prince  of
the  Mashauasha.^     "  Their  soul  had  said  to  them  for  the  second  time  that  they


-JT^Jp^^


\mMM^


TUE    CAI'TIVK    CIlIKl'S    OF    |;AJ]SES    III.    AT    MIOUINET-HABI  ."

would  end  their  lives  in  the  nomes  of  Egypt,  that  they  would  till  its  valleys
and  its  plains  as  their  own  land."  The  issue  did  not  correspond  with  their
intentions.  "  Death  fell  upon  them  within  Egypt,  for  they  had  hastened  with
their  feet  to  the  furnace  whicli  consumes  corruption,  under  the  fire  of  the
valour  of  the  king  who  rages  like  Baal  from  the  heights  of  heaven.  All  his
limbs  are  invested  with  victorious  strength  ;  with  his  right  hand  he  lays  hold
of  the  multitudes,  his  left  extends  to  those  who  are  against  him,  like  a  cloud


•  The  second  campaign  against  the  Libyans  is  known  to  us  from  the  inscriptions  of  the  year  XI.
atMedinet-Habu,  published  byDuMiciiEN,  Uutorische  Inschriften,  vol.  i.  pis.  xiii.-xxvii.,  and  by  E.  and
J.  DE  Rouge,  Imcriptions  Hig'i-oghjphiqius,  pis.  csxi.-cxxv.,  translated  in  part  by  Chabas,  fjtudeK  stir
VAntiijuiie,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  237-243.  It  is  to  this  campaign,  probably,  tliat  the  scenes  at  Jledinet-Habu
refer  which  were  published  by  Ciiami'cjlliun,  Monumeuls  de  I'figijjjte,  pis.  cov.-ccviii.,  and  in  Kosellini,
Munumenli  Slurii-i,  pis.  cxxxvi.-oxxxviii.

'  Drawn  by  IJoudier,  from  a  photogra])li  by  Beato ;  cf.  Ciiampollion,  Monuments,  etc.,  pi.  cciii.,
and  vol.  i.  pp.  720,  721 ;  Rosellini,  Mim.  Storiei,  pi.  cxliii.;  TiEiv-iius,  Dnnhm.,  iii.  209  h;  Makiette,
Viiyuije  de  la  Haute- ligypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  51.  The  first  prisoner  on  the  left  is  the  Prince  of  the  Khati
(cf  tiie  cut  on  p.  474  of  the  present  work),  the  second  is  the  Prince  of  the  Amauru  [Ainoritcs],  the
third  the  Prince  of  the  Zakkala,  the  fourtli  that  of  the  Shardana,  the  fifth  that  of  the  Shakalasha
(see  the  cut  on  p.  465  of  this  work),  and  the  sixth  that  of  the  Tursha  [Tyrseni].


472  TEE   CLOSE   OF   TEE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.

of  arrows  directed  upon  tliem  to  destroy  them,  and  his  sword  cuts  like  tliat  of
Montii.  Kapur,  who  had  come  to  demand  homage,  blind  with  fear,  tiirew
down  his  arms,  and  his  troops  did  the  same.  He  sent  up  to  heaven  a  suppliant
cry, and  his  son  [Mashashalu]  arrested  his  foot  and  his  hand;  for, behold, there
rises  beside  him  the  god  who  knows  what  he  has  in  his  heart :  His  Majesty
falls  upon  their  heads  as  a  mountain  of  granite  and  crushes  them,  the  earth
drinks  up  their  blood  as  if  it  had  been  water  .  .  . ;  their  army  was  slaughtered,
slaughtered  their  soldiers,"  near  a  fortress  situated  on  the  borders  of  the  desert
called  the  "Castle  of  Usirmari-Miamon."  They  were  seized,  "they  were
stricken,  their  arms  bound,  like  geese  piled  up  in  the  bottom  of  a  boat,  under
the  feet  of  His  Majesty."  ^  Tiie  fugitives  were  pursued  at  the  sword's  point
from  the  Castle  of  Usirmari-Miamon  to  the  Castle  of  the  Sands,  a  distance  of
over  thirty  miles.^  Two  thousand  and  seventy-five  Libyans  were  left  upon  the
ground  that  day,  two  thousand  and  fifty-two  perished  in  other  engagements,
while  two  thousand  and  thirty-two,  both  male  and  female,  were  made  prisoners.^
These  were  almost  irreparable  losses  for  a  people  of  necessarily  small  numbers,
and  if  we  add  the  number  of  those  who  had  succumbed  in  the  disaster  of  six
years  before,  we  can  readily  realise  how  discouraged  the  invaders  must  have  been,
and  how  little  likely  they  were  to  try  the  fortune  of  war  once  more.  Their  power
dwindled  and  vanished  almost  as  quickly  as  it  had  arisen ;  the  provisional
cohesion  given  to  their  forces  by  a  few  ambitious  chiefs  broke  up  after  their
repeated  defeats,  and  the  rudiments  of  an  empire  which  had  struck  terror  into
the  Pharaohs,  resolved  itself  into  its  primitive  elements,  a  number  of  tribes
scattered  over  the  desert.  They  were  driven  back  beyond  the  Libyan  moun-
tains ;  fortresses  guarded  the  routes  they  had  previously  followed,  and  they
were  obliged  henceforward  to  renounce  any  hope  of  an  invasion  en  masse,  and
to  content  themselves  with  a  few  raiding  expeditions  into  the  fertile  plain  of  the
Delta,  where  they  had  formerly  found  a  transitory  halting-place.  Counter-raids
organised  by  the  local  troops  or  by  the  mercenaries  who  garrisoned  the  principal

'  DCmichex,  Hist.  Inscr,,  vol.  i.  pi.  xv.  11.  23-31  ;  E.  and  J.  de  Rocge,  Inscriptions  Eiiroghjphiques,
pis.  cxxiv.  1.  27-cxxvi.  1.  31 ;  cf.  Chaeas,  Etudes  sur  V Antiquity,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  238,  239.  The  name
of  the  sou  of  Kapur,  Mashaslialu,  Masesyla,  which  is  wanting  in  this  inscription,  is  supplied  from  the
parallel  inscription  in  Di.'MiCHEX,  Historische  Inscli ri/ten,  vol.  ii.  pis.  xx.,  xxi.,  1.  H.

-  The  text  from  Medinet-Habu  published  in  Bruosoh,  Die  JEgyptologie,  p.  472.  The  distance  of
eight  aturu  or  eight  schoeni,  there  indicated,  is  equivalent  to  some  31  miles  according  to  I.  Levy,
L'Atour  tt  1e  Schoene,  in  the  Eecneil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  p.  171.  The  Castle  uf  Usirmari-Miamon  was
"on  the  mountain  of  the  horn  of  the  world,"  which  induces  me  to  believe  that  we  must  seek  its  site
on  the  borders  of  the  Libyan  desert.  The  royal  title  entering  into  its  name  being  liable  to  change
with  every  reign,  it  is  possible  that  we  have  an  earlier  reference  to  this  stronghold  in  a  mutilated
passage  of  the  Athribis  Stele  (11.  S.  9),  which  relates  to  the  campaigns  of  Minephtah  (Maspero,
Azotes  sur  quelques 2wints  de  6rammaire,etc.,iii  the  Zeilscliri/t,  1SS3,  p.  U6);  it  must  have  commanded
one  of  the  most  frequented  routes  leading  to  the  oasis  of  Amon.

'  DuMiouEN,  Historifchc  Tnschri/ten,  vol.  i.  pi.  xxvii.  11.  a-p;  cf.  Chauas,  IJtudrs  sur  VAntiquite',
2nd  edit.,  pp.  242.  243.


'1


6A/


>  >


M^^'^^'l


.^IV-BV


T*l*-::^=^5i,


ItAM.SE^    HI.    Jw.M).^     IMI.    illlj.r>    MF     iiii,    l,l!;^\\'.

l''iom  a  photograph  by  Beato.


474


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.


THE    PRINCE   OF    THE    KHATI."


towDS  ill  the  neighbourhood  of  Blemphis — Hermopolis  aud  Thinis  * — inflicted
punishment  upon  them  when  they  became  too  audacious.  Their  tribes,
henceforward,  as  far  as  Egypt  was  concerned,  formed  a  kind  of  reserve  from

which  the  Pharaoh  could  raise  soldiers  every
year,  and  draw  sufficient  materials  to  bring  his
army  up  to  fighting  strength  when  internal
revolt  or  an  invasion  from  without  called
for  military  activity.

The  campaign  of  the
XI"'  year  brought  to  an
end  the  great  military  ex-
peditions of  Ramses  III.
Henceforward  he  never  took
the  lead  in  any  more  serious
military  enterprise  than
that  of  repressing  the  Bedawin  of  Seir  for  acts  of  brigandage,^  or  the
Ethiopians^  for  some  similar  reason.  He  confined  liis  attention  to  the
maintenance  of  commercial  and  industrial  relations  with  manufacturing
countries,  and  with  the  markets  of  Asia  and  Africa.  He  strengthened
the  garrisons  of  Sinai,  and  encouraged  the  working  of  the  ancient  mines
iu  that  region.^  He  sent  a  colony  of  quarrymen  and  of  smelters  to  the
land  of  Atika,  in  order  to  work  the  veins  of  silver  which  were  alleged  to  exist
there."  He  launched  a  fleet  on  the  Red  Sea,  and  sent  it  to  the  countries  of
fragrant  spices.''  "  The  captains  of  the  sailors  were  there,  together  with  tlie
chiefs  of  the  corvee  and  accountants,  to  provide  provision "  for  the   people

'  Tlte  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  od.  Birch,  pi.  57,  1.  10,  pi.  58, 1.  6  (cf.  Eiseklohr- Birch,  The
Annah  of  Pamsea  HI.,  in  the  Pecords  of  the  Past,  Ut  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  24, 25),  speaks  of  fortificatious
erected  in  tlie  towns  of  Anhuri-Shu,  possibly  Thinis,  and  of  Thut,  possibly  Hermopolis,  in  order  lo
repel  the  tribes  of  the  Tihonu  who  were  ceaselessly  harassing  the  frontier.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Giulin,  from  a  photograph  taken  at  Mcdinet-Habu ;  cf.  Champollion,  Monu-
mejiia  de  VPgtjpte,  pi.  cciii.,  aud  vol.  i.  pp.  720,  721 ;  Kosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxliii. ;  Lepsius,
Denkm.,  iii.  209  b;  Mariette,  Foj/aje  de  la  Haute-Pgypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  51.

'  The  Great  Harris  Papj/rus,  ed.  Birch,  pi.  76,  11.  9,  10;  cf.  Chabas,  Pecherches  sur  la  XIX'
dijnastie,  pp.  50,  T>\,  aud  Eisenlohr-Birch,  The  Annals  of  Ramses  111.,  in  the  Pecords  of  the  Past,
1st  series,  vol.  \ni.  p.  48.  The  Sairfi  of  the  Egyptian  texts  have  been  identified  with  the  Bedawin  of
Seir  by  Brugsch,  Gescli.  .Egyptens,  p.  593;  cf.  W.  Max  Mcller,  Asien  und  Europa,-pp.  135, 136,  240.

*  For  lists  of  the  people  of  the  south  see  Chasipollion,  Mon.  de  VEgypie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  10,  11  ;
LEPSirs,  Denlan.,  iii.  207,  vol.  i.  pp.  725,  726  d,  e;  Di;iiiCHEX,  Hist,  his.,  vol.  i.  pis.  xiii.,  xvi.,  xvii.

^  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  Biucii,  pi.  7S,  II.  6-8 ;  cf  Chabas,  Pecherches  sur  la  XIX
dynastie,  pp.  66-6S,  and  Birch,  in  the  Survey  of  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  text.

«  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  Birch,  pi.  78, 11. 1-5  ;  QtCH.\B.is,  Pecherches  sur  la  XIX' dynastie,
pp.  63-66,  and  Eiseslohr-Birch,  The  Annals  of  Pamses  III,  in  the  Pecords  of  the  Fast,  1st  series,
vol.  viii.  p.  50.  This  is  the  Gebel-Ataka  of  our  day,  as  Ebers  has  pointed  out  (W.  Max  MixLEii,
Asien  tmd  Europa,  p.  39).  All  this  district  is  imperfectly  explored,  but  we  know  that  it  contains
mines  and  quarries  some  of  which  were  worked  as  late  as  in  the  time  of  the  Mameluk  Sullans.

'  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  Birch,  pi.  77,  1.  7-pl.  78,  1.  1 ;  cf.  Chabas,  Pecherches  sur  la
X[X'  dymrstie,  pp.  59-63,  and  Eisenlohr-Birch,  Tlie  Annah  of  Pameses  III.,  in  the  Pecords  of  the
Past,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  48-50.


CRUISERS    ON   THE  RED    SEA.  475-

of  the  Divine  Lands  "  from  the  innumerable  products  of  Egypt;  and  these
products  were  counted  by  myriads.  Sailing  through  the  great  sea  of  Qodi,
they  arrived  at  Piianit  without  mishap,  and  there  collected  cargoes  for  their
galleys  and  ships,  consisting  of  all  the  unknown  marvels  of  Tonutir,  as
well  as  considerable  quantities  of  the  perfumes  of  Puatin,  which  they  stowed
on  board  by  tens  of  thousands  without  number.  The  sons  of  the  princes  of
Tomitir  came  themselves  into  Qimit  with  their  tributes.  They  reached  the
region  of  Coptos  safe  and  sound,  and  disembarked  there  in  peace  with  their
riches."  It  was  somewhere  about  Sau  and  Tuau  tliat  the  merchants  and
royal  ofHcers  landed,  following  the  example  of  the  expeditions  of  the  XII"'  and
XVIII"'  dynasties.  Here  they  organised  caravans  of  asses  and  slaves,  which
taking  the  shortest  route  across  the  mountain — that  of  the  valley  of  Rahanii —
carried  the  precious  commodities  to  Coptos,  whence  they  were  transferred  to
boats  and  distributed  along  the  river.  The  erection  of  public  buildings,
which  had  been  interrupted  since  the  time  of  Minephtah,  began  again  with
renewed  activity.  The  captives  in  the  recent  victories  furnished  the  requisite
labour,  while  the  mines,  the  voyages  to  the  Somali  coast,  and  the  tributes  of
vassals  provided  the  necessary  money.  Syria  was  not  lost  sight  of  in  this
resumption  of  peaceful  occupations.  The  overthrow  of  the  Khati  secured
Egyptian  rule  in  this  region,  and  promised  a  long  tranquillity  within  its
borders.  One  temple  at  least  was  erected  in  the  country — that  at  Pa-kanaua —
where  the  princes  of  Kharu  were  to  assemble  to  offer  worship  to  the  Pharaoh,
and  to  pay  each  one  his  quota  of  the  general  tribute.^  The  Pulasati  were
employed  to  protect  the  caravan  routes,  and  a  vast  reservoir  was  erected
near  Aina  to  provide  a  store  of  water  for  the  irrigation  of  the  neighbouring
country.^  The  Delta  absorbed  the  greater  part  of  the  royal  subsidies ;  it  had
suffered  so  much  from  the  Libyan  incursions,  that  the  majority  of  the  towns
within  it  had  fallen  into  a  condition  as  miserable  as  that  in  which  they
were  at  the  time  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Shepherds.  Heliopolis,^  Bubastis,^
Thmuis,^  Amii,^  and  Tanis'  still  preserved  some  remains  of  the  buildings  whicli

*  Tbis  temple  is  mentioned  in  tlie  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  IStucii,  pi.  9,  11.  1-3  ;  cf.  Eiseklouh-
IJincu,  Tlie  Annals  of  Jiameses  lit,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  pp.  33,  34,  andW.  Max
Mt'LLtit,  Asien  und  Eurujni,  pp.  205,  20(j,  who  does  not  see  in  this  a  town,  but  the  laud  of  Canaan.
I  recognise  in  it  the  town  ot  I'u-kanana  of  Galilee  (t'liAHAS,  Voijiige  d'uii  Eijypliiin,  pp.  112,  113).

*  The.  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  Biucu,  pi.  77,  11.  6,  7 ;  cf.  EiSENLOiiii-Buicii,  The  Annals  of
Uameses  III.,  in  the  llecurds  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  p.  49.  Brugsch  would  identify  the  name
Aiua  with  the  ^Ean  of  elasaic  times  (Gesch.  .h'gyideiis,  p.  5U3,  Diet.  Oeoijr.,  pp.  117-12U);  Chalias
identified  it  rightly  {Recherclics  pour  servir  a  Vhihtoire  de  VlCgyple,  pp.  5(j,  ."i7)  with  the  Aiuini  of  the
Anatlasi  Papyrus,  Xo.  1,  pi.  xxvii.  1.  C,  which  is  between  Mount  tJ.isios  and  Uaphia  (CiiAiiA.s,  yuyage
d'un  Egyptien,  p.  388),  on  the  road  leading  from  Egypt  lo  Syria.

'  WiEDEJiAx.v,  .Egypt.  Geschichte,  p.  ."iUO ;  tiBiFm'ii,  Antiquities  of  Tell  el-Yahudiyeh,  pi.  xjti.  8.

*  Naville,  lluhastis,  pi.  ,\xxviii.  G,  and  pp.  45,  4(j.

*  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  47  c  ;  base  of  a  statue  from  Tlimuis.
"  Pethie,  Tanis  II. :  Nebesheh,  pp.  11,  2'J,  31,  and  pi.  s..  No.  8.

'  I'ETBIE,  Tunis  II.,  1)1.  vii.,  Nos.  142-144,  and  p.  29.


476


TEE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.


had  already  been  erected  in  them  by  Kamses;  he  constructed  also,  at  the
place  at  present  called  Tel  el-Yahiidiyeh,  a  royal  palace  of  limestone,
granite,  and  alabaster,  of  which  the  type  is  unique  amongst  all  the  structures
hitherto  discovered.  Its  walls  and  columns  were  not  ornamented  with  the
usual  sculptures  incised  in  stone,  but  the  whole  of  the  decorations — scenes  as
well   as   inscriptions — consisted   of  plaques   of  enamelled   terra-cotta   set   in


THE  COLOSSAL   OSIRIAN  FIGURES  Df  THE  TIEST   COCKT   AT  MEDINET-HABU.'

cement.  The  forms  of  men  and  animals  and  the  lines  of  hieroglyphs,  standing
out  in  slight  relief  from  a  glazed  and  warm-coloured  background,  constitute
an  immense  mosaic-work  of  many  hues.  The  few  remains  of  the  work
show  great  purity  of  design  and  an  extraordinary  delicacy  of  tone.  All  the
knowledge  of  the  Egyptian  painters,  and  all  the  technical  skill  of  their
artificers  in  ceramic,  must  have  been  employed  to  compose  such  harmoniously
balanced  decorations,  with  their  free  handling  of  line  and  colour,  and  their
thousands  of  rosettes,  squares,  stars,  and  buttons  of  varicoloured  pastes.^  The
difficulties  to  overcome  were  so  appalling,  that  when  the  marvellous  work  was

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato,

'  This  temple  has  beeu  known  since  the  beginning  of  the  century,  and  the  Louvre  is  in  possession
of  some  fragments  from  it  whicli  came  from  Salt's  collection ;  it  was  rediscovered  in  1870,  and  some
portions  of  it  were  transferred  by  Marittte  to  the  Boulaq  Jluseum  (Brugsoh,  An  den  Herausgeher,  in
the  Zeitschrift,  187],  pp.  87, 88  ;  E.  Brugsch,  On  et  Onioii,m  the  Eecueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  viii.  pp.  1-11 ;
Maspeuo,  Guide  du  Visiteur,  pp.  109,  241).  The  remainder  was  destroyed  by  the  fellahin,  at  the
instigation  of  the  eiiliglitened  amateurs  of  Cairo,  and  fragments  of  it  liave  passed  into  various
private  collections  (Hayter-Lewis,  Tel  el-Yahudah—'' the  Mouud  of  the  Jew  "—in  the  TransncUon<>
of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  177-192).  Xaville,  The  Mound  of  the  Jew  and  the  City  of  Onias,
pp.  .5-12,  was  the  last  to  explore  it.  The  decoration  has  been  attributed  to  ChaldsDan  Influence,  but  it  is
a  work  purely  Egyptian,  both  iu  style  and  in  teclinique  (Maspero,  ArchifoJogie  Egyptienne,  pp.  257-259).


ly;


1  Wir  h  iW&W^^^m)


1  '■!'


\^,


[      ^Oiw


'BlL  '^>-


3  a

ca     o


s  s

o

q

P.


478  THE   CLOSE    OF    THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

once  accomplislied,  no  subsequent  attempt  was  made  to  construct  a  second  like
it:  all  the  remaining  structures  of  Ramses  III.,  whether  at  Memphis,^  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Abydos,-  or  at  Karuak,^  were  in  the  conventional  style  of  the
Pharaohs.     Ho  determined,  nevertheless,  to  give  to  the  exterior  of  the  Mem-
uonium,  which  he  built  near  Medinet-Habu  for  the  worship  of  himself,  the  pro-
portions and  appearance  of  an  Asiatic  "  Migdol,"  influenced  probably  by  his
remembrance  of  similar  structures  which  he  had  seen  during  his  Syrian  campaign.
The  chapel  itself  is  of  tlie  ordinary  type,  with  its  gigantic  pylons,  its  courts  sur-
rounded by  columns — each  supporting  a  colossal  Osirian  statue — its  hypostyle
hall,  and  its  mysterious  cells  for  the  deposit  of  spoils  taken  from  the  peoples  of
the  sea  and  the  cities  of  Asia.*    His  tomb  was  concealed  at  a  distant  spot  in  the
Biban-el-Moluk,  and  we  see  depicted  on  its  walls  the  same  scenes  that  we  find  in
the  last  resting-place  of  Seti  I.  or  Ramses  II.,  and  in  addition  to  them,  in  a
series  of  supplementary  chambers,  the  arms  of  the  sovereign,  his  standards,
his  treasure,  liis  kitchen,  and  the  preparation  of  offerings  wiiich  were  to  be
made  to  him.^     His  sarcophagus,  cut  out  of  an  enormous  block  of  granite,  was
brought  for  sale  to  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  Cambridge ''
■obtained  possession  of  its  cover,  while  the  Louvre  secured  the  receptacle  itself.''
These  were  years  of  profound  tranquillity.     The  Pharaoh  intended  that
absolute    order    should   reign  throughout  his   realm,  and  that  justice  should
be  dispensed  impartially  within  it.      There  were   to   be  no  more  exactions,
no  more  crying  iniquities :    whoever  was  discovered  oppressing  the  people,
no  matter  whether  he  were  court  oifiuial  or  feudal   lord — was  instantly  de-
jjrived  of  his  functions,  and  replaced  by  an  administrator  of  tried  integrity.'^
Ramses   boasts,   moreover,   in   an   idyllic    manner,  of  having    planted  trees
everywhere,  and  of  having  built   arbours   wherein  the  people  might  sit  in
the  shade  in  the  open  air;  while  women  might  go  to  and  fro  where  they
would  in  security,  no  one  daring  to  insult  them  on  the  way.     The  Shardanian

'  Eemains  of  buildings  and  statues  discovered  at  Memphis,  tlie  inscriptions  ou  which  were  pub-
lished by  Brugsch,  Recueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pi.  iv.  2,  4.

-  Makiette,  Ahydos,  vol.  i.  pp.  4,  y,  10.

'  For  the  part  taken  by  Ramses  III.  in  tlie  construction  of  the  buildings  at  Karnak,  see  Mariette,
Karnah,  pp.  IG,  IS,  21,  26,  30,  31 ;  the  temple  which  ho  built  before  the  pylon  of  Eamses  II.  is
described  in  Champolliox,  Monuments  de  VEgypie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  10-16.

'  See,  for  more  on  this  subject,  pp.  12S,  129  of  the  present  work.  A  description  of  the  chapel  is  in
JoMARD,  Description  de  V Egypt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5S-G6;  in  Champollion,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  336-344, 719-724.
and  Lettres  Sorites  d'£gtjpte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  332-33G ;  in  Rosellini,  Mou.  Star.,  vol.  iv.  p.  8,  et  seq. ;  in
Brugsch,  Reiseher i elite aus  .Egypt.,pp.  301-310;  and  in  Dujiiohen,  Gesch.des  Alien  -Fji/jjf., pp.  110-113.

^  The  tomb  of  Eamses  III.  is  described  in  Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'Egypt,  etc.,  vol.  i.
pp.  404-424,  744-751 ;  another  tomb  was  commenced  for  him,  but  the  work  was  abruptly  suspended
(CiiAMPOLLiON,  0/1.  cit,  vol.  i.  pp.  441,  442).

"  Birch,  Eemarlis  on  the  Corer  of  the  Sarcophagus  of  Barneses  III.,  in  the  Fitzioilliam  Museum,  1876.

•  E.  DE  RofGE,  Notices  des  principaux  monuments,  1872,  pp.  173-186.

'  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.  Birch,  pi.  59, 1.  11,  pi.  60, 1.  1  :  this  passage  had  already  been  noticed
by  Brugsch,  Die  JEgyptologie,  pp.  288-  290,  who  saw  in  it  an  allusion  to  the  presence  of  foreigners.
The  reference  is  merely  to  a  royal  official,  a  count  (zaiti),  who  was  oppressing  the  province  of
Athribis  which  had  been  entrusted  to  liim.     He  was  sternly  expelled  from  his  office  by  the  king.


THE   COXSPIBACr   OF   PENTAU'lRlT.  479

and  Libyan  mercenaries  were  restricted  to  tlie  castles  whicli  they  garrisoned,
and  were  subjected  to  such  a  severe  discipline  that  no  one  had  any  cause
of  complaint  against  these  armed  barbarians  settled  in  the  heart  of  Egypt.
"  I  have,"  continues  the  king,  "  lifted  np  every  miserable  one  out  of  his
misfortune,  I  have  granted  life  to  him,  T  have  saved  him  from  the  mighty  who
were  oppressing  him,  and  have  secured  rest  for  every  one  in  his  own  town."  ^
The  details  of  the  description  are  exaggerated,  but  the  general  import  of  it
is  true.  Egypt  had  recovered  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  which  it  had  been
deprived  for  at  least  half  a  century,  that  is,  since  the  death  of  Minephtah.  The
king,  however,  was  not  in  such  a  happy  condition  as  liis  people,  and  court
intrigues  embittered  the  later  years  of  his  life.  One  of  his  sous,  whose  uame
is  uuknonn  to  us,  but  who  is  designated  in  the  official  records  by  the  nick-
name of  Pentaiiirit,  formed  a  conspiracy  against  him.'-^  His  mother,  Tii,  who
was  a  woman  of  secondary  rank,  took  it  into  her  head  to  secure  the  crown
for  him,  to  the  detriment  of  the  children  of  Queen  Isif.  An  extensive
plot  was  hatched  iu  which  scribes,  officers  of  the  guard,  priests,  aud  officials
in  high  place,  both  natives  and  foreigners,  were  involved.  A.  resort  to  the
supernatural  was  at  first  attempted,  and  the  superintendent  of  the  Herds,  a
certain  Panhuibaunii,  who  was  deeply  versed  in  magic,  undertook  to  cast  a
spell  upon  the  Pharaoh,  if  he  could  only  procure  certain  conjuring  books  of
which  he  was  not  possessed.  These  were  found  to  be  iu  the  royal  library.  He
managed  to  introduce  himself  under  cover  of  the  night  into  the  harem,
where  he  manufactured  certain  waxen  figures,  of  which  some  were  to  excite
the  hate  of  his  wives  against  their  husband,  while  others  would  cause  him
to  waste  away  and  finally  perish.  A  traitor  betrayed  several  of  the  conspirators,
who,  being  subjected  to  the  torture,  informed  upon  others,  and  these  at
length  brought  the  matter  home  to  Pentauirit  and  his  immediate  accomplices.
All  were  brought  before  a  commission  of  twelve  members,  summoned  expressly
to  try  the  case,  and  the  result  was  the  condemnation  and  execution  of  six
women  and  some  forty  men.  The  extreme  penalty  of  the  Egyptian  code  was
reserved  for  Pentauirit,  and  for  the  most  culpable, — "  they  died  of  themselves,"
and  the  meaning  of  this  phrase  is  indicated,  I  believe,  by  the  appearance  of  one

'  27ie  Great  Ilarris  Faiiyrus,  ed.  Bikch,  pi.  7S,  I.  8,  pi.  79,  1.  1 ;  cf.  Chauas,  liecherchee  sur  la
XIX'  dytiaslie,  pp.  68-73.

'  The  documents  bearing  on  this  affair  are  a  large  papyrus,  mutilated  at  the  beginning,  now  at
Turin,  and  twootlier  fragments,  the  Lee  Papyrus  und  the  IloUin  Papyrus,  the  latter  of  which  is  in  the
Bibliothi-iiue  Nationale  iu  Paris.  The  largo  papyrus  was  published,  translated,  and  annotated  by
UicvEKiA,  Le  Papyrus  Judiciain:  de  Turin  et  les  Papyrus  Lee  ct  lloUin,  ISOM,  to  which  we  are  indebted
for  the  o.\plauation  of  the  affair.  The  other  two  fragments,  of  which  the  tivst  is  given  in  Shaupe,
Egyptian  Inseriptioiis,  'Jtml  series,  pis.  Ixxxvii.,  Ixxxviii.,  were  studied  by  Chaba.s,  Le  Papyrus  3fa-
giiiue  Ilarris,  pp.  lU'J  274,  and  Mdanges  Egyptohyiques,  Ist  series,  pp.  l-i);  afterwards  by  Ukvekia,
op.  cit.,  pp.  123-137.  Tlie  three  documents  have  been  retranslated,  since  Chabas  aud  Deve'ria,  by
Lei'age-Kenoui?,  Ahslract  of  Criminal  Proeeedings  in  a  Case  of  Conspiracy,  in  the  Jtecords  of  the  Past,
let  seriee,  vol.  viii.  pp.  ,53-G5,  and  into  German  by  liRCGScil,  Oesckiclite  .Kgyptens,  pp.  (iOll  -G17.


480


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.


of  the  mummies  disinterred  at  Deir  el-Baliari.^  The  coffin  iu  wliicU  it  was
placed  was  very  plain,  painted  white  and  without  inscription  ;  the  customary
•removal  of  entrails  had  not  been  eifected,  but  the  body  was  covered  with  a
thick  layer  of  natron,  which  was  applied  even  to  the  skin  itself  and  secured
by  wrappings.  It  makes  one's  flesh  creep  to  look  at  it :  tlie  hands
and  feet  are  tied  by  strong  bands,  and  are  curled  up  as  if  under
an  intolerable  pain ;  the  abdomen  is  drawn  up,  the  stomach  pro-
jects like  a  ball,  the  chest  is  contracted,  the  head  is  thrown
back,  the  face  is  contorted  in  a  hideous  grimace,  the  retracted  lips
expose  the  teeth,  and  the  mouth  is  open  as  if  to  give  utterance
to  a  last  despairing  cry.  The  conviction  is  borne  in  upon  us  that
the  man  was  invested  while  still  alive  with  the  wrajjpings  of
the  dead.  Is  this  the  mummy  of  Pentauirit,  or  of  some  other
prince  as  culpable  as  he  was,  and  condemned  to  this  frightful
punishment  ?  -  In  order  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such  wicked
plots,  Pharaoh  resolved  to  share  his  throne  with  that  one  of
his  sons  who  had  most  right  to  it.  In  the  XXXIP'^  ^  year  of
his  reign  he  called  together  his  military  and  civil  chiefs,  the
generals  of  the  foreign  mercenaries,  the  Shardana,  the  priests,
and  the  nobles  of  the  court,  and  presented  to  them,  according  to
custom,  his  heir-designate,  who  was  also  called  Ramses.  He  placed
the  double  crown  upon  his  brow,  and  seated  him  beside  him-
self upon  the  throne  of  Horus.  This  was  an  occasion  for  tiie
Pharaoh  to  bring  to  remembrance  all  the  great  exploits  he  had
performed  during  his  reign — his  triumphs  over  the  Libyans  and
over  the  peoples  of  the  sea,  and  the  riches  he  had  lavished  upon  the  gods :
at  the  end  of  the  enumeration  he  exhorted  those  who  were  present  to  observe
the  same  fidelity  towards  the  son  which  they  had  observed  towards  the  father,
and  to  serve  the  new  sovereign  as  valiantly  as  they  had  served  himself.^

'  Cf.  tlie  translation  by  Deveeia,  Le  Papyrus  Judiciaire  de  Turin,  p.  105,  and  those  given  by
Lepage-Rexocf,  Criminal  Proceediiiijs  in  a  Case  of  Conspiracy,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,
vol.  viii.  p.  50,  and  EuM an,  Btitrage  znr  Eenntniss  des  JEgyptisclien  Gerichtsverfahrens,  in  the  Zeitschrift,
1879,  1).  77,  note  1,  p.  78,  and  J':gypten  und  A-.'gyptisches  Leben,  pp.  207,  20S,  whicli  agree  in  making
it  a  case  of  judicial  suicide :  there  was  left  to  the  condemned  a  choice  of  his  mode  of  death,  iu  order
to  avoid  the  scandal  of  a  public  execution.  It  is  also  possible  to  make  it  a  condemuation  lo  death
in  person,  which  did  not  allow  of  the  substitution  of  a  proxy  willing,  for  a  payment  to  his  family,  to
undergo  death  in  place  of  the  condemned  ;  but,  unfortunately,  no  other  text  is  to  be  found  supporting
the  existence  of  such  a  practice  in  Egypt.

■  Maspero,  /.e-:  Momies  Boyales.  etc.,  in  Mem.  de  la  Mission  Franraise,so\.  i.  pp.  503-5tJG,  and  pi.  xviii.

'  The  date  of  the  year  XXXII.  for  this  event,  is  furnished  by  the  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.
BiiiCH,  pi.  1,  1.  1  ;  it  is  confirmed  by  the  double  date  of  a  papyrus  published  by  Maspeko,  Le
Papyrus  Mallet,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  i.  pp.  53,  54.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsch-Bey ;  cf.  Maspeko,  Les  Momies
Royales,  etc.,  in  the  MCmoires  de  la  Mission  Francaise,  vol.  i.  pi.  xvii.

^  The   Great  Harris  Papyrus,  ed.   BiRcn,  pi.  79,  11.  4-12;  cf.  Chabas,   Recherches  pour  sercir  h


THE    MUMMY    OP
RAMSES    III.*


TEE  MUMMY   OF  RAMSES   III.  "481

The  joint  reign  lasted  for  only  four  years.^     Ramses  III.  was  not  tauch
over  sixty  years  of  age  when  he  died.     He  was  still  vigorous  and  muscular,
but  he  had  become  stout  and  heavy.    The  fatty  matter  of  the  body  having
been  dissolved  by  the  natron  in  the  process  of  embalming,  the  skin  distended
during  life  has  gathered  up  into  enormous  loose  folds,  especially  about  the
nape  of  the  neck,  under  the  chin,  on  the  hips,  and  at  the  articulations  of  the
limbs.     The  closely  shaven  head  and  cheeks  present  no  trace  of  hair  or  beard.
The  forehead,  although  neither  broad  nor  high,  is  better  proportioned  than
that  of  Eamses  II. ;  the  supra-orbital  ridges  are  less  accentuated  than  his,  the
cheek-bones  not  so  prominent,  the  nose  not  so  arched,  and  the  chin  and  jaw
less  massive.     The  eyes  were  perhaps  larger,  but  no  opinion  can  be  offered
on  this  point,  for  the  eyelids  have  been  cut  away,  and  the  cleared-out  cavities
have  been  filled  with  rags.     The  ears  do  not  stand  out  so  far  from  the  head  as
those  of  Eamses  II.,  but  they  have  been  pierced  for  ear-rings.     The  mouth,
large  by  nature,  has  been  still  further  widened  in  the  process  of  embalming,
owing  to  the  awkwardness  of  the  operator,  who  has  cut  into  the  cheeks  at  the
side.     The  thin  lips  allow  the  white  and  regular  teeth  to  be  seen ;  the  first
molar  on  the  right  has  been  either  broken  in  half,  or  has  worn  away  more
rapidly  than  the  rest.'-^     Ramses  III.  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  have  been  a  sort  of
reduced  copy,  a  little  more  delicate  in  make,  of  Ramses  II. ;  his  face  shows
more  subtlety  of  expression  and  intelligence,  thougli  less  uobility  than  that  of
the  latter,  while  his  figure  is  not  so  upright,  his  shoulders  not  so  broad,  and
his  general  muscular  vigour  less.     What  has  been  said  of  his  personality  may
be  extended  to  his  reign  ;  it  was  evidently  and  designedly  an  imitation  of  the
reign  of  Ramses  II.,  but  fell  short  of  its  model  owing  to  the  insufiSciency  of
his  resources  in  men  and  money.     If  Ramses  III.  did  not  succeed  in  becoming
one  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  Theban  Pharaohs,  it  was  not  for  lack  of
energy  or  ability  ;  the  depressed  condition  of  Egypt  at  the  time  limited  the
success  of  his  endeavours  and  caused  them  to  fall  short  of  his  intentions.
The  work  accomplished  by  him  was  not  on  this  account  less  glorious.     At
his  accession  Egypt  was  in  a  wretched  state,  invaded  on  the  west,  threatened
by  a  flood  of  barbarians  on  the  east,  without  an  army  or  a  fleet,  and  with  no
resources  in  the  treasury.     In  fifteen  years  he  had  disposed  of  his  inconvenient
neighbours,  organised  an  array,  constructed  a  fleet,  re-established  his  authority

I'hittoire  de  l'£gtjpte,  pp.  73-75,  and  Eisenlohb-Birch,  Annuls  of  Kamses  III.,  in  tbo  Records  of  the
Part,  Ist  eeriee,  vol.  viii.  pp.  51,  52.

'  This  mny  be  inferred  from  a  document  edited  by  Maspero, £e  Papyrus  Mallet,iji  the  Recueil  de
Travaux,  vol.  i.  pp.  53,  54:  the  term  of  four  years  Is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  a  rough  draft  of  a
panegyric  on  the  accession  of  Ramses  IV.  boars  the  date  of  his  IV"'  year  (Masi'EEO,  A^o(es  sur  quelqtiei
imnts  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Ueciieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  llti,  117).

^  As  to  the  mummy  of  Uamscs  III.,  see  Masi'EUO,  Les  ilomies  royahs  de  V(rir  el-Rahari,  in  the
Mi'moiret  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  5(53-506.

2  I


482  THE    CLOSE    OF   TEE    TIIEBAN  EMPIRE.

abroad,  and  settled  the  administration  at  home  on  so  firm  a  basib,  that  the
country  owed  the  peace  which  it  enjoyed  for  several  centuries  to  the  institu-
tions and  prestige  which  he  had  given  it.  His  associate  in  the  government,
Eamses  IV.,  barely  survived  him.  Then  followed  a  series  of  rois  faineants
bearing  the  name  of  Kamses,  but  in  an  order  not  yet  clearly  determined.  It
is  generally  assumed  that  Eamses  V.,  brother  of  Kamses  III.,  succeeded
Kamses  IV.  by  supplanting  his  nephews^ — who,  however,  appear  to  have  soon
re-established  their  claim  to  the  throne,  and  to  have  followed  each  other  in
rapid  succession  as  Kamses  VI.,  Ramses  VII.,  Kamses  VIII.,  and  Maritiimu.i
Others  endeavour  to  make  out  that  Kamses  V.  was  the  son  of  Kamses  IV.,  and
that  the  prince  called  Pamses  VI.  never  succeeded  to  the  throne  at  all.  At
any  rate,  his  son,  who  is  styled  Kamses  VII.,  but  who  is  asserted  by  some  to
have  been  a  son  of  Ramses  III.,  is  considered  to  have  succeeded  Ramses  V.,
and  to  have  become  the  ancestor  from  whom  the  later  Ramessides  traced  their
descent."  The  short  reigns  of  these  Pharaohs  were  marked  by  no  events  which
would  cast  lustre  on  their  names ;  one  might  say  that  they  had  nothing  else
to  do  than  to  enjoy  peacefully  the  riches  accumulated  by  their  forefather.^
Kamses  IV.  was  anxious  to  profit  by  the  commercial  relations  which  had  been
again  established  between  Egypt  and  Puanit,and,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  transit
between  Coptos  and  Kosseir,  founded  a  station,  and  a  temple  dedicated  to  Isis,
in  the  mountain  of  Bakhni ;  by  this  route,  we  learn,  more  than  eight  thousand
men  had  passed  under  the  auspices  of  the  high  priest  of  Amon,  Nakhtu-ramses.^
This  is  the  only  undertaking  of  public  utility  which  we  can  attribute  to  any  of
these  kings.  As  we  see  them  in  their  statues  and  portraits,  they  are  heavy  and
squat  and  without  refinement,  with  protruding  eyes,  thick  lips,  flattened  and
commonplace  noses,  round  and  expressionless  faces.  Their  work  was  confined
to  the  engraving  of  their  cartouches  on  the  blank  spaces  of  the  temples  at
Karnak  and  Medinet-Habu,  and  the  addition  of  a  few  stones  to  the  buildings
at  Memphis,  Abydos,  and  Heliopolis.      Whatever  energy   and  means   they

'  The  order  of  the  Kamessi  Jes  was  tirst  made  out  by  Champollion  the  younger  (of.  Champolliox-
FiGEAC,  L'Jigijpte  Ancienne,  pp.  355, 356)  aud  by  Kosellini  (il/on.  S(orici,  vol.  ii.  p.  59,  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  135,
136).  Buuseu  (JEgyptens  Stelluiig,  vol.  ui.  pp.  IIU,  120)  and  Lepsius  (^Konigsbucli,  pis.  xxxTiii.-xli.)
reckon  in  it  thirteen  kings ;  E.  do  Eouge  puts  the  number  at  fifteen  or  sisteen  (Etude  sur  une  Stele  de
la  Bibl.  Imp^riale,  pp.  184,  193,  194);  Maspero  makes  the  number  to  be  twelve  (ies  Momies  royales,
etc.,  in  the  Me'moires  de  Ui  Mission  Erangaise,  vol.  i.  p.  662),  which  was  reduced  still  further  by  Sethe
(Untersucliungen  zur  Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp. 59-64).  Ermau  thiuka  that  Kamses  IX. and  Kamses  X.
were  also  possibly  sons  of  Kamses  III.  (^Die  Sshne  Eajnses  HI.,  in  the  Zeitsclirift,  1SS3,  pp.  60,  61) ;  he
consequently  declines  to  recognise  King  Maritvlma  as  a  son  of  that  sovereigD,  as  Brugsch  would  make
out  {Geschichte  ^gypteiis,  p.  625).

2  This  is  the  position  ably  maintained  by  Sethe,  Untersucliungen  zur  Geschichte  ^gypttiis,  pp.  59-
64.  The  monuments  of  these  later  Kamessides  are  so  rare  and  so  doubtful  that  I  cannot  yet  see  my
wav  to  a  solution  of  the  questions  which  they  raise.

^  For  the  probable  duration  of  their  reigns,  which  coincide  with  the  lives  of  two  high  priests  of
Amon,  see  Maspeko,  Momies  royales,  in  the  Memoires,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  663-666.

*  Lepsics,  jDeji&m.  iii.  219  c;  cf.  Buugsch,  Geschichte  .^gyptens,  pp.  620-623.


TEE  SONS   AND    SUCCUSSOIiS    OF  RAMSES  III.


483


possessed  were   expended   on   tlie   construction  of  their   magnificent   tombs.

These  may  still  he  seen  in  the  Bibau  el-Moluk,  and  no  visitor  can  refrain  from

admirin"-  tliem  for  their  magnitude  and  decoration.     As  to  funerary  chapels,

owing  to  the  shortness  of  the   reigns  of

these  kings,  there  wasnot  time  to  construct

them,  and  they  therefore  made  up  for  this

want  by  appropriating  the  chapel  of  their

father,  which  was  at  Medinet-Habu,  and  it

was  here  consequently  that  their  worship

was  maintained".^     The  last  of  the  sons

of  Eamses  III.  was  succeeded  by  another

and  equally   ephemeral    Ramses ;    after

whom  came  Ramses  X.  and  Ramses  XL,

who  re-established  the  tradition  of  more

lasting  reigns.     There  was  now  no  need

of  expeditions  against  Kharu  or  Libya,

for  these  enfeebled   countries  no  longer

disputed,  from  the  force  of  custom,  the

authority  of  Egypt.    From  time  to  time

an  embassy  from  these  countries  would

arrive  at  Thebes,  bringing  presents,  which

were  pompously  recorded  as  representing

so  much  tribute.^     If  it  is  true  that  a

people  which   has  no  history  is  hajipy,

then    E,u;ypt    ought    to    be  reckoned    as

more  fortunate  under  the  feebler  descendants  of  Ramses  III.  tlian  it  had  ever

been  under  the  most  famous  Pharaohs.

Thebes  continued  to  be  the  favourite  royal  residence.  Here  in  its  temple
the  kings  were  crowned,  and  in  its  palaces  they  passed  the  greater  part  of
their  lives,  and  here  in  its  valley  of  sepulchres  they  were  laid  to  rest  when
their  reigns  and  lives  were  ended.     The  small  city  of  the  beginning  of  the

'  Their  tombs  were  described  by  Cbampollion  ;  that  of  Ramses  IV.  in  the  Moiiumeiiis  de  VEgypte,
etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  473-476,  S13-821  (cf.  Lefebcre,  Les  Hypog^es  ih-  Thebes,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Misnoii
Fraiifaite,  vol.  i.  pts.  2  and  3),  that  of  Ramses  V.  in  Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  490-
G8S  (cf.  Lefkbuee,  op.  nit.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  2),  that  of  Ramses  VI.  in  Champollion,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.
490-688  (cf.  LEFEBmiE,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pis.  48-80),  that  of  Ramses  VII.  in  Ciiajipolliox,  op.  cit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  442-446,  803-806  (cf.  Lefebube,  pp.  1-8).  There  is  iu  the  Turin  Museum  a  plan  on  a  papyrus
which  Champollion  thought  to  bo  that  of  the  tomb  of  Ramses  III.  (Champollion-Fhieac,  Egijptc
Ancienw,  p.  348),  but  wliich  TjCpsius  rightly  referred  to  tliat  of  Ramses  IV.  {Gmndplan  des  Grabcs
liamaee  IV.,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Berlin,  1867;  cf.  Chabas,  Melanges
A'gyptologiques,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175-202).

'  The  mention  of  a  tribute,  for  instance,  in  the  time  of  Ramses  IV.  from  the  I.otauu  (Lepsius,
Venlcm.,  iii.  223  c,  I.  0).

'  Drawn  by  Fauchor-Oudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Eniil  Brug.seh-liey  ;  cf.  Navii.le,  Buhastu,
pis.  xvi.,  xx.wiii.  k.     This  is  the  Ramses  VI.  of  tlio  series  now  generally  adopted.


A    KAM.SES    OF    THE    \.V"    DYNASTY.


484  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THE  BAN   EMPIRE.

XVIII"'  dynasty  had  long  encroached  upon  the  plain,  and  was  now  trans-
formed into  an  immense  town,  with  magnificent  monuments,  and  a  motley
population,  having  absorbed  in  its  extension  the  villages  of  Ashiru,^  and
Madit,  and  even  thel  southern  Apit,  which  we  now  call  Luxor.  But  their
walls  could  still  be  seen,  rising  up  in  the  middle  of  modern  constructions,
a  memorial  of  the  heroic  ages,  when  the  power  of  the  Theban  princes  was
trembling  in  the  balance,  and  when  conflicts  with  the  neighbouring  barons
or  with  the  legitimate  king  were  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  at  every
moment.^  The  inhabitants  of  Apit  retained  their  walls,  which  coincided
almost  exactly  with  the  boundary  of  Nsittaui,  the  great  sanctuary  of  Amon ;
Ashiru  sheltered  behind  its  ramparts  the  temple  of  Miit,  while  Apit-risit
clustered  around  a  building  consecrated  by  Amenothes  III.  to  his  divine
father,  the  lord  of  Thebes.  Within  the  boundary  walls  of  Thebes  extended
whole  suburbs,  more  or  less  denselj'  populated  and  prosperous,  through
which  ran  avenues  of  sphinxes  connecting  together  the  three  chief  boroughs
of  which  the  sovereign  city  was  composed.^  On  every  side  might  have
been  seen  the  same  collections  of  low  grey  huts,  separated  from  each  other
by  some  muddy  pool  where  the  cattle  were  wont  to  drink  and  the  women
to  draw  water;  long  streets  lined  with  high  houses,  irregularly  shaped  open
spaces,  bazaars,  gardens,  courtyards,  and  shabby-looking  palaces  which,
while  presenting  a  plain  and  unadorned  exterior,  contained  within  them  the
refinements  of  luxury  and  the  comforts  of  wealth.*  The  population  did  not
exceed  a  hundred  thousand  souls,^  reckoning  a  large  proportion  of  foreigners
attracted  hither  by  commerce  or  held  as  slaves.  The  court  of  the  Pharaoh
drew  to  the  city  numerous  provincials,  who,  coming  thither  to  seek  their
fortune,  took  up  their  abode  there,  planting  in  the  capital  of  Southern  Egypt
types  from  the  north  and  the  centre  of  the  country,  as  well  as  from  Nubia  and
the  Oases;    such  a  continuous  infusion  of  foreign  material  into  the  ancient

'  Upon  this  extension  of  Thebes,  see  pp.  305,  300  of  the  present  work.  The  village  of  AshirA
was  situated  to  the  south  of  the  temple  of  Karnak,  close  to  the  temple  of  Milt  (CH.iMPOLuoN,  Monu-
ments, etc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  262 ;  Brogsoh,  Diet,  giog.,  pp.  73-75).  Its  ruins,  containing  the  statues  of  Sokhit
collected  by  Amenothes  III.  (see  p.  306  of  the  present  work),  extend  around  the  remains  marked  X
in  Mariette's  plan  {Karnak,  pi.  B  ;  cf.  Bri'gsch-Revillout.  Bonuses  ge'ograplnques  et  topographiques
sur  Thebes,  in  the  Revue  Egyptologique,  vol.  i.  p.  180).

-  These  are  the  walls  which  are  generally  regarded  as  marking  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  temples :
an  examination  of  the  ruins  of  Thebes  shows  us  that,  during  the  XX""  and  XXI"  dynasties,  brick-
built  houses  lay  against  these  walls  both  on  the  inner  and  outer  sides,  so  that  they  must  have  been
half  hidden  by  buildings,  as  are  the  ancient  walls  of  Paris  at  the  present  day.

^  For  the  period  during  which  these  avenues  were  constructed,  see  pp.  308,  309  of  the  present  work.

'  The  only  researches,  as  far  as  I  know,  which  have  been  carried  out  in  these  ruins  are  those  of
Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'Arch^oIogie  t^gyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  ] 84-190.

°  Letronne,  after  having  shown  that  we  have  no  authentic  ancient  document  giving  us  the  popula-
tion, fixes  it  at  200,000  souls  {CEuvres  choisies,  ed.  F.kcnan,  pt.  1,  vol.  i.  pp.  126-136).  My  estimate,
which  is,  if  anything,  exaggerated,  is  based  on  the  comparison  of  the  area  of  ancient  Thebes  and  that
of  such  modern  towns  as  Siut,  Girgeh,  and  Qina,  whose  populations  arc  known  for  the  last  fifty
vears  from  the  census.


THEBKS  AND   ITS  PEOPLE.


485


Theban  stock  gave  rise  to  families  of  a  highly  mixed  character,  in  which
all  the  various  races  of  Egypt  were  blended  in  the  most  capricious  fashiou.
Id  every  twenty  officers,  and  in  the  same  number  of  ordinary  officials,
about  half  would  be  either  Syrians,^  or  recently  naturalised  Nubians,  or  the


Tbrnb     c1  ih"  K  r  ,


descendants  of  both,  and  among  the  citizens  such  names  as  Pakhari  the  Syrian,
Palamnaui  the  native  of  the  Lebanon,  Pinahsi  the  negro,  Palasiai  the  Alasian,
preserved  the  indications  of  foreign  origin.^  A  similar  mixture  of  races  was
found  in  other  cities,  and  Memphis,  Bubastis,  Tanis,  and  Siut  must  have
presented   as   striking   an  aspect  in  this  respect   as  Thebes.''     At   Memphis

'  See  p.  438  of  the  present  volume  an  to  Ben-Azana  of  tlie  tosvn  of  Zor-Bisaua,  and  p.  140  as  to
Arisu,  the  Syrian,  who  was  for  a  short  time  King  of  Egypt.

'  Among  the  forty-three  inilividuals  compromised  in  the  conspiracy  against  Ramses  III.  (see  pp.
479, 480  of  the  present  work)  whose  names  have  been  examined  by  Deveria  (_Le  Papyrus  Jiidiciaire  de
Turin,  etc.,  pp.  138-102),  nine  are  foreigners,  eliiefly  Semites,  and  were  so  recognised  by  tlie  Esyptians
themselves — Adiram(p.  139),  Balmaliaru  (p.  141),  Garapusa  (p.  144),  lunini  the  Libyan  (pp.  144, 157,
158),  Paiarisalama,  possibly  the  Jerusalemite  (pp.  144,  148,  149),  Nanaiu,  possibly  the  Ninevite  (pp.
146,  147),  Paluka  tlio  Lyciau  (pp.  152,  153),  Qiidendena  (p.  150),  and  Uarana  or  Uaramu  (pp.  100,
161).  In  regard  to  Kliarui,  Pakliari,  see  W.  Ma.k  MOi.LKn,  Asien  und  Europa,  p.  240 ;  and  for
Palasiai,  see  Wiedemann,  Stila  at  Frciharg  in  Baden,  in  the  Proccedinrjf  BihI.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,
vol.  xiii.  pp.  31,  32;  and  Likblexn,  Diclionnaire  des  noins  jiropres.  No.  S88,  p.  280.  As  to  the  part
played  by  foreigners  in  Egypt  and  their  number,  see  BiiU(}.scii,  Geschichie  Miijijptens,  p.  107,  et  seq.,
and  EEiJiAN,  ^i:)jypten  und  JEgyplisclics  Lehen,  jip.  150,  157,  083,  084.

'  An  e.xamination  of  the  stelae  of  Abydos,  published  by  Mariette  in  his  Catalogue  G<fn(fral,  shows
the  extent  of  foreign  influence  in  this  city  in  the  middle  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.


486  THE   CLOSE    OF   TEE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.

there  were  regular  colonies  of  Phoenician,  Canaanite,  and  Amorite  merchants
sufficiently  prosperous  to  have  temples  there  to  their  national  gods,  and
influential  enough  to  gain  adherents  to  their  religion  from  the  indigenous
inhabitants.  They  worshipped  Baal,  Aniti,  Baal-Zaphuna,  and  Ashtoreth,  side
by  side  with  Phtah,  Nofirtiimu,  and  Sokhit,^  and  this  condition  of  things  at
Memphis  was  possibly  paralleled  elsewhere — as  at  Tanis  and  Bubastis.  This
blending  of  races  was  probably  not  so  extensive  in  the  country  districts,
except  in  places  where  mercenaries  were  employed  as  garrisons ;  but  Sudanese
or  Hittite  slaves,  brought  back  by  the  soldiers  of  the  ranks,  had  introduced
Ethiopian  and  Asiatic  elements  into  many  a  family  of  the  fellahin.^  We  have
only  to  examine  in  any  of  our  museums  the  statues  of  the  Mempliite  and
Theban  periods  respectively,  to  see  the  contrast  between  the  individuals  repre-
sented in  them  as  far  as  regards  stature  and  appearance.  Some  members  of
the  courts  of  the  Kamessides  stand  out  as  genuine  Semites  notwithstanding  the
disguise  of  their  Egyptian  names ;  and  in  the  times  of  Kheops  and  Usirtasen
they  would  have  been  regarded  as  barbarians.  Many  of  them  exhibit  on  their
faces  a  blending  of  the  distinctive  features  of  one  or  other  of  the  predominant
Oriental  races  of  the  time.  Additional  evidence  of  a  mixture  of  races  is  forth-
coming when  we  examine  with  an  unbiased  mind  the  mummies  of  the  period,
and  the  complexity  of  the  new  elements  introduced  among  the  people  by  the
political  movements  of  the  later  centuries  is  thus  strongly  confiTmed.  The
new-comers  had  all  been  absorbed  and  assimilated  by  the  country,  but  the
generations  which  arose  from  this  continual  cross-breeding,  while  representing
externally  the  Egyptians  of  older  epochs,  in  manners,  language,  and  religion,
were  at  bottom  something  different,  and  the  difference  became  the  more
accentuated  as  the  foreign  elements  increased.  The  people  were  thus
gradually  divested  of  the  character  which  had  distinguished  them  before  the
conquest  of  Syria ;  the  dispositions  and  defects  imported  from  without  counter-
acted to  such  an  extent  their  own  native  dispositions  and  defects  that  all
marks  of  individuality  were  effaced  and  nullified.  The  race  tended  to  become
more  and  more  what  it  long  continued  to  be  afterwards, — a  lifeless  and  inert
mass,  without  individual  energy — endowed,  it  is  true,  with  patience,  endurance,
cheerfulness  of  temperament,  and  good  nature,  but  with  little  power  of  sell-

'  These  gods  are  mentioned  in  the  preamble  of  a  letter  written  on  the  eerso  of  the  Saltier  Papyrus,
No.  iv.  pi.  1.  1.  6;  they  were  first  noticed  by  Goodwin  {S'otes,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S73,  p.  H).  From
the  mode  in  which  they  are  introduced  we  may  rightly  infer  that  they  had,  like  the  Egyptian  gods
who  are  mentioned  with  them,  their  chapels  at  Memphis.  As  to  the  other  Semitic  gods  and  god-
desses worshipped  in  Egypt,  see  pp.  1j4,  159  of  the  present  work.  A  place  in  Memphis  is  called
"the  district  called  the  district  of  the  Khatill"  in  an  inscription  of  the  IIT''  year  of  Ai  (Daresst,
Notes,  etc.,  §  cxiii.,  in  the  Ri  cueit  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvi.  p.  123),  and  shows  that  Hittites  were  there  by
the  side  of  Canaanites.

'  One  of  the  letters  in  the  Great  Bologna  Papyrus  treats  of  a  Syrian  slave,  employed  as  a  cultivator
at  Hermopolis,  who  had  run  away  from  his  master  (Chabas,  Melanges  Egyptologiques,  3rd  series,
vol.  i.  pp.  232,  233).


TDE  PEOPLE  AND    THEIR   LORDS.  487

government,  and  thus  forced  to  submit  to  foreign  masters  who  made  use  of
it  and  oppressed  it  witliout  pity.

The  upper  cLisses   had  degenerated  as  much  as  the  masses.     The  feudal
nobles  who  had  expelled  the  Sheplierds,  and  carried  the  frontiers  of  the  empire
to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  seemed  to  have  expended  their  energies  in  the
effort,  and  to  have  almost  ceased  to  exist.     As  long  as  Egypt  was  restricted  to
the  Nile  valley,  there  was  no  such  disproportion  between  the  power  of  the
Pharaoh  and  that  of  his  feudatories  as  to  prevent  the  latter  from  maintaining
their  privileges  beside,  and,  when  occasion  arose,  even  against  the  monarch.
The  conquest  of  Asia,  while  it  compelled  them  either  to  take  up  arms  them-
selves  or  to  send  their  troops   to  a   distance,  accustomed   them   and   their
soldiers  to  a  passive  obedience.     The  maintenance  of  a  strict  discipline  in  the
army  was  the  first  condition  of  successful  campaigning  at  great  distances  from
the  mother  country  and  in  the  midst  of  hostile  people,  and  the  unquestioning
respect  which  they  had  to  pay  to  the  orders  of  their  general  prepared  them  for
abject  submission  to  the  will  of  their  sovereign.     To  their  bravery,  moreover,
they  owed  not  only  money  and  slaves,  but  also  necklaces  and  bracelets  of
honour,  and  distinctions   and  offices  in  the    Pharaonic  administration.     The
king,  in  addition,  neglected  no  opportunity  for  securing  their  devotion  to  him-
self.    He  gave  to  them  in  marriage  his  sisters,  his  daughters,  his  cousins,  and
any  of  the  princesses  whom  lie  was  not  compelled  by  law  to  make  his  own  wives.
He  selected  from    their   harems  nursing-mothers  for  his  own  sons,  and  this
choice  established  between  him  and  them  a  foster  relationship,  which  was  as
binding  among  the  Egyptians  and    other  Oriental   peoples   as  one  of  blood.
It  was  not  even  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  this  relation  that  the  foster-
mother's  connexion  with  the  Pharaoh's  son  should  be  durable  or  even  effective  :
the  woman  had  only  to  offer  her  breast  to  the  child  for  a  moment,  and  this
symbol  was  quite  enough  to  make  her  his  nurse — his   true    mondit.     This
fictitious  fosterage  was  carried  so  far,  that  it  was  even  made  use  of  in  the  case
of  youths  and  persons  of  mature  age.     When  an  Egyptian  woman  wished  to
adopt  an  adult,  the  law  prescribed  that  she  should  offer  him  the  breast,  and
from  that  moment  he  became  her  son.     A  similar  ceremony  was  prescribed  in
the  case  of  men  who  wished  to  assume  the  quality  of  male  nurse — moridi — or
even,  indeed,  of  female  nurse — mondit — like  that  of  their  wives ;  according  to
which  they  were  to  place,  it  would  seem,  the  end  of  one  of  their  fingers  in  the
moutli  of  the  child.''     Once  this  affinity  was  established,  tlie  fidelity  of  these
feudal  lords  was  established  beyond   question ;  and  their  official  duties  to  the

'  These  symbolical  modes  of  adoption  were  lirst  pointed  out  by  Maspe^ic,  iVofes  aujour  lejour,^  23,
in  Prnc.  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soc.,  1891-2,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  308-312  ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Die  Milckverwandlxchafl  im  alt.
jEgijpt.,  in  Am  Vr-Quelle,\>iW2..  vol.  iii.  pp.  2.09-2H7.  Legend  bus  given  examples  of  them :  as,  forinstance,
where  Isis  fosters  the  chilil  of  Malkander,  King  of  Byblos,  by  inserting  the  tip  of  her  finger  in  its  mouth.


488  TEE    CLOSE   OF   THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

sovereign  were  not  considered  as  accomplished  when  they  had  fulfilled  tlieir
military  obligations,  for  they  continued  to  serve  him  in  the  palace  as  they
had  served  him  on  the  field.  Wherever  the  necessities  of  the  government
called  them — at  Memphis,  at  Kamses,  or  elsewhere — they  assembled  around
the  Pharaoh;  like  him  they  had  their  palaces  at  Thebes,  and  when  they
died  they  were  anxious  to  be  buried  there  beside  him.^  Many  of  the  old
houses  had  become  extinct,  while  others,  owing  to  marriages,  were  absorbed
into  the  royal  family ;  the  fiefs  conceded  to  the  relations  or  favourites  of  the
Pharaoh  continued  to  exist,  indeed,  as  of  old,  but  the  ancient  distrustful  and
turbulent  feudality  had  given  place  to  an  aristocracy  of  courtiers,  who  lived
oftener  in  attendance  on  the  monarch  tlian  on  their  own  estates,  and  whose
authority  continued  to  diminish  to  the  profit  of  the  absolute  rule  of  tlie  king.
There  would  be  nothing  astonishing  in  the  "  count "  becoming  nothing  more
than  a  governor,  hereditary  or  otherwise,  in  Thebes  itself;  he  could  hardly  be
anything  higher  in  the  capital  of  the  empire.^  Bat  the  same  restriction  of
authority  was  evidenced  in  all  the  provinces :  the  recruiting  of  soldiers,  the
receipt  of  taxes,  most  of  the  otHces  associated  with  the  civil  or  military
administration,  became  more  and  more  affairs  of  the  State,  and  passed  from  the
hands  of  the  feudal  lord  into  those  of  the  functionaries  of  the  Crown.  The
few  barons  who  still  lived  on  their  estates,  while  they  were  thus  dispossessed
of  the  greater  part  of  their  prerogatives,  obtained  some  compensation,  on  the
other  hand,  on  the  side  of  religion.  From  early  times  tliey  had  been  by  birth
the  heads  of  the  local  cults,  and  their  protocol  had  contained,  together  with  those
titles  which  justified  their  possession  of  the  temporalities  of  the  nome,  others
which  attributed  to  them  spiritual  supremacy.  The  sacred  character  with  which
they  were  invested  became  more  and  more  prominent  in  proportion  as  their  poli-
tical influence  became  curtailed,  and  we  find  scions  of  the  old  warlike  families  or
representatives  of  a  new  lineage  at  Thinis,  at  Akhmim,-^  in  the  nome  of  Baalu,^

'  The  tomb  of  a  prince  of  Tobfli,  the  leaser  Apbroditopolis,  was  discovered  at  Thebes  by  Maspeuo,
Le  Tombeau  de  MontuhiJchopslmf,  iu  the  M^moires,  etc.,  vol.  v.  p.  435,  et  seq.  The  rock-cut  tombs  of
two  Tliinite  princes  were  noted  in  the  same  necropolis,  and  referred  to  by  Champollion,  Monuments,
etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  525,  No.  31,  and  one  of  them  was  published  by  Virey,  Le  Tombeau  de  Kliem,  in  tlie
Memoires  de  la  Mission,  vol.  v.  p.  362,  et  seq.  These  two  wore  of  the  time  of  Thutmosis  111.  I  have
remarked  in  tombs  not  yet  made  public  the  mention  of  princes  of  El-Kab,  who  played  an  important
part  about  the  person  of  the  Pharaohs  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  XX"'  dynasty.

^  Kakhmiti  and  his  son  Manakhpirsonbu  were  both  "counts"  of  Thebes  under  Thatmosis  III.
(ViKEY,  Le  Tombeau  de  Selihmara,  in' the  Memoircs  de  la  Mission  Fran  false,  vol.  v.  pp.  1-3,  and  Le
Tombeau  de  Bamenliliepersenb,  p.  197,  et  seq.),  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  there  was  any  other
person  among  them  invested  with  the  same  functions  and  belonging  to  a  diffeient  family.

'  See,  for  example,  the  tomb  of  Anhirimosu,  high  priest  of  Anhuri-Shu  aud  prince  of  Thinis,
under  Miuephtah  (Makiette-Maspeko,  Monuments  divers,  pp.  20,  27,  aud  pi.  78),  where  the  sacerdotal
character  is  almost  exclusively  prominent.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  tombs  of  the  princes  of
AkhmSm  in  the  time  of  Khiiniatonii  and  his  successors:  the  few  still  existing  iu  1SS4-5  have  not
been  published.     The  stelse  belouging  to  them  are  at  Paris  and  Berlin.

*  Griffith,  The  Inscriptions  of  Siiit  and  Der-Eifeh,  pis.  IS,  19,  where,  iu  the  tomb  of  Prince  Nana,
the  religious  features  of  the  inscriptions  eclipse  the  military  ones.


THE   FEUDAL    LORDS   IN   THEIR   RELIGIOUS   ASPECT.  489

at  Hieiacoupolis,^  at  El-Kab,-  and  iu  every  place  where  we  have  information
from  the  monuments  as  to  their  position,  bestowing  more  concern  upon
their  sacerdotal  than  on  their  other  duties.  This  transfiguration  of  the
functions  of  the  barons,  which  had  been  completed  under  the  XIX"'  and  XX'"
dynasties,  corresponded  with  a  more  general  movement  by  which  the  Pharaohs
themselves  were  driven  to  accentuate  their  official  position  as  high  priests,  and
to  assign  to  their  sons  sacerdotal  functions  in  relation  to  the  principal  deities.
This  rekindling  of  religious  fervour  would  not,  doubtless,  have  restrained
military  zeal  in  case  of  war  ;  ^  but  if  it  did  not  tend  to  suppress  entirely  in-
dividual bravery,  it  discouraged  the  taste  for  arms  and  for  the  bold  adventures
which  had  characterised  the  old  feudality.  The  duties  of  sacrificing,  of  offering
prayer,  of  celebrating  the  sacred  rites  according  to  the  prescribed  forms,
and  rendering  due  homage  to  the  gods  in  the  manner  they  demanded,  were
of  such  an  exactingly  scrupulous  and  complex  character  that  the  Pharaohs
and  the  lords  of  earlier  times  had  to  assign  them  to  men  specially  fitted  for,
and  appointed  to,  the  task ;  *  now  that  they  had  assumed  these  absorbing  func-
tions themselves,  they  were  obliged  to  delegate  to  others  an  increasingly  greater
proportion  of  their  civil  and  military  duties.  Thus,  while  the  king  and  his
great  vassals  were  devoutly  occupying  tliemselves  in  matters  of  worship  and
theology,  generals  by  profession  were  relieving  them  of  the  care  of  command-
ing their  armies ;  and  as  these  individuals  were  frequently  the  chiefs  of
Ethiopian,  Asiatic,  and  especially  of  Libyan  bands,  military  authority,  and,
with  it,  predominant  influence  in  the  State  were  quickly  passing  into  the
hands  of  the  barbarians.  A  sort  of  aristocracy  of  veterans,  notably  of  Shardana
or  Mashauasha,  entirely  devoted  to  arms,  grew  up  and  increased  gradually
side  by  side  with  the  ancient  noble  families,  now  by  preference  devoted  to
the  priesthood.'

The  barons,  whether  of  ancient  or  modern  lineage,  were  possessed  of
immense  wealth,  especially  those  of  priestly  families.  The  tribute  and  spoil
of  Asia  and  Africa,  when   once  it   had  reached  Egypt,  hardly  ever  left   it :

'  Ilorimusa,  Princu  of  Hieraconpolis  under  Thtatmosis  III.,  is,  above  everything  else,  a  propliet
of  tlio  local  Horns  (Boubunt,  Les  Tomheaux  d'Hierdcnn2)olis,  in  the  L'ludes  Ardigolotjiques,  etc.,
didiiea  a  M.  le  D'  Leemans,  pp.  39,  40).

'  The  princes  of  El-Kab  during  the  XIX"'  and  XX"'  dynasties  were,  before  everything,  priests
of  NekhabJt,  as  appears  from  an  examination  of  tlieir  tombs,  wliicli,  lying  in  a  side  valley,  far
away  from  the  tomb  of  I'lliiri,  are  rarely  visited.

'  The  sons  of  Kamacs  11.,  Khamoioit  and  Jlaritiimu,  were  brave  warriors  in  spite  of  tlioir  being
high  priests  of  Plitali  at  Mempliis,  and  of  Ka  at  Heliopolis.  With  respect  to  Khamoitit,  see  pp.  42-i,
425  of  the  present  worli ;  and  in  regard  to  Marltumii,  see  Eiiman,  AuffiihrUches  Verzcichniss  der
JEgyiiliechen  AlUrluiiur,  IS'Jl,  p.  92,  No.  7317.  We  sliall  see  later  on  how  tlie  higli  pricst-s  of  Anion,
Hrihor,  Pionkhi,  Painozmu,  took  the  title  of  commander-in-chief.

*  For  furUicr  information  upon  those  "  men  of  tlio  roll,"  see  Dawn  nf  Cimlization,  pp.  I2i-Vn.

'  This  military  aristocracy  was  fully  developed  iu  the  XXT'  and  XXII'"'  dynasties,  but  it  began
to  take  shape  after  Kamses  III.  had  planted  the  Shardana  and  Qahaka  in  certain  towns  as  garrisons;
see  on  this  subject,  pp.  472-474,  479  of  the  present  work.


490  TEE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

they  were  distributed  among  the  population  in  proportion  to  the  position  occu-
pied by  the  recipients  in  the  social  scale.  The  commanders  of  the  troops,  the
attendants  on  the  king,  the  administrators  of  the  palace  and  temples,  absorbed
the  greater  part,  but  the  distribution  was  carried  down  to  the  private  soldier
and  his  relations  in  town  or  country,  who  received  some  of  the  crumbs.^
When  we  remember  for  a  moment  the  four  centuries  and  more  during  which
Egypt  had  been  reaping  the  fruits  of  her  foreign  conquest,  we  cannot  think
without  amazement  of  the  quantities  of  gold  and  other  precious  metals  which
must  have  been  brought  in  divers  forms  into  the  valley  of  the  Nile.^  Every
fresh  expedition  made  additions  to  these  riches,  and  one  is  at  a  loss  to  know
whence  in  the  intervals  between  two  defeats  the  conquered  could  procure  so  much
wealth,  and  why  the  sources  were  never  exhausted  uor  became  imj^overished.
This  flow  of  metals  had  an  influence  upon  commercial  transactions,  for  although
trade  was  still  mainly  carried  on  by  barter,  the  mode  of  operation  was  becoming
changed  appreciably.  In  exchanging  commodities,  frequent  use  was  now
made  of  rings  and  ingots  of  a  certain  prescribed  weight  in  tahonii ;  and  it
became  more  and  more  the  custom  to  pay  for  goods  by  a  certain  number  of
talonu  of  gold,  silver,  or  copper,  rather  than  by  other  commodities :  it  was
the  practice  even  to  note  down  in  invoices  or  in  the  official  receipts,  alongside
the  products  or  manufactured  articles  with  which  payments  were  made,  the
value  of  the  same  in  weighed  metal.^  This  custom,  although  not  yet  widelv
extended,  placed  at  the  disposal  of  trade  enormous  masses  of  metal,  which  were
preserved  in  the  form  of  ingots  or  bricks,  except  the  portion  which  went  to  the
manufacture  of  rings,  jewellery,  or  valuable  vessels.^     The  general  prosperity

'  See,  on  pp.  SG,  87,  88  of  this  work,  the  notices  of  the  quantity  of  spoils  received  by  the  two
officers  of  euhordinute  rank,  both  called  Ahmoeis  of  El-Kab.  On  one  occasion  there  is  (pp.  90,  91)  the
distribution  of  booty  to  the  wliole  crew  of  a  ship  who  had  distinguished  themselves  brilliantly.

^  The  quantity  of  gold  in  ingots  or  rings,  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Tlmtmosis  III.,  represents
altogether  a  weight  of  nearly  a  ton  and  a  quarter,  or  in  value  some  £140,000  of  our  money.  And  this
is  far  from  being  the  whole  of  the  metal  obtained  from  the  enemy,  for  a  large  portion  of  the  inscrip-
tion has  disappeared,  and  the  unrecorded  amount  might  be  taken,  without  much  risk  of  error,  at  as
much  as  that  of  which  we  have  evidence — say,  some  two  and  a  half  tons,  which  Thfitmosis  had
received  or  brought  back  between  the  yeurs  XXIII.  and  XLII.  of  his  reign — an  estimation  rather
under  than  over  the  reality.  These  figures,  moreover,  take  no  account  of  the  vessels  and  statues,  or
of  the  furniture  and  arms  plated  with  gold.  Silver  was  not  received  in  such  large  quantities,  but  it
was  of  great  value,  and  the  like  may  be  said  of  copper  and  lead.

^  The  facts  justifying  this  position  were  observed  and  put  together  for  the  first  time  by  Chabas,
Ileclierches  sur  les  poids,  etc.,  des  Anciens  Hgyptiens,  pp.  15—16  :  a  translation  is  given  in  this  memoir
of  a  register  of  the  XX"'  or  XXI"  dynasty  (Mariette,  Les  Papyrus  Jigyptiens  du  Mus^e  de  Soulaq,
vol.  ii.  pis.  iii.,  iv.),  which  gives  the  price  of  butcher's  meat,  both  in  gold  and  silver,  at  this  date.
Fresh  examples  have  been  since  collected  by  Spiegelberg,  who  has  succeeded  in  drawing  up  a  kind
of  tariff  for  the  period  between  the  XVIII"'  and  XX"'  dynasties  {Rechnungen  aus  der  Zeit  Sett's  I.,
Text,  pp.  87-93).

*  Tliere  are  depicted  on  the  monuments  bags  or  heaps  of  gold  dust,  ingots  in  the  shape  of  bricks,
rings,  and  vases,  arranged  alongside  each  other  :  to  cite  only  one  example,  see  the  Treasure  scenes
at  Medinet-IIabu  (Champollion,  Alotiuments  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  i.  pp.  365,  367;  Dumiohen,  Historische
hischriflen,  vol.  i.  pis.  xxx.-xxxiv.,  and  Besultate,  vol.  i.  pis.  xxviii.,  xxix.,  and  pp.  22,  23),  which  re-
minded many  Egyptologists  of  the  legend  of  Rhampsinitos.


RICHNESS  IN   THE  PRECIOUS  METALS;    GOLDSMITHS'    WORK.      4  91

encouraged  a  passion  for  goldsinitlis'  work,  and  the  use  of  bracelets,  necklaces,
and  chains  became  common  among  classes  of  the  people  who  were  not  pre-
viously accustomed  to  wear  them.^  There  was  henceforward  no  scribe  or
merchant,  however  poor  he  might  be,  who  had  not  his  seal  made  of  gold  or
silver,  or  at  any  rate  of  copper  gilt.  The  stone  was  sometimes  fixed,  but
frequently  arranged  so  as  to  turn  round  on  a  pivot ;  while  among  people  of
superior  rank  it  had  some  emblem  or  device  upon  it,  such  as  a  scorpion,  a
sparrow-hawk,  a  lion,  or  a  cynocephalous  monkey.  Chains  occupied  the  same
position  among  the  ornaments  of  Egyptian  women  as  rings  among  men ;  they
were  indispensable  decorations.  Examples  of  silver  chains  are  known  of  some
five  feet  in  length,  while  others  do  not  exceed  two  to  three  inches.  There
are  specimens  in  gold  of  all  sizes,  single,  double,  and  triple,  with  large  or
small  links,  some  thick  and  heavy,  while  others  are  as  slight  and  tiexible  as
the  finest  Venetian  lace.  The  poorest  peasant  woman,  alike  with  the  lady  of
the  court,  could  boast  of  the  possession  of  a  chain,  and  she  must  have  been
in  dire  poverty  who  had  not  some  other  ornament  in  her  jewel-case.  The
jewellery  of  Queen  Ahhotpu  shows  to  what  degree  of  excellence  the  work  of  the
Egyptian  goldsmiths  had  attained  at  the  time  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos :
they  had  not  only  preserved  the  good  traditions  of  the  best  workmen  of
the  XII"'  dynasty,  but  they  had  perfected  the  technical  details,  and  had
learned  to  combine  form  and  colour  with  a  greater  skill.^  The  pectorals  of
Prince  Khamoisit  and  the  Lord  Psaru,  now  in  the  Louvre,  but  which  were
originally  placed  in  the  tomb  of  the  Apis  in  the  time  of  Kamses  11.,^  are
splendid  examples.  The  most  common  form  of  these  represents  in  miniature
the  front  of  a  temple  with  a  moulded  or  flat  border,  surmounted  by  a  curved
cornice.  In  one  of  them,  wiiich  was  doubtless  a  present  from  the  king  himself,
the  cartouche,  containing  the  first  name  of  the  Pharaoh-TJsirmari,  appears  just
below  the  frieze,  and  serves  as  a  centre  for  the  design  within  the  frame.  Tiie
wings  of  the  ram-headed  sparrow-hawk,  the  emblem  of  Amonra,  are  so  dis-
played as  to  support  it,  while  a  large  urajus  and  a  vulture  beneath  embracing
both  the  sparrow-hawk  and  the  cartouche  with  outspread  wings  give  the  idea
of  divine  protection.  Two  didu,  each  of  them  filling  one  of  the  lower  corners,
symbolise  duration.     The   framework  of  the  design  is  made  up  of  divisions

'  See,  for  the  Egyptian  soUlsmiths'  work  of  tliis  period,  Pekrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans
V Anliquilg',  vol.  i.  pp.  831-839,  and  Masi-ero,  ArrM^oloijie  Eiji/pliennc,  pp.  301-315.

'  Some  of  the  ji-wela  of  Queeu  Ahhotpu  I.  iire  represented  ou  pp.  2,  3,  97, 108  of  the  present  work  ;
for  the  jeweUery  of  the  Xtl"'  dynasty,  see  Daivn  of  Cirilization,  p.  518.

'  These  jewels,  which  were  ditcovered  by  Muriette  in  his  excavations  in  the  Serapeuiu,  iire
represented  in  Le  StSrup^um  de  Memphis,  1803,  pis.  9,  12,  20;  of.  Piiis.sE  d'Avknnes,  Uin-
toire  de  I'Arl  Eijijptitn,  vol.  ii.,  and  Text,  pp.  440,  141 ;  Phurot-Ciiipiez,  Llisloirv  de  I'Art  ilune
VAiitiqiul<f,  vol.  i.  pp.  831-832,  and  MasI'ero,  Ltn  llijour  ^gijptiens  du  Louvre,  in  La  Nature,  vol.  xlv.
pp.  230-234.


492


THE    CLOSE   OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.


3tnflj|-«


wmmmmmtmm


mm


PECTORAL    OP    RAMSES  II.


marked  out  in  gold,  and  filled  either  with  coloured  enamels  or  pieces  of  polished
stone.  The  general  effect  is  one  of  elegance,  refinement,  and  harmony,  the
three  principal  elements  of  the  design  becoming  enlarged  from  the  top  down-
wards in  a  deftly  adjusted  gradation.  The  dead-gold  of  the  cartouche  in  the
upper  centre  is  set  off  below  by  the  brightly  variegated  and  slightly  undulating

band  of  colours  of   the    sparrow-hawk,
while  the  urseus  and  vulture,  associated
together  witli  one  pair  of  wings, envelope
the   upper   portions  iu  a  lialf-circle  of
enamels,  of  which  the  shades  pass  from
red  through  green  to  a  dull  blue,  with
a  freedom  of  handling  and  a  skill  in  the
manipulation  of  colour  which  do  honour
to  the  artist.      It  was  not  his   fault  if
there  is  still  an  element  of  stiffness  in
the  appearance  of  the  pectoral  as  a  whole,
for  the  form  which  religious  tradition
had  imposed  upon  the  jewel  was  so  rigid
that  no  artifice  could  completely  get  over  this  defect.     It  is   a  type  which
arose  out   of  the   same   mental   concepts   as   had   given   birth   to   Egyptian
architecture  and  sculpture — monumental  in  character,  and  appearing  often  as
if  designed   for   colossal  rather  tlian   ordinary   being.'!.     The  dimensions,  too
overpowering    for    the   decoration  of  normal   men  or  women,  would  find  an
appropriate   place   only   on  the    breasts  of  gigantic    statues :    the   enormous
size   of  the   stone   figures   to   which   alone   they  are   adapted  would   relieve
them,  and  show  them  in  their  proper  proportions.     The  artists  of  the  second
Thebaa  empire  tried  all  they  could,  however,  to  get  rid  of  the  square  frame-
work  in  which   the  sacred  bird  is   enclosed,  and  we   find  examples  among
the  pectorals  in  the  Louvre  of  the  sparrow-hawk  only  with  curved  wiugs,^
or  of  the  ram-headed  hawk  with  the  wings  extended ;  but  in  both  of  them
there  is  displayed    the   same    brilliancy,  the  same  purity  of  line,  as  in  the
square-shaped   jewels,  while    the    design,  freed  from    the    trammels   of   the
hampering  enamelled  frame,  takes    on  a  more   graceful  form,   and    becomes
more  suitable  for  personal  decoration.      The  ram's  head  in  the  second  case
excels  in  the  beauty  of  its  workmanship  anything  to  be  found  elsewhere  in

>  Drawu  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  jewel  iu  the  Louvre;  cf.  Pierket,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle
Uistorique  de  la  Galerie  Egypiietme,  p.  124,  No.  521,  and  Mariette,  Le  Semp^um  de  Memphis,
1863,  pi.  0.

=  This  pectoral  is  reproduced  as  a  tail-piece  to  the  table  of  conteutsof  the  present  chapter,  p.  4o2  ;
cf.  PiERRET,  Catalogue  de  la  Salle  Eistorique  de  la  Galerie  Egyptienne,  p.  127,  No.  534,  aud  Mariette,
Le  Serapimn  de  Memphis,  18G3,  pi.  20.


FURNITURE,    COSTUME,    EDUCATION.


4;):5


THE    K.\.M-HEAI>ED


[■AUKOW-


UAWK    IX    THE    LOUVFE.'


the  iiinseums  of  Europe  or  Egypt.
It   is  of   the    finest   gold,  but   its
value  does   not  depend  upon  tiic
precious    material :     the     ancient
engraver  knew  how  to   model   it
with  a  bold  and  free  hand,  and  he  has  managed
to  invest  it  with  as  much  dignity  as  if  he  had
been  carving  his  subject  in  heroic  size  out  of
a  block  of  granite  or  limestone.     It  is  not  an
example  of  pure  industrial  art,  but  of  an  art

for  which  a  designation  is  lacking.  Other  examples,  although  more  carefully
executed  and  of  more  costly  materials,  do  not  approach  it  in  value :  such,
for  instance,  are  the  ear-rings  of  Ramses  XII.  at  Gizeh,  which  are  made
up  of  an  ostentatious  combination  of  disks,  filigree-work,  chains,
beads,  and  liauging  figures  of  the  urajus.^

To  get  an  idea  of  the  character  of  the  plate  on  the  royal  side-
boards, we  must  have  recourse  to  the  sculptures  in  the
temples,  or  to  the  paintings  on  the  tombs :  the  engraved
gold  or  silver  centrepieces,  dishes,  bowls,  cups,  and
iimphorte,  if  valued  by  weight  only,  were  too  precious  to
escape  the  avarice  of  the  impoverished  generations  which
followed  the  era  of  Thebau  prosperity.^  In  the  fabrication  of
these  we  can  trace  foreign  influences,  but  not  to  the  extent
of  a  predominance  over  native  art:  even  if  the  subject  to  be
dealt  with  by  the  artist  happened  to  be  a  Phoenician  god  or  an  Asiatic  prisoner,
he  was  not  content  with  slavishly  copying  liis  model;  he  translated  it  and
interpreted  it,  so  as  to  give  it  an  Egyptian  character.

The  household  furniture  was  in  keeping  with  these  precious  objects.  Beds
and  armchairs  in  valuable  woods,  inlaid  with  ivory,  carved,  gilt,  painted  in
subdued  and  bright  colours,  upliolstered  with  mattresses  and  cushions  of  many-
hued  Asiatic  stuffs,  or  of  home-made  materials,  fashioned  after  Chaldsean
patterns,^  were  in  use  among  the  well-to-do,  while  people  of  moderate  means

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  jewel  in  the  Louvre ;  cf.  Piekeet,  Catalogue  de  la  SalJe
llittorvinc  de  la  Galerie  Egyplienne,  p.  127,  No.  535,  and  Mahiette,  Le  Sfrap€am  de  Memphis,  pi.  12.

'  Mauiette,  Ahydoa,  vol.  ii.  pi.  U)  «,  h,  and  Catalogue  Ge;ieral,  pp.  527-529,  No.  1370.

'  See  pp.  235,  263  of  the  present  work  for  specimens  of  table-serviceB,  especially  of  those  in  the
precious  njetnls ;  the  finest  examples  have  been  described  by  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Uiit.  de  I'Art  Hgyptien,
vol.  ii.,  and  Tixt,  pp.  430-133,  435-43S.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-fiudin,  from  one  of  these  objects  in  the  tomb  of  Eamees  III. ;  cf.  Cuami'ollion,
Mimuments  de  V Kgijple,  etc.,  pi.  colviii. ;  Rosellini,  Monumenii  Cirili,  pi.  xci.

»  For  E;,'yptian  furniture  in  the  XIX"'  and  XX"'  dynasties,  see  Prisse  d'Avennes,  SM.  de  I'Art
iigyplien,  vol.  ii.,  and  Text,  pp.  438,  431);  Perrot-(,'iiii>iez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  I'Antiq.,  vol.  i.  pp.  841-
844  ;  Erman,  . Kgypten  und  JEgyptiseUes  Lehen,  pp.  259-2G3 ;  Maspero,  Arch,  ligyplienne,  pp.  264-270  ;
and  particularly  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  40S-421,  vol.  ii.  iip.  195-201.


decorated  abmchair.'


494


TEE   CLOSE   OF  THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


EGTPTIAX    WIG.'


had  to  be  content  with  old-fashioned  furniture  of  the  ancient  regime.  The
Theban  dwelling-house  was  indeed  more  sumptuously  furnished  than  the
earliest  Mempliite,  but  we  find  the  same  general  arrangements  in  both,
which  provided,  in  addition  to  quarters  for  the  masters,  a  similar  number  of
rooms  intended  for  the  slaves,  for  granaries,  storehouses,  and  stables.^  While
the  outward  decoration  of  life  was  subject  to  change,  the  inward  element
remained  unaltered.  Costume  was  a  more  complex  matter
tlian  in  former  times :  the  dresses  and  lower  garments  were
more  gaufiered,  had  more  embroidery  and  stripes  ;  the  wigs
were  larger  and  longer,  and  rose  up  in  capricious  arrange-
ments of  curls  and  plaits.^  The  use  of  tlie  chariot  had  now
become  a  matter  of  daily  custom,  and  the  number  of  domestics,
already  formidable,  was  increased  by  fresh  additions  in  the
shape  of  coachmen,  grooms,  and  saises,  who  ran  before  their
master  to  clear  a  way  for  the  horses  through  the  crowded
streets  of  the  city.^  As  material  existence  became  more
complex,  intellectual  life  partook  of  the  same  movement,  and,
without  deviating  much  from  the  lines  prescribed  for  it  by
the  learned  and  the  scribes  of  the  Memphite  age,  literature  had  become  in
the  mean  time  larger,  more  complicated,  more  exacting,  and  more  difficult  to
grapple  with  and  to  master.  It  had  its  classical  authors,  whose  writings  were
committed  to  memory  and  taught  in  the  schools.  These  were  truly  masterpieces,
for  if  some  felt  that  they  understood  and  enjoyed  them,  others  found  them  almost
beyond  their  comprehension,  and  complained  bitterly  of  their  obscurity.'  The
later  writers  followed  them  pretty  closely,  in  taking  pains,  on  the  one  hand,
to  express  fresh  ideas  in  the  forms  consecrated  by  approved  and  ancient
usage,  or  when  they  failed  to  find  adequate  vehicles  to  convey  new  thoughts,

•  It  is  easy  to  convince  oneself  of  this,  by  comparing  a  town  of  the  XII"'  dynasty,  given  on  p.  315,
Dawn  of  Civilization,  after  Petrie's  drawings,  with  the  plans  of  houses  of  the  XVIII"',  for  which  also
I  am  indebted  to  Petrie,  Tell  el-Amarna,  pis.  xsxviii.-xlii.

-  For  the  costume  of  this  period,  see  Wilkix.son,  Ma7iners  atul  Cuytoms,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  322-
339,  and  especially  Eemax,  JEgypteii  und  .^gyptiscJies  Leben,  pp.  2)S7-310.  Examples  are  given  in
the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  ISO,  1S5,  188,  ISU,  194,  and  in  the  present  work,  pp.  96,  227,  269,  328,
501,  510-517,  519,  520,  522,  531-533.

'  The  pictures  at  Tel  el-Amarna  exhibit  the  king,  queen,  and  princesses  driving  in  their
chariots  with  escorts  of  soldiers  and  runners  (Lepsixjs,  Denhm.,  iii.  92,  93).  We  often  find  in  the
tomb-paintings  the  chariot  and  coachman  of  some  dignitary,  waiting  while  their  master  inspects  a
field  or  a  workshop,  or  while  lie  is  making  a  visit  to  the  palace  for  some  reward  (CH.iMPOLLiON,
Monuments  de  VSgypte,  etc.,  pi.  cxliv.,  No.  1,  and  vol.  i.  p.  2G  i ;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Civili,  pi.  cxvi.,
No.  5,  and  p.  238,  et  seq. ;  Lepsits.  Denhm.,  iii.  104, 105,  108).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  J[.  de  Mortens ;  cf.  Erman,  Auy'Uhtliches
Verzeichniss  der  J!!gypiischen  Alterfiimer,  No.  6911,  j).  89.

'  See  in  the  Anasfasi  Papijrus,  No.  1,  pi.  x.  1.  9,  pi.  xi.  1.  8,  the  passage  in  which  tlie  scribe  of
the  time  of  Ramses  II.  states  th.at  few  could  understand  the  ancient  writings  attributed  to  the  Prince
Didifhoril,  son  of  Mykerinos,  and  one  of  which  at  least,  chap.  Ixiv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  has  come
down  to  us  (Chabas,  Voyage  d'un  £gyptien,  pp.  43-46).


INFLUENCE    OF   THE  SEMITIC  LANGUAGES    ON   THE  EGYPTIAN.      495


resorting  iu  their  lack  of
for  the  requisite  expressions,
least  superficially,  some-
writings  of  Asia,  compelled


imagination    to   the   foreigner

The   necessity  of  knowing,   at

thing     of     the     dialect     and

the     Egyptian     scribes    to

study   to    some    degree


the  literature  of  Phcenicia  and
of  Chaldsea.2  From  these  sources  they  had  borrowed  certain  formulse
of  incantation,^  medical  recipes,^  and  devout  legends,  in  which  the  deities
of  Assyria  and  especially  Astarte  played  the  chief  part.^  They  appropriated
in  this  manner  a  certain  number  of  words  and  phrases  with  which  they  were
accustomed  to  interlard  their  discourses  and  writings.  They  thought  it
polite  to  call  a  door  no  longer  by  the  word  ro,  but  by  the  term  tird,  and  to
accompany  themselves  no  longer  with  the  harp  bonit,  but  with  the  same
instrument  under  its  new  name  hinnor,  and  to  make  the  saldm  in  saluting
the  sovereign  in  place  of  crying  before  him,  aan.  They  were  tiiorough-goiiig
Semiticisers ;  but  one  is  less  oifended  by  their  affectation  when  one  considers
that  the  number  of  captives  in  the  country,  and  the  intermarriages  with
Canaanite  women,  had  familiarised  a  portion  of  the  community  from  childhood
with  the  sounds  and  ideas  of  the  languages  from  which  the  scribes  were
accustomed  to  borrow  unblushingly."     This  artifice,  if  it  served  to  infuse  an

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  photographs  of  the  objects  in  the  Museums  of  Bt'rlin  ami  Gizeh.

\  See  what  has  beeu  said  on  this  subject  on  p.  167  of  the  present  work.  Several  of  the  literary
or  religious  pieces  found  at  Tel  el-Amarna  were  to  help  iu  their  studies  Egyptian  scribes  who  were
qualifying  for  the  office  of  dragoman.     See  pp.  275,  276  of  the  present  work.

See  tlie  Ilarris  Mtujh  Papyrus,  ed.  Cu.\B.\s,  pi.  c.  11.  1-5 ;  the  formula  tliere  given  seems  a
transcription  in  hieroglyphics  of  an  incantation  iu  cuneilbrni  characters.

*  Ebera  Papyrus,  pi.  l.\iii.,  1.  8,  et  seq.,  where  the  Egyptian  compiler  has  inserted,  among  other
formuliB,  a  trivial  recipe  furnished  him  by  an  "  Asiatic  of  Byblo.^."

'  Birch,  Varia,  in  the  Zeitscliri/t,  1871,  pp.  119,  120,  according  to  fragments  then  in  the  Tysseu
Amherst  collection.

The  Semiticisiug  mania  of  the  Theban  scribes  was  pointed  out  by  Masi'Euo,  Dii,  Genre  lipislo-
laire,  pp.  8-10,  and  afterwards  by  Eujian,  .Fgypte/i  nnd  J:ijypluches  Leben,  pp.  GS2-G84.  Some  of  the
words  thus  introduced  have  been  put  together  and  commented  on  by  Lautii,  SemiHsche  Lchiiiwrter
im  Jigyplhchen,  in  the  ZiUichri/t  der  D.  Morgendl.  GuselUclmfl,  vol.  xxv.  pp.  (HS-Gll,  and  by  Bondi,
Dem  nelraucli-phl'mizitcheu  Sprachzioeiije  angelwriije  LehmcSrIer  in  Hieroglyphisclien  uml  Uicratiscken


496  THE   CLOSE   OF  TEE    TEES  AN  EMPIRE.

appearance  of  originality  into  tlieir  writings,  liad  no  influence  upon  their
metliod  of  composition.  Tiieir  poetical  ideal  remained  what  it  had  been  in
the  time  of  their  ancestors,  but  seeing  that  we  are  now  unable  to  determine
the  characteristic  cadence  of  sentences  or  the  mental  attitude  whicli  marked
each  generation  of  literary  men,  it  is  often  difficult  for  us  to  find  out  the
qualities  in  their  writings  which  gave  them  popularity.  A  complete  library
of  one  of  the  learned  in  the  Kamesside  period  must  have  contained  a  strange
mixture  of  works,  embracing,  in  addition  to  books  of  devotion,  which  were  in-
dispensable to  those  who  were  solicitous  about  their  souls,^  collections  of  hymns,
romances,  war  and  love  songs,  moral  and  philosophical  treatises,  letters,  and  legal
documents.  It  would  have  been  similar  in  character  to  the  literary  possessions
of  an  Egyptian  of  the  Memphite  period,^  but  the  language  in  which  it  was  written
would  not  have  been  so  stiff  and  dry,  but  would  have  flowed  more  easily,  and
been  more  sustained  and  better  balanced.  The  great  odes  to  the  deities  which
we  find  in  the  Theban  papijri  are  better  fitted,  perhaps,  than  the  profane  com-
positions of  the  period,  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  advance  which  Egyptian  genius
had  made  in  the  width  and  richness  of  its  modes  of  expression,  while  still  main-
taining almost  the  same  dead-level  of  ideas  which  had  characterised  it  from
the  outset.  Among  these,  one  dedicated  to  Harmakhis,  the  sovereign  sun,  is  no
longer  restricted  to  a  bare  enumeration  of  the  acts  and  virtues  of  the  "  Disk,"
but  ventures  to  treat  of  his  daily  course  and  his  final  triumphs  in  terms  which
might  have  been  used  in  describing  the  victorious  campaigns  or  the  apotheosis
of  a  Pharaoh.^  It  begins  with  his  awakening,  at  the  moment  when  he  has  torn
himself  away  from  the  embraces  of  night.  Standing  upright  in  the  cabin  of
the  divine  bark,  "  the  fair  boat  of  millions  of  years,"  with  the  coils  of  the  serpent
Mihni  around  him,  he  glides  in  silence  on  the  eternal  current  of  the  celestial
waters,  guided  and  protected  by  those  battalions  of  secondary  deities  with  whose

Texlen,  1S86.  It  appears  not  to  have  been  noticed  tliat  several  of  these  words  betray  an  Aramueau
origin  from  the  XVIII""  dynasty  onwards.

»  There  are  found  in  tlie  rubrics  of  many  religious  books,  for  example  tliat  dealing  with  the  unseen
world  (Maspeko,  ttudes  de  Mijthologie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  54-57),  promises  of  health  and  prosperity  to  the
soul  which,  "  while  still  on  earth,"  had  read  and  learned  them.  A  similar  formula  appears  at  the  end  of
sewral  important  chapters  of  the  Bool-  of  the  Dead  (^Gvietsse,  Bit.  Fungr.  Kciiiptien,  ch.  64,  pp.  5S,  59).

2  See  Dawn  of  Civilizatioii,  pp.  398-401.  The  composition  of  these  libraries  may  be  gathered
from  the  collections  of  papyri  which  have  turned  up  from  time  to  time,  and  liave  been  sold  by  the
Arabs  to  European  buyers ;  e.g.  the  Sallier  Collection,  the  Anastasi  Collections,  and  tl)at  of  Harris.
They  have  found  their  way  eventually  into  the  British  Museum  or  the  Museum  at  Leyden,  and  have
been  published  in  the  Select  Papyri  of  the  former,  or  in  the  Moimmejits  £gijptiens  of  tlie  latter.

'  Tlie  hymn  to  Harmakhis  is  in  the  Berlin  Museum,  and  was  publislied  by  Lepsics,  Denhn.,  vi.  115,
117  a;  it  was  translated  by  Maspero,  litudes  de  Mijthohgie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  454-457,  and  Hist.  Ancienne
des  Peuptes  de  V  Orient.  4tli  edit.,  pp.  280-284.  A  hymn  to  "Plitah  in  the  same  style,  now  also  at  Berlin
(LEPSirs,  Denkm.,  vi.  llS-121),has  been  translated  by  Vierret, Etudes  tgyptoJog.  pp.  1-19.  Finally,  the
great  hymn  to  Amon  in  the  Bulaq  Papyrus  (Mariette,  Leg  Papyrus  ICgyptiens,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pis.  11-13)
has  been  translated  into  Frencli  by  Gbebavt,  Hymne  a  Amon-Ed  des  Pap.  Egypt,  dti  Mus^e  du  Boulaq,
1876,  vol.  i.,  into  German  by  Stern,  Ein  Hymmis  auf  Amoti-Ba,  in  Zeitschrift,  1873,  pp.  74-81, 125-127,
and  into  English  by  Goodwin,  Transhitiun  of  an  Egyptian  Symn  to  Amon,  in  Trans.  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
vol.  ii.  pp.  250-26!*,  and  Hymn  to  Amen-Ea,  in  Eecords  of  the  Past,  let  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  127-136.


FAIRY  STORIES.  497

otkl  forms  tlie  monuments  have  made  us  lamiliar.  "  Heaven  is  in  delight,
the  earth  is  in  joy,  gods  and  men  are  making  festival,  to  render  glory  to
rhni-Hurmakhis,  when  they  see  him  arise  in  his  bark,  having  overturned  his
enemies  in  his  own  time ! "  They  accompany  him  from  hour  to  hour,  they
fight  the  good  fight  with  him  against  Apopi,  they  shout  aloud  as  he  inflicts
each  fresh  wound  upon  the  monster ;  they  do  not  even  abandon  him  wlien  the
west  has  swallowed  him  up  in  its  darkness.^  Some  parts  of  the  hymn  remind
us,  in  the  definiteuess  of  the  imagery  and  in  the  abundance  of  detail,  of  a
portion  of  the  poem  of  Peutauiiit,  or  one  of  those  inscriptions  of  Ramses  III.
wherein  he  celebrates  the  defeat  of  hordes  of  Asiatics  or  Libyans.

The  Egyptians  took  a  delight  in  listening  to  stories.  They  preferred  tales
which  dealt  with  the  marvellous  and  excited  their  imagination,  introducing
speaking  animals,  gods  in  disguise,  ghosts  and  magic.^  One  of  them  tells  of  a
king  who  was  distressed  because  he  had  no  heir,  and  had  no  sooner  obtained  the
favour  he  desired  from  the  gods,  than  the  Seven  Hathors,  the  mistresses  of  Fate,
destroyed  his  happiness  by  predicting  that  the  child  would  meet  with  his  death
by  a  serpent,  a  dog,  or  a  crocodile.'-^  Efforts  were  made  to  provide  against  such
a  fatality  by  shutting  him  up  in  a  tower ;  but  no  sooner  had  he  grown  to  man's
estate,  than  he  procured  himself  a  dog,  went  off  to  wander  througli  the  world,  and
married  the  daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Naharaim.  His  fate  meets  him  first  under
the  form  of  a  serpent,  which  is  killed  by  his  wife ;  he  is  next  assailed  by  a  croco-
dile, and  the  dog  kills  the  crocodile,  but  as  the  oracles  must  be  fulfilled,  the
brute  turns  and  despatches  his  master  without  further  consideration.^  Another
story  describes  two  brothers,  Anupu  and  Bitiu,  who  live  happily  together  on
tlieir  farm  till  the  wife  of  the  elder  falls  in  love  with  the  younger,  and  on  his
repulsing  her  advances,  she  accuses  him  to  her  husband  of  having  offered  her
violence.  The  virtue  of  tlie  younger  brother  would  not  have  availed  him
much,  had  not  his  animals  warned  him  of  danger,  and  had  not  Phra-Harmakhis
surrounded  him  at  the  critical  moment  with  a  stream  teeming  with  crocodiles.
He  mutilates  himself  to  prove  his  innocence,  and  announces  that  henceforth  he
will  lead  a  mysterious  existence  far  from  mankind  ;  he  will  retire  to  the  Valley

'  The  remains  of  Egyptian  romantic  literature  have  been  collected  and  translated  into  Frencli  by
SIaspero,  Lea  Contee  pnpuJaires  de  I'Egypte  Ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  1889,  and  subsequently  into  English
by  Klisdehs  Petuie,  Ecjyiitian  Tales,  i.,  ii.,  1895.

*  For  the  part  of  fairy  godmothers  played  in  Egypt  by  the  Seven  Hathors,  cf.  MAsrEiio,  Les
Contes  populairee  de  V Egypte  Ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  Ixv.-lxviii. ;  for  the  methods  of  evading,  or  at
least  of  delaying,  the  execution  of  decrees  of  fate,  cf.  Dawn  uf  Civtlization.,  pp.  212-213.

'  Tliid  Slory  of  the  Doomed  Prince  was  discovered  in  the  Harris  Papyrus,  No.  500,  in  the  ISritisli
Bluseura,  and  published  by  Goodwin,  Translalinn  of  a  Fragment  of  an  Egyptian  Fabulous  Tale,  the
Doomed  Prince,  in  tlie  Transactions  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  319-35()  (of.  the  Records  of
the  Past,  Ist  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1.53-lGO),  translated  and  commented  on  by  Masi-ero,  Ktudes  figyplierines,
vol.  i.  pp.  1—17,  and  completed  by  Eeers,  Das  alte  .Kijyptisdie  Marchen  vom  verwimschenen  Prinzen,
nacherzShll  uud  zu  Ende  gefiihrt,  in  Weeternumns  JUvnatshc/'te,  Oct.,  1881,  pp.  9G  103;  cf.  MAsrKRO,
l.es  Coutes  popiUuires  de  V Egypte  Auc'enne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  225-244,  and  Petrie,  Egyptian  Tales,  2nd
series,  pp.  13-35.

2k


498  THE   CLOSE   OF   TEE   TEE  BAN  EMPIRE.

of  the  Acacia,  place  his  heart  on  the  topmost  flower  of  the  tree,  aud  no  one
will  be  able  with  impunity  to  steal  it  from  him.  The  gods,  however,  who
frequent  this  earth  take  pity  on  bis  loneliness,  and  create  for  him  a  wife  of
such  beauty  that  the  Nile  falls  in  love  with  her,  and  steals  a  lock  of  her  hair,
which  is  carried  by  its  waters  down  into  Egypt.  Piiaraoh  finds  the  lock,  and,
intoxicated  by  its  scent,  commands  his  people  to  go  in  quest  of  the  owner.
Having  discovered  the  lady,  Pharaoh  marries  her,  and  ascertaining  from  her  who
she  is,  he  sends  men  to  cut  down  the  Acacia,  but  no  sooner  has  the  flower  touched
the  earth,  than  Bitiu  droops  and  dies.  The  elder  brother  is  made  immediately
acquainted  with  the  fact  by  means  of  various  prodigies.  The  wine  poured  out
to  him  becomes  troubled,  his  beer  leaves  a  deposit.  He  seizes  his  shoes  and
staff  and  sets  out  to  find  the  heart.  After  a  search  of  seven  years  he  discovers
it,  and  reviving  it  in  a  vase  of  water,  he  puts  it  into  the  mouth  of  the  corpse,
which  at  once  returns  to  life.  Bitiu,  from  this  moment,  seeks  only  to  be
revenged.  He  changes  himself  into  the  bull  Apis,  and,  on  being  led  to  court,
he  reproaches  the  queen  with  the  crime  she  has  committed  against  him.  The
queen  causes  his  thi'oat  to  be  cut ;  two  drops  of  his  blood  fall  in  front  of  the
gate  of  the  palace,  and  produce  in  the  night  two  splendid  "Persea"  trees,  which
renew  the  accusation  in  a  loud  voice.  The  queen  has  them  cut  down,  but  a
chip  from  one  of  them  flies  into  her  mouth,  and  ere  long  she  gives  birth  to
a  child  who  is  none  other  than  a  re -incarnation  of  Bitiii.  When  the  child
succeeds  to  the  Pharaoh,  he  assembles  his  council,  reveals  himself  to  them,  and
punishes  with  death  her  who  was  first  his  wife  and  subseqiiently  his  mother.^  The
hero  moves  throughout  the  tale  without  exhibiting  any  surprise  at  the  strange
incidents  in  which  he  takes  pai't,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  did  not  seriously
outrage  the  probabilities  of  contemporary  life.  In  every  town  sorcerers  could
be  found  who  knew  how  to  transform  themselves  into  animals  or  raise  the  dead
to  life :  ^  we  have  seen  how  the  accomplices  of  Pentaiiirit  had  recourse  to  spells
in  order  to  gain  admission  to  the  royal  palace  when  they  desired  to  rid  them-
selves of  Eamses  III.^  The  most  extravagant  romances  differed  from  real  life
merely  in  collecting  within  a  dozen  pages  more  miracles  than  were  customarily
supposed  to  take  place  in  the  same  number  of  years ;  it  was  merelj'  the
multiplicity  of  events,  and  not  the  events  tiiemselves,  that  gave  to  the  narra-
tive its  romantic  aud  improbable  character.''     The  rank  of  the  heroes  alone

'  The  Orbiney  Papyrus,  which  contuias  the  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers  (^Select  Papyri,  vol.  ii.  pis.  is.-
xis.),  was  discovered  aud  interpreted  by  E.  de  Eouge,  Notice  sur  un  monument  ^gyptien  en  gcriture
hi^ratiquf,  in  the  Atli^nieum  Franfais,  1S52,  and  in  the  Eevue  Arch^ohgique,  1st  series,  vol.  viii.  p.  30,
et  seq.  It  has  since  then  been  translated  or  commented  upon  by  some  dozen  Egyptologists,  and  the
translation,  with  a  bibliography,  will  bo  found  in  Maspero,  Les  Contcs  pojntlaires  de  I'Egypte  Ancienne,
2nd  edit.,  pp.  1-32,  aud  also  in  Petrie,  Egyptian  Tales,  2ud  series,  pp.  30-S6.

'  Cf.  Daun  of  Civilization,  pp.  260,  270,  2S2,  for  the  resurrections  cfTectcd  by  the  magician  Didi.

'  Cf.  p.  479  of  the  present  volume.

*  For  this  manner  of  accounting  for  the  marvellous  in  Egyptian  tales,  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Contes
populaires,  etc.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  Ivii.,  et  seq. ;  Petbie,  Egyptian  Tales,  2nd  series,  pp.  v.,  vi.


BISTORICAL   ROMANCES — FABLES.  499

raised  the  tale  out  of  the  region  of  ordinary  life ;  they  are  always  tlie  sons  of
kings,  Syrian  prince?,  or  Pharaohs ;  sometimes  we  come  across  a  vague  and
undefined  Pharaoh,  who  figures  under  the  title  of  Piruiaui  or  PniitiV  but  more
often  it  is  a  well-known  and  illustrious  Pharaoh  who  is  mentioned  by  name.^
It  is  related  how,  one  day,  Kheops,  suli'eriug  from  ennui  within  his  palace,
assembled  his  sons  in  the  hope  of  learning  from  them  something  whicii  he  did
not  already  know.  They  described  to  him  one  after  another  the  prodigies
performed  by  celebi'ated  magicians  under  Kanibri  and  Snofnii ;  and  at  length
Jrykerinos  assured  him  that  tiiere  was  a  certain  Didi,  living  then  not  far
from  Jleidum,  who  was  capable  of  repeating  all  the  marvels  done  by  former
wizards.^  Most  of  the  Egyptian  sovereigns  were,  in  the  same  way,  subjects  of
more  or  less  wonderful  legends — Sesostris,  Amenothes  III.,  Thiitmosis  III.,
Amenemhait  I.,  Khiti,  Sahuri,  Usirkaf,  and  Kakiii.^  These  stories  were  put  into
literary  shape  by  the  learned,  recited  by  public  story-tellers,  and  received  by
the  people  as  authentic  history;  they  finally  filtered  into  the  writings  of  the
chroniclers,  who,  in  introducing  them  into  the  annals,  filled  up  witli  their
extraordinary  details  the  lacunar  of  authentic  tradition.^  Sometimes  the
narrative  assumed  a  briefer  form,  and  became  an  apologue.  In  one  of  them
the  members  of  the  body  were  supposed  to  have  combined  against  the  head,
and  disputed  its  supremacy  before  a  jury;  the  parties  all  pleaded  their
cause  in  turn,  and  judgment  was  given  in  due  form,"  Animals  also  had  their
place  in  this  universal  comedy.  The  passions  or  the  weaknesses  of  humanity
were  attributed  to  them,  and  the  narrator  makes  the  lion,  rat,  or  jackal  to
utter  sentiments  from  which  he  draws  some  short  practical  moral.  La  Fontaine
had  predecessors  on  the  banks  of  tlie  Nile  of  whose  existence  he  little
dreamed.'

'  For  the  meaning  of  these  titles,  cf.  Dawn  of  Ciuilizatiou,  pp.  263,  2G4.

'  Maspero,  Les  Contes  populuirts  iJe  VEgypte  Ancivnnc,  2nd  edit.,  p.  xxxiv.,  et  seq.

"  This  is  the  Tale,  of  King  Khi'ifui  and  the  Magicians,  discovered  and  published  by  Emiax,  Ein
newer  Vapijrus  des  Berliner  Museums,  in  the  National  Zeitung  of  Berlin  (No.  for  the  14th  May,  1886),
and  subseiiuently  in  .Egi/pten  und  -Egyp.  Lehen,  etc,  pp.  498-302,  and  again  in  Die  Miirchen  des  Papyrus
Weslcar,i.,u.,  1890;  cf.  Maspero,  ie«  Contes  populairrs  de  I'Sgypte  Ancieune,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  51-86,  and
1''.  Pktuie,  Eyy/itian  Tales,  1st  series,  pp.  9-60.

*  Sesostris-Uamses  II.  appears  in  the  Tale  if  Satni-Khdmois (ilxsFERO,  Les  Contes  popidaires,  2nd
edit.,  p.  19.5,  et  seq.),  Amenothes  III.  in  the  Talc  of  the  Vnclean  (cf.  on  this  subject  pp.  418,  449  of
this  volume),  Thutmosis  III.  In  the  Tale  of  Tluilii  (cf.  p.  277  of  this  volume),  Ameueniliait  I.,  with
his  sun  tsirtasen  I.,  in  the  Memoirs  of  Siniihit(c\'.  Damn  of  Civilization,j)p.  471-473),  Khiti  in  the  St.
Petersburg  Papyrus,  No.  1,  at  present  unedited  (cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  448),  and  finally  Sahuri,
tJairkaf,  and  KakiQ,  in  the  Tale  of  King  Khufiii  and  the  Magicia7is  (cf.  Dawn  of  Givilizatioh.
pp.  387-389).

'  Maspero,  Les  Contes  populaircs  de  V Kgypte  Anciunne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  xxxv.-.\li.,  and  Notes  sur
(luelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'llistoire,  in  the  Ueeueil  dc  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  .'56-64,  121-138.
1  shall  have  occasion  to  revert  to  this  subject  again  later  on.

"  This  version  of  the  Fable  of  the  Members  and  the  Stomach  was  discovered  upon  a  schoolboy's
tablet  at  Turin,  and  published  by  Maspero,  Eludes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  260-264.

'  The  first  Egyptologist  to  chiim  an  Egyptian  origin  for  many  of  our  fables  was  Zlndel,  Eaope
€tait-d  J aif  uu  Egyptieni  in  the  llevue  Archfohigique,  2nd  scries,  vol.  iii.  pp.  354-369;  cf  Lacth,
Uber  die  eymbolische  Schrift  der  Alten  ^gypter,  in  the  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at


500


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


As  La  Fontaine  found  an  illustrator  in  Granville,  so,  too,  in  Egypt  the
draughtsman  brought  his  reed  to  the  aid  of  the  fabulist,  and  by  his  cleverly
executed  sketches  gave  greater  point  to  the  sarcasm  of  story  than  mere  words
could  have  conveyed.^  ^Yhere  the  author  had  briefly  mentioned  that  the
jackal  and  the  cat  had  cunningly  forced  their  services  on  the  animals  whom
they  wished  to  devour  at  their  leisure,  the  artist  would  depict  the  jackal  and
the  cat  equipped  as  peasants,  with  wallets  on  their  backs,  and  sticks  over


THE    CAT    AND    THE    JACKAL    GO    OFF    To    TUE    FIELDS    WITH    TUEIK    FLOCKS."

their  shoulders,  marching  behind  a  troup  of  gazelles  or  a  flock  of  fat  geese :
it  was  easy  to  foretell  tlie  fate  of  their  unfortunate  charges.  Elsewhere  it  is  an
ox  who  brings  up  before  his  master  a  cat  who  has  cheated  him,  and  his  pro-
verbial stupidity  would  incline  us  to  think  that  he  will  end  by  being  punished
himself  for  the  misdeeds  of  which  he  had  accused  the  other.  Puss's  sly  and
artful  expression,  the  ass-headed  and  important-looking  judge,  with  the  wand
and  costume  of  a  high  and  mighty  dignitary,  give  pungency  to  the  story,  and

Munich,  186S,  vol.  i.  pp.  357,  358.  The  Fahle  of  the  Lion  and  the  licit  was  discovered  in  a  demotic
papyrus  at  Leyden  (i.  384,  p.  xviii.  11.  11-34  ;  cf.  Leemans,  Monuments  ^gyptiens,  vol.  i.  pi.  ccsxiii.)
by  Lauth,  ijber  die  Tlderfahel  in  .^gypten,  in  the  Silzungsherichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at
Munich,  1868,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  51,  and  retranslated  into  French  and  German  by  Bkugsch,  La  Fable  du
Lion  et  de  la  Souris  d'apres  un  manuscrit  d^inotiquc,  in  the  lievue  ArcMologique,  2nd  series,  1878,  and
^Esopische  Fabeln  in  tinem  JEgyptischen  Papyrus,  in  tlie  Zeitschrift,  1S78,  pp.  47-50  (cf  Brugsch,
ErUdmng,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S78,  p.  87,  and  Lauth,  ^«  die  BedaMion,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S79,  pp.  92,
93).  The  same  papyrus  contains  other  fables,  introduced  into  a  dialogue  in  which  the  jackal  and
the  eat  sustain  the  conversation;  its  general  contents  were  pointed  out  by  Lauth,  Vber  die  Thierfabel
in  JKgypten,  pp.  49-51,  and  the  translation  of  a  considerable  part  of  it  was  given  by_  Revillout,
Entretiens  philosophiques  d'une  chatte ^hiopienne  et  d'unpeltt  chacal  Roufi,  in  the  Revue  Fgyptologique,
vol.  i.  pp.  153-159,  vol.  iv.  pp.  82-88.

'  The  first  to  study  Egyptian  caricatures  and  fables  was  Lauth,  Die  Thierfabel  in  JEgyplen,  in
the  Sitzungsberichfe  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Munich,  1868,  vol.  ii.  pp.  45-49;  his  views  have
not  received  the  attention  they  deserve.  The  caricatures  are  preserved  in  two  papyri,  one  in  the  British
Museum,  the  other  at  Turin,  which  were  published  by  Lepsius,  .4msii'(i7</  der  icichtigsten  Urltunden,
pi.  xxiii. ;  and  on  ostraca,  of  which  one  only,  that  in  the  former  Abbott  collection,  and  now  at  New
York,  was  published  by  Pbisse  d'Avennes,  Notice  sur  le  Miisee  du  Caire  (Estrait  de  )a  Revue  Arche'ol.,
1846),  p.  17,  and  by  MAtPEKO,  L'Arch^ologie  JEgyptitnne,  pp.  1G4,  165.  They  have  been  studied  by
De'veria  in  CH-ViirFLEURY,  Eist.  de  la  Caricature  Antique,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  20-28,  and  by  Ollivier-
Beauregard,  La  Caricature  Egyptieune,  historique,  politique  et  morale,  1894,  in  which  the  interpre-
tation is  more  ingenious  than  true  to  the  meaning  of  the  documents.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Lepsius,  Auswahl  der  wichtiijsten  Urhunden,  pi.  xxiii.


CARICATURES   AND    SATIRES.


JOI


THE    CAT    BEFORE    ITS   JULGE.'


recall  the  daily  scenes
at  the  judgment-seat  of
the  lord  of  Tiiebes.  In
another  place  we  see  a
donkey,  a  lion,  a  croco-
dile, and  a  monkey
giving  an  instrumental
and  vocal  concert.  A
lion  and  a  gazelle  play
a  frame  of  chess.  A  cat
of  fashion,  with  a  flower
in  her  hair,  has  a  dis-
agreement with  a  goose :
they  have  come  to  blows,  and  the  excitable  puss,  who  fears  she  will  come
off  worst  in  the  struggle,  falls  backwards  in  a  fright.  The  draughtsmen  having
once  found  vent  for  their  satire,  stopped  at  nothing,  and  even  royalty  itself

did  not  escape  their  at-
tacks. While  the  writers
of  the  day  made  fun  of
the  military  calling,  both
in  prose  and  verse,^  the
caricaturists  parodied
the  combats  and  trium-
phal scenes  of  the  Ramses
or  Thutmosis  of  the  day
depicted  on  the  walls  of
the  pylons.  The  Pharaoh
of  all  the  rats,  perched
upon  a  cliariot  drawn  by
dogs,  bravely  charges  an
army  of  cats;  standing  in  the  heroic  attitude  of  a  conqueror,  he  pierces  them
with  his  darts,  while  his  horses  tread  the  fallen  underfoot ;  his  legions  mean-
while in  advance  of  him  attack  a  fort  defended  by  tomcats,  with  the  same
ardour  that  the  Egyptian  battalions  would  display  in  assaulting  a  Syrian  strong-
hold.^ This  treatment  of  ethics  did  not  prevent  the  Egyptian  writers  from
giving  way  to  their  natural  inclinations,  and  composing  large  volumes  on  this

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  LErsms,  AuswaU  (Ur  wichtigilen  Urkunden,  pi.  xxiii.
'  Cf.  the  fragments  which  I  liave  cited  in  this  connexion  on  pp.  457,  4.^)S  of  this  volume.
'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  Lepsivs,  Auswahl  dcr  wiMvjsfen  Urkunden,  pi.  xxiii.
*  This  JB  the  scene  which  serves  us  the  head-piece  to  tlie  present  chapter;  see  p.  453.


A  CONCERT  OF  ANIMALS  DEVOTED  TO  MISIC.''


502  TEE    CLOSE    OF    THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

subject  after  the  manner  of  Kaqimui  or  Phtahhotpu.^  One  of  their  books,
in  which  the  aged  Ani  inscribes  his  Instructions  to  his  son,  Khoushotpii,  is
compiled  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  and  contains  the  usual  commonplaces
upon  virtue,  temperance,  piety,  the  respect  due  to  parents  from  children,  or
to  the  great  ones  of  this  world  from  their  inferiors.^  The  language  in  which
.  it  is  written  is  ingenious,  picturesque,  and  at  times  eloquent ;  the  work  explains
much  that  is  obscure  in  Egyptian  life,  and  upon  which  the  monuments  have
thrown  no  light.  "Beware  of  the  woman  who  goes  out  surreptitiously  in  her
town,  do  not  follow  her  or  any  like  her,  do  uot  expose  thyself  to  the  experi-
ence of  what  it  costs  a  man  to  face  an  Ocean  of  which  the  bounds  are  unknown.^
The  wife  whose  husband  is  far  from  home  sends  thee  letters,  and  invites  thee  to
come  to  her  daily  when  she  has  no  witnesses ;  if  she  succeeds  in  entangling
thee  in  her  net,  it  is  a  crime  which  is  punishable  by  death  as  soon  as  it  is
known,  even  if  no  wicked  act  has  taken  place,  for  men  will  commit  every  sort
of  crime  when  under  this  temptation  alone."  *  "  Be  not  quarrelsome  in
breweries,  for  fear  tliat  thou  mayest  be  denounced  forthwith  for  words  which
have  proceeded  from  thy  mouth,  and  of  having  spoken  that  of  which  thou  art  no
longer  conscious.  Thou  fallest,  thy  members  helpless,  and  no  one  holds  out
a  hand  to  thee,  but  thy  boon-companions  around  thee  say  :  '  Away  with  the
drunkard ! '  Tliou  art  wanted  for  some  business,  and  thou  art  found  rolling
on  the  ground  like  an  infant."  ^  In  speaking  of  what  a  man  owes  to  his  mother,
Ani  waxes  eloquent :  "  When  she  bore  thee  as  all  have  to  bear,  she  had  in
thee  a  heavy  burden  without  being  able  to  call  on  thee  to  share  it.  When
thou  wert  born,  after  thy  months  were  fulfilled,  she  placed  herself  under  a
yoke  in  earnest,  her  breast  was  in  thy  mouth  for  three  years ;  in  spite  of  the
increasing  dirtiness  of  thy  habits,  her  heart  felt  no  disgust,  and  she  never  said  :
'  AVhat  is  that  I  do  here  ? '     When  tliou  didst  go  to  school   to  be  instructed  in

'  See  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  399  401.

-  This  papyrus,  now  in  the  Gizeli  Museum,  was  discovered  and  published  by  Maiuette,  Ltn
Papyrus  Egypiiem  dii  Muse'e  de  Boulaq.  vol.  i.  pis.  15-23.  It  was  translated  in  extenso  by  E.  de
KouGE,  Etude  sur  le  papyrus  du  iUutfie  de  Boulaq,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  l'Acad€mie  des  Iiiscrip-
tio7is  et  Belles-Lettres,  1872,  vol.  vii.  pp.  340-351,  and  by  Chabas,  L'^gyptologie,  vols,  i.,  ii. ;  in
part  by  Bkcgsch,  Altlijyptische  Lebensregeln  in  eincm  hieratischeii  Papyrus  des  Vice-Koniglichen
Museums  zii  Bulaq,  in  the  Ztitsclirift,  1872,  pp.  49-58;  and  finally,  without  any  new  material,
lengthily  paraphrased  by  Amelineau,  La  Morale  Egyptienne,  Quiuze  Siecles  avaiit  noire  ere,  etc. ;
the  fragments  which  I  here  quote  have  been  translated  in  the  Guide  du  Vitileur  an  Muse'e  de  Boulaq,
pp.  192-194.

^  I  have  been  obliged  to  paraphrase  the  sentence  considerably  to  render  it  intelligible  to  the
modern  reader.  Tlie  Egyptian  text  says  briefly  :  "  Do  not  know  the  man  who  braves  the  water  of
the  Ocean  whose  bounds  are  unknown."  To  know  the  man  means  liere  hnoto  the  state  of  the  man
who  does  an  action.

*  The  Moral  Papyrus  of  Bulaq.  p.  ii.  11.  13-17  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens  du  Mm^e  de
Boulaq,  vol.  i.  pi.  16 ;  Chabas,  L'L'gyptologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  55-87.

'  The  Moral  Papyrus  of  Bulaq,  p.  iii.  U.  6-11  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens  du  Musie  de
Boulaq,  vol.  i.  pi.  17;  Chabas,  L'£gyptologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  101-109.


COLLECTIONS    OF  MAXIMS   AND    MORAL    DIALOGUES.  503

writing,  she  followed  thee  every  day  with  bread  aud  beer  from  thy  house.
Now  thou  art  a  full-grown  mau,  thou  hast  taken  a  wife,  thou  hast  provided
thyself  with  a  house  ;  bear  always  in  mind  the  pains  of  thy  birth  aud  the  care
for  thy  education  that  thy  mother  lavished  on  thee,  that  her  anger  may  not
rise  up  against  thee,  aud  that  she  lift  not  her  hands  to  (lod,  for  he  will  hear
her  complaint !  "  ^  The  whole  of  the  book  does  not  rise  to  this  level,  but  we
rind  in  it  several  maxims  which  appear  to  be  popukxr  proverbs,  as  for  instance :
"He  who  hates  idleness  « ill  come  without  being  called;"  "A  good  walker
comes  to  his  journey's  end  without  needing  to  hasten;""  or,  " The  ox  which
goes  at  the  head  of  the  flock  and  leads  the  others  to  pasture  is  but  an  animal
like  his  fellows."^  Towards  the  end,  the  son  Khonshotpu,  weary  of  such  a
lengthy  exhortation  to  wisdom,  interrupts  his  father  roughly  :  "  Do  not  ever-
lastingly speak  of  thy  merits,  I  have  heard  enough  of  thy  deeds ;  "  *  whereupon
Ani  resignedly  restrains  himself  from  further  speech,  and  a  final  parable  gives
us  the  motive  of  his  resignation  :  "  This  is  the  likeness  of  the  man  who  knows
the  strength  of  his  arm.  The  nursling  who  is  in  the  arms  of  his  mother  cares
•only  for  being  suckled  ;  but  no  sooner  has  he  found  his  mouth  than  he  cries  :
'  Give  me  bread ! '  "  ^

It  is,  perhaps,  difficult  for  us  to  imagine  an  Egyptian  in  love  repeating
madrigals  to  his  mistress,^  for  we  cannot  easily  realise  that  the  hard  and
blackened  bodies  we  see  in  our  museums  have  once  been  men  and  women
loving  and  beloved  in  their  own  day.  The  feeling  which  they  entertained
one  for  another  had  none  of  the  reticence  or  delicacy  of  our  love ;  they  went
straight  to  the  point,  and  the  language  in  which  they  expressed  themselves

'  Tlie  Moral  Papyrus  of  Boulaq,  p.  vi.  1.  17,  j).  vii.  1.  o;  of.  Mabiette,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens  du
Mus^e  de  Boulaq,  vol.  i.  p.  20 ;  E.  de  Rouge,  Etude  sur  le  Papyrus  du  Musee  de  Boulaq,  p.  8  :  Chabas,
L' Hgyptoloyie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  42-54.

''  The  Moral  Papyrus,  etc.,  p.  vii.  1.  14  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Les  Papyrus  Etjypticns,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pi.  21 ;
E.  DE  Rouge,  Etude,  etc.,  p.  9;  Chabas,  L' Hgyptologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  80,  81.

■■  The  Moral  Papyrus,  etc.,  p.  viii.  1.  3;  cf.  Mabiette,  Les  Papyrus  Eijypliens,  etc.,  vul.  i.  pi.  22  ;
Chabas,  L'Eijyptoloyie,  pp.  09-101.

'  The  Moral  Paj/yrus,  etc.,  p.  i.K.  11.  7-12  ;  cf.  Makiette,  is  Papyrus  Egyptieus,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pi.  23  ;
■Chabas,  L'KgyiAologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  190-202.

'  TJie  Moral  Papyrus,  etc.,  pi.  ix.  11. 12- 17 ;  cf.  Mabiette,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pi.  23  ;
E.  DE  Rocge,  Etude,  etc.,  pp.  11,  12;  Chabas,  L'lj^gyptologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  202-211.

'  The  reinuinu  of  Egyptian  amatory  literature  have  been  collected,  translated,  and  commentated
on  by  MASPEito,  Ltudes  Egyplitnues,  vol.  i.  pp.  217-259.  They  have  been  preserved  in  two  papyri,
one  of  which  is  at  Turin  (1'lette-Rossi,  Les  Papyrus  hi^ratiques  de  Turin,  pis.  Ixxix.-lxxxii. ;  cf.
Chabas,  L'Lpisode  du  Jardin  des  Fleurs,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  of  the  Acade'mie  des  Inscriptions  et
BeUe8-L(  ttres,  1S74,  pp.  117-124,  aud  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  p.  153,  et  seq.  ;  Maspero,
Jitudta  Egyiitienues,  vol.  i.  pp.  217-230),  the  other  iu  the  British  Museum  (Goodwin,  On  Four  Songs
contained  in  an  Egyptian  Papyrus  in  the  British  Museum,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of
Biblical  Archaiology,  vol.  iii.  pp.  380-388 ;  Maspebo,  Etudes  Egyptieunes,  vol.  i.  pp.  230-250  ;  Ebman.
JEgypten  und  Jigyplischen  Leben,  pp.  518-521).  The  first  of  these  appears  to  be  a  sort  of  dialogue  in
which  the  trees  of  a  garden  boast  one  after  auothcr  of  the  beauty  of  a  woman,  and  discourse  of  the
iove-scenes  which  took  place  under  their  shadow.


504  THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.

is  sometimes  too  coarse  for  our  taste.'  The  manners  and  customs  of  daily-
life  among  the  Egyptians  tended  to  blunt  in  them  the  feelings  of  modesty
and  refinement  to  which  our  civilization  has  accustomed  us.  Their  children
went  about  without  clothes,  or,  at  any  rate,  wore  none  until  the  age  of  puberty.
Owing  to  the  climate,  both  men  and  women  left  the  upper  part  of  the  body
more  or  less  uncovered,  or  wore  fabrics  of  a  transparent  nature.  In  the  towns,
the  servants  who  moved  about  their  masters  or  his  guests  had  merely  a  narrow
loin-cloth  tied  round  their  hips ;  while  in  the  country,  the  peasants  dispensed
with  even  this  covering,  and  the  women  tucked  up  their  garments  when  at
work  so  as  to  move  more  freely.  The  religious  teaching  and  the  ceremonies
connected  with  their  worship  drew  the  attention  of  the  faithful  to  the  unveiled
human  form  of  their  gods,  and  the  hieroglyi^hs  themselves  contained  pictures
which  shock  our  sense  of  propriety.  Hence  it  came  about  that  the  young  girl
who  was  dejiianded  in  marriage  had  no  idea,  like  the  maiden  of  to-day,  of  the
vague  delights  of  an  ideal  union.  The  physical  side  was  impressed  upon  her
mind,  and  she  was  well  aware  of  the  full  meaning  of  her  consent.  Her  lover,
separated  from  her  by  her  disapproving  parents,  thus  expresses  the  grief
which  overwhelms  him  :  "  I  desire  to  lie  down  in  my  ciiamber, — for  I  am  sick
on  thy  account, — and  the  neighbours  come  to  visit  me. — Ah  !  if  my  sister  but
came  with  them, — she  would  show  the  physicians  what  ailed  me, — for  she
knows  my  sickness!"^'  Even  while  he  thus  complains,  he  sees  her  in  his
imagination,  and  his  spirit  visits  the  places  she  frequents  :  "  The  villa  of  my
sister, — (a  pool  is  before  the  house), — the  door  opens  suddenly, — and  my  sister
passes  out  in  wrath. — Ah !  why  am  I  not  the  porter, — that  she  might  give  me
her  orders  ! — I  should  at  least  hear  her  voice,  even  were  she  angry, — and  I,  like
a  little  boy,  full  of  fear  before  her !  "  ^  Meantime  the  young  girl  sighs  in  vain
for  "  her  brother,  the  beloved  of  her  heart,"  and  all  that  charmed  her  before
has  now  ceased  to  please  her.  "  I  went  to  prepare  my  snare,  my  cage  and  the
covert  for  my  trap — for  all  the  birds  of  Puanit  alight  upon  Egypt,  redolent
with  perfume ; — he  who  flies  foremost  of  the  flock  is  attracted  by  my  worm,
bringing  odours  from  Puanit, — its  claws  full  of  incense. — But  my  heart  is  with
thee,  and  desires  that  we  should  trap  them  together, — I  with  thee,  alone,  and
that  thou  shouldest  be  able  to  hear  the  sad  cry  of  my  perfumed  bird, — there
near  to  me,  close  to  me,  I  will  make  ready  my  trap, — 0  my  beautiful  friend,

'  Cf.  on  this  subject,  Maspeko,  Les  Contes  populaires  de  Vf'cfypte  Ancienne,  2ud  edit ,
pp.  liv.,  Iv.

-  Harris  Papi/rus,  No.  500,  pi.  x.  11.  9,  10  ;  cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  Jifjyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  238,  239 ;
Ekman,  yEijijpten  und  -Egypt isches  Ltben  im  Alterthum.  p.  520.  For  the  meanius;  of  the  words
"brother"  and  "sister"  in  such  eases,  see  Daion  of  Civilization,  pp.  50,  51.

'  Harris  Papyrus,  No.  500,  pi.  x.  11.  10-13;  cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  p.  239;
Ebman,  ^gypten  und  JEgyptisches  Leben  im  Alterthum,  p.  520.


LOVE-SONGS.  505

tlioii  wlio  goost  to  tlie  field  of  the  well-beloved  !  "  '  The  latter,  however,  is
slow  to  appear,  the  day  passes  away,  the  evening  comes  on  :  "  The  cry  of  the
goose  resounds — which  is  caught  by  the  worm-bait, — but  thy  love  removes
me  far  from  the  bird,  and  I  am  unable  to  deliver  myself  from  it ; — I  will  carry
off  my  net,  and  what  sliall  I  say  to  my  motiier, — when  I  shall  have  returned
to  her? — Every  day  I  come  back  laden  with  spoil, — but  to-day  I  have  not
been  able  to  set  my  trap, — for  thy  love  makes  me  its  prisoner  ! "  "  The  goose
flies  away,  alights, — it  has  greeted  the  barns  with  its  cry  ; — the  Hock  of  birds
increases  on  the  river,  but  I  leave  them  alone  and  think  only  of  thy  love, —
for  my  heart  is  bound  to  thy  heart — and  I  cannot  tear  myself  away  from  thy
beauty."  -  Her  mother  probably  gave  her  a  scolding,  but  she  hardly  minds
it,  and  in  the  retirement  of  her  chamber  never  wearies  of  thinking  of  her
brother,  and  of  passionately  crying  for  him  :  "  0  my  beautiful  friend  !  I  yearn
to  be  with  thee  as  thy  wife — and  that  thou  shouldest  go  whither  thou  wishest
with  thine  arm  upon  my  arm, — for  then  I  will  repeat  to  my  heart,  which  is  in
thy  breast,  my  supplications. — If  my  great  brother  does  not  come  to-night, — I  am
as  those  who  lie  in  the  tomb — for  thou,  art  thou  not  health  and  life, — he  who
transfers  the  joys  of  thy  health  to  my  heart  which  seeks  thee?"^  The  hours
pass  away  and  he  does  not  come,  and  already  "  the  voice  of  the  turtle-dove
speaks, — it  says :  '  Behold,  the  dawn  is  here,  alas !  what  is  to  become  of
me  ?  '  *  Thou,  thou  art  the  bird,  thou  callest  me, — and  I  find  my  brother  in
his  chamber, — and  my  heart  is  rejoiced  to  see  him ! — -I  will  never  go  away
again,  my  hand  will  remain  in  thy  hand, — and  when  I  wander  forth,  I  will  go
with  thee  into  the  most  beautiful  places, — -happy  in  that  he  makes  rae  the
foremost  of  women — and  that  he  does  not  break  my  heart."  ''  We  should  like
to  quote  the  whole  of  it,  but  the  text  is  mutilated,  and  we  are  unable  to  fill
in  the  blanks.  It  is,  nevertheless,  one  of  those  products  of  the  Egyptian  mind
which  it  would  have  been  easy  for  us  to  appreciate  from  beginning  to  end,
witiiout  effort  and  almost  without  explanation.  The  passion  in  it  finds  ex-
pression in  such  sincere  and  simple  language  as  to  render  rhetorical  ornament
needless,  and  one  can  trace  in  it,  therefore,  nothing  of  the  artificial  colouring

'  Harrie  Paiiyrun,  No.  500,  pi.  xii.  11.  2-7;  cf.  Maspeko,  l-Jtutles  £gyptiennef,  vol.  i.  pp.  243,  244;
Ekman',  JEijijpttH  und  ^Eiiyptisclii's  Lebeii,  pp.  518,  51!).

=  Harrin  Paiiyrus,  No.  500,  pi.  sii.  U.  7-11;  cf.  MasI'EKO,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  244-246;  Erman,
op.  cit.,  p.  519.

'  Harris  Papyrus,  No.  500,  pi.  xiii.  l\.  3-6;  cf.  Maspero,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  247,  248;  Erman,
op.  cit.,  p.  519.  The  expression  iu  the  first  wetse—nibit  piVu—"  mistress  of  the  house,"  which  I
translate  "  my  wife,"  is  explained  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  51,  note  5.

*  Literally,  "  Where  is  my  road?  "

'  Harris  Papyrus,  No.  500,  pi.  xiii.  11.  0-8  ;  cf.  Ma.si'EHO,  up.  cit,  vol.  i.  pp.  248,  249,  ami  Euman,
op.  cit.,  p.  519.  I''or  the  relations  of  this  love-soug  to  the  Canticles  of  Solomon,  see  Masi'eko,  up.  cit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  258,  259.


506


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE


which  would  limit  it  h>  a  particular  place  or  time.  It  translates  a  universal
sentiment  into  the  common  language  of  humanity,  and  the  hieroglyphic  groups
need  only  to  be  put  into  the  corresponding  words  of  any  modern  tongue  to  bring


^    7 '—


T     c\^  ^    A  *      Tombs         OV

— ^1  of  A  and  ,    ,         T^  vj

oMmp  oih  sill       I   '    ff  tfii  ^f.


^


X


C


^'


y


pr-


JSf°pol  sof  the

An„/xvii*<fp    -

cChcTRamaojII!


y  u  r  n  e    h


Tefnpre_.
of  Set  1"


Tombs  of  trie
";ueens  of  the


i-


Thtftnics     1V


Oruf  AmenoiheslII


7ie^^,y!4u    ■  '^gT  of'  TKTHm&is  III


THE

THEBAN

C  EIMETERIES


home  to  the  reader  their  full  force  and  intensity.  We  might  compare  it
with  those  popular  songs  which  are  now  being  collected  in  our  provinces
before  the  peasantry  have  forgotten  them  altogether :  the  artlessness  of
some  of  the  expressions,  the  boldness  of  the  imagery,  the  awkwardness  and
somewhat  abrupt  character  of  some  of  the  passages,  communicate  to  both
that  wild  charm  which  we  miss  in  the  most  perfect  specimens  of  our  modern
love-poets.

Opposite  the  Thebes  of  the  living,  Khafitnibus,  the  Thebes  of  the  dead,  had
gone  on  increasing  in  a  remarkably  rapid  manner.'     It  continued  to  extend  iu


'  See  pp.  30y-312  of  the  present  work  for  what  is  there  said  of  the  cemeteries  of  Thebes  during
the  XVIIl"' dynasty.  The  literal  meaning  of  Khalitnibiis,  "Opposite  to  its  master" — the  master
being  here  Amon  of  Karnak — was  discovered  by  Brugsch,  Uther  den  StucUnameu.  Khefti-her-neb-s,
iu  the  Zeitschrifty  1S63,  pp.  3S-10.  It  was  properly  applied  to  the  original  part  of  the  necropolis,
Qurneh,  the  Assassif  and  Drah-abu'l-Neggah,  but  it  was  .ilso  extended  so  as  to  include  the  entire
region  of  tombs.


THE   NECROPOLIS    OF   THEBES.


507


the  south-western  direction  from  the  heroic  period  of  the  XYIIl"'  dynasty
onwards,  and  all  the  eminences  and  valleys  were  gradually  appropriated  one
after  the  other  for  burying-places.  At  the  time  of  which  I  am  speaking,  this
region  formed  an  actual  town,  or  rather  a  chain  of  villages,  each  of  which  was
grouped  round  some  building  constructed  by  one  or  other  of  tlie  Pharaohs  as


THE    NECROPOLIS    OF    SHEIKH    AHI)
EL-QUENEH.'


a  funerary  chapel.  Towards  th(
north,  opposite  Karnak,  they  clustued
at  Drah-abu'1-Neggah  around  pyramid-,
of  the  first  Theban  monarehs,  at  (iiu-neh  around  the  mausolea  of  Ramses  I.
and  Seti  I.,  and  at  Sheikh  Abd  el-Qurneli  they  lay  near  the  Auienopheum
and  the  Pamonkaniqimit,  or  Ramesseum  built  by  Ramses  11.^  Towards  the
south  tliey  diminished  in  number,  tombs  and  monuments  becoming  fewer  and
appearing  at  wider  intervals ;  the  Migdol  of  Ramses  III.  formed  an  isolated
suburb,  tliat  of  Azamit,  at  Medinet-Habu :  ^  the  chapel  of  Isis,  constructed  by
Amenothes,  son  of  Hapu,  formed  a  rallying-point  for  the  huts  of  the  hamlet  of
Karka  ;  ■*  and  in  the  far  distance,  in  a  wild  gorge  at  the  extreme  limit  of  human
habitations,  the  queens  of  the  Ramesside  line  slept  their  last  sleep.   Each  of  these

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograph  by  13eato.

'  For  information  on  the  royal  lemplea,  seo  pp.  382,  .383,  419  of  the  present  work  for  (jurneh,
pp.  310-312  for  the  Amenopheum,  and  pp.  419-421  for  the  Eamesseum.  The  name  of  the  Raiuesseum
was  found  in  the  ontraca  by  Wieijemann,  Ei/i  Fund  Thebanisclur  Ostralia,  in  tlie  Zeituchrifl,  18U3,  p.  34.

'  The  name  was  transcribed  in  Greek  with  the  masculine  article  Pa,  Pasemis;  in  Coptic,  Siime,
Sime  (Bkugsch,  Gimjr.  Ins.,  vol.  i.  pp.  185,  180,  and  Vict.  Giog.,  pp.  988-991;  cf.  Goodwin,  Topo-
graiihicAiV  Notes  /mm  Coptic  Papijri,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  18(18,  p.  75,  where  the  identification  of  the
Coptic  with  the  hieroglyphic  name  was  made  for  the  first  time,  as  far  as  I  am  aware).

'  The  village  of  Karka  or  Kaka  was  identified  by  Brugsch  with  the  hamlet  of  Deir  el-Medineh
(Der  Tempel  von  Dir  el-Me.dineh,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  1870,  p.  127);  the  founder  of  the  temple  was  none
other  than  Amenothes,  who  was  minister  under  Amenothes  III. ;  see  pp.  299,  301,  448,  449  of  tho
present  work.


508  THE    CLOSE    OF    THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

temples  had  around  it  its  enclosing  wall  of  dried  brick,^  and  the  collection
of  buildings  within  this  boundary  formed  the  Khirii,  or  retreat  of  some  one
of  the  Theban  Pharaohs,  which,  in  the  official  language  of  the  time,  was
designated  the  "august  Khiru  of  millions  of  years."-  A  sort  of  fortified
structure,  which  was  built  into  one  of  the  corners,  served  as  a  place  of  deposit
for  the  treasure  and  archives,  and  could  be  used  as  a  prison  if  occasion
required.^  The  remaining  buildings  consisted  of  storehouses,  stables,  and
houses  for  the  priests  and  other  officials.  In  some  cases  the  storehouses  were
constructed  on  a  regular  plan  -which  the  architect  had  fitted  in  with  that
of  the  temple.  Their  ruins  at  the  back  and  sides  of  the  Kamesseum  form  a
double  row  of  vaults,  extending  from  the  foot  of  the  hills  to  the  border  of  the
cultivated  lands.  Stone  recesses  on  the  roof  furnished  shelter  for  the  watch-
men.* The  outermost  of  the  village  huts  stood  among  the  nearest  tombs.  The
population  which  had  been  gathered  together  there  was  of  a  peculiar  character,
and  we  can  gather  but  a  feeble  idea  of  its  nature  from  the  surroundings  of  the
cemeteries  in  our  own  great  cities.  Death  required,  in  fact,  far  more  attendants
among  the  ancient  Egyptians  than  with  us.  The  first  service  was  that  of  mummi-
fication, which  necessitated  numbers  of  workers  for  its  accomplishment.  Some
of  the  workshops  of  the  embalmers  have  been  discovered  from  time  to  time  at
Sheikh  Abd  el-Qurneh  and  Deir  el-Bahart,  but  we  are  still  in  ignorance  as  to
their  arrangements,  and  as  to  the  exact  nature  of  the  materials  which  they  em-
ployed.^ A  considerable  superficial  space  was  required,  for  the  manipulations  of
the  embalmers  occupied  usually  from  sixty  to  eighty  days,  and  if  we  suppose  that
the  average  deaths  at  Thebes  amounted  to  fifteen  or  twenty  in  the  twenty-four
hours,  they  would  have  to  provide  at  the  same  time  for  the  various  degrees  of  satu-
ration of  some  twelve  to  fifteen  hundred  bodies  at  the  least."  Each  of  the  corjises,
moreover,  necessitated  the  employment  of  at  least  half  a  dozen  workmen  to  wash

'  For  a  boundary  wall  at  Qurueli,  and  another  at  Jledinet-Habu,  see  Jollois-Devilliers,  Description
des  Buines  de  Qournali,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  349,  350,  and  Idem  ,  Description  des
edifices,  etc.,  de  Me'diutt-Abu,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egyple,  vol.  iii.  pp.  42,  43.

*  Birch,  Le  Papyrus  Abbott,  in  tho  Itevuc  Arcii^ologique,  lS.i9,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  2G3,  2G4 ;  Chabas-
LiEBLEiN,  Deux  Papyrus  hieratiques  du  Musge  de  Turin,  p.  12,  et  seq.,  and  Melanges  Egyptologiques,
3rd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  53,  note  3,  and  Maspero,  Une  EnquHe  judiciaire  it  Tlubes,  p.  59,  et  seq.

^  This  was  tile  liliatmu,  the  dungeon,  frequently  mentioned  in  the  documents  bearing  upon  the
necropolis  (Pleyte-Rossi,  Ijcs  Papyrus  hieratiques  de  Turin,  pis.  xlii.  1.  7,  .xlviii.  1.  23,  etc.).

*  Jollois-Devilliers,  Description  du  tombeaud'Osyinandyas,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  ii.
pp.  268-270,  and  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  24,  co.ordinate  2.  Tlie  discovery  of  quantities  of  ostraca  iu  the
ruins  of  tbese  chamberssliowstiiat  they  served  partly  for  cellars  (Wiedemann,  Ein  Fund  Tliebanischer
Ostraca,  in  tlie  Zeitsclirift,  1SS3,  pp  33-35;  cf.  pp.  419-421  of  the  present  work).

'  The  methods  of  embalming  among  the  Egyptians  have  been  studied  during  the  present  century
by  RoCYER,  Notice  sur  les  embaumemcnts,  etc.,  in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  vi.  pp.  461-487,  and
especially  by  Pettigrew,  History  of  Egyptian  Mummies,  4to,  1834,  where  there  is  a  resume oi  previous
treatises.  For  Theban  burials,  see  Bidge,  Tiie  Mummy,  Chapters  on  Egyptian  Funereal  An-liieology,  1S93.

"  I  have  formed  luy  estimate  of  fifteen  to  twenty  deaths  per  day  Irom  the  mortality  of  Cairo  during
the  French  occupation.  This  is  given  by  E.  Desgenettes,  Tables  necrologiques  du  Kaire  pendant
les  annees  VII.,  VIII,  et  IX.  {nOS,  1799,  ISuO,  ISOl),  in  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  229-
2t)(j,  but  only  approximately,  as  many  deaths,  especially  of  females,  must  iiave  been  concealed  tVom
the  authorities;   I  have,  however,  made  an  average  from  the  totals,  and  applied  the  rate  of  morlalily


HEAD    OF    A    THEBAN    MUMMY.^


THE  MUMMIES.

it,  cut  it  open,  soak  it,  dry   it,  and  apply

the   usual    bandages   before  placing   the

amulets  upon    the  cauouically  prescribed

places,  and  using  the  conventional  prayers.

There  was  fastened  to  the  breast,  imme-
diately below  the  neck,  a  stone  or  green

porcelain  scarab,  containing  an  inscription

which  was  to  be  efficacious  in  preventing

the  heart,  "  his  heart  which  came  to  him

from  his  mother,  his  heart  from  the  time

he  was  upon  the  earth,"  from  rising  up  and

witnessing  against  the  dead  man  before  the

tribunal  of  Osiris.^     There  were  placed  on

his  fingers   gold   or   enamelled   rings,  as

talismans  to  secure  for  him  the  true  voice.^

The    body   becomes   at   last   little    more

than  a  skeleton,  with  a  covering  of  yellow

skin  which  accentuates  the  anatomical  details,  but  the  head,  on  the  other
hand,  still  preserves,  where  the  operations  have  been  properly  conducted,  its
natural  form.  Tiie  cheeks  have  fallen  in  slightly,  the  lips  and  the  flesliy
parts  of  the  nose  have  become  thinner  and  more  drawn  than  during  life,  but
the  general  expression  of  the  face  remains  unaltered.*  A  mask  of  pitch  was
placed  over  the  visage  to  preserve  it,  above  which  was  adjusted  first  a  piece  of
linen  and  then  a  series  of  bands  impregnated  with  resin,  which  increased  the
size  of  tlie  head  to  twofold  its  ordinary  bulk.^      The  trunk  and  limbs  were

tlius  obtained  to  ancient  Thebe8.  The  same  result  follows  from  calculations  based  on  more  recent
figures,  obtained  before  the  great  hygienic  changes  introduced  into  Cairo  by  Ismail  Pacha,  i.e.  from
August  1, 1858,  to  July  31,  1859  (Schnefi',  Considerations  surle  mouvement  He  la  population  en  Sgyple,
in  the  iUmoires  de  I'Institiit  Egyptien,  vol.  i.  p.  544),  and  from  May  24,  1865,  to  May  16,  1866  (Cn.
Edmoxd,  L'Egypte  a  VExposition  Vnivermlle  de  18G7,  Svo,  Paris,  1867),  and  lor  tlie  two  years  Irom
April  2,  1869,  to  March  21,  1870,  and  from  April  2,  1870,  to  March  21,  1871  {Statistiqii.e  de  t'Egypte,
vol.  ii.  p.  94,  vol.  iii.  p.  116).

'  The  manipulations  and  prayers  were  prescribed  in  the  "  Book  of  Embalming,"  see  Maspeiiu,
iUmoires  sur  ijueiqnes  Pajnjrus  du  Louvre,  pp.  14-104.  For  the  scarabs,  see  Bikch,  On  Formulas
relating  to  the  Heart,  iu  the  Zeitsehrift,  1866,  pp.  89-92,  and  1867,  pp.  16,  17,  51-5G;  of.  MaspeuO,
Guide  du  Vixileur,  pp.  228-230,  and  Budge,  Tlie  Mummy,  etc.,  pp.  234-240.

■  The  Ceremonies  and  formulae  connected  with  this  ring,  "the  riug  of  the  true  voice,"  are  given
in  Masi'eho,  M^mnires  sur  quelques  I'apyrus  du  Louvre,  pp.  33-35.  Tlie  prescribed  gold  ring  was
often  replaced  by  one  of  blue  or  green  enamel.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Emil  Drugsch  Bey  ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Momies  royals,
etc.,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pi.  xviii.  is.     It  is  the  head  of  the  sciibe  Nibsoni.

'  See  the  heads  of  the  following:  Set!  1.  (pi.  1  of  the  present  work),  Kamses  II.  (]>.  429  of  the
present  work),  those  of  the  three  Thiitmnses  (ibid.,  pp.  242,  243,  290).  These,  it  is  true,  were  royal
mummies,  but  the  mummies  of  ordinary  citizens  were  no  less  carefully  treated,  and  Jomard  has
already  pointed  out  the  contrast  betweeu  llie  appearance  of  the  head  and  that  of  the  body  {1)( seription
des  Ilypoijfes  de  la  viUe  de  Theties,  in  the  Deseription  de  I'Kgypte,  vo!.  iii.  pp.  77-84).

°  This  was  the  case  in  regard  to  the  mummies  of  Alimosis,  Thutmosis  III.,  Ramses  III,,  and
Seti  I.  (MasI'EKO,  T-ies  Momii'S  royales  de  Deir  el-haliari,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Missian  Fravraise,
vol.  i.  ))]p.  ^3i>,  555,  565).     Those  of  Kamses  II.  and  of  Thiitmosis  I.  ami  H.  had  no  masks.


510


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    TBEBAN  EMPIRE.


TUli    MANl'FACTtliE    ANll    I'AlSTINl,    Ul     TllK    CAliTONXACjE.'

bound  round  with  a  first  covering  of  some  pliable  soft  stuff,  warm  to  the  touch.
Coarsely  powdered  natron  was  scattered  here  and  there  over  the  body  as  an
additional  preservative.  Packets  placed  between  the  legs,  the  arms  and  the
hips,  and  in  the  eviscerated  abdomen,  contained  the  heart,  spleen,  the  dried
brain,  tlie  hair,  and  the  cuttings  of  the  beard  and  nails.  In  those  days  the  hair
had  a  special  magical  virtue :  by  burning  it  while  uttering  certain  incantations,
one  might  acquire  an  almost  limitless  power  over  the  person  to  whom  it  had
belonged.  The  embalmers,  therefore,  took  care  to  place  with  the  mummy  such
portions  of  the  hair  as  they  had  been  obliged  to  cut  off,  so  as  to  remove  them
out  of  the  way  of  the  perverse  ingenuity  of  the  sorcerers.^  Over  the  first
covering  of  the  mummy  already  alluded  to,  there  was  sometimes  placed  a  strip
of  papyrus  or  a  long  piece  of  linen,  upon  which  the  scribe  had  transcribed
selections — both  text  and  pictures — -from  "  The  Book  of  the  going  forth
by  Day : "  in  such  cases  the  roll  containing  the  whole  work  was  placed
between  the  legs.^  The  body  was  further  wrapped  in  several  bandages,
then  in  a  second  piece  of  stuff,  then  in  more  bands,  the  whole  being  finally
covered  with  a  shroud  of  coarse  canvas  and  a  red  linen  wiuding-slieet,  sewn
together  at  the  back,  and  kept  in  place  by  transverse  bands  disposed  at  intervals
from  head  to  foot.  The  son  of  the  deceased  and  a  "  man  of  the  roll "  were
present  at  this  lugubrious  toilet,  and  recited  at  the  application  of  each  piece
a  prayer,  in  which  its  object  was  defined  'and  its  duration  secured."'  Every
Egyptian  was  supposed  to  be  acquainted  with  the  formulae,  from  having  learned


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  Kosellini,  Monument!  Civili,  pi.  cxxvi.  4,  5.

=  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  274 ;  this  whole  description  is  based  on  the  royal
mummies  of  Deir  el-Baliari,  and  some  score  of  other  Theban  mummies  of  the  XX"'  or  XXI"  dynasty
discovered  from  1881  to  1886.

'  At  Deir  el-Bahart  a  strip  of  papyrus  was  found  on  the  mummies  of  Pinozmii  and  Zodphtahau-
fonkhfi  respectively  (Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales,  etc.,  in  the  Mgmoires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,
vol.  i.  pp.  572,  573,  574),  and  inscribed  pieces  of  linen  on  those  of  Thfttmosis  III.  and  the  Princess
MarStamon  (ibid.,  pp.  539,  548).

*  This  is  to  be  seen  from  the  numerous  rubrics  inserted  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  (Lepsitjs,  Todten-
huch,  i.  11.  22-24,  xv.  11.  47-49,  xviii.  11.  39,  40,  Ixx.  1.  3,  Ixxii.  11.  9-11,  cxxxv.  1.  4,  cxxxvi.  II.  11-15,
cxliv.  11.  31-35,  cxli.  U.  4-7,  clxii.  II.  12,  13).


THE   FUNEliAL    OF  A    lilCIl   MAN.  .ill


WKAPPING   OP    THE   MUMMY,    fNDEU    THE    DIKECTIOX    UP    THE    "  MAN    OP    THE    ROLL."  '

them  during  his  lifetime,  by  which  he  was  to  have  restored  to  him  the  use  of
his  limbs,  and  be  protected  from  the  dangers  of  the  worki  beyond.  These  were
repeated  to  the  dead  person,  however,  for  greater  security,  during  the  pi-ocess
of  embalming,  and  the  son  of  the  deceased,  or  the  master  of  the  ceremonies,.
took  care  to  whisper  to  the  mummy  the  most  mysterious  parts,  which  no  living
ear  might  hear  with  impunity.^  The  wrappings  having  been  completed,  the
deceased  person  became  aware  of  his  equipment,  and  enjoyed  all  the  privileges
of  the  "  instructed  and  fortified  Manes.'"  He  felt  himself,  both  mummy  and
double,  now  ready  for  the  tomb.

Egyptian  funerals  were  not  lii<e  those  to  which  we  are  accustomed — mute
ceremonies,  in  which  sorrow  is  barely  expres.sed  by  a  furtive  tear:  noise,
sobbings,  and  wild  gestures  were  their  necessary  concomitants.''  Not  only  was
it  customary  to  hire  weeping  women,  who  tore  their  hair,  filled  the  air  with
their  lamentations,  and  simulated  by  skilful  actions  the  depths  of  despair,  but
the  relatives  and  friends  themselves  did  not  shrink  from  making  an  outward
show  of  their  grief,  nor  from  disturbing  the  equanimity  of  the  passers-by  by  the
immoderate  expressions  of  their  sorrow.  One  after  another  they  raised  their
voices,  and  uttered  some  expression  appropriate  to  the  occasion  :  "  To  the  West,
the  dwelling  of  Osiris,  to  the  West,  thou  who  wast  the  best  of  men,  and  who
always  hated  guile."  ^  And  the  hired  weepers  answered  in  chorus  :  "  0  chief,"'
as  thou  goest  to  the  West,  the  gods  themselves  lament." "  The  funeral  cortege
started  in  the  morning  from  the   house  of  mourning,  and  proceeded  at  a  slow

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Ro.sellini,  Monumenti  Civili,  p\.  oxxvi.  2,  3.

•  See  ae  to  thu  "equipped  Manes"  and  tlie  "instructed  Manes,"  Dawn,  of  Civilization,  p.  18:i.

'  The  arrangements  in  regard  to  burials  were  studied  for  the  first  time  after  Wilkinson,  Manners-
and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  jip.  127-492,  by  Maspeiio,  Eludes  Kgijptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  81-191,  and
Lectures  Historiques,  pp.  140-K!(»;  afterwards  by  Bpdoe,  The  Mammy,  Chapters  on  Egyptian  Funereal
Archieology,  pp.  l.">3-173.

*  Formula  taken  from  the  scene  of  a  burial  in  tlie  tomb  of  Rai  (Champollion,  Monuments,  etc.,
pis.  clxxvii.,  clxxviii.,  and  vol,  i.  pp.  TAi,  545;  Ro.sellini,  Monumenti  Civili,  pis.  exxviii.,  cxxix.).

♦  The  "chief"  is  one  of  the  names  of  Osiris  (Maspero,  M^moirct  sur  qneli^ues  papyrus  du  Louvre,
pp.  11,  12,  and  Ktudes  Egyptitnnes,  vol.  i.  pp.  172,  u.  2.  179,  n.  1),  and  is  applied  naturally  to  the  deail
person,  who  has  become  an  Osiris  by  virtue  of  tlie  embalming ;  cf.  bawn  of  Ciuilizalion,  p.  17S,  et  seq.

°  From  an  inscription  on  the  tomb  of  Harlvliamiti  at  Memphis  (Makiettk,  Mon.  divers,  pi.  GO).


5]  2


THE    CLOSE    OF    TEE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.


pace  to  the  Nile,  amid  the  clamours  of  the  mourners.  The  route  was  cleared
by  a  number  of  slaves  and  retainers.  First  came  those  who  carried  cakes  and
flowers  in  their  hands,  followed  by  others  bearing  jars  full  of  water,  bottles  of
liqueurs,  and  phials  of  jjerfumes ;  then  came  those  who  carried  painted  boxes
intended  for  the  provisions  of  the  dead  man,  and  for  containing  the  TJshabtiu,  or
"  Eespondents."  The  succeeding  group  bore  the  usual  furniture  required  by
the  deceased  to  set  up  house  again,  coffers  for  linen,  folding  and  arm  chairs.


THE    FUNERAL    OP    HAUMHABI.'


state-beds,  and  sometimes  even  a  caparisoned  chariot  with  its  quivers.  Then
came  a  groom  conducting  two  of  his  late  master's  favourite  horses,  who,  having
accompanied  the  funeral  to  the  tomb,  were  brought  back  to  their  stable.
Another  detachment,  more  numerous  than  the  others  combined,  now  filed  past,
bearing  the  effects  of  the  mummy  ;  first  the  vessels  for  the  libations,  then  the  cases
for  the  Canopic  jars,  then  the  Canopic  jars  themselves,  the  mask  of  the  deceased,
coloured  half  in  gold  and  half  in  blue,  arms,  sceptres,  military  batons,  necklaces,
scarabs,  vultures  with  encircling  wings  worn  on  the  breast  at  festival-times,
■chains, "  Eespondents,"  and  the  human-headed  sparrow-hawk,  the  emblem  of  the
soul.  Many  of  these  objects  were  of  wood  plated  with  gold,  others  of  the  same
material  simply  gilt,  and  others  of  solid  gold,  and  thus  calculated  to  excite  the
cupidity  of  the  crowd.  Offerings  came  next,  then  a  noisy  company  of  female
weepers  ;  then  a  slave,  who  sprinkled  at  every  instant  some  milk  upon  the
ground  as  if  to  lay  the  dust ;  then  a  master  of  the  ceremonies,  who,  the  panther
skin  upon  his  shoulder,  asperged  the  crowd  with  perfumed  water ;  and  behind

'  Drawu  by  Fauclier  Gudin,  from  the  coloured  print  in  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd
«dit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvi. ;  cf.  BoritiANT,  Le  Tombeau  d'Harmhabi,  in  the  M^inoires  de  la  Mission
Fran^aise,  vol.  v.  pi.  v.     The  left  side  of  this  design  fits  on  to  the  right  of  tlie  following  cut.


inE  pnocESSiON  of  offerings  and  funebart  furniture.     513

him  comes  the  hearse.  Tlie  littt(;r,  according  to  custom,  was  made  iu  the  form
of  a  boat — representing  tlie  bark  of  Osiris,  with  his  ark,  and  two  guardians,
Isis  and  Nephthys — and  was  phiced  upon  a  sledge,  which  was  drawn  by  a  team
of  oxen  and  a  rehiv  of  fellahiii.     The  sides  of  the  ark  were,  as  a  rule,  formed


THE    FUNEllAI,    OF    HAR-MHABJ.'

of  movable  wooden  panels,  decorated  with  pictures  and  inscriptions  ;  sometimes,
however,  but  more  rarely,  the  panels  were  replaced  by  a  covering  of  em-
broidered stutt'  or  of  soft  leather.  In  the  latter  case  the  decoration  was
singularly  rich,  the  figures  and  hieroglyphs  being  cut  out  with  a  knife,  and
the  spaces  thus  left  filled  in  with  pieces  of  coloured  leather,  which  gave
the  whole  an  appearance  of  brilliant  mosaic-work.^  In  place  of  a  boat,  a
shrine  of  painted  wood,  also  mounted  upon  a  sledge,  was  frequently  used.
When  the  ceremony  was  over,  this  was  left,  together  with  the  coftin,  in
the  fomb.8  The  wife  and  cliildren  walked  as  close  to  the  bier  as  possible,
and  were  followed  by  the  friends  of  the  deceased,  dressed  in  long  linen
garments,*  each  of  them  bearing  a  wand.     The  ox-driver,  while  goading  his

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Guiliii,  after  a  coloured  print  in  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2ud
edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Isvi ;  cf.  Boumant,  Tomheati  d' narmhahi,  in  the  Mgmoires  de  la  Musioii  Frangaise,
vol.  V.  pi.  V.     This  cut  joins  on  to  the  left  of  (hat  on  tho  precedin<;  page.

'  One  of  these  coverings  wa.s  found  in  the  hiiling-place  at  Deir  el-Bahaii;  it  had  belonged  to  the
Princess  Isimlihobiu,  whose  mummy  is  now  at  Gizeh  (Maspeuo,  Guide  du  Visiteur,  pp.  327,  32S,
So.  3221).  It  was  reproduced,  uncoloured,  by  Ma.speuo,  Les  ilomis  royales,  in  the  3Uinoires  de  la
Mission  Frangaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  .')34-.589,  and  Arcli^oloyie  Fgyptienne,  pp.  203-2S4 ;  iu  colours  by
Vii.i,iKit3  Stuaut,  The  Funeral  Tent  of  an  Egyptian  Queen,  lSS2,and  Eijypt  after  the  War.  pi.  i.  I  a  2,
and  in  E.  Bhugsch,  Tm  Tente  Fun^raire  de  la  rrincesse  Isimldieh.  pis.  iii.-vii.

»  I  found  in  the  tomb  of  Sonnozmi'i  (Masi-ero,  Etudis  de  Mythologie,  etc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  227-229)  two
of  these  sledges  with  the  superstructure  in  the  form  of  a  temple.  They  are  now  in  the  Gizeh
Museum  (Toda,  Sonnot'em  en  Tehas,  Inventariu  y  Texlos  de  uu  Sepulcro  Egipcio  de  la  A'.V"  Dinastia,
pp.  22,  23,  24 ;  ViHEY,  Notice  des  principaux  monuments  exposes  au  Muse'e  de  Gizeh,  Nos.  1251,
12.59,  pp.  320,  321).

*  The  whole  of  this  description  is  taken  Irom  the  pictures  representing  the  interment  of  a  certain
lliirrnhabi,  who  died  at  Thebes  in  the  time  of  Thutmosis  IV.     Wilkinson  reproduced  the  whole  of

2l


514


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.


THE    BOAT    CAKKVIXG    THE    MUllMY.


beasts,  cried  out  to  them  :  "  To  the  West,  ye  oxen  who  draw  the  hearse,  to  the
West !  Yonr  master  comes  behind  you  !  "  "  To  the  West,"  the  friends  repeated  ;
"  the  excellent  man  lives  no  longer  who  loved  truth  so  dearly  and  hated  lying  !  "  ^
This  lamentation  is  neitlier  remarkable  for  its  originality  nor  for  its  depth  of
feeling.  Sorrow  was  expressed  on  such  occasions  in  prescribed  formulaj  of
always  the  same  import,  custom  soon  enabling  each  individual  to  compose  for

himself  a  repertory  of
monotonous  exclama-
tions of  condolence,  of
which  the  prayer,  "To
the  West ! "  formed  the
basis,  relieved  at  inter-
vals by  some  fresh  epi-
thet. The  nearest  rela-
tives of  the  deceased,
however,  would  find  some
more  sincere  expressions
of  grief,  and  some  more
touching  appeals  with
which  to  break  in  upon  the  commonplaces  of  tiie  conventional  theme.  They
blended  with  their  inarticulate  cries,  and  the  usual  protestations  and  formula,
an  eulogy  upon  the  deceased  and  his  virtues,  allusions  to  his  disposition  and
deeds,  mention  of  the  offices  and  honours  he  had  obtained,  and  reflections  on
the  uncerlainty  of  human  life — the  whole  forming  the  melancholy  dirge
which  each  generation  intoned  over  its  predecessor,  while  waiting  itself  for
the  same  office  to  be  said  over  it  in  its  turn.'*

On  reaching  the  bank  of  the  Nile  the  funeral  cortege  proceeded  to  embark.^
The  bearers  of  otrerings,  friends,  and  slaves  passed  over  on  hired  barges,  whose
cabins,  covered  externally  with  embroidered  stuffs  of  several  colours,  or  with

(hem  to  illustrate  his  cliapter  on  Egyptian  funerals  (Mi)Miers  and  Customs,  ^uil  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvi.,
and  pp.  444-440),  and  also  Bouriant  (Tomhcau  de  Harmhahi,  pi.  v.,  in  tlie  ilimoires  dc  la  Mission
Fran^aise,  vol.  v.  p.  431).

'  These  expressions  lire  taken  from  the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb  of  Rai  (Cuampollion,  Monu-
ments de  I'Egypte,  etc.,  pis.  clxxvii.,  elxxviii.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  544,  545 ;  Eusellini,  Monumeuii  Cicili,
jjIs.  cxxviii.,  exxix).

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  pictures  in  the  tomb  of  Notirhotpu  at  Thebes;  of.  Wilkin.'^on,
Planners  and  Customs,  2n(i  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvii. ;  Chamfolliox,  Monuments  de  VKgijpte,  pi.  clxxiii.  2  ;
RosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Givili,  pi.  cxxxi.  2  ;  Dimichen,  Die  Flotte  einer  .JSgijptisclien  Konitjin,  pi.  xxx.

'  Maspero,  Eludes  Egypliemies,  vol.  i.  pp.  81,  S2,  117,  118.

*  The  description  of  this  seconil  pait  of  the  funeral  arrangements  is  taken  from  tlie  tomb  of
llarmbabl  (Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2ud  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvi.,  and  Bouri.\nt,  'I'omhcau  de
Harmhahi,  in  the  M€moires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  v.  pi.  v.),  and  especially  from  tluit  of
Nofirhotpu  (Wilkinson,  op.  cit.,  2ud  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvii. ;  Champoli.ion,  op.  ci<.,pl8.clxxii.,  clxxiii.
clxxvii.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  547.  518;  Rosellini,  Monumenti  Civili,  pis.  cxxx  ,  cxxxi.;  Dimicuen,  Die
Flotte  einer  -Iigyptisclien  Konitjin,  ]d.  xxx.).


TBE   CROSSING    OF   THE  NILE.


515


■appliqiii-  leather,  looked  like  the  pedestals  of  a  monument :  crammed  together  on
the  boats,  fhey  stood  upright  nitli  their  faces  turned  towards  the  funeral  bark.


THE    BOATS    COXTAIMXCi    THE    FEMALE    WEEIEKS    AXIl    THE    I'EMl'LE    OF    THE    HULSEHOLIl.'

The  latter  was  supposed   to  represent  the   Noshemit,  the  mysterious  skiff  of
Abydos,  whioli  had  been  used  iu  the  obsequies  of  Osiris  of  yore.    It  was  elegant,


THE    IIOATS    (.UNTAIXI.NG    THE   FKIKNUS    AXU    THE    FLNEllAUY    FUliNITEUE."

light,  and  slender  in  shape,  and  ornamented  at  bow  and  stern  with  a  lotus-flower
of  metal,  which  bent  back  its  head  gracefully,  as  if  bowed  down  by  its  own
weight.     A  temple-shaped  shrine  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  boat,  adorned  with

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  paintiuRs  on  tlie  tomb  ofXofirbotpii  at  Thebos  (cf.  Wilkinson,
Munnere  and  Cnstnme,  2m\  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvii. ;  Chamfollion,  Mwiuments  de  I'Jigijpte,  pi.  clx.\iii.  3  ;
UosELi.iN'1,  Monunvmii  Civili,  pi.  cx.xx.  1,  2;  Dl'miciie.v,  Die  Ftulle,  etc.,  pi.  xxx.).

"  Drawn  by  Fuucbcr-fiuilii.,  from  paiutin;,'9  on  Ibe  tomb  of  Xolirbotpu  at  Tliebes  ;  cf  Wilkinson,
op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvii.:  CiiAsiroLLiox,  op.  cii.,  pi.  clxxii.  2;  IIosellini,  oj-.  rit.,  pi.  cxxx.  1;
Dlmicue.s,  op.  cit.,  pi.  xxx.


5i(;


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN   EMPIRE.


A   COKNEE   OF   THE   THEBAN   NECKOPOLIS.^


bouquets  of  flowers  aud  with  green  palm-branches.  The  female  members  of
the  fomily  of  the  deceased,  crouched  beside  the  shrine,  poured  fortli  lamen-
tations, while  two  priestesses,  representing  respectively  Isis  and  Nephthys,
took  up  positions  behind  to  protect  the  body.  The  boat  containing  the  female
mourners  having  taken  the  funeral  barge  in  tow,  the  entire  flotilla  pushed  out
into  the  stream.  This  was  tiie  solemn  moment  of  the  ceremony— the  moment
in  which  the  deceased,  torn  away  from  his  earthly  city,  was  about  to  set  out
upon  that  voyage  from  which  there  is  no  return.  The  crowds  assembled  on
the  banks  of  the  river  hailed  the  dead  with  tlieir  parting  prayers:  "Mayest
thou  reach  in  peace  the  West  from  Thebes  !  In  peace,  in  peace  towards  Abydos,
mayst  thou  descend  in  peace  towards  Abydos,  towards  the  sea  of  the  West ! "  ^

This    crossing    of    the
Nile  was  of  special  sig-
nificance   in    regard    to
the  future  of   the    soul
of  the  deceased:  it  re-
presented his  pilgrimage
towards  Abydos,  to  the
"Mouth  of  the  Cleft"  which  gave  him  access  to  the  other  world,  and  it  was
for  this  reason  that  the  name  of  Abydos  is  associated  with  that  of  Thebes  in
the  exclamations  of  the  crowd.^     The  voices  of  the  friends  replied  frequently
aud  mournfully:  "To  the  West,  to  the  West,  the  land  of  the  justified!     The
place  which  thou  lovedst  weeps  and  is  desolate !  "     Then  the  female  mourners
took  up  the  refrain,  sayiug :  "  In  peace,  in  peace,  to  the  West !  0  honourable
one,  go  in  peace  !     If  it  please  God,  when  the  day  of  Eternity  shall  shine,  we
shall  see  thee,  for  behold  thou  goest  to  the  land   which  mingles  all   men
together ! "     The  widow  then  adds  lier  note  to  the  concert  of  lamentations  r
"  0  my  brother,  0  my  husband,  O  my  beloved,  rest,  remain  in  thy  place,  do
not  depart  from  the  terrestrial  spot  where  thou  art !     Alas,  thou  goest  away
to  the  ferry-boat  in  order  to  cross  the  stream  !     O  sailors,  do  not  hurry,  leave
him ;  you,  you  will  return  to  your  homes,  but  he,  he  is  going  away  to  tlie  land
of  Eternity !     O  Osirian  bark,  why  hast  thou  come  to  take  away  from  me  iiim
who  has  left  me  !  "*     The  sailors  were,  of  course,  deaf  to  her  appeals,  and  the

•  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvi.,  and  Champollion,  Monunu-nts
(le  VEgypte,  toI.  i.  p.  835.

2  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  stele  in  the  Gizeh  Bluseum ;  cf.  MAraEXTE,  Notices  dea
piincipaux  ^ronuments,  1S64,  p.  137,  and  Album 2ihotographique  duMus^e  deBoulaq,  pi.  14;  Maspero,
Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Tmvanx,  vol.  ii.  pis.  106,  107 ;  Perrot-
Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  i.  p.  307.  Another  representation  of  a  similar'character
is  in  the  Turin  Museum  ;  Maspero,  op.  cit..  in  the  Ttecueil  de  Travaua;  vol.  ii.  plates  on  pp   lOU,  107.

'  The  significance  of  the  crossing  of  the  Nile,  and  the  mystic  meaning  of  the  voyage  toward*


Abydos,  were  pointed  out  by  Maspero,  J^:tudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  p.  118,  et  seq.
'  Wilkinson,  op.  cit.,  vol.  Iii.  pi.  Ixvii. :  cf.  Maspero,  Htudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.


pp.  134-139.


THE  FUNERARY  CHAPEL  AND  THE  FAREWELL  TO  THE  DECEASED,     f)!/

mummy  pursued  its  undisturbed  course  towards  the  last  stage  of  its  mysterious
voyage.

The  majority  of  the  tombs — those  which  were  distributed  over  the  plain  or
<ju  the  nearest  spurs  of  the  hill — were  constructed  on  the  lines  of  those  brick-
built  pyramids  erected  on  mastabas  which  were  very  common  during  the
■early  Theban  dynasties.^  The  relative  proportions  of  the  parts  alone  were
modified:  the  mastaba,  wliich  had  gradually  been  reduced  to  an  insignificant
base,  had  now  recovered  its  original  height,  while  the  pyramid  had  cor-
respondingly decreased,  and  was   much  reduced  in  size.      The    chapel    was


THE   FAREWELL    TO    TUE    MVMMY,    AND    THE    DOUBLE    RECEIVED    BY   THE    GODDESS."

constructed  within  the  building,  and  the  mummy-pit  was  sunk  to  a  varying
depth  below.  The  tombs  ranged  along  the  mountain-side  were,  on  the  other
hand,  rock-cut,  and  similar  to  those  at  el-Bersheh  and  Beni-liasan.^  The
heads  of  wealthy  families  or  the  nobility  naturally  did  not  leave  to  the  last
moment  the  construction  of  a  sepulchre  worthy  of  their  rank  and  fortune.
They  prided  themselves  on  having  "  finished  their  house  which  is  in  the  funeral
valley  when  the  morning  fur  the  hiding  away  of  their  body  should  come."  *
Access  to  these  tombs  was  by  too  steep  and  difficult  a  path  to  allow  of  oxen
being  employed  for  the  transport  of  the  mummy  :  the  friends  or  slaves  of  the
deceased  were,  therefore,  obliged  to  raise  the  sarcophagus  on  their  shoulders
and  bear  it  as  best  they  could  to  the  door  of  the  tomb.  The  mummy  was  then
placed  in  an  upright  position  on  a  heap  of  sand,  with  its  back  to  the  wall  and
facing  the  assistants,  like  the  master  of  some  new  villa  who,  having  been
accompanied  by  his  irieiids  to  see  liim  take  possession,  turns  for  a  moment  on


'  Of.  wliat  is  Baid  of  these  brick  pyramids  in  tlie  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  4G0,  161.

'  Drawn  by  Faiichor-Gudin,  from  the  paintings  in  tlie  Theban  tombs;  cf.  Kosellini,  MouunicuU
Civili,  pi.  cxxxii.

^  Cf..  for  tlicBO  Tlioban  tombs,  MAiil'EiiO,  Archgologie  liijijplienne,  pp.  141,  142.  The  chapel  of  the
Apis  of  Amenothes  III.,  represented  on  ji.  425  of  the  i)resent  work,  is  a  good  example  of  this  kind
of  tomb    -half  mastaba,  half  (lyramid.

'  Maiciette,  Let  I'uinjrui  A'ljijplicns  du  Mmfc  de  Boulaq,  vol.  i.  pi.  xvii.  11.  K!,  11


518  THE   CLOSE    OF    TEE   THEBAN  EMPIRE

the  threshold  to  take  leave  of  them  before  entering.  A  sacrifice,  an  offering-,
a  prayer,  and  a  fresh  outburst  of  grief  ensued ;  the  mourners  redoubled  their
cries  and  threw  themselves  upon  the  ground,  the  relatives  decked  the  mummy
with  flowers  and  pressed  it  to  their  bared  bosoms,  kissing  it  upon  the  breast
and  knees.  "  I  am  thy  sister,  0  great  one !  forsake  me  not !  Is  it  indeed  thy
will  that  I  should  leave  thee  ?  If  I  go  away,  tliou  shalt  be  here  alone,  and  is
there  any  one  who  will  be  with  thee  to  follow  thee?  O  thou  who  lovedst
to  jest  with  me,  thou  art  now  silent,  thou  speakest  not ! "  Whereupon  the
mourners  again  broke  out  in  chorus  :  "  Lamentation,  lamentation  !  Jlake,
make,  make,  make  lamentation  without  ceasing  as  loud  as  can  be  made.  O
good  traveller,  wlio  takest  thy  way  towards  the  land  of  Eternity,  thou  hast
been  torn  from  us !  0  thou  who  hadst  so  many  around  thee,  thou  art  now
in  the  land  which  briiigest  isolation !  Thou  who  lovedst  to  stretch  thy  limbs-
in  walking,  art  now  fettered,  bound,  swathed !  Thou  who  hadst  fine  stuffs  in
abundance,  art  laid  in  the  linen  of  yesterday ! "  ^  Calm  in  the  midst  of  the
tumult,  the  priest  stood  and  offered  the  incense  and  libation  with  the  accus-
tomed words :  "  To  thy  double,  Osiris  Nofirhotpii,  whose  voice  before  the  great
god  is  true !  "  This  was  the  signal  of  departure,  and  the  mummy,  carried  by
two  men,  disappeared  within  the  tomb :  the  darkness  of  the  other  world  had
laid  hold  of  it,  never  to  let  it  go  again.

The  chapel  was  usually  divided  into  two  chambers :  one,  which  was  of  greater
width  than  length,  ran  parallel  to  the  facade ;  the  otiier,  which  was  longer
than  it  was  wide,  stood  at  right  angles  with  the  former,  exactly  opposite  to
the  entrance.^  The  decoration  of  these  chambers  took  its  inspiration  from  the
scheme  which  prevailed  in  the  time  of  the  Memphite  dynasties,  but  besides
the  usual  scenes  of  agricultural  labour,  hunting,  and  sacrifice,  there  were
introduced  episodes  from  the  public  life  of  the  deceased,  and  particularly  the
minute  portrayal  of  the  ceremonies  connected  with  his  burial.  These  pictorial
biographies  are  always  accompanied  by  detailed  explanatory  inscriptions;
every  individual  endeavoured  thus  to  show  to  the  Osirian  judges  the  rank  he
had  enjoyed  here  upon  earth,  and  to  obtain  in  the  fields  of  lalil  the  place
which  he  claimed  to  be  his  due.  The  stele  was  to  be  found  at  the  far  end  of
the  second  chamber ;  it  was  often  let  in  to  a  niche  in  the  form  of  a  round-
headed  doorway,  or  else  it  was  replaced  by  a  group  of  statues,  either  detached

'  The  lamentations  for  Maritri,  in  the  tomb  ofNofirhotpu,  iu  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,
2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  Ixvii. ;  cf.  Maspero,  t'tudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.  pp.  139-1-13,  where  the  Egyptian
text  has  been  restored  as  far  as  possible  from  the  material  at  our  disposal.

'  Cf.  tlie  varieties  of  this  T  or  cross-sliaped  plan  inCHAMPOLUON,  Mo7i.  de  VJigypte  et  de  la  Nuhie^
vol.  i.  pp.  487,  494,  496,  499,  505,  519,  526,  527,  529,  532,  535,  537,  538,  546. 558,  5U9.  Two  excellent
articles  on  the  arrangement  and  state  of  these  tombs  have  been  published  by  Jomakd,  DescHptioii»
des  hypoge'es  de  la  ville  de  Thebes,  in  the  Description  de  VKgypte,  vol.  iii.  p.  34,  et  seq.,  and  by  A.
Khind,  Tlt^hes,  its  Tomhs  and  their  Tenants,  pp.  3S-6I,  77-123.


THE  funerahy  sacrifice.


519


or  sculptured  in  the  rock  itself,  representing  the  occupant,  his  wives  iiiid
children,  who  took  the  jilace  of  tlie  supporters  of  the  double,  formerly  always
hidden  within  the  serdab.  The  ceieniony  of  the  "Opening  of  tlie  Mouth"
took  place  in  front  of  the
niche  on  the  day  of  burial,
at  the  raoment  when  the
deceased,  liaving  completed
his  terrestrial  course,  en-
tered his  new  home  ^and
took  possession  of  it  for
all  eternity.^  The  object
of  this  ceremony  was,  as
we  know,  to  counteract
the  effects  of  the  embalm-
ing, and  to  restore  ac-
tivity to  the  organs  of  the
body  whose  functions  had
been  suspended  by  death. ^
The  "man  of  the  roll"
and  his  assistants,  aided
by  the  priests,  who  repre-
sented the  "  children  of
Horus,"  once  more  raised
the  mummy  into  an  upright
position  upon  a  heap  of  sand
in  the  middle  of  the  chapel,
and  celebrated  in  his  behalf  the  divine  mystery  instituted  by  Horus  for  Osiris.
They  purified  it  both  by  ordinary  and  by  red  water,  by  the  incense  of  the  south
and  by  the  alum  of  tlie  north,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  in  which  the  statues  of
tlie  gods  were  purified  at  the  beginning  of  the  temple  sacrifices ;  they  then  set  to
work  to  awake  the  deceased  from  his  sleep :  they  loosened  his  shroud  and  called
back  the  double  who  had  escaped  from  the  body  at  the  moment  of  the  death-
agony,*  and  restored  to  him  the  use  of  his  arms  and  leg^'.     As  soon  as  the

'  Cf.,  for  the  idea  involved  in  this  ceremony,  iJawn  <-f  Cimlization,  pp.  179,  180.  The  texts  anil
pictures  relating  to  the  "Opening  of  the  Mouth"  have  been  published  by  Schiap.\relli,  i?  iiin*
del  Funerati  del  Aiitichi  ICtjiziani,  l>y  whom  they  have  been  annotated  at  length  ;  cf.  MA,sPEIio,  Etudes
de  Mythrilogie  et  d'A:chiiilofjie  Egi/iitieimes,  vol.  i.  pp.  203-321.  The  short  description  I  have  given  iu
the  text  follows  exactly  the  order  observed  iu  the  tomb  of  Seti  I.  (E.  Lefedcre,  Leu  llijpuge'es  royaux
de  Thihea:  J.  Le  lomhcau  de  t-eii  I'',  in  the  Mimoireii  de  la  Migsion  Fraiiraisc,  vol.  ii.,  pt.  3.
pis.  i.-xiii.).

2  MAbPEBo,  iludes  de  MijUtologie  el  d'Archiblogie  £gypt!ennes,  vol.  i.  p|>.  292-310.

'  IJrawn  liy  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger,  taken  at  Tliebea  iu  1881.

'  Mabpeho,  ujK  cil.,  vol.  i.  p.  300.


NICHE    IN   THE   TOMB   OF    MESJNA.^


520


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    TBEBAN  EMPIRE.


sacrificial  slaughterers  had  despatched  the  bull  of  the  fouth,  and  cut  it  in
pieces,  the  priest  seized  the  bleeding  haunch,  and  raised  it  to  the  lips  of  the
mask  as  if  to  invite  it  to  eat;  but  the  lips  still  remained  closed,  and  refused  to

perform  their  office.     The  priest  then

touched  them  with  several  iron  instru-
ments hafted  on  wooden  handles,  which

were  supposed  to  possess  the  power

of  unsealing  them.     The  "  opening  "

once   efiected,   the   double   became

free,  and    the   tomb-paintings   from

thenceforward  ceasing  to  depict  the

mummy,    represented     the    double

only.     They  portrayed  it  "  under  the

form  which  he  had  on  this  earth,"

wearing  the  civil  garb,  and  fulfilling

his  ordinary  functions.^    Tlie  corpse

was  regarded  as   merely  the   larva,

to  be  maintained  in  its  integrity  in

order  to  ensure  survival ;  but  it  could

be    relegated    without    fear    to  the

ilepths  of  the  bare  and  naked  tomb,

there  to  remain  until  the  end  of  time,

if  it  pleased  the  gods  to  preserve

it    from    robbers    or    archtoologists.

At  the  period  of  the  first  Tliebau
empire  the  coffins  were  rectangular  wooden  chests,  made  on  the  models  of  the
limestone  and  granite  sarcophagi,  and  covered  with  prayers  taken  from  the
various  sacred  writings,  especially  from  tiie  "  Book  of  the  Dead " :  *  during
the  second  Theban  empire,  they  were  modified  into  an  actual  sheath  for  the
body,  following  more  or  less  the  contour  of  the  human  figure.  This  external
model  of  the  deceased  covered  his  remains,  and  his  figure  in  relief  served


COFFIS-LID.-


CUFFIN-LID.''


'  See  the  cut  on  p.  517,  where  on  the  left  side,  in  front  of  the  tomb,  the  deceased  is  represented
as  a  mummy ;  wliile  on  the  right,  through  the  tomb  doorway,  he  is  represented  as  the  "  double,"
alive  and  witli  his  usual  dress  and  appearance.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  deMertens;  it  is  the  coffin  of  Tamakit,
from  the  tomb  of  Sonnozmii,  discovered  at  Thebes  in  ISSG,  and  sold  to  tbe  Berlin  Museum  (Erman,
Aus/uhrliches  Verzeichniss,  p.  114,  n.  10S59).

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Mertens;  this  coffin  was  discovered  in
1886  at  JMealab,  near  Gebeleiu  (Euman,  op.  cit.,  p.  143,  n.  S51G).

'  A  description  of  the  coffins  of  this  type,  botli  Theban  and  Memphite.  of  the  XII"'  dynasty,  is
given  in  Lepsius,  .Elteste  Texte  des  Tndlenhuclis,  pp.  21-24,  pis.  1-43,  and  in  JIasfero,  Trois  Annies
defouUles,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Fmn^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  210-237.


COFFINS— THE  REPAST   OS    TUB  DECEASED.


521


as  a  liil  to  the  coflia.  The  head  was  covered  with  the  full-dress  wig,  a  tippet
of  white  cambric  half  veiled  the  bosom,  the  petticoat  fell  in  folds  about  the
limbs,  the  feet  were  shod  with  sandals,  the  arms  were  outstretched  or  were
folded  over  tlie  breast,  and  the  hands  clasped  various  objects — either  the
crux  ansafa,  the  buckle  of  the  belt,  the  iat,  or  a  garland  of  flowers.     Some-


mi;    lAKAMJIili.NALlA    UF    A    MLMMV    Ul'    1  LIE    XX'"    Tu    THE    XXII""    DYNASTIES.'

times,  on  the  contrary,  the  col'lin  was  merely  a  conventional  reproduction  of
the  liumaii  iorm.  The  two  feet  and  legs  were  joined  together,  and  the  model-
ling of  the  knee,  calf,  thigh,  and  stomach  was  only  slightly  indicated  in  the
wood.  Towards  the  close  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  it  was  the  fashion  for  wealthy
persons  to  have  two  colIins,  one  fitting  inside  the  other,  painted  black  or
white.  From  the  XX'"  dynasty  onwards  they  were  coated  with  a  yellowish
varnish,  and  so  covered  with  inscriptions  and  mystic  signs  that  each  coiBu  was
u  tomb  in  miniature,  and  could  well  have  done  duty  as  such,  and  thus  meet  all


pi.  15.


Dritwu    by    Faucher-Gudiii,    from    Mariette,   Album  plioloyraphique   du   Musie   de   Boulaq,


522


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE   TIIEBAN  EMPIRE.


the  needs  of  the  soul.'  Later  still,  during  the  XXT'  and  XXII'"'  dynasties,
these  two,  or  even  three  coffins,  were  enclosed  in  a  rectangular  sarcophagus  of
thick  wood,  which,  surmounted  by  a  semicircular  lid,  was  decorated  with  pictures
and  hallowed  by  prayers  :  four  sparrow-hawks,  perched  on  the  uprights  at  the


THE    FUJJEIiAL    liEPAST — MUSIC   AXD    DANXING.-

corners,  watched  at  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  protected  the  body,  enabling
the  soul  at  the  same  time  to  move  freely  within  the  four  houses  of  which  the
world  was  composed.  The  workmen,  after  having  deposited  the  mummy  in  its
resting-place,  piled  upon  the  floor  of  the  tomb  the  canopic  jars,  the  caskets,
the  provisions,  the  furniture,  the  bed,  and  the  stools  and  chairs  ;  the  Ushabtin
occupied  compartments  in  their  allotted  boxes,  and  sometimes  there  would  be
laid  beside  them  the  mummy  of  a  favourite  animal — a  monkey,  a  dog  of  some
rare  breed,  or  a  pet  gazelle,  whose  coffins  were  shaped  to  their  respective  outlines,

'  The  first  to  summarise  the  characteristics  of  the  coftins  aud  sarcophagi  of  the  second  Theban
period  was  Makiette,  Notice  des  principuux  Monuments,  ISO-t,  pp.  37-40,  but  he  places  the  use  of  the
yellow-varnished  coiBns  too  late,  viz.  during  the  XXII'"'  dynasty.  Examples  of  them  have  since
been  found  which  iucontestably  belong  to  the  XX"'.  Cf.  the  results  of  later  researches  in  Maspebo,
Archevlogie  Egyptiennc,  pp.  273-276.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  fragment  in  the  British  Museum  (cf.  Champollion,  Monuments
de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  ccclxxvii.  ter ;  Eosellini,  Monutnenti  Civili,  xcix.  1).  The  scene
representing  the  funeral  repast  and  its  accompanying  dances  occurs  frequently  in  the  Thebnn  tombs:
cf.  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Kiibie,  pi.  clsxxvii. ;  Uosellini,  Mo7iumenti  Civili,
pis.  Ixxviii.,  Ixxix.,  xcvi.,  scvlii.,  xcix.;  Viret,  Le  Tombeau  de  Rekhmara,  in  the  Mi'moires  de  la
Mission  Frunfaise,  vol.  v.  pis.  xli.-xliii. ;  Bouwant,  Tombeau  de  Barmhabi,  in  the  Mimoires  de  la
Mission,  pi.  ii. ;  Soheil,  Tombeau  de  Rat'escrlcasenb,  in  the  M£moires,  vol.  v.  pis.  ii.,  ii".,  iii.


THE   COPPIX    OF   THE    FAVOURITE    GAZELLE   OF
IstMKHOBlCl.'


TDE   SONG    OF   THE  HARPER.

the  better  to  place  before  the
deceased  the  presentment  of  the
living  animal.  A  few  of  the  piiu-
cipal  objects  were  broken  or
damaged,  in  the  belief  that,  by
thus  destroying  them,theirdoubles
would  go  forth  and  accompany  the
human  double,  and  render  him
their  accustomed  services  during
the  whole  of  his  posthumous  ex-
istence ;  a  charm  pronounced  over
them  bound  them  indissolubly  to
his  person,  and  constrained  them
to  obey  his  will.  This  done,  the
priest    muttered    a    final   prayer,

and  the  masons  walled  up  the  doorway.  The  iuneral  feast  now  took  place
with  its  customary  songs  and  dances.  The  almelis  addressed  the  guests  and
exhorted  them  to  make  good  use  of  the  passing  hour :  "  Be  happy  for  one
day!  for  when  you  enter  your  tombs  you  will  rest  there  eternally  throughout
the  length  of  every  day  !  "  -

Immediately  after  the  repast  the  friends  departed  from  the  tomb,  and  the
last  link  which  connected  the  dead  with  our  world  was  then  broken.  The
sacred  harper  was  called  upon  to  raise  the  farewell  hymn :  ^  "  0  instructed
mummies,^  eunead  of  the  gods  of  the  coffin,  who  listen  to  the  praises  of  this
dead  man,  and  who  daily  extol  the  virtues  of  this  instructed  mummy,  who  is
living  eternally  like  a  god,  ruling  in  Amentit,  ye  also  who  shall  live  in  the
memory  of  posterity,  all  ye  who  shall  come  and  read  these  hymns  inscribed,
according  to  the  rites,  within  the  tombs,  repeat :  '  The  greatness  of  the  under-
world, what  is  it  ?  The  annihilation  of  the  tomb,  why  is  it?  '  It  is  to  conform
to  the  image  of  the  land  of  Eternity,  the  true  country  where  there  is  no  strife


'  Drawn  by  Faiieher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Emil  13i  iigscli-Bey,  taken  in  1881 ;  of.  Maspeuo,
Let  Momiea  royahs  de  Deir  el-Bahart,  in  the  Me'nioires  <h  la  Mission  Frangaiae,  pi.  xxi.  B.

'  HosELLiNi,  Monumeiili  Clvili,  pi.  .\cvi.  4.  The  original,  reproduced  by  PEiutOT-CuiriEi!,  Uistoire
de  I'AH  dam  V Antiquity,  vol.  i.  pi.  xii.,  is  in  the  Louvre.

'  The  harper  is  often  represented  performing  tliis  last  oliice,  and,  without  mentioning  IJruce's
liarper,  reproduced  on  p.  520  of  tliis  volume,  wo  iiud  the  Bcene  in  Eosei.lini,  Man.  Civili,  xcv.,  Nos.
.S,  4,  xcvi.,  No.  1;  in  Dujiichen,  llist.  Innc.hriftcn,  vol.  ii.  pis.  xl.,  xl.  a;  in  BENEun'E,  Tombeau  de
Nefurhotpon,  in  the  Memoires  di:  la  Mission  Fran(;aise,  vol.  v.  pi.  ii.,  and  pp.  504-510,  u2'.»-5Hl.  lu
tlie  tomi)  of  NoUrliotpii,  and  in  many  others,  the  daughters  or  tlio  relatives  of  tlie  dcceu.sed  accompany
or  oven  replace  the  harper;  in  this  case  they  belonged  to  a  priettly  family,  and  fiUlillcd  the  duties
of  the  "  Female  Singers  "  of  Anion  or  some  other  god.

•  "Instructed  mummies"  is  an  analogous  expression  to  that  of  "instructed  shade,"  which  I
have  already  explained  in  Vawn  of  Civilization,  p.  183,  and  on  pp.  510,  .'lU  of  tlie  present  work.


524  THE    CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

and  where  violence  is  held  in  abhorrence,  where  none  attacks  his  neigliboiir.
and  where  none  among  our  generations  who  rest  within  it  is  rebellious,
from  the  time  when  your  race  first  existed,  to  the  moment  when  it  shall  become
a  multitude  of  multitudes,  all  going  the  same  way  ;  for  instead  of  remaining  in
this  land  of  Egypt,  there  is  not  one  but  shall  leave  it,  and  there  is  said  to  all
who  are  here  below,  from  the  moment  of  their  waking  to  life :  '  Go,  prosper
safe  and  sound,  to  reach  the  tomb  at  length,  a  chief  among  the  blessed,  and  ever
mindful  in  thy  heart  of  the  day  when  thou  must  lie  down  on  the  funeral
bed  ! '"  1  The  ancient  song  of  Antuf,  modified  in  the  course  of  centuries,  was
still  that  which  expressed  most  forcibly  the  melancholy  thought  paramount
in  the  minds  of  the  friends  assembled  to  perform  the  last  rites.  "  The  im-
passibility of  the  chiefs  is,  in  truth,  the  best  of  fates !  Since  the  times  of
the  god  bodies  are  created  merely  to  pass  away,  and  young  generations  take
their  place  :  Ea  rises  in  the  morning,  Tumii  lies  down  to  rest  in  the  land  of
the  evening,  all  males  generate,  the  females  conceive,  every  nose  inhales  the  air
from  the  morning  of  their  birth  to  the  day  when  they  go  to  their  place !  Be
happy  then  for  one  day,  0  man ! — May  there  ever  be  perfumes  and  scents
for  thy  nostrils,  garlands  and  lotus-flowers  for  thy  shoulders  and  for  the  neck
of  thy  beloved  sister  ^  who  sits  beside  thee !  Let  there  be  singing  and  music
before  thee,  and,  forgetting  all  thy  sorrows,  think  only  of  pleasure  until  the
day  when  thou  must  enter  the  country  of  Maritsakro,  the  silent  goddess,
thougli  all  the  same  the  heart  of  the  son  who  loves  thee  will  not  cease  to  beat !
Be  happy  for  one  day,  0  man ! — I  have  heard  related  what  befell  our  ancestors ;
their  walls  are  destroyed,  their  place  is  no  more,  they  are  as  those  who  have
ceased  to  live  from  the  time  of  the  god !  The  walls  of  thy  tomb  are  strong,
thou  hast  planted  trees  at  the  edge  of  thy  pond,  thy  soul  reposes  beneath  them
and  drinks  the  water ;  follow  that  which  seemeth  good  to  thee  as  long  as
thou  art  on  earth,  and  give  bread  to  him  who  is  without  land,  that  thou
mayest  be  well  spoken  of  for  evermore.  Think  upon  the  gods  who  have  lived
long  ago :  their  meat  offerings  fall  in  pieces  as  if  they  had  been  torn  by  a
panther,  their  loaves  are  defiled  with  dust,  their  statues  no  longer  stand
upright  within  the  temple  of  Ea,  their  followers  beg  for  alms  !  Be  happy  for
one  day  ! "     Those  gone  before  thee  "  have  had  their  hour  of  joy,"  and  they

'  DuMiCHEN,  Historisclie  Inschri/ten,  vol.  ii.  jil.  xi.  a,  U.  9-15,  the  text  of  which  has  been  revised
and  corrected  by  Benkdite,  Le  Tombeau  de  Neferhoipuu,  in  the  Md'moires  tie  la  ilission  Franfaise,
vol.  V.  pi.  ii.  11.  9-15,  and  pp.  505-5  J7;  cf.,  for  the  translation,  Maspero,  Mudes  Egyptiennes,  vol.  i.
pp.  165-167.

'  Osiris  is  here  designated  by  the  word  "chief,"  as  I  have  already  pointed  out  on  p.  511,
note  5.

'  For  the  meaning  of  this  word  '•  sister,"  cf.  its  use  in  the  love-songs  of  the  llariu  Papyrus,
No.  500,  vol.  ii.  pj).  504,  505  of  the  present  work.  Marriages  between  brothers  and  sisters  in  Egypt
(see  Daion  of  Civilization,  pp.  50,  51)  rendered  it  the  most  natural  appellation.


TflE   COMMON  FIT.


5  25


liavc  put  off  sadness  "  "liii'li  shortens  the  inoinonls  until  tlic  day  wlicn  licarts
are  destroyed  ! — Be  mindl'iil.  therefore,  of  tlio  day  when  thou  shalt  be  taken
t(i  the  eouiitrv  wliere  all  men  arc  miu'^Ied  :   none  has  ever  taken  llulhcr  liis


O.NK    Ul'   TUK    IIAKI'EUS   Of    TUE    TU-MU    OF    UAMSES    III.'

goods  with  liini,  and  no  one  can  over  return  I'roni  it!""  The  grave  did
not,  however,  mingle  all  men  as  impartially  as  the  poet  would  have  us  believe.
The  poor  and  insignificant  liad  merely  a  place  in  the  common  pit,  which  was-
situated  in  the  centre  of  the  Assassif,"  one  of  the  richest  funerary  quarters  of
Thebes.  Yawning  trenches  stood  ever  open  there,  ready  to  receive  their  prey  ;
the  rites  were  hurriedly  performed,  and  the  grave-diggers  covered  the  mummies
of  the  day's   burial  with  a  little  sand,  out  of  whi(di   we   receive   them  intact.


'  IJniwu  lpy  Boiulicr,  from  a  pliologrupli  Inkon  liy  Iiisiri^'cT  in  ISSl;  ct'.,  uinoii^' otliui- worU.s  in
wliich  tliis  picture  is  given,  La  Descrijitiun  dc  l'Aiyi>t<\  Aiit.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  91 ;  Cji.\mpoi,i.ion,  Monuuients
dc  VEijijpte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  cclxi.,  inul  Rdbicixini,  Monumeiiti  Civili,  pi.  xcvii.

'  iitiiKHi'.s,  Jlistiirischi-  Inschriflmi,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xl.;  Stkbn,  Das  Lied  di  s  Ilar/ners,  in  tho  Zeil-
tchrift,  ISTS,  pp.  .'jH-C:i,  72,  7:i,  iiu(l  tlie  Snug  of  the  Harper,  in  tho  llec.ord»  of  the  I'asf,  Ist  series,
vol.  vi.  pp.  127-i:i0:  Masi'kho,  liiudeii  l'i<i;iplietmei),  vol.  i.  pp.  172-177;  Benkdite,  Tombeau  de
NeferUolyou,  in  tlio  Mi^moirtt  de  la  Miatiun  Franraise,  vol.  v.  pi.  iv.  pp.  52'J-5:il.

'  Tliero  is  really  only  one  coinpleto  deaeription  of  a  cemetery  of  the  poor,  namely,  tlmt  givc^n  liy
A.  RlllNI),  TUehet,  iU  Tomha  and  their  Tenaiits,  pp.  Vll-VA'J.  Mariotto  canseil  oxteusivo  oxcavutiou.*
to  be  made  by  Gabet  and  Vassalli,  lS.')',)-18a2,  in  the  Assiissif,  near  the  spot  worked  by  Kliind,  and  tlio
objects  t'onnd  are  now  in  the  (iizch  Museum,  but  the  accounts  of  tho  work  are  among  his  un|)ublishod
jiapers.  Vassalli  assures  mo  that  ho  sometimes  Ibund  tho  mummies  piled  one  on  another  to  tho
depth  of  sixty  bodies,  and  oven  then  he  did  uot  reaoh  tho  lowest  of  the  pile.  Tho  hurried  excava-
tions wliich  I  made  in  1882  and  1884,  appeared  to  confirm  these  statements  of  IJhiud  and  Vassalli.


526  THE    CLOSE    OF   THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

sometimes  isolated,  sometimes  in  groups  of  twos  or  threes,  showing  tliat  they
bad  not  even  been  placed  in  regular  layers.^  Some  are  wrapped  only  in
bandages  of  coarse  linen,  and  have  been  consigned  without  further  covering
to  the  soil,  while  others  have  been  bound  round  with  palm-leaves  laid  side  by
side,  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of  primitive  basket.-  The  class  above  the  poorest
people  were  buried  in  rough-hewn  wooden  boxes,  smaller  at  the  feet  than
towards  the  head,  and  devoid  of  any  inscription  or  painting.^  JIany  liave
been  placed  in  any  coffin  that  came  to  hand,  with  a  total  indifference  as  to
suitability  of  size ;  others  lie  in  a  badly  made  bier,  made  up  of  the  fragments
of  one  or  more  older  biers.  None  of  them  possessed  any  funerary  furniture,
except  the  tools  of  his  trade,  a  thin  pair  of  leather  shoes,  sandals  of  cardboard
or  plaited  reeds,  rings  of  terra-cotta  or  bronze,  bracelets  or  necklets  of  a  single
row  of  blue  beads,  statuettes  of  divinities,  mystic  eyes,  scarabs,  and,  above
all,  cords  tied  round  the  neck,  arms,  limbs,  or  waist,  to  keep  oft',  by  their
mystic  knots,  all  malign  influences.*

The  whole  population  of  the  necropolis  made  their  living  out  of  tlie  dead.
This  was  true  of  all  ranks  of  society,  headed  by  the  sacerdotal  colleges  of
the  royal  chapels,^  and  followed  by  the  priestly  bodies,  to  whom  was  entrusted
tiie  care  of  the  tombs  iu  the  various  sections,  but  the  most  influential  of
whom  confined  their  attentions  to  the  old  burying-ground,  "Isit-mait,"  the
True  Place.''  It  was  their  duty  to  keep  up  the  monuments  of  the  kings,
and  also  of  private  individuals,  to  clean  the  tombs,  to  visit  the  funerary
chambers,  to  note  the  condition  of  their  occujxxnts,  and,  if  necessary,  repair
the  damage  done  by  time,  and  to  provide  on  certain  days  the  offerings  pre-
scribed by  custom,  or  by  clauses  in  the  contract  drawn  up  between  the  family
of  the  deceased  and  the  religious  authorities.  The  titles  of  these  oflicials
indicated  how  humble  was  their  position  in  relation  to  the  deified  ancestors  in
whose  service  they  were  employed ;  they  called  themselves  the  "  Servants  of
the  True  Place,"  and  their  chiefs  the  "Superiors  of  the  Servants,"  but  all  the
while  they  were  people  of  considerable  importance,  being  rich,  well  educated,
and  respected  in  their  own  quarter  of  the  town.     They  professed  to  have  a

'  Khind,  Tliehes,  its  Tonibe  and  their  Tenants,  pp.  125,  126.

^  Passalacqua,  Catalogue  raisonne'  d  hittorique  des  Antiquit€s  dfeouvertes  en  Egypte,  p.  204.

'  Ehind,  op.  cit.,  p.  126.

*  Ehind,  op.  cit,,  pp.  128-131.

'  We  fiud  on  several  mouumcntstlie  names  of  persons  belonging  to  these  sacerdotal  bodies,  priests
of  Ahmosis  I.  (Maspero,  Rapport  sur  ttne  Mission  en  Italie,  in  the  Recueil  de  Tmi'aHj-,  vol.  iii.  p.  109),
priests  of  Tbutmosis  I.,  of  Tljutmosis  II.,  of  Ameu6thes  II.,  and  of  Seti  I.  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  112-114).

"  Tlie  persons  connected  with  the  "  True  Place  "  were  for  a  long  time  considered  as  magistrates,
and  the  "True  Place"  as  a  tribunal;  their  actual  office  was  discovered  independent!}' by  Brugsch
{Didionnaire  g^ographiqne,  pp.  127G-127S)  and  by  Mnspero  (Rapport  sur  une  Mission  en  Italic,  in  the
Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159-106).  The  list  of  those  among  them  who  were  known  up  to  1882
will  be  found  in  the  Rapport  sur  une  Mission  en  Italie  (Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1G6-169,  and
vol.  iii.  pp.  103,  104),  together  with  remarks  on  their  costume  (ibid.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ill,  112).


THE  LIVING   POPULATION   OF   THE  NECROPOLIS.


527


special  devotion  for  Amenothes  I.  and  his  mother,  Nofiitari,  who,  after  five  or
six  centuries  of  continuous  homage,  had  come  to  be  considered  as  the  patrons
of  Khafitnibus,^  but  tliis  devotion  was  not  to  the  depreciation  of  otlier  sovereigns.
It  is  true  that  tlie  oi3Scials  were  not  always  clear  as  to  the  identity  of  the
royal  remains  of  which  they  had  the  care,  and  they  were  known  to  have  changed
one  of  their  queens  or  princesses  into
a  king  or  some  royal  prince.^  They
were  surrounded  by  a  whole  host  of
lesser  functionaries  —  bricklayers,
masons,  labourers,  exorcists,  scribes
<nlio  wrote  out  pious  formulae  for
poor  people,  or  copied  the  "  Books  of
the  going  forth  by  day "  for  the
mummies),  weavers,  cabinet-makers,
and  goldsmiths.  The  sculptors  and
the  painters  were  grouped  into  guilds  ;^
many  of  them  spent  their  days  in  the
tombs  they  were  decorating,  while
■others  had  their  workshops  above-
ground,  probably  very  like  those  of
our  modern  monumental  masons.  Thev
kept  at  the  disposal  of  their  needy
■customers  an  assortment  of  ready-
juade  statues  and  stelae,  votive  tablets
to  Osiris,  Anubis,  atid  otlier  Theban
gods  and  goddesses,  singly  or  combined.
The  name  of  the  deceased  and  the
enumeration  of  the  members  of  his  family  were  left  blank,  and  were  inserted
.after  purchase  in  the  spaces  reserved  for  the  purpose.'^  These  artisans  made  the
greater  part  of  their  livelihood  by  means  of  these  epitaphs,  and  the  majority
.thought  only  of  selling  as  many  of  them  as  they  could ;  some  few,  however,

'  Masi'kho,  liappnrt  eur  uiie  HHshou  en  Italic,  in  the  Becueil  du  Tmvaux,  vol.  ii.  jip.  1C5,  ICO;  cf.
pp.  98-100  of  the  present  work  for  the  worship  of  these  two  soveroisns.

'  Thus  Queen  Ahhotpu  I.,  whom  the  '^ servant"  Anhurkhau  knew  to  be  a  woman  (Lepsius,
Denhm.,  iii.  2  d),  is  transformed  Into  a  King  Ahhotpu  in  the  tomb  of  Khabokhnlt  (Lepsius,  Denkm,
iii.  2  a) ;  cf.  Maspero,  Leg  Momies  royales  de  Delr .el-Bahari,  in  the  M^inoires  de  la  Mission  Francaise,
voL  i.  pp.  Glfi-G20.

'  We  gather  tliis  from  the  inscriptions  which  give  us  the  various  titles  of  the  sculptors,  draughts-
men, or  workmen,  but  I  have  been  unable  to  make  out  the  respective  positions  held  by  these  different
persons  {Itupimrt  sur  ^l,lc  Mimion  en  Italie,  in  the  llecueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  iii.  pp.  107,  lOS).

'  Drawn  by  Uoudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Gayet,  taken  in  1S92.

'  I  succeeded  in  collecting  at  the  Boulak  :\luseum  a  considerable  number  of  these  unflnished
statues  and  stela;,  coming  from  the  worksliops  of  tlio  necropolis  (Maspero,  Guide  du  Vieitcur,
j)p.  a08-310).


AMHNUTUES   III.    AT    LlXOli.'


528


THE   CLOSE    OF   TEE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


devoted  themselves  to  work  of  a  higher  kind.  Sculpture  had  reached  a  high
degree  of  development  under  tlie  Thutmoses  and  the  Eaiuses,  and  the  art  of
depicting  scenes  in  bas-relief  had  been  brouglit  to  a  perfection  hitherto  unknown.
This  will  be  easily  seen  by  comparing  the  pictures  in  the  old  mastabas,  such
as  those  of  Ti  or  Phtahhotpu,  with  the  finest  parts  of  the  temples  of  Quvneh,

Abydos,  Karnak,  Deir
el-Bahari,  or  with  the
scenes  in  the  tombs  of
Seti  I.  and  Eamses  II.,
or  those  of  private  indi-
viduals such  as  Hui.
The  modelling  is  firm
and  refined,  showing  a
skill  in  the  use  of  the
chisel  and  an  elegance
of  outline  which  have
never  been  surpassed :
the  Amenothes  III.  of
Luxor  and  the  Khamhait
of  Sheikh  Abd  el-Qurneh
might  serve  for  models
in  our  own  schools  of
tlie  highest  types  which
Egyptian  art  could  pro-
duce at  its  best  in  this
particular  branch.  The  drawing  is  freer  than  in  earlier  examples,  the  action
is  more  natural,  the  composition  more  studied,  and  the  perspective  less  wihl.
We  feel  that  the  artist  handled  his  subject  con  amove.  He  spared  no  trouble  in
sketching  out  his  designs  and  in  making  studies  from  nature,  and,  as  papyrus
was  expensive,  he  drew  rough  drafts,  or  made  notes  of  his  impressions  on
the  flat  chips  of  limestone  with  which  the  workshops  were  strewn.  Nothing
at  that  date  could  rival  these  sketches  for  boldness  of  conception  and  freedom
in  execution,  whether  it  were  in  the  portrayal  of  the  majestic  gait  of  a  king
or  the  agility  of  an  acrobat.  Of  the  latter  we  have  an  example  in  tlie
Turin  Museum.  The  girl  is  nude,  with  the  exception  of  a  tightly  fitting  belt
about  her  hips,  and  she  is  throwing  herself  backwards  with  so  natural  a  motion,
that  we  are  almost  tempted  to  expect  her  to  turn  a  somersault  and  fall  once
more  into  position  with  her  heels  together.     The  unfinished  figures  on  the


KiiA:iiii.\iT.


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Mertens,  taken  from  a  bas-relief  brought  to
Berlin  by  Lepsius;  cf.  Ebjian,  Attf/illirliches  Yerzeichniss,  p.  103,  note  20C;{.


TEE  DRAUGETSMEN,   SCULPTOES,  AND   PAINTERS.


529


SKETCH   OF  A    FEMALE   ACROBAT.'


tomb  of  Seti  I.  show  with  what  a  steady  hand  the  clever  draughtsman  could
sketch  out  his  subjects.  The  head  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  round  to
the  throat  is  described  by  a  single  line,  and  the  contour  of  the  shoulders
is  marked  by  another.  The  form  of  the  body  is  traced  by  two  undu-
lating lines,  while  the  arms
and  legs  are  respectively
outlined  by  two  others.^
The  articles  of  apparel
and  ornaments,  sketched
rapidly  at  first,  had  to  be
gone  over  again  by  the
sculptor,  who  worked  out
the  smallest  details.  One
micht  almost  count  the
tresses  of  the  hair,  while
the  folds  of  the  dress  and
the  enamels  of,  the  girdle
and  bracelets  are  minutely
chiselled.  When  the  draughtsman  had  finished  his  picture  from  the  sketch
which  he  had  made,  or  when  he  had  enlarged  it  from  a  smaller  drawing,  the
master  of  the  studio  would  go  over  it  again,  marking  here  and  there  in  red
the  defective  points,  to  which  the  sculptor  gave  his  attention  when  working  the
subject  out  on  the  wall.  If  he  happened  to  make  a  mistake  in  executing  it,
he  corrected  it  as  well  as  he  was  able  by  filling  up  with  stucco  or  hard  cement
the  portions  to  be  remodelled,  and  by  starting  to  work  again  upon  the  fresh
surface.  This  cement  has  fallen  out  in  some  cases,  and  reveals  to  our  eyes
to-day  the  marks  of  the  underlying  chiselling.  There  are,  for  example,  two
profiles  of  Seti  I.  on  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  hypostyle  hall  at  Karnak,
one  faintly  outlined,  and  the  other  standing  fully  out  from  the  surface  of  the
stone.  The  sense  of  the  picturesque  was  making  itself  felt,  and  artists  were  no
longer  to  be  excused  for  neglecting  architectural  details,  the  configuration  of
the  country,  the  drawing  of  rare  plants,  and,  in  fact,  all  those  accessories  which
had  been  previously  omitted  altogether  or  merely  indicated.  The  necessity
of  covering  such  vast  surfaces  as  the  pylons  offered  had  accustomed  them  to
arrange  the  various  scenes  of  one  and  the  same  action  in  a  more  natural  and
intimate  connexion  than  their  predecessors  could  possibly  have  done.  In  these
scenes  the  Pharaoh  naturally  played  the  chief  part,  but  in  place  of  choosing
for  treatment  merely  one  or  other  important  action  of  the  monarch  calculated

'  One  of  these  is  reproduced  on  p.  385  of  the  present  work.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  by  Petrio  from  an  ostracon  in  the  Turin  Museum.

2  M   •


530


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.


to  exhibit  his  courage,  the  artist  endeavoured  to  portray  all  the  succes-
sive incidents  in  his  campaigns,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  early  Italian
painters   were   accustomed  to  depict,  one  after  the  other,  and  on  the  same

canvas,  all  the  events  of  the
same  legend.  The  details
of  these  gigantic  composi-
tions may  sometimes  ap-
pear childish  to  us,  and  we
may  frequently  be  at  a  loss
in  determining  the  relations
of  the  parts,  yet  the  whole
is  full  of  movement,  and,
although  mutilated,  gives
us  even  yet  the  impression
which  would  have  been
made  upon  us  by  the  tur-
moil of  a  battle  in  those
distant  days.^

The  sculptor  of  statues
for  a  long  time  past  was
not  a  whit  less  skilful  than
the  artist  who  executed
bas-reliefs.  The  sculptor
was  doubtless  often  obliged
to  give  enormous  propor-
tions to  the  figure  of  the
king,  to  prevent  his  being
overshadowed  by  the  mass  of  buildings  among  which  the  statue  was  to
appear ;  but  this  necessity  of  exaggerating  the  human  form  did  not
destroy  in  the  artist  that  sense  of  proportion  and  that  skilful  handling  of
the  chisel  which  are  so  strikingly  displayed  in  the  sitting  scribe  or  in  the
princess  at  Meidixm ;  it  merely  trained  him  to  mark  out  deftly  the  principal
lines,  and  to  calculate  the  volume  and  dimensions  of  these  gigantic  granite
figures  of  some  fifty  to  sixty-five  feet  high,^  with  as  great  confidence  and  skill
as  he  would  have  employed  upon  any  statue  of  ordinary  dimensions  which

'  Mas-pero,  L'ArcJie'ologie  £gyptien7ie,  pp.  179-181 ;  cf.,  for  example,  the  scenes  taken  from  the
representation  of  the  battle  of  Qodshi'i  on  pp.  392-305  of  the  present  work.

■  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  photographs  taken  in  1S81  by  Insiuger  and  Daniel  Heron.
The  original  bas-relief  is  on  the  west  wall  of  the  great  hypostyle  hall  at  Karnak;  cf.  Maeiette,
Voyage  de  la  Haute-Egypte,  vol.  ii.  pi.  43.

'  See  pp.  311-313  of  the  present  work  for  the  colossal  figures  of  Amenothes  III.  in  the  Tbeban
]ilain  before  the  Amenopheum,  and  ibid.,  pp.  420,  411,  412,  and  424  for  the  statues  of  Kamsts  II.  at
the  Eamesseum,  Abu-Simbel,  and  Tanis  respectively.


BAS-RELIEF    OF    SETI  I.,    SHOWING    COBEECTIOSS    MADE    IIY
THE  SCl'LPTOR.-


BAS-llELIEFS   AND    STATUES.  5;}1

mi'>-bt  be  entrusted  to  him.  The  colossal  statues  at  Abu-8imbel  and  Thebes
Still  witness  to  the  incomparable  skill  of  the  Thebau  sculptors  in  the
difficult  art  of  imagining  and  executing  superhuman  types.  The  decadence
of  Egyptian  art  did  not  begin  until  the  time  of  Ramses  III.,^
but  its  downward  progress  was  rapid,  and  the  statues  of  the
Kamesside  period  are  of  little  or  no  artistic  value.  The  form
■of  these  figures  is  poor,  the  technique  crude,  and  the  ex-
pression of  the  faces  mean  and  commonplace.
They  betray  the  hand  of  a
mechanical  workman  who,
wliile  still  in  the  possession
of  the  instruments  of  his
trade,  can  infuse  no  new
life  into  tlie  traditions
of  the  schools,  nor  break
away  from  them  alto-
gether. We  must  look,
not  to  the  royal  studios,
but  to  the  workshops  con-
I  .  ;,       ^-..^^^^       "  y        KBI  nected  with  the  necro-

sis" ~^  /         ^H^PP2    polls,  if  we  want  to  find

statues  of  half  life-
size  displaying  intel-
ligent workmanship,
all  of  wliich  we  mijjht
be  tempted  to  refer  to  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  if  the  inscriptions  upon  them
did  not  fix  their  date  some  two  or  three  centuries  latei\  An  example  of  them
may  be  seen  at  Turin  in  the  kneeling  scribe  embracing  a  ram-headed  altar :
the  face  is  youthful,  and  has  an  expression  at  once  so  gentle  and  intelligent
that  we  are  constrained  to  overlook  the  imperfections  in  the  bust  and  legs  of
the  figure.  Specimens  of  this  kind  are  not  numerous,  and  their  rarity  is  easily
accounted  for.  The  multitude  of  priests,  soldiers,  workmen,  and  small  middle-
class  people  who  made  up  the  bulk  of  the  Theban  population  had  aspirations
for  a  luxury  little  commensurate  with  their  means,  and  the  tombs  of  such  people
are,  therefore,  full  of  objects  which  simulate  a  character  they  do  not  possess,  and
are  deceptive  to  the  eye :  such  were  the  statuettes  made  of  wood,  substituted

'  See  p.  418  of  tlie  present  work  for  my  opinion  on  the  ordinary  tlieory,  which  makes  the  decadence
of  Egyptian  sculpture  begin  in  the  time  of  Eanises  II.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Petrie  ;  the  scribe  bears  ui)on  liis  right  shoulder,
perliaps  t;itooed,  the  human  imiige  of  the  god  Amou-Ra,  wlioso  animal  emblem  lie  embraces.

'  Drawn  by  Fauclicr-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograiih  taken  in  the  T-ouvre;  cf.  BKNiiDni!,  La  Statuette
tie  la  dame  Tuiii,  in  the  Monuments  et  iUmoires,  vol.  ii.  \Aa.  ii.-iv.


k


THE   KNEELING    SCRIBE   AT    TURIN."


THE   LADY   tCi.'


532


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


from  economical  motives  instead  of  the  limestone  or  sandstone  statues  usually
provided  as  supporters  for  the  "  double."  The  funerary  sculptors  had  acquired
a  perfect  mastery  of  the  kind  of  art  needed  for  people  of  small  means,  and  we
find  among  the  medley  of  commonplace  objects  which
encumber  the  tombs  they  decorated,  examples  of  artistic
works  of  undoubted  excellence,  such  as  the  ladies  Nai
and  Tiii  now  in  the  Louvre,  the  lady  Nehai  now  at
Berlin,  and  the  naked  child  at  Turin.^  The  lady  Tiii
in  her  lifetime  had  been  one  of  the  singing-women  of
Amon.  She  is  clad  in  a  tight-fitting  robe,  which  accen-
tuates the  contour  of  the  breasts  and  hips  without
coarseness :  her  right  arm  falls  gracefully  along-
side her  body,  while  her  left,  bent  across  her
chest,  thrusts  into  her  bosom  a  kind  of  magic
whip,  which  was  the  sign  of  her  profession.  The
artist  was  not  able  to  avoid  a  certain  heaviness
in  the  treatment  of  her  hair,  and  the  careful
execution  of  the  whole  work  was  not  without  a
degree  of  harshness,  but  by  dint  of
scraping  and  polishing  the
wood  he  succeeded  in
softening  the  outline,  and
removing  from  the  figure
every  sharp  point.  The
lady  Nehai  is  smarter  and
more  graceful,  in  her  close-fitting  garment  and  her  mantle  thrown  over  the
left  elbow  ;  and  the  artist  has  given  her  a  more  alert  pose  and  resolute
air  than  we  find  in  the  stiff  carriage  of  her  contemporary  Tiii.  The  little
girl  in  the  Turin  Museum  is  a  looser  work,  but  where  could  one  find  a  better
example  of  the  lithe  delicacy  of  the  young  Egyptian  maiden  of  eight  or  ten
years  old?  We  may  see  her  counterpart  to-day  among  the  young  Nubian
girls  of  the  cataract,  before  they  are  obliged  to  wear  clothes  ;  there  is  the  same
thin  chest,  the  same  undeveloped  hips,  the  same  meagre  thighs,  and  the
same  demeanour,  at  once  innocent  and  audacious.  Other  statuettes  repre-
sent matrons,  some  in  tight  garments,  and  with  their  hair  closely  confined,

'  The  lady  N.al  was  reproduced  by  Maspero,  in  O.  Eayet,  Les  Monuments  de  I'Art  antique,  vol.  i.,
and  in  VArch^ologie  igyptienne,  p.  263.

2  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Pelrie ;  cf.  Maspero,  La  Dame  Tout,  in  La  Nature,
23rd  year,  vol.  ii.  p.  213,  fig.  2.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograph  by  M.  de  Merteus  ;  cf.  Erman,  AusfiikrUches  Verzekhniss,
p.  120,  No.  804:1.  Enamelled  eyes,  according  to  a  common  custom,  were  inserted  in  the  sockets,  but
have  disappeared.


I


i(.y-


yOUNG    girl    in   the   TURIN   MCSEUSI.'


i^it^-^:\


THE  LADY  NEHaI.'


WOODEN  STATUETTES.


533


^


•others  without  auy  garmeut  whatever.     The  Turin  example  is  that  of  a  lady
who  seems  proud  of  her  large  ear-rings,  and  brings  one  of  them  into  promi-
nence, cither  to  show  it  off  or  to  satisfy  herself  that  the  jewel  becomes  her :
her  head   is  square-shaped,  the   shoulders    narrow,
the  chest  puny,  the  pose  of  the  arm  stiff  and  awk-
ward, but   the   eyes   have  such  a  joyful  openness,
and  her  smile   such  a   self-satisfied  expression,
that  one  readily  overlooks  the  other  defects  of
the   statue.     In   this   collection   of   miniature
figures  examples  of  men  are  not  wanting,  and
there   are   instances   of  old   soldiers,  officials,
guardians  of  temples,  and  priests  proudly
executing  their  office  in  their  distinctive
panther  skins.     Three  individuals  in  the
Gizeh  were  contemporaries,  or  almost  so,
of  the  young  girl  of  the  Turin  Museum.
They  are  dressed  in  rich  costumes,  to
which  they  have,  doubtless,a  just  claim ;
for  one  of  them,  Hori,  surnamed  Ka,
rejoiced  in  the  favour  of  the  Pharaoh,
and  must  therefore  have  exercised  some
court  function.  They  seem  to  step  forth
with  a  measured   pace   and   firm   de-
meanour, the   body   well  thrown  back
A  SOLDIER.^  and  the  head  erect,  their  faces  display-

ing something  of  cruelty  and  cunning.^
An  officer,  whose  retirement  from  service  is  now  spent  in  the  Louvre,  is  dressed
in  a  semi-civil  costume,  with  a  light  wig,  a  closely  fitting  smock-frock  with
shirt-sleeves,  and  a  loin-cloth  tied  tightly  round  the  hips  and  descending  half-
way down  the  thigh,  to  which  is  applied  a  piece  of  stuff  kilted  lengthwise,
projecting  in  front.*'  A  colleague  of  his,  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum,  still  main-
tains possession  of  his  official  baton,  and  is  arrayed  in  his  striped  petticoat,
his  bracelets  and  gorget  of  gold.  A  priest  in  the  Louvre  holds  before  him,
grasped  by  both  hands,  the  insignia  of  Amon-Ea — a  ram's  head,  surmounted

'  Maspebo,  Guide  du  Thiteur  ait  Mug&  de  Boulaq,  Nos.  3274-3276,  pp.  106,  107,  and  Archeologie
^gyptienne,  pp.  2G1,  262;  Phimite  Viukv,  Notice  dee  principaux  monuments  exposes  au,  Mtiafe  de
Gizeh,  Nos.  878-S81,  pp.  105,  VM).

^  Drawn  by  Bondier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  dcMertens;  ci.'Enyt-KS,  AmfUhrUches  Verzeichnias,
p.  120,  No.  4607.  Othur  statuettes  of  the  same  kind  in  the  museum  of  the  Louvre  have  been  repro-
duced by  Maspeuo,  in  0.  Ravet,  Leg  Monuments  del' Art  antique,  aniin  Arch.  ^gi/jMennCtPp.  261-203.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  ph(;tograpli  by  Potrie ;  ef.  JlASPEiiO,  La  Dame  Tout,  in  La  Nature,
.23rd  year,  vol.'il.  p.  213,  fig.  3.

*  Tliis  is  reproduced  by  heliogravure  in  O.  Kavkt,  Lcs  Monuments  de  I' Art  antique,  vol.  i.


iij])ii


STATUE  IN  THE  TURIN
MUSEUM.^


534


TEE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


by  the  solar  disk,  and  inserted  on  the  top  of  a  thick  handle ;  another,  who
has  been  relegated  to  Turin,  appears  to  be  placed  between  two  long  staves,
each  surmounted  by  an  idol,  and,  to  judge  from  his  attitude,  seems  to  have  no
small  idea  of  his  own  beauty  and  importance.  The  Egyptians  were  an  obser-
vant people  and  inclined  to  satire,  and  I  have  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  the

sculptors,  ia  giving  to
such  statuettes  this
cliaracter  of  childlike
vauity,  yielded  to  the
temptation  to  be  merry
at  the  expense  of  their
model.

The  smelters  and
engravers  in  metal  oc-
cupied in  relation  to
the  sculptors  a  some-
what exalted  position.
Bronze  had  for  a  long
time  been  employed  in  funerary  furniture,  and  ushahim  (respondents),'*
amulets,  and  images  of  the  gods,  as  well  as  of  mortals,  were  cast  in  this
metal.  Many  of  these  tiny  figures  form  charming  examples  of  enamel-work,
and  are  distinguished  not  only  by  the  gracefulness  of  the  modelling,  but
also  by  tiie  brilliance  of  the  superimposed  glaze ;  but  the  majority  of  them
were  purely  commercial  articles,  manufactured  by  the  hundred  from  the  same
models,  and  possibly  cast,  for  centuries,  from  the  same  moulds  for  the
edification  of  the  devout  and  of  pilgrims.  We  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be
surprised  if  they  are  lacking  in  originality ;  they  are  no  more  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  each  other  than  the  hundreds  of  coloured  statuettes  whicli
one  may  find  on  the  stalls  of  modern  dealers  in  religious  statuary.^  Here
and  there  among  the  multitude  we  may  light  upon  examples  showing  a
marked  individuality  :  the  statuette  of  the  lady  Takushit,  which  now  forms
one  of  the  ornaments  of  the  museum  at  Athens,''  is  an  instance.  She  stands
erect,  one  foot  in  advance,  her  right  arm  hanging  at  her  side,  her  left  pressed
against  her  bosom ;  she  is  arrayed  in  a  short  dress  embroidered  over  with
religious  scenes,  and  wears  upon  her  ankles  and  wrists  rings  of  value.     A  wig

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.

"  Bronze  respondents  are  somewhat  rare,  anJ  most  of  those  wbicli  are  to  be  found  among  the
dealers  are  counterfeit.  The  Gizeh  Museum  possesses  two  examples  at  least  of  indisputable  authen-
ticity (Maspero,  Guide  (hi  Visiteur,  Nos.  1501  and  1601,  pp.  133,  134);  both  of  these  belong  to  the
XX"  dynasty.

'  Maspero,  Arch^oloyie  Egyptienne,  pp.  294,  295.

*  Maspero,  Statuette  Egyptienne  de  bronze  incruste  d'argent  de  la  collection  di  Demetrio,  in  the-
Gazette  ArcMologique,  18S3,  pp.  1S5-1S9,  and  pis.  33,  34 ;  cf.  ArcMologie  tgyptienne,  pp.  292,  293.


From  al^ronze  in  the  Museum  at  Athens


Printed  m  Pans


Plate  III


1


METAL-FOUNDING,   BRONZE.


535


SHKINE    IN    THE   TUKIN    MCSEUM.'


with  stiff-looking  locks,  regularly  arranged  in  rows,  covers  her  head.  Tlie
details  of  the  drapery  and  the  ornaments  are  incised  on  the  surface  of  the
bronze,  and  heishtened  with  a  thread  of  silver.  The  face  is  evidently  a
portrait,  and  is  that  apparently
of  a  woman  of  mature  age,
but  the  body,  according  to
the  tradition  of  the  Egyptian
schools  of  art,  is  that  of  a
young  girl,  lithe,  firm,  and
elastic.  The  alloy  contains
gold,  and  the  warm  and  soft-
ened liglits  reflected  from  it
blend  most  happily  and  har-
moniously with  the  white  lines
of  the  designs.  The  joiners  oc-
cupied, after  the  workers  in
bronze,  an  important  position
in  relation  to  the  necropolis,
and  the  greater  part  of  the
furniture  which  they  executed  for  the  mummies  of  persons  of  high  rank
was  remarkable  for  its  painting  and  carpentry-work.  Some  articles  of  their
manufacture  were  intended  for  religious  use — such  as  those  shrines,  mounted
upon  sledges,  on  which  the  image  of  the  god  was  placed,  to  whom  prayers  were
made  for  the  deceased;  others  served  for  the  household  needs  of  the  mummy,
and,  to  distinguish  these,  there  are  to  be  seen  upon  their  sides  religious  and
funereal  pictures,  offerings  to  the  two  deceased  parents,  sacrifices  to  a  god  or
goddess,  and  incidents  in  the  Osirian  life.  Tlie  funerary  beds  consisted,  like
those  intended  for  the  living,  of  a  rectangular  framework,  placed  upon  four  feet
of  equal  height,  although  there  are  rare  examples  in  which  the  supports  are
so  arranged  as  to  give  a  gentle  slope  to  the  structure.  The  fancy  wliich  actuated
the  joiner  in  making  such  beds  supposed  that  two  benevolent  lions  had,  of
their  own  free  will,  stretched  out  their  bodies  to  form  the  two  sides  of  the
couch,  the  muzzles  constituting  the  pillow,  while  the  tails  were  curled  up  under
the  feet  of  the  sleeper.^  Many  of  the  iieads  given  to  the  lions  are  so  noble
and  expressive,  that  they  will  well  bear  comparison  with  the  granite  statues
of  these  animals  which  Amenothes  III.  dedicated  in  his  temple  at  Soleb.^     The

'  Drawn  liy  Fauchcr-Gudiii,  from  a  ijUotogiaph  by  Lanzoue  ;  cl".  PEitKOT-Cim'iEZ,  Ilist.  de  I'Art
dans  I' AtUiquit^,  vol.  i.  p.  300.

'  Upon  these  funerary  couches,  see  Maspero,  Arch^uh/jie  Egyptienne,  pp.  277-2S0.

'  Cf.  the  two  lion's  heads  in  the  Hofkjiann  sale,  Antiquit(fs  Kijijptiennes,  p.  SO,  Nos.  280,  28 1,
and  pis.  xxiv.,  xxv.  ;  they  belonged  to  a  funeral  couch,  and  not  to  a  throne,  as  the  couipilcr  of  tho
Catalogue  maintains.


536


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.


other  trades  depended  upon  the  proportion  of  their  members  to  the  rest  of  the
community  for  the  estimation  in  which  they  were  held.  The  masons,  stone-
cutters, and  common  labourers  ^  furnished  tlie  most  important  contingent ;
among  these  ought  also  to  be  reckoned  the  royal  servants— of  whose  functions
we  should  have  been  at  a  loss  to  guess  the  importance,  if  contemporary  docu-
ments had  not  made  it  clear — fishermen,  hunters,  laundresses,  wood-cutters,

gardeners,    and     water-carriers.^       Without

reckoning  the  constant  libations  needed

for  the  gods  and  the  deceased,  the

-^^^.-■^  _^^«^,_^         workshops  required  a  large

- ''^''^^•'-te- '"'  I  l  t  1  ^^     quantity  of   drinking  water

for  the  men  engaged  in
them.  In  every  gang  of
workmen,  even  in  the  present
day,  two  or  three  men  are
set  apart  to  provide  drinking-
water  for  the  rest ;  in  some
arid  places,  indeed,  at  a  dis-
tance from  the  river,  such  as
the  Valley  of  the  Kings,  as
many  water-carriers  are  re-
quired as  there  are  workmen.  To  the  trades  just  mentioned  must  be  added  the
low-caste  crowd  depending  on  the  burials  of  the  rich,  the  acrobats,  female
mourners,  dancers  and  musicians.  The  majority  of  the  female  corporations
were  distinguished  by  the  infamous  character  of  their  manners,  and  prostitution
among  them  had  come  to  be  associated  with  the  service  of  the  god.*

There  was  no  education  for  all  this  mass  of  people,  and  their  religion  was
of  a  meagre  character.  They  worshipped  the  official  deities,  Amon,  Mut,  Isis,
and  Hathor,  and  such  deceased  Pharaohs  as  Amenothes  I.  and  Nofritari,  but

'  Chabas-Lieblein,  Deux  Papyrus  Hi^ratiqnes  du  Mus^e  de  Turin,  pp.  12-14,  atui  Maspero,  Uiie
Enquete  judiciare  a  Thebes  au  temjJS  de  la  XX'  dynastie,  p.  66,  et  seq.

'  With  regard  to  the  fishermen  of  the  necropolis,  see  Pleyte-Eossi,  Papj/nis  de  Turin,  yil.  xssvii.
II.  19-23;  the  Cailliaud  ostracon,  which  contains  a  receipt  given  to  some  fishermen,  was  found  near
Sheikh  Abd  el-Qurneh,  and  consequently  belonged  to  the  fishermen  of  the  necropolis  (Deveria,
(Euvres,  vol.  i.  pp.  129-142).  There  is  a  questlou  as  to  the  water-carriers  of  tlie  Khiru  in  the  hieratic
registers  of  Turin  CPleyte-Rossi,  Papyrus  de  Turin,  pis.  xsxv.  1.  2,  xxxvi.  1.  U,  xsxvii.  11.  5,  12;
Chabas,  Melanges  Egyptoloijiques,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  16),  also  as  to  the  washers  of  clothes  (Id.,
ibid.,  pis.  XXXV.  1.  16,  xxxvi.  11.  12,  17),  wood-cutters  (Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  xxxvi.  1.  13),  gardeners  and
workers  in  the  vineyard  (Id.,  ibid.,  pis.  xxxvi.  1.  14,  xxxvii.  U.  15-17,  xxxviii.  1.  13).

^  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudiii,  from  a  photograph  by  Lauzone  ;  cf.  Lanzone,  Dizionario  de  Mitologia
Egizia,  pi.  cxviii.

*  The  heroine  of  the  erotic  papyrus  of  Turin  bears  the  title  of  "Siuging-woman  of  Amon"  (Pleyte-
Eossi,  Papyrus  de  Turin,  p.  203,  et  seq.),  and  the  illustrations  indicate  her  profession  so  clearly  and
so  expressively,  tliat  no  details  of  her  sayings  and  doings  are  wanting :  upon  tlie  double  character  of
the  singing-women  in  general,  see  BIasi'ero,  La  Dame  Toui,  in  La  Nature,  23rd  year,  vol.  ii.  p.  213.


THE   swallow-goddess   FROM    THE    TUEBAN    NECROPOLIS.'


THE  IlELIGIONS   OF   THE  NECROPOLIS.


537


tliey  had  also  their  own  Pantheon,  in  which  animals  predominated — such  as
the  goose  of  Anion,  and  his  ram  Pa-rahaninofir,  the  good  player  on  the  horn,
the  hippopotamus,  the  cat,  the  chicken,  the  swallow,  and  especially  reptiles.^
Death  was  personified  by  a  great  viper,  the  queen  of  the  West,  known  by
the  name  Mavitsakro,  the  friend  of  silence.  Three  heads,  or  the  single  head
of  a  woman,  attached  to  the  one  body,  were  assigned  to  it.^  It  was
supposed  to  dwell  in  the  mountain  opposite  Karnak,  which  fact  gave  to  it,  as
well  as  to  the  necropolis  itself,  the
two  epithets  of  Kiiafitnibus  and
Ta-tahnit,  that  is.  The  Summit.^
Its  chapel  was  situated  at  the  foot
of  the  hill  of  Sheikh  Abd  el-
Qurneh,  but  its  sacred  serpents
'crawled  and  wriggled  through  tlie
necropolis,  working  miracles  and
effecting  the  cure  of  the  most  dan-
gerous maladies.  The  faithful  were
accustomed  to  dedicate  to  them,
in  payment  of  their  vows,  stela?,  or
slabs  of  roughly  hewn  stone,  with
inscriptions  which  witnessed  to
a.  deep  gratitude.  "Hearken!  I,
from  the  time  of  my  appearance
on  earth,  I  was  a  '  Servant  of  the  True  Place,'  Noiirabu,  a  stupid  ignorant
person,  who  knew  not  good  from  evil,  and  I  committed  sin  against  The  Summit.
iShe  punished  me,  and  I  was  in  her  hand  day  and  night.  I  lay  groaning  on  my
•couch  like  a  woman  in  child-bed,  and  I  made  supplication  to  the  air,  but  it  did
not  come  to  me,  for  I  was  hunted  down  by  The  Summit  of  the  West,  the  brave
one  among  all  the  gods  and  all  the  goddesses  of  the  city  ;  so  I  would  say  to  all

'  The  worship  of  the  ram  of  Amon,  the  goose,  the  swallow,  the  cat,  aril  the  serpent  was  pointed
out,  particularly  from  the  mouuments  in  the  Turin  Museum,  by  Maspeuo,  liiudes  de  Mijlliolotjiv  et
■d'Arch<ftilo(jie  Egyptir.nnes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  395-401,  411-11-i;  cf.  "Wiedemann,  Le  Culle  dca  unhnaux  en
E(jypti:,  in  the  Mnnifim,  vol.  viii.  pp.  90-104,  and  Zu  dem  TInerhull  der  Alien  jEgypter,  iu  the  Melanges
Charlee  de  llarlez.  pp.  372-380.  A  stele  exhibiting  tlie  eat  and  goose  lace  to  face  was  reproduced  iu
Daicri  of  Ciillizatiun,  p.  87.  As  to  the  cult  of  tlie  hippopotamus  in  the  necropolis,  tee  the  little  stele
published  by  MA.si'Eiio,  Rapport  sur  une  Mission  en  Italie,  iu  the  Becmil  de  Travanx,  vol.  iv.  p.  151,
and  by  Lanzose,  Diziotmrin  di  Milologia  Eijizia,  pi.  ccelxxx.

'  As  to  the  cult  cf  Maritsalcro,  see  Maspeko,  f.'ludcs  de  Mijthologie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  402-410.

^  As  to  the  first  of  these  names,  see  p.  50(i  of  the  present  work.  The  abundance  of  the  monuments
of  Maritsakro  found  at  Sheikh  Abd  el-Gurneh,  inclines  me  to  believe  that  her  .sanctuary  was  situated
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  temple  of  tJazmosft  (Maspeuo,  in  the  Revue  Critique,  1S90,  vol.  ii.
pp.  412-414),  but  there  was  also  on  the  top  of  the  hill  another  sanctuary  whicli  would  equally  satisfy
■the  name  Ta-tabnlt  (MAsriaio,  Etudes  de  Mi/tli(jloijie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  40S-410).

*  Drawn  by  Fauclicr-fiuilin,  from  a  photograph  by  Lanzone  ;  cf.  Laxzone,  Dizionario  di  Milologia
JEgiziu,  pi.  cxxv.     The  stele  from  which  1  have  taken  this  figure  is  in  the  Turin  Museum.


f^t^jli      _^— 1.


THE  GODDESS  MAHtTSAKBO.'


538  THE   CLOSE    OF    THE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.

the  miserable  sinners  among  the  people  of  the  necropolis  :  '  Give  heed  to  The
Summit,  for  there  is  a  lion  in  The  Summit,  and  she  strikes  as  strikes  a  spell-cast-
ing Lion,  and  she  pursues  him  who  sins  against  her ! '  I  invoked  then  my  mistress,
and  I  felt  that  she  flew  to  me  like  a  pleasant  breeze ;  she  placed  herself  upon
me,  and  this  made  me  recognise  her  hand,  and  appeased  she  returned  to  me,  and
she  delivered  me  from  suffering,  for  she  is  my  life.  The  Summit  of  the  West,
when  slie  is  appeased,  and  she  ought  to  be  invoked!"'  There  were  many
sinners,  we  may  believe,  among  that  ignorant  and  superstitious  population,  but
the  governors  of  Thebes  did  not  put  their  confidence  in  the  local  deities  alone  to
keep  them  within  bounds,  and  to  jirevent  tlieir  evil  deeds  ;  commissioners,  with
the  help  of  a  detachment  of  Mazaiu,  were  an  additional  means  of  conducting
them  into  the  right  way.^  They  had,  in  this  respect,  a  hard  work  to  accomplish,
for  every  day  brought  with  it  its  contingent  of  crimes,  which  they  had  to  follow
up,  and  secure  the  punishment  of  the  authors.^  Nsisuamon  came  to  inform  them
that  the  workman  Nakhtummaut  and  his  companions  had  stolen  into  his  house,
and  robbed  him  of  three  large  loaves,  eight  cakes,  and  some  pastry  ;  they  had
also  drunk  a  jar  of  beer,  and  poured  out  from  pure  malice  the  oil  which  they
could  not  carry  away  with  them.*  Panibi  had  met  the  wife  of  a  comrade  alone
near  an  out-of-the-way  tomb,  and  had  taken  advantage  of  her  notwithstanding
her  cries ;  this,  moreover,  was  not  the  first  offence  of  the  culprit,  for  several
young  girls  had  previously  been  victims  of  his  brutality,  and  had  not  ventured
up  to  this  time  to  complain  of  him  on  account  of  the  terror  with  which  he
inspired  the  neighbourhood.®  Crimes  against  the  dead  were  always  common  ;
every  penniless  fellow  knew  what  quantities  of  gold  and  jewels  had  been  entombed
with  the  departed,  and  these  treasures,  scattered  around  them  at  only  a  few
feet  from  the  surface  of  the  ground,  presented  to  them  a  constant  temptation
to  which  they  often  succumbed.^  Some  were  not  disposed  to  have  accomplices,
while  others  associated  together,  and,  having  purchased  at  a  serious  cost  tlie

'  See  stele  No.  102  in  Turin,  published  by  Maspeko,  Notes  sur  qitelqiies  points  de  Grammaire,  etc.,
in  the  Hecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  i.  pp.  109,  110,  and  Lanzone,  Dizionario  di  Mitologia  Egizia,  pi.  cxxv.
The  figure  reproduced  on  p.  537  of  the  present  work  was  taken  from  this  monument.

'  The  part  played  by  the  Mazaift  in  the  necropolis  was  first  pointed  out  by  Birch,  Le  Papynis
Abbott,  in  the  lievue  Arch^ologique,  1st  series,  vol.  xvi.  p.  261 ;  cf.  CHABAS-LiEBLEry,  Deux  Papyrus
hi^ratiqnes  du  Muse'e  de  Turin,  p.  16.

'  A  brief  description  of  the  crimes  committed  in  the  necropolis,  and  the  strikes  wliich  disturbed
it,  have  been  dealt  with  by  Spiegelberg,  Arbeiter  und  Arheiterbeiregung  im  Pharaonenreich,  1S95.

*  See  the  ostracon,  No.  5637,  in  the  Britisli  Museum,  published  by  Birch,  Inscriptions  in  the
Hieratic  and  Demotic  Characters,  pi.  xv.,  translated  by  Chabas,  Mitangea  Egyptologiques,  3rd  series,
vol.  i.  pp.  212-216;  cf.  Spiegelberg,  op.  cit.,  p.  11.

»  See  the  Salt  Papyrus,  No.  124,  pi.  i.  1.  19,  jil.  ii.  II.  1-4,  in  Chabas,  Melanges  Egyptologiques,
3rd  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  180,  ISl,  and  in  Spiegelberg,  op.  cit..  pp.  11-15 ;  cf.,  for  other  crimes  of  the  same
kind,  Chabas,  op.  cit.,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  39.

"  See  the  Abbott  Papyrus,  pi.  iii.  11.  17,  IS,  pi.  iv.  11.  1-4,  for  an  account  of  the  particular  tombs
violated  by  a  band  of  robbers  (SIaspero,  Une  Enquetejudiciare  it  Thebes,  pp.  22-24  ;  Chabas,  Melanges,
etc.,  3rd  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  73,  74) ;  we  shall  have  occasion  further  on  to  show  that  even  the  royal
tombs  did  not  escape  the  rapacity  of  thieves.


CRIMES  IN   THE  NECROPOLIS.  531)

connivauce  of  the  custodians,  set  boldly  to  work  on  tombs  both  recent  and
ancient.^  Not  content  with  stealing  the  funerary  furniture,  which  they  disposed
of  to  the  undertakers,  they  stripped  the  mummies  also,  and  smashed  the  bodies
in  their  efforts  to  secure  tlie  jewels;  then,  putting  the  remains  together  again,
they  rearranged  the  mummies  afresh  so  cleverly  that  they  can  no  longer  be
distinguished  by  their  outward  appearance  from  the  originals,  and  tlie  first
wrappings  must  be  removed  before  the  fraud  can  be  discovered.-  From  time  to
time  one  of  these  rogues  would  allow  himself  to  be  taken  for  the  purpose  of
denouncing  his  comrades,  and  avenging  himself  for  the  injustice  of  which  he
was  the  victim  in  the  division  of  the  spoil ;  he  was  laid  hold  of  by  the  Mazaiu,
and  brought  before  the  tribunal  of  justice.  The  lands  situated  on  the  left  bank
of  the  Nile  belonged  partly  to  the  king  and  partly  to  the  god  Amon,  and  any
infraction  of  the  law  in  regard  to  the  necropolis  was  almost  certain  to  come
within  the  jurisdiction  of  one  or  other  of  them.^  The  commission  appointed,
therefore,  to  determine  the  damage  done  in  any  case,  included  in  many  instances
the  high  priest  or  his  delegates,  as  well  as  the  officers  of  the  Pharaoh.*  The
office  of  this  commission  was  to  examine  into  the  state  of  the  tombs,  to  inter-
rogate the  witnesses  and  the  accused,  applying  the  torture  if  necessary  :  when
they  had  got  at  the  facts,  the  tribunal  of  the  notables  condemned  to  impale-
ment some  half  a  dozen  of  the  poor  wretches,  and  caused  some  score  of  others
to  be  whipped.^  But,  when  two  or  three  months  had  elapsed,  the  remembrance
of  the  punishment  began  to  die  away,  and  the  depredations  began  afresh.

The  low  rate  of  wages  occasioned,  at  fixed  periods,  outbursts  of  discon-
tent and  trouble  which  ended  in  actual  disturbances.  The  rations  allowed  to
each  workman,  and  given  to  him  at  the  beginning  of  each  month,  would  possibly
have  been  sufficient  for  himself  and  his  family,  but,  owing  to  the  usual  lack
of  foresight  in  the  Egyptian,  they  were  often  consumed  long  before  the  time
fixed,  and  the  pincli  soon  began  to   be  felt.''     The  workmen,  demoralised  by

'  As  to  the  corruption  and  complicity  of  scribes,  priest.^,  and  guardians,  see  Chabas,  l\[clanges
Jigypiologiques,  3rd  scries,  vol.  i.  pp.  19(;-201,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  34-43.  Many  of  these  individuals  figure
in  the  list  of  robbers  copied  on  to  the  back  of  the  Abbott  Papyrus;  see  as  to  the  scribes  (11.  11,  2H,
27,  40,  41),  as  to  the  priests  (11.  S,  12,  18,  33,  35),  and  even  a  prophet  appears  among  them  (11.  13,  38).
Other  examples  are  cited  by  Spiegkluurg,  Arhe.Uer  und  Arheiterheicegung  iiii  PharaoneHreidi,  p.  24,
and  especially  in  the  Translation,  n/  the  Mayor  Papyri  A,  B,  in  which  [a  fair  proportion  of  ])riests,
scribes,  and  guardians  are  to  be  found  among  those  accused  of  violating  the  tombs.

'  Jomard  pointed  out  some  time  ago  eases  of  these  re-made  mummies  of  men  and  animal*
(Description  des  Ilijpog^es  de  la  ville  de  Tliebes,  in  Description  ile  VKgypte,  vol.  iii.  pp.  85,  Stj,  94,  05).
JIany  were  discovered  among  those  of  the  princes  and  princesses  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  at  Ueir  el-
Bahari  (Masi-ero,  Les  Momies  rogales,  in  M^in.  de  la  Mimion  Fran^aiae,  vol.  1.  pp.  538-542, 544, 547, 548).

'  Masi'kro,  Uiu!  Enquile  judiciare  a  Thebes  sous  la  XX'  dijnastie,  p.  C9.

*  W'itli  regard  to  this  organisation  of  tlie  police  and  of  the  tribunals  of  justice,  I  can  only  refer  to-
the  work  of  Si'IEGELBErg,  already  referred  to,  Slndien  und  Matcrialien  zum  Ilechtswesen  des  I'ha-
raonenreiches,  1892.

'  This  is  how  I  translate  n  fairly  common  expression,  which  means  literally,  "  to  bo  put  on  the  wood."
Spiegelberg  sees  in  this  only  a  method  of  aduiinistering  torture  {op.  cit.,  pp.  70-78,  125,  ii.  32:i).

°  See  pp.  342-344  of  the  Daicn  of  Ciriiization  for  what  is  said  on  tliis  subject.     lii  ief  descriptions-


540  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

their  involuntary  abstinence,  were  not  slow  to  turn  to  the  overseer :  "  We
are  perishing  of  hunger,  and  there  are  still  eighteen  days  before  the  next
month."  1  The  latter  was  prodigal  of  fair  speeches,  but  as  his  words  were
rarely  accompanied  by  deeds,  the  workmen  would  not  listen  to  him ;  they
stopped  work,  left  the  workshop  in  turbulent  crowds,  ran  with  noisy  demon-
strations to  some  public  place  to  bold  a  meeting— perhaps  the  nearest  monu-
ment, at  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  Thutmosis  III.,^  behind  the  chapel  of
jMiuephtah,**  or  in  the  court  of  that  of  Seti  I.*  Their  overseers  followed
them ;  the  police  commissioners  of  the  locality,  the  Mazaiu,  and  the  scribes
mino-led  with  them  and  addressed  themselves  to  some  of  the  leaders  with  whom
they  might  be  acquainted.  But  these  would  not  at  first  give  them  a  hearing.
"  We  will  not  return,"  they  would  say  to  the  peacemakers ;  "  make  it  clear
to  your  superiors  down  below  there."  It  must  have  been  mauifest  that  from
their  point  of  view  their  complaints  were  well  founded,  and  the  official,  who
afterwards  gave  an  account  of  the  affair  to  the  authorities,  was  persuaded  of
this.  "  We  went  to  hear  them,  and  they  spoke  true  words  to  us."  ^  For  the
most  part  these  strikes  had  no  other  consequence  than  a  prolonged  stoppage
of  work,  until  the  distribution  of  rations  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  month
o-ave  the  malcontents  courage  to  return  to  their  tasks.  Attempts  were  made
to  prevent  tlie  recurrence  of  these  troubles  by  changing  the  method  and  time
of  payments.  These  were  reduced  to  an  interval  of  fifteen  days,  and  at  length,
indeed,  to  one  of  eight."  The  result  was  very  much  the  same  as  before :  the
workman,  paid  more  frequently,  did  not  on  that  account  become  more  prudent,
and  the  hours  of  labour  lost  did  not  decrease.  The  individual  man,  if  he  had
had  nobody  to  consider  but  himself,  might  have  put  up  with  the  hardships
of  his  situation,  but  there  were  almost  always  wife  and  children  or  sisters  con-
cerned, who  clamoured  for  bread  in  their  hunger,  and  all  the  while  the  store-
houses of  the  temples  or  those  of  the  state  close  by  were  filled  to  overflowing
with  durrah,  barley,  and  wheat.''    The  temptation  to  break  open  the  doors  and  to

of  these  disorders  have  been  given  by  Maspero,  La  Vie  populaire  a  Tltehes,  of  which  a  summary  was
published  in  the  Bullelin  du  Cercle  Historique,  1S83,  pp.  68-71,  Lectures^Butoriqiies,  pp.  34-38,  and
by  Spiegelbekg,  Arheiler  und  ArheiterbeweguHg  im  I'haraomnreich,  pp.  17-23.

'  Pleyte-Rossi,  Turin  Papyrus,  pi.  xlii.  1.  2.

'  Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  xlii.  11.  2,  3 ;  perhaps  the  chapel  of  Uazraosii,  or  possibly  the  free  space  before
the  temple  of  Deir  el-Bahari.

'  Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  xlvi.  1.  15  ;  cf.  Chae.^s,  Mdanges  Egyptologiquns,  3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  55.  The  site
of  this  'chapel  was  discovered  by  Prof.  Petrie  in  the  spring  of  1896.  It  had  previously  been
supposed  to  be  a  temple  of  Amenotlies  III.

'  Pleyte-Kossi,  Turin  Papyrus,  pi.  xlviii.  1.  117;  cf.  Chabas,  Melanges  Egyptologiques,  3rd  series,
vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  57  ;  it  was  probably  the  court  of  the  temple  of  Qurueh.

'  The  outbreak  which  I  have  described  is  treated  fully  in  Pleyte-Rossi,  Ttirin  Papyrus,  pi.  xliv.
U.  11-17;  cf.  Chabas,  Mdanges  Egyptologiques,  ord  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  49-51.

«  Chauas-Lieblein,  Deux  Papyrus  hiifratiques  du  Mtisee  de  Turin,  pp.  25,  38,  and  pi.  iv.  1.  2.

'  Khonsu,  for  example,  excites  his  comrades  to  pillage  the  storehouses  of  the  gate  (Plevte-
Itossi,  Turin  Papyrus,  pi.  xlv.  1.  6,  xlvi.  1.  2;  cf.  Chabas,  UManges  Egyptologiques,  3rd  scries,  vol.  ii.
pp.  53,  51).


STSIKES  AMONG    THE    WORKMEN  AT  THEBES.  541

help  themselves  in  the  present  necessity  must  have  been  keenly  felt.  Some
bold  spirits  among  the  strikers,  having  set  out  together,  scaled  the  two  or  three
boundary  walls  by  which  the  granaries  were  protected,  but  having  reached
this  position  their  heart  failed  them,  and  they  contented  themselves  with
sending  to  the  chief  custodian  an  eloquent  pleader,  to  lay  before  him  their
very  humble  request :  "  We  are  come,  urged  by  famine,  urged  by  thirst,
having  no  more  linen,  no  more  oil,  no  more  fish,  no  more  vegetables.  Send
to  Pharaoh,  our  master,  send  to  the  king,  our  lord,  that  he  may  provide
us  with  the  necessaries  of  life."  ^  If  one  of  them,  with  less  self-restraint,  was-
so  carried  away  as  to  let  drop  an  oath,  which  was  a  capital  offence,  saying,
''  By  Amon !  by  the  sovereign,  whose  anger  is  death  !  "  if  he  asked  to  be  taken
before  a  magistrate  in  order  that  he  might  reiterate  there  his  complaint,  the
others  interceded  for  him,  and  begged  that  he  might  escape  the  punishment
fixed  by  the  law  for  blasphemy  ;  the  scribe,  good  fellow  as  he  was,  closed  his-
ears  to  the  oath,'-^  and,  if  it  were  in  his  power,  made  a  beginning  of  satisfying
their  demands  by  drawing  upon  the  excess  of  past  months  to  such  an  extent
as  would  pacify  them  for  some  days,  and  by  paying  them  a  supplemental  wage
in  the  name  of  the  Pharaoh.^  They  cried  out  loudly :  "  Shall  there  not  be
served  out  to  us  corn  in  excess  of  that  which  has  been  distributed  to  us ;  if
not  we  will  not  stir  from  this  spot?"  At  length  the  end  of  the  month
arrived,  and  they  all  appeared  together  before  the  magistrates,  when  they  said  :
"  Let  the  scribe,  Khamoisit,  who  is  accountable,  be  sent  for  !  "  He  was  there-
upon brought  before  the  notables  of  the  town,  and  they  said  to  him  :  "  See
to  the  corn  which  thou  hast  received,  and  give  some  of  it  to  the  people  of
the  necropolis."  Pmontuniboisit  was  then  sent  for,  and  "rations  of  wheat  were
given  to  us  daily."  Famine  was  not  caused  only  by  the  thriftlessness  of  the
multitude  :  administrators  of  all  ranks  did  not  hesitate  to  ajipropriate,  each
one  according  to  his  irosition,  a  portion  of  the  means  entrusted  to  them  for  the
maintenance  of  their  subordinates,  and  the  latter  often  received  only  instal-
ments of  what  was  due  to  them.  The  culprits  often  escaped  from  their  difS-
culties  by  either  laying  hold  of  half  a  dozen  of  their  brawling  victims,  or  by
yielding  to  them  a  proportion  of  their  ill-gotten  gains,  before  a  rumour  of
the  outbreak  could  reach  head-quarters.  It  happened  from  time  to  time,
however,  when  the  complaints  against  them  were  either  too  serious  or  too
frequent,  that  they  were  deprived  of  their  functions,  cited  before  the  tribunals,

'  Pleyte-Kossi,  Ttirin  Ptijiyrui,  pi.  xliii.  II.  1-5.

'  Id.,  ibid.,  pi.  xliii.  11.  (!,  7;  of.  Chaisas,  Ilehraio-Mjijptiaoa,  in  the  Transactions  of  tlio  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  vol.  i.  pp.  177-182,  and  Mdanges  Krjyptologiques,  3r(I  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  4S.

'  Pi.EVTE-Ro--si,  Turin  Papyruf,  pi.  xlvi.  11.  11-17;  cf.  Cuaba.s,  Milamjes  Eijyplohfjiquee,
3rd  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  52-.")5,  and  Chahas-Likulein,  Deux  rai/yrug  hi^raliifiea  du  Mutie  de  Turing
p.  38


542  THE   CLOSE   OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

and  condemned.  What  took  place  at  Thebes  was  repeated  with  some  varia-
tions in  each  of  the  other  large  cities.  Corruption,  theft,  and  extortion  had
prevailed  among  the  officials  from  time  immemorial,  and  the  most  active
"kings  alone  were  able  to  repress  these  abuses,  or  confine  them  within  narrow
limits ;  ■'  as  soon  as  discipline  became  relaxed,  however,  they  began  to  appear
again,  and  we  have  no  more  convincing  jiroof  of  the  state  of  decadence
into  which  Thebes  had  fallen  towards  the  middle  of  the  XX"*  dynasty,  than
the  audacity  of  the  crimes  committed  in  tlie  necropolis  during  the  reigns  of
the  successors  of  Ramses  III.

The  priesthood  of  Amon  alone  displayed  any  vigour  and  enjoyed  any
prosperity  in  the  general  decline.  After  the  victory  of  the  god  over  the
heretic  kings  no  one  dared  to  dispute  his  supremacy,  and  the  Ramessides
displayed  a  devout  humility  before  him  and  his  ministers.'-^  Henceforward
he  became  united  to  Ea  in  a  definite  manner,  and  his  authority  not  only
extended  over  the  whole  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  but  over  all  the  countries  also
-which  were  brought  within  her  influence ;  so  that  while  Pharaoh  continued  to
be  the  greatest  of  kings,  Pharaoh's  god  held  a  position  of  undivided  supremacy
among  the  deities.  He  was  the  chief  of  the  two  Enneads,  the  Heliopolitan  and
the  Hermopolitan,  and  displayed  for  the  latter  a  special  affection  ;  for  the
vague  character  of  its  eight  secondary  deities  only  served  to  accentuate  the
position  of  the  ninth  and  principal  divinity  with  whose  primacy  that  of  Amon
was  identified.  It  was  more  easy  to  attribute  to  Amon  the  entire  work  of
creation  when  Shu,  Sibu,  Osiris,  and  Sit  had  been  excluded — the  deities  whom
the  theologians  of  Heliopolis  had  been  accustomed  to  associate  with  the  demi-
urge ;  and  in  the  hymns  which  they  sang  at  his  solemn  festivals  they  did  not
hesitate  to  ascribe  to  him  all  the  acts  which  the  priests  of  former  times  had
assigned  to  the  Ennead  collectively.  "  He  made  earth,  silver,  gold, — the  true
lapis  at  his  good  pleasure.^ — He  brought  forth  the  herbs  for  the  cattle,  the
plants  upon  which  men  live. — He  made  to  live  the  fish  of  the  river, — the  birds
which  hover  in  the  air, — giving  air  to  those  which  are  in  the  egg. — He  animates
the  insects, — he  makes  to  live  the  small  birds,  the  reptiles,  and  the  gnats  as
well. — He  provides  food  for  the  rat  in  his  hole, — supports  the  bird  upon  the

'  See  pp.  316,  317  of  the  present  work  for  the  measures  taken  by  Harmhabi  to  put  a  stop  to  the
double-dealing  of  the  officials  and  the  depredatious  of  the  soldiers.

-  For  the  exalted  position  obtained  by  Amon  under  the  XVIH"'  dynasty,  see  p.  312,  et  seq.,  of  the
present  work ;  and  ibid.,  pp.  311-316,  for  the  triumph  of  Amon  and  his  priests.

'  Mamette,  Les  Papyrus  £gyptkns  du  Muse'e  dc  Boulaq,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xi.  p.  S,  11.  6,  7 ;  cf.  Gkebact,
L'Hymne  a  Ammoii-Bd  des  Pupyrus  de  Boulaq,  p.  22.  Besides  Gre'baut's  French,  we  have  also  the
Englisli  trauslatiou  of  this  hymn  by  Goodwin,  Translation  of  an  Egyptian  Hymn  to  Amon,  in  the
Transactions  o(  the  Tiihh  Aich.  Soc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  250-263,  and  Hymn  to  Amen  Pa,  in  the  Becords  of
the  Past,  1st  series,  pp.  127-136,  and  the  German  translation  by  L.  Steb.v,  Ein  Mymnus  auf  Ammon-
Bu,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S73,  yp.  71-Sl,  125-127.


ajMON,  and  the  beliefs  concerning  niM.  543

branch. — May  he  be  blessed  for  all  this,  be  who  is  alone,  but  witli  many  luuids."*
"Men  spring  from  his  two  eyes,'"-'  and  quickly  do  they  lose  their  breath  while
acclaiming  him — Egyptians  and  Libyans,  Negroes  and  Asiatics  :  "  Hail  to
thee ! "  they  all  say  ;  "  praise  to  thee  because  thou  dwellest  amongst  us ! —
Obeisances  before  thee  because  thou  createst  us ! " — "  Thou  art  blessed  by
every  living  thing,— thou  hast  worshippers  in  every  place,— in  the  highest  of
the  heavens,  in  all  the  breadth  of  the  earth, — in  the  depths  of  the  seas. — The
gods  bow  before  thy  Majesty, — magnifying  the  souls  which  form,  them, — rejoic-
ing at  meeting  those  who  have  begotten  them, — they  say  to  thee :  '  Go  in
peace, — father  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  gods, —  who  suspended  the  heaven,
levelled  the  earth  ; — creator  of  beings,  maker  of  things, — sovereign  king,  chief
of  the  gods, — we  adore  thy  .souls,  because  thou  hast  made  us, — we  lavish
oiferings  upon  thee,  because  thou  hast  given  us  birth, — we  shower  benedictions
upon  thee,  because  thou  dwellest  among  us.' "  ^  We  have  here  the  same  ideas
as  those  which  predominate  in  the  hymns  addressed  to  Atonu,*  and  in  the
prayers  directed  to  Phtah,  the  Nile,  Shu,  and  the  Sun-god  of  Heliopolis  at  the
same  period.'^  The  idea  of  a  single  god,  lord  and  maker  of  all  things,  con-
tinued to  prevail  more  and  more  throughout  Egypt— not,  indeed,  among  the
lower  classes  who  persi.sted  in  the  worsliip  of  their  genii  and  their  animals,  but
among  the  royal  family,  the  priests,  the  nobles,  and  people  of  culture.  The
latter  believed  that  the  Sun-god  had  at  length  absorbed  all  the  various  beings
who  had  been  manifested  in  the  feudal  divinities:  these,  in  fact,  had  sur-
rendered their  original  characteristics  in  order  to  become  forms  of  the  Sun,
Amon  as  well  as  the  others — and  the  new  belief  displayed  itself  in  magni-
fying the  solar  deity,  but   the   solar  deity   united   with  the   Tlieban  Amon,

'  llAniETTE,  Les  Papyrus  Kijyidiens  da  Miisce  da  Boulu'i,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xi.  p.  G,  II.  3-7;  cl'.  Gkeisalt,
L'Uijmne  a  Ammun-Rd  des  i'rt/i//r«s  de  Boulaq,  pp.  17,  IS.

''  Mahiette,  ihid.,  vul.  ii.  pi.  xi.  p.  G,  1.  3;  for  the  idea  of  ci'uatiou  as  proceeJiiig  from  tlie  tours
of  the  god,  see  Maspebo,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  ISO.

'  MAmETTE,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xi.  p.  7,  1.  2,  p.  8,  1.  1 ;  cf.  Ghebalt,  VBymnc  a  Ainmon-Itd  dea
Paiiyrm  de  Bouhiq,  pp.  18-20.  CT.  another  hymn  of  a  nioremyatic  character,  iuscribcxl  iu  the  temple
of  Amon  in  the  TheUin  Oa^ia,■  it  was  published,  with  a  German  trauslatioi.,  by  Bkigsch,  lieim  an
der  Grossen  Oaxe  El-Khargeh,  pi.  vii.  pp.  27-18,  and  in  Kuglish  by  Birch,  IiiscripHon  of  Darius  at  the
Temple  of  Khanjeh,  iu  the  Transactions  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  v.  pp.  293-302  ;  the  latter  translation  is
also  to  tie  found  in  the  Records  of  the  Fast,  Ist  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  135-H4,

See  the  fragments  of  these  compositions  given  on  pp.  322,  323  of  the  present  work.  Breasted
{De  Ilymnis  in  Solem  »uh  Aineuophide  IV.  conceptis,  p.  9)  points  out  the  decisive  infiuenee  exercised
by  the  solar  hymus  of  Amenothts  IV.  on  the  development  of  the  solar  ideas  contained  in  the  hymns
to  Amon  put  forth  or  re-edited  in  the  XX"'  dynasty.

'  The  hymn  to  Phtah  is  contaiued  iu  the  Berlin  I'apyrua,  No.  VII.  (Lepsids,  Deuhm.,  vi.  pis.  118-
121);  it  was  explained  hy  ruutRrr,  f.'tudes  jiijyptolotjiiiucs,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-19.  As  to  liymus  to  the
Nile,  see  Masi-eho,  ilriwrt  o/  Civilization,  jjp.  39-13;  the  Berlin  Papyrus,  No.  V.  (Lei'siu.s,  ;>»/««.,
vi.  115-117),  contains  a  line  hymn  addressed  to  Ka-HarmaUhis,  which  was  translated  by  Ma.si'euo  in
litudes  de  Mylhohgie,  etc.,  Jigyptiennes,  vol.  ii.  ])]i.  irjl-Vil  (cf.  JJisloire  Ancienue,  -Ith  eilit.,  pp.  280-
284),  and  by  Lu.'iUi.VGTO.N,  Hymn  to  Ra-IIarmachis,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  series,  vol.  viii.
pp.  129-131.


544  TTJE    CLOSE   OF   THE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.

that  is,  Amon-Ka.  The  omnipotence  of  this  one  god  did  not,  however,  exclude
a  belief  in  the  existence  of  his  compeers ;  the  theologians  thought  all  tlie
while  that  the  beings  to  whom  ancient  generations  had  accorded  a  complete
independence  in  respect  of  their  rivals  were  nothing  more  than  emanations
from  one  supreme  being.  If  local  pride  forced  them  to  apj^ly  to  this  single
deity  the  designation  customarily  used  in  their  city — Phtah  at  Memphis,
Anhuri-Shii  at  Thinis,  Khnumu  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  first  cataract —
they  were  quite  willing  to  allow,  at  the  same  time,  that  these  appellations
were  but  various  masks  for  one  face.  Phtah,  Hapi,  Khnumu,  Ra, — all  the
gods,  in  fact, — were  blended  with  each  other,  and  formed  but  one  deity — a
unique  existence,  multiple  in  his  names,  and  mighty  according  to  the  impor-
tance of  the  city  in  which  he  was  worshipped.  Hence  Amon,  lord  of  the
capital  and  patron  of  the  dynasty,  having  more  partisans,  enjoyed  more
respect,  and,  in  a  word,  felt  himself  possessed  of  more  claims  to  be  the  sole
god  of  Egypt  than  his  brethren,  who  could  not  claim  so  many  worshippers.

He  did  not  at  the  outset  arrogate  to  himself  the  same  empire  over  tiie  dead
as  he  exercised  over  the  living ;  he  had  delegated  his  functions  in  this  respect
to  a  goddess,  Maritsakro,  for  whom  the  poorer  inhabitants  of  the  left  bank
entertained  a  persistent  devotion.^  She  was  a  kind  of  Isis  or  hospitable  Hathor,
whose  subjects  in  the  other  world  adapted  themselves  to  the  nebulous  and
dreary  existence  provided  for  their  disembodied  "  doubles."  The  Osirian  and
solar  doctrines  were  afterwards  blended  together  in  this  local  mythology,  and
from  the  XI"'  dynasty  onwards  the  Theban  nobility  had  adopted,  along  with
the  ceremonies  in  use  in  the  Memphite  period,  the  Heliopolitan  beliefs  concerning
the  wanderings  of  the  soul  in  the  west,  its  embarkation  on  the  solar  ship,  and
its  resting-places  in  the  fields  of  lalu.  The  rock-tombs  of  the  XVIII'"  dynasty
demonstrate  that  the  Thebans  had  then  no  different  concept  of  their  life
beyond  the  world  from  that  entertained  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  most  ancient
cities  :  they  ascribed  to  that  existence  the  same  inconsistent  medley  of  contra-
dictory ideas,  from  which  each  one  might  select  what  pleased  him  best — either
repose  in  a  well-provisioned  tomb,  or  a  dwelling  close  to  Osiris  in  the  middle
of  a  calm  and  agreeable  paradise,  or  voyages  with  Ra  around  the  world."  The
fusion  of  Ra  and  Amon,  and  the  predominance  of  the  solar  idea  which  arose
from  it,  forced  the  theologians  to  examine  more  closely  these  inconsistent
notions,  and  to  eliminate  from  them  anything  which  might  be  out  of  harmony

'  See  what  is  said  about  this  goddess  and  her  cult,  pp.  537,  538  of  the  present  work.

'  Tlio  Pyramid  tests  are  found  for  the  moat  part  in  the  tombs  of  Nofirii  (Maspero,  La  Pyramide
du  roi  Ounas,  iu  the  Becueil,  vol.  iii.  pp.  201-216)  and  Harhotpft  (Maspero,  Trots  Amines  defouilles,
in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Missiou,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  137,  et  seq.,  225-231,  236)  ;  the  texts  of  the  Bool;  of  the
Dead  are  met  with  on  the  Theban  coifins  of  the  same  period  (Lepsius,  JSUeste  Texte,  and  Maspero,
Trois  Annies  defouilles,  in  the  Mimoires  de  la  Mission,  vol.  i.  pp.  155-172,  177-lSO,  210-22i).


AM  ON    GOD    OF    THE  DEAD.  545

with  the  new  views.  The  devout  servant  of  Amon,  desirous  of  keeping  in
constant  touch  with  his  god  both  here  and  in  the  other  world,  couhl  not
imagine  a  happier  future  for  his  soul  than  in  its  going  forth  in  the  fulness  of
light  by  dav,  and  taking  refuge  by  night  on  the  very  bark  which  carried  the
object  of  his  worship  through  the  thick  darkness  of  Hades.  To  this  end  he
endeavoured  to  collect  the  formula}  which  would  enable  him  to  attain  to  this
supreme  happiness,  and  also  inform  him  concerning  the  hidden  mysteries  of
that  obscure  half  of  the  world  in  which  the  sun  dwelt  between  daylight  and
daylight,  teaching  him  also  how  to  make  friends  and  supporters  of  the  benevolent
arenii,  and  how  to  avoid  or  defeat  the  monsters  whom  he  would  encounter.  The
best  known  of  the  books  relating  to  these  mysteries  contained  a  geographical
description  of  the  future  world  as  it  was  described  by  the  Theban  priests  to-
wards the  end  of  the  Eamesside  period  ;  it  was,  in  fact,  an  itinerary  in  which  was
depicted  each  separate  region  of  tiie  underworld,  with  its  gates,  buildings,  and
inhabitants.^  The  account  of  it  given  by  the  P]gyptiau  tlieologians  did  not  exhibit
much  inventive  genius.  They  had  started  witli  the  theory  that  the  sun,  after
setting  exactly  west  of  Thebes,  rose  again  due  east  of  the  city,  and  they  therefore
placed  in  the  dark  hemisphere  all  the  regions  of  the  universe  which  lay  to  the
north  of  those  two  points  of  the  compass.  The  first  stage  of  the  sun's  journey,
after  disappearing  below  the  horizon,  coincided  with  the  period  of  twilight ;
the  orb  travelled  along  the  open  sky,  diminishing  the  brightness  of  his  fires
as  he  climbed  northward,  and  did  not  actually  enter  the  underworld  till  he
reached  Abydos,  close  to  the  spot  where,  at  the  "  Mouth  of  the  Cleft,"  the  souls
of  the  faithful  awaited  him.  As  soon  as  he  had  received  them  into  his
boat,  he  plunged  into  the  tunnel  which  there  pierces  the  mountains,  and  the
cities  through  which  he  first  passed  between  Abydos  and  the  Fayum  were
known  as  the  Osirian  fiefs.  He  continued  his  journey  tlirough  them  for  the
space  of  two  hours,  receiving  the  homage  of  the  inhabitants,  and  putting  such
of  the  shades  on  shore  as  were  predestined  by  their  special  devotion  for  the  Osiris

'  The  mouumental  text  of  this  book  is  found  sculptured  on  a  certain  number  of  the  tombs  of  the
Theban  kings ;  it  was  partially  copied  by  Cuampolmon,  Monuments  de  VEij)j}ite  ct  de  la  Niibie,  vol.  i.
p.  7.")8,  ft  seq.,  and  in  extenso  by  Lefebuke,  Lee  Uypog^es  roijaux  de  Thebes,  in  whicli  the  chapters  arc
distributed  throughout  the  work  according  to  the  place  wliich  tliey  occupy  on  the  walls  of  the  tombs.
Several  texts  from  papyri  liave  been  puldisbod,  notably  tliat  by  Lanzone,  Le  Domicile  des  Esprits,
1879  ;  by  Mauiette,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens  du  Must^e  de  Dotdaq,  vol.  i.  pis.  -10-41 ;  and  by  Pleyte,  Les
Monuments  de  Leyde,  3rd  part,  T.  71.  It  was  first  translated  into  English  by  Biiicn,  The  Vapyrus  of
Neshhem,  Hvn,  1803,  then  into  French  by  Dkvkuia,  Catalogue  des  Manuscrila  Kiiypliens  du  Mus(fe  de
Louvre,  pp.  15-18  (cf.  Pieuket,  lleeueil  d'inscriptiuns  inddites  du  Mus(fe  du  Louvre,  vol.  i.  pp.  103-
148),  and  by  Maspkho,  litudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'ArcUologie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  30-147.  An  edition  without
illustrations,  rarely  met  with  on  papyrus,  has  been  edited  and  translato.l  by  JiidUiKU,  Le  Livre  de  samir
,;e  qu'il  y  a  de  I'JIades,  18a3,  8vo.  A  study  of  the  ideas  which  inspired  its  composition  has  been
made  by  Masi'eho,  jitudes  de  Mtjthologie  ct  d'Archeologie,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-181.  Mention  is  made  m
this  article  of  other  still  rarer  and  more  mystorioua  works  of  the  same  type,  found  on  the  walls  of  the
royal  tombs ;  the  illustration  on  p.  547  is  taken  from  one  of  the  latter.

2  N


546  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

of  Abydos  and  his  associates,  Horus  and  Anubis,  to  establish  themselves  in  this
territory.     Beyond  Heracleopolis,  he  entered   the  domains  of  the  Memphite
gods,  the  "  laud  of  Sokaris,"  and  this  probably  was  the  most  perilous  moment
of  his  journey.     The  feudatories  of  Phtah  were  gathered  together  in  grottoes,
connected  by  a  labyrinth  of  narrow  passages  through  which  even  the  most  fully
initiated  were  scarcely  able  to  find  their  way ;  the  luminous   boat,  instead  of
venturing  within  these  catacombs,  passed  above  them  by  mysterious  tracks.
The  crew  were  unable  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  sovereign  through  whose  realm
they  journeyed,  and  they  in  like  manner  were  invisible  to  him  ;  he  could  only
hear  the  voices  of  the  divine  sailors,  and  he  answered  them  from  the  depth
of  the  darkness.     Two  hours  were  spent  in  this  obscure  passage,  after  which
navigation  became  easier  as  the  vessel  entered  the  nomes  subject  to  the  Osirises
of  the  Delta  :  four  consecutive  hours  of  sailing  brought  the  bark  from  the
province  in  which  the  four  principal  bodies  of  the  god  slept  to  that  in  which
his  four  souls  kept  watch,  and,  as  it  passed,  it  illuminated  the  eight  circles
reserved  for  men  and  kings  who  worshipped  the  god  of  Mendes.     From  the
tenth   hour   onwards  it   directed  its  course   due   south,  and  passed    through
the  Augarit,  the  place  of  fire  and  abysmal  waters  to  which  the  HelJopolitans
consigned  the  souls  of  the  impious ;  then  finally  quitting  the  tunnel,  it  soared
up  in  the  east  with  the  first  blusli  of  dawn.     Each  of  the  ordinary  dead  was
landed  at  that  particular  hour  of  the  twelve,  which  belonged  to  the  god  of  his
choice  or  of  his  native  town.     Left  to  dwell  there  they  suffered  no  absolute
torment,  but  languished  in  the  darkness  in  a  kind  of  painful  torpor,  from  which
condition  the  approach  of  the  bark  alone  was  able  to  rouse  them.     They  hailed
its  daily  coming  with  acclamations,  and  felt  new  life  during  the  hour  in  which
its  rays  fell  on  them,  breaking  out  into  lamentations  as  the  bark  passed  away
and  the  light  disappeared  with  it.     The  souls  who  were  devotees  of  the  sun
escaped  this  melancholy  existence  ;  they  escorted  the  god,  reduced  though  he
was  to  a  mummied  corpse,  on  his  nightly  cruise,  and  were  piloted  by  him  safe
and  sound  to  meet  the  first  streaks  of  the  new  day.    As  the  boat  issued  from
the  mountain  in  the  morning  between  the  two  trees  which  flanked  the  gate
of  the  east,  these  souls  had  their  choice  of  several  ways  of  spending  the  day  on
which  they  were  about  to  enter.     They  might  join  their  risen  god  in  his  course
through  the  hours  of  light,  and  assist  him  in  combating  Apophis  and  his  accom-
plices, plunging  again  at  night  into  Hades  witliout  having  even  for  a  moment
quitted  his  side.    They  might,  on  the  other  hand,  leave  him  and  once  more  enter
the  world  of  the  living,  settling  themselves  where  they  would,  but  always  by
preference  in  the  tombs  where  their  bodies  awaited  them,  and  where  tliey  could
enjoy  the  wealth  which  had  been  accumulated  there :  they  might  walk  within


548


THE   CLOSE    OF   THE   THEBAN   EMPIRE.


their  garden,  and  sit  beneath  the  trees  they  had  planted ;  they  could  enjoy  the
open  air  beside  the  pond  they  had  dujr,  and  breathe  the  gentle  north  breeze  on  its
banks  after  the  midday  heat,  until  the  time  when  the  returning  evening  obliged

them  to  repair  once  more
toAbydos.and  re-embark
with  the  god  in  order  to
pass  the  anxious  vigils  of
the  night  under  his  pro-
tection. Thus  from  the
earliest  period  of  Egyp-
tian history  the  life  be-
yond the  tomb  was  an
eclectic  one,  made  up  of
a  series  of  earthly  enjoy-
ments combined  together.
The  Pharaohs  had
enrolled  themselves  in-
stinctively among  the
most  ardent  votaries  of
this  complex  doctrine.
Their  relationship  to  the
sun  made  its  adoption  a
duty,  and  its  profession
was  originally,  perhaps,
one  of  the  privileges  of
their  position.  Ra  in-
vited them  on  board
because  they  were  his  children,  subsequently  extending  this  favour  to  those
whom  they  should  deem  worthy  to  be  associated  with  them,  and  thus  become
companions  of  the  ancient  deceased  kings  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.'-^  The
idea  which  the  Egyptians  thus  formed  of  the  other  world,  and  of  the  life  of
the  initiated  within  it,  reacted  gradually  on  their  concept  of  the  tomb  and  of
its  befitting  decoration.  They  began  to  consider  the  entrances  to  the  pyramid,
and  its  internal  passages  and  chambers,  as  a  conventional  representation  of  the
gates,  passages,  and  halls  of  Hades  itself;  when  the  pyramid  passed  out  of
fashion,  and  they  had  replaced  it  by  a  tomb  cut  in  the  rock  in  one  or  other  of

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato  of  the  tomb  of  Ramses  IV.

^  This  is  apparently  what  we  gather  from  the  picture  inserted  in  chapter  xvii.  of  the  "  Book  of
tlie  Dead  "  (Lepsius,  Das  Todtenbuch,  pi.  vii.,  and  from  the  variants  collected  by  Naville,  Das  Tlie-
hanische  Todtenbuch,  vol.  i.),  where  we  see  the  kings  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  guiding  the  divine
bark  and  the  deceased  with  them.


THE  ENTRANCE  TO  A  EOTAL  TOMB.'


■K<C


-4''^:.o]}.j-^j^:;ht4^-


^i


h


o


't-c


;p:^<|<w   -^<£


yidi:


^11


£

*^-'


oc


0^


111:2  aiii-rS'^^^^^

»«;«    l.dr;i?   -«   C        Hi!


^.iiiH:


-fell


■>  ■~"^'


^^^[l^f^tt


^oiOl^eOl;-''^^'''


M!iy!^5H^liri3dl^ i^c^ te %k  \  •


Uq|]f^<|<^|


k'  ^^ll^l^^i


^:


ifi$t4r^^^^i■i^l^^:^^SSa44


M^^aSl^!l5l4J:5'^M-()^'^^Ci^


550  TEE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

the  branches  of  the  Bab  el-Moluk  valley,  the  plan  of  construction  which  they  chose
was  an  exact  copy  of  that  employed  by  the  Memphites  and  earlier  Thebans,
and  they  hollowed  out  for  themselves  in  the  mountain-side  a  buryiug-place  on
the  same  lines  as  those  formerly  emf)loyed  within  the  pyramidal  structure.
The  relative  positions  of  the  tunnelled  tombs  along  the  valley  were  not  deter-
mined by  any  order  of  rank  or  of  succession  to  the  throne ;  ^  each  Pharaoh  after
Kamses  I.  set  to  work  on  that  part  of  the  rock  where  the  character  of  the  stone
favoured  his  purpose,  and  displayed  so  little  respect  for  his  predecessors,  that
the  workmen,  after  having  tunnelled  a  gallery,  were  often  obliged  to  abandon  it
altogether,  or  to  change  the  direction  of  their  excavations  so  as  to  avoid  piercing
a  neighbouring  tomb.^  The  architect's  design  was  usually  a  mere  project
which  could  be  modified  at  will,  and  which  he  did  not  feel  bound  to  carry  out
with  fidelity ;  the  actual  measurements  of  the  tomb  of  Eamses  IV.  are  almost
everywhere  at  variance  with  the  numbers  and  arrangement  of  the  working
drawing  of  it  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  in  a  papyrus.*  The  general
disposition  of  the  royal  tombs,  however,  is  far  from  being  complicated ;
we  have  at  the  entrance  the  rectangular  door,  usually  surmounted  by  the  sun,
represented  by  a  yellow  disk,  before  which  the  sovereign  kneels  with  his  hands
raised  in  the  posture  of  adoration ;  this  gave  access  to  a  passage  sloping  gently
downwards,  and  broken  here  and  there  by  a  level  landing  and  steps,  leading
to  a  first  chamber  of  varying  amplitude,  at  the  further  end  of  which  a  second
passage  opened  which  descended  to  one  or  more  apartments,  the  last  of  which
contained  the  coffin.  The  oldest  rock-tombs  present  some  noteworthy  ex-
ceptions to  this  plan,  particularly  those  of  Seti  I.  and  Eamses  III ;  ^  but
from  tlie  time  of  Ramses  IV.,  there  is  no  difi'erence  to  be  remarked  in  them
except  in  the  degree  of  finish  of  the  wall-paintings  or  in  the  length  of  the
passages.  The  shortest  of  the  latter  extends  some  fifty-two  feet  into  the  rock,
while  the  longest  never  exceeds  three  hundred  and  ninety  feet.  The  same
artifices  which  had  been  used  by  the  pyramid-builders  to  defeat  the  designs  of
robbers  ^— false  mummy-pits,  painted  and  sculptured  walls  built  across  passages,
stairs  concealed  under  a  movable  stone  in  the  corner  of  a  chamber — were  also

"  CHAjn-OLLiON,  Lettrei  €crites  d'Egypte,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  223,  224.

'  CosTAZ,  Description  des  Tomheaux  des  Eois,  in  the  Degcriplion  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  iii.  p.  195  ;
Wilkinson,  Topoijraijhy  of  Thebes  and  General  View  of  Egypt,  p.  109  ;  cf.  p.  122.

=  Tbe  papyrus  is  now  in  the  Turin  Museum.  It  was  published  by  Lepsius,  Grund/jlan  des
Grahes  Konig  Hamses  IV.  in  einem  Tiiriner  Papyrus,  1867,  who  was  the  first  to  rtco'-uize  it
as  being  the  plan  of  the  tomb  of  Eamses  IV.,  and  to  notice  the  discrepancies  between  it  and  the
tomb  itself.

*  For  the  tomb  of  Seti  I.,  see  supra,  pp.  384,  3S5,  and  for  the  tomb  of  Ramses  III  supra
p.  478.

'  For  the  precautions  taken  by  the  architects  of  the  great  pyramids  against  robbers,  cf.  Dawn  of
Civilization,  p.  367  ;  tlie  account  of  the  discovery  of  the  tomb  of  Seti  I,  is  given  in  Belzoni,  Narra-
tive of  the  Operations  and  Recent  Discoveries  in  Egypt,  p.  237,  et  seq.


FATE  OF  SOULS  ACCORDING  TO  THE  TEACEINQ  OF  TEE  PRIESTS.    55]

employed  by  the  Theban  engineers.  The  decoration  of  the  walls  was  suggested,
as  in  earlier  times,  by  the  needs  of  the  royal  soul,  with  this  difference — that
the  Thebans  set  themselves  to  render  visible  to  his  eyes  by  paintings  that
whicli  tlie  jMeinphites  bad  been  content  to  present  to  his  intelligence  in  writing,
so  tiiat  the  Pharaoh  could  now  see  what  his  ancestors  had  been  able  merely  to
read  on  the  walls  of  their  tombs.  Where  the  inscribed  texts  in  the  burial-
chambur  of  Unas  state  that  Unas,  incarnate  in  the  Sun,  and  thus  representing
Osiris,  sails  over  the  waters  on  high  or  glides  into  the  Elysian  fields,  the
sculptured  or  painted  scenes  in  the  interior  of  the  Theban  catacombs  display
to  the  eye  Kamses  occupying  the  place  of  the  god  in  the  solar  bark  and  in  the
fields  of  lalu.  Where  the  walls  of  Unas  bear  only  the  prayers  recited  over  the
mummy  for  the  opening  of  liis  mouth,  for  the  restoration  of  the  use  of  his
limbs,  for  his  clothing,  perfuming,  and  nourishment,  we  see  depicted  on  those
of  Set!  I.  or  Eamses  IV.  the  mummies  of  these  kings  and  the  statues  of
their  doubles  in  the  hands  of  the  priests,  who  are  portrayed  in  the  perform-
ance of  these  various  offices.  The  starry  ceilings  of  the  pyramids  reproduce
the  aspect  of  the  sky,  but  without  giving  the  names  of  the  stars:  on  the
ceilings  of  some  of  the  Eamesside  rock-tombs,  on  the  other  hand,  the  con-
stellations are  represented,  each  with  its  proper  figure,  while  astronomical
tables  give  the  position  of  the  heavenly  bodies  at  intervals  of  fifteen  days,
so  that  the  soul  could  tell  at  a  glance  into  what  region  of  the  firmament
the  course  of  the  bark  would  bring  him  each  night.  In  the  earlier  Ramesside
tombs,  under  Seti  I.  and  liamses  II.,  the  execution  of  these  subjects  shows
evidence  of  a  care  and  skill  which  are  quite  marvellous,  and  both  figures
and  hieroglyphics  betray  the  hand  of  accomplished  artists.  But  in  the
tomb  of  Kamses  III.  the  work  has  already  begun  to  show  signs  of  inferiority,
and  the  majority  of  tiie  scenes  are  coloured  in  a  very  summary  fashion  ;  a  raw
yellow  predominates,  and  the  tones  of  the  reds  and  blues  remind  us  of  a  child's
first  efforts  at  painting.  Tliis  decline  is  even  more  marked  under  the  succeed-
ing Kamessides;  the  drawing  has  deteriorated,  the  tints  have  become  more
and  more  crude,  and  the  latest  paintings  seem  but  a  lamentable  caricature  of
the  earlier  ones.^

The  courtiers  and  all  those  connected  with  the  worship  of  Amon-Ka —
priests,  prophets,  singers,  and  functionaries  connected  with  the  neci-opolis —
shared  the  same  belief  with  regard  to  the  future  world  as  their  sovereign,
and  tliey  carried  their  faith  in  tiie  sun's  power  to  the  point  of  identifying
themselves  with  him  after  death,  and  of  substituting  the  name  of  Ea  for  that
of  Osiris;-    they  either  did  not  venture,  however,  to    go   further  tlian  tliis,

'  Masi'Kho,  Archi'iilogie  lujyptienw.,  pp.  152-158.

"  For  tbu  BubBtitution  of  tlio  title  ot  Ki\  for  tliat  of  Osiris,  and  for  the  mouuments  which  have
ipermittcd  ua  to  take  cognizance  of  tliis  change,  cf.  Maspero,  Rapport  sur  ime  Mission  en  Italie,  in  the


55-2


TEE   CLOSE   OF   THE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.


or  were  unable   to  introduce  into  their  tombs  all  that  we  find  in  the   Bab
el-Moluk.     They  confined  themselves  to  writing  briefly  on  their  own  coSlns,  or
confiding  to  the  mummies  of  their  fellow-believers,  in  addition  to  the  "  Book
of  the  Dead,"  a  copy  of  the  "  Book  of  knowing   what  there  is  in  Hades,"
or   of   some    other   mystic    writing    which    was    in
^ — ^-^         harmony    with    their     creed.      Hastily
prepared  copies  of  these  were  sold  by
unscrupulous  scribes,  often  badly  written
and  almost  always  incomplete,  in  which
were    hurriedly    set    down    haphazard
the  episodes  of  the  course  of  the  sun
with    explanatory  illustrations.     The
representations  of  the  gods  in  them
are  but  little  better  than  caricatures,
the  text  is  full  of  faults  and  scarcely
decipherable,    and    it    is    at    times
difficult  to  recognize  the  correspond-
ence of  the  scenes  and  prayers
with  those  in  the  royal  tombs.
Although    Amon    had    become
the  supreme  god,  at   least  for
this  class  of  the  initiated,  he
was  by  no  means  the  sole  deity
worshipped  by  the  Egyptians  :
the  other  divinities  previously  associated  with  him  still  held  their  own  beside
him,  or  were  further  defined  and  invested  with  a  more  decided  personality.    The
goddess  regarded  as  his  partner  was  at  first  represented  as  childless,  in  spite  of
the  name  of  Maut  or  Miit— the  mother — by  which  she  was  invoked,  and  Amon
was   supposed  to  have   adopted  Montu,   the  god  of  Hermonthis,  in  order  to
complete  bis  triad.     Montu,  however,  formerly  the  sovereign  of  the  Theban
plain,  and  lord  over  Amon  himself,  was  of  too  exalted  a  rank  to  play  the
inferior  part  of  a  divine  son.     The  priests  were,  therefore,  obliged  to  fall  back
upon  a  personage  of  lesser  importance,  named  Khonsii,  who  up  to  that  period
had  been  relegated  to  an  obscure  position  in  the  celestial  hierarchy.     How
they  came  to  identify  him  with  the  moon,  and  subsequently   with  Osiris  and

Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  iii.  pp.  10-1-lOG,  and  Mdanges  de  Mythologie  et  d'ArcMologie  Eijyptienms^
vol.  ii.  jip.  26,  27.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bronze  statuette  in  the  Gizeb  Museum  ;  cf.  Mariette,  Album
photographiqiie  du  Musee  de  Boidaq,  pi.  i.

*  Plan  drawn  by  Tliuillier :  A  is  the  pylon,  B  the  court,  G  the  hypostyle  hall,  E  the  passage
isolating  the  sanctuary,  D  the  sanctuary,  F  the  opisthodomus  with  its  usual  chambers.


TEMPLE   OT   KHONSU.'


KIIONSU.


553


Thot,  is  as  yet  unexplained,'  but  tlie  assimilation  had  taken  place  before  the
XIX'"  dynasty  drew  to  its  close.  Klionsu,  thus  honoured,  soon  became  a
favourite  deity  with  both  the  people  and  the  upper  classes,  at  first  merely


i3%;|^  iSycjif


'  — ^-■*'-0!' — ''^  -*.—-■  —  \'~!^  '~Si'-''-  -'^-^-1


THE   TEMPLE    OE    KHilNSU    AT    KAKNAK.-


supplementing  Montu,  but  finally  supplanting  hiia  in  the  third  place  of  the
Triad.  From  the  time  of  Sesostris  onwards,  Tlieban  dogma  acknowledged
him  alone  side  by  side  with  Amon-Ka  and  Mut  the  divine  mother.

It  was  now  incumbent  on  the  Pharaoh  to  erect  to  this  newly  made  favourite
a  temple  whose  size  and  magnificence  should  be  worthy  of  the  rank  to  which
his  votaries  had  exalted  him.  To  this  end,  Ramses  III.  chose  a  suitable  site  to
the  south  of  the  hypostyle  hall  of  Karnak,  close  to  a  corner  of  the  enclosing  wall,
and  there  laid  the  foundations  of  a  temple  which  his  successors  took  nearly
a  century  to  finish.-'  Its  proportions  are  by  no  means  perfect,  the  sculpture
is  wanting  in  refinement,  the  painting  is  coarse,  and  the  masonry  was  so  faulty,
that  it  was  found  necessary  in  several  places  to  cover  it  with  a  coat  of  stucco
before  the  bas-reliefs  could  be  carved  on  the  walls ;  yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,


'  It  is  ]iosBible  that  tliis  assimilation  originated  iu  tile  fact  tliat  Kbonsil  ia  deriveil  fri)tu  tliB  vorl>
"  klionsfi,"  to  iiaviRute  :  Khoneii  would  thus  have  been  ho  who  crossed  the  heavens  iu  bis  bark — that
is,  the  moou-god  (BittGseu,  BKlirjlon  U7i(l  Mi/tJtulogin  der  Alien  JEijtjijltr,  pp.  117,  118);  ef.  Dawn  of
Civilization,  p.  507.

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Cudin,  from  ii  plioto^'raph  by  Beato.

'  Tlie  proof  that  the  temple  was  fouudcd  by  Kamses  III.  is  furnished  by  the  inscriptions  of  tho
Eancluary  and  the  surrounding  ehauibers  ;  cf.  Lei'SHS,  Denkm.,  iii.  207  b.


554


THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.


its  general  arrangement  is  so  fine,  that  it  may  well  be  regarded,  in  preference
to  other  more  graceful  or  magnificent  buildings,  as  the  typical  temple  of  the
Theban  period.     It  is  divided  into  two  parts,  separated  from  each  other  by  a

solid  wall.  In  tlie  centre
of  the  smaller  of  these  is
placed  the  Holy  of  Holies,
which  opens  at  both  ends
into  a  passage  ten  feet  in
width,  isolating  it  from  the
surrounding  buildings.  To
the  right  and  left  of  the
sanctuary  are  dark  chambers,
and  behind  it  is  a  hall  sup-
ported by  four  columns,  into
which  open  seven  small
apartments.  This  formed
the  dwelling-place  of  the
god  and  his  compeers.  The
sanctuary  communicates,  by
means  of  two  doors  placed
in  the  southern  wall,  with  a
hypostyle  hall  of  greater
width  than  depth,  divided
by  its  pillars  into  a  nave  and
two  aisles.  The  four  columns
of  the  nave  are  twenty-three
feet  in  height,  and  have
bell-shaped  capitals,  while
those  of  the  aisles,  two  on  either  side,  are  eighteen  feet  high,  and  are  crowned
with  lotiform  capitals.  The  roof  of  the  nave  was  thus  five  feet  higher  than
those  of  the  aisles,  and  in  the  clear  storey  thus  formed,  stone  gratings,  similar
to  those  in  the  temple  of  Amon,  admitted  light  to  the  building.  The  court-
yard, surrounded  by  a  fine  colonnade  of  two  rows  of  columns,  was  square,  and
was  entered  by  four  side  posterns  in  addition  to  the  open  gateway  at  the  end
placed  between  two  quadrangular  towers.  This  pylon  measures  104  feet  in
length,  and  is  32  feet  6  inches  wide,  by  58  feet  high.  It  contains  no  internal
chambers,  but  merely  a  narrow  staircase  which  leads  to  the  top  of  the  door-
way, and  thence  to  the  summit  of  the  towers.      Four  long  angular  grooves


THE  COURT  OP  THE  TEMPLE  OP  KHONSO.'


'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.


THE   TEMPLE   OF  KHONSU.


555


run  up  the  ftifade  of  the  towers  to  a  height  of  about  twenty  feet  from  the
ground,  and  are  in  the  same  line  with  a  simihir  number  of  square  holes
which  pierce  the  thickness  of  the  building  higher  up.  In  these  grooves
were  placed  Venetian  masts,  made  of  poles  spliced  together  and  held  in  their
place  by  means  of  hooks
and  wooden  stays  which
projected  from  the  four
holes ;  these  masts  were
to  carry  at  their  tops
pennons  of  various  colours.'
Such  was  the  temple  of
Khonsvi,  and  the  majority
of  the  great  Theban  build-
ings— at  Luxor,  Qurneli,
the  Eamesseum,  or  Medi-
net-Habu — were  constructed
on  similar  lines.  Even
in  their  half-ruined  con-
dition there  is  somethinsr
oppressive  and  uncanny  in
their  appearance.  The  gods
loved  to  shroud  themselves
in  mystery,  and,  therefore,
the  plan  of  the  building
was  so  arranged  as  to
render  the  transition  almost
imperceptible  from  the
blinding  sunlight  outside  to  the  darkuess  of  their  retreat  within.  In  the
courtyard,  we  are  still  surrounded  by  vast  spaces  to  which  air  and  light  have
free  access.  The  hypostyle  hall,  however,  is  pervaded  by  an  appropriate
twilight,  tlie  sanctuary  is  veiled  in  still  deeper  darkness,  while  in  the
chambers  beyond  reigns  an  almost  perpetual  night.  The  effect  produced  by
this  gradation  of  obscurity  was  intensified  by  constructional  artifices.  The
different  parts  of  the  building  are  not  all  on  the  same  ground-level,  the
pavement  rising  as  the  sanctuary  is  approached,  and  tiie  rise  is  concealed
by  a  \'e\v  steps  placed  at  intervals.     The  difference  of  level  in   the  temple

'  For  a.  (leBcription  of  the  varioua  parts  of  the  temple  of  Khonsft,  cf.  Pkrkot-Ciiipiez,  Hid.  de
I'Art  dans  I'AnliquM,  vol.  i.  j.p.  354-3G1,  591,  593-505,  {J09,  012,  G18,  619,  iiml  Masi'Kuo,  Archgulogie
i.'gypticnne,  pp.  G9-73.

=  Drawu  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Insinger  aud  Daniel  He'ron.


THE  COLONNADE   BUILT  BT  THUTMOSIS  IH."


556


TEE   CLOSE   OF   TEE    TEEBAN  EMPIRE.


KAF\NA1C

VNDEt^   THE     F^AMESSIDES.


Sule


"SoMtlreJ


of   Khonsii    is    not  more  than  five
feet  three  inches,  but   it    is    com-
bined with  a  still  more  considerable
lowering  of  the  height  of  the  roof.
From  the  pylon  to  the  wall  at  the
further  end  the  height  decreases  as
we  go   on ;    the  peristyle   is    more
lofty  than  the  hypostyle  hall,  this
again  is  higher  than  the  sanctuary
and  the   hall  of  columns,  and  the
chamber  beyond  it  drops  still  further
in  altitude.^

Karnak  is  an  exception  to  this
rule ;  this  temple  had  in  the  course
of   centuries    undergone    so   many
restorations  and  additions,  that  it
formed   a   collection  of    buildings
rather   than   a   single   edifice.      It
might  have  been  regarded,  as  early
as  the  close  of  the  Theban  empire,
as    a    hind    of  museum,    in    which
every  century  and  every  period  of
art,  from  the  XIl'"  dynasty  down-
wards, had  left  its  distinctive  mark.-
All   the  resources  of   architecture
had    been    brought     into    requisi-
tion during  this  period  to  vary,
at   the   will   of  each   sovereign,
the  arrangement  and  the  general
effect   of  the   component    parts.
Columns  with  sixteen  sides  stand
in  the  vicinity  of  square  pillars,

'  This    is    "the    law    of   progressive

diminution  of  heights"  of  Pekrot-Chipiez,

Risioire  de  VArt,  vol.  i.  pp.  365,  366.  ^

'  =  A  on   the   phm   denotes   the   XII"'

dynasty     temple     (cf.

Dawn   of  Chilizatioti.

pp.  506,  507) ;  B  is  the

great  hypostyle  hall  of

Seti  I.  and  Ramses  II.

(see  supra,  p.  478,  note

3);    C   the   temple  of

Ramses  III.


THE   TEMPLE   OF  AMOX  AT  KARNAK.


557


and  lotil'orm  capitals  alternate  with  those  of  the  bell-shape ;  attempts
were  even  made  to  introduce  new  types  altogether.  The  architect  who
built  at  the  back  of  the  sanctuary  what  is  now  known  as  the  colonnade  of
Tutmosis  III.,  attempted
to  invert  the  bell-shaped
capital ;  the  bell  was
turned  downwards,  and
the  neck  attached  to  the
plinth,  while  the  mouth
rested  on  the  top  of  the
shaft.*  This  awkward
arrangement  did  not
meet  with  favour,  for
we  find  it  nowhere  re-
peated ;  other  artists,
however,  with  better
taste,  sought  at  this
time  to  apply  the  flowers
symbolical  of  Upper  and
Lower  Egypt  to  the  de-
corations of  the  shafts.
In  front  of  the  sanctuary
of  Karnak  two  pillars  are
still  standing  which  have
on  them  in  relief  repre-
sentations    respectively

of  the  full-blown  lotus  and  the  papyrus.-'  A  building  composed  of  so  many
incongruous  elements  required  frequent  restoration — a  wall  which  had  been
undermined  by  water  needed  strengthening,  a  pylon  displaying  cracks  claimed
attention,  some  unsafe  colonnade,  or  a  colossus  which  had  been  injured  by  the
fall  of  a  cornice,  required  shoring  up — so  that  no  sooner  had  the  corvee  for  repairs
completed  their  work  in  one  part,  than  they  had  to  begin  again  elsewhere.  The
revenues  of  Amon  must,  indeed,  have  been  enormous  to  have  borne  the  continual

'  .Jollois-Devilliei!s,  Description  du  palais,  des  propyli'ef,  des  avenues  de  sphinx,  des  temples,
etc.,  in  tlie  Discrijition  de  VEgyple,  vol.  ii.  p.  474,  aud  vol.  iii.  pi.  30,  No.  4  ;  Lei'SIUS,  Sur  VOriijine
dee  cnlnnnes-piliers  en  E(jijpte,  p.  29;  PEBKOT-CairiEZ,  Histoire  de  I'Art  daits  V Antiquity,  vol.  i.  p.  558,
and  Maspebo,  Archfologie  Kgyjdiemic,  pji.  5G,  57.

'  Drawn  by  Fuuclier-Gudin,  frum  a  plioUiKrapli  by  Ueutu.

'  For  further  remarks  ou  these  pillars,  usually  called  stele  pillars,  el'.  Juli.ois-Devillujus,
Description  du  palais,  des  propylies,  etc.,  iu  the  Description  de  I'Egypte,  vol.  iii.  pp.  4G1,  4G2,  and
vol.  iii.  pi.  30,  No.  7;  Lepsius,  Sur  VOrigine  des  colonnes-pitiers  en  Egypte,  pp.  27,  28;  PrisSE
d'Avennes,  Ilistoire  de  I'Art  Egyptien,  pp.  359,  3G0,  and  Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans
I'Antiquit^,  vol.  i.  p.  548.


the  two  stele-pillars  at  karnak.-


558  THE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THEBAN  EMPIRE.

drain  occasioned  by  restoration,  and  the  resources  of  the  god  would  soon  have
been  exhausted  had  not  foreign  wars  continued  to  furnish  him  during  several
centuries  with  all  or  more  than  he  needed.  The  gods  had  suffered  severely  in
the  troublous  times  which  had  followed  the  reign  of  Seti  II.,  and  it  required
all  the  generosity  of  Kamses  III.  to  compensate  them  for  the  losses  they
had  sustained  during  the  anarchy  under  Arisd.^  The  spoil  taken  from  the
Libyans,  from  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea,  and  from  the  Hittites  bad  flowed  into
the  sacred  treasuries,  while  the  able  administration  of  the  sovereign  had  done
the  rest,  so  that  on  the  accession  of  Ramses  IV.  the  temples  were  in  a  more
prosperous  state  than  ever."  They  held  as  their  own  property  169  towns,  nine
of  which  were  in  Syria  and  Ethiopia ;  they  possessed  113,433  slaves  of  both
sexes,  493,386  head  of  cattle,  1,071,780  arurse  of  land,  514  vineyards  and
orchards,  88  barks  and  sea-going  vessels,  336  kilograms  of  gold  both  in
ingots  and  wrought,  2,993,964  grammes  of  silver,  besides  quantities  of  copper
and  precious  stones,  and  hundreds  of  storehouses  in  which  they  kept  corn,
oil,  wine,  honey,  and  preserved  meats — the  produce  of  their  domains.  Two
examples  will  suffice  to  show  the  extent  of  this  latter  item  :  the  live  geese
reached  the  number  of  680,714,  and  the  salt  or  smoked  fish  that  of  494,800.*
Anion  claimed  tlie  giant  share  of  this  enormous  total,  and  three-fourtlis  of
it  or  more  were  reserved  for  his  use,  namely — 86,486  slaves,  421,362  head  of
cattle,  898,168  arurse  oi  cornland,  433  vineyards  and  orchards,  and  56  Egyptian
towns.*  The  nine  foreign  towns  all  belonged  to  him,  and  one  of  them  con-
tained the  temple  in  which  he  was  worshipped  by  the  Syrians  whenever  they
came  to  pay  their  tribute  to  the  king's  representatives :  ^  it  was  but  just  that
his  patrimony  should  surpass  that  of  his  compeers,  since  the  conquering  Pharaohs
owed  their  success  to  him,  who,  without  the  co-operation  of  the  other  feudal
deities,  had  lavished  victories  upon  them.  His  domain  was  at  least  five  times
more  considerable  than  that  of  Ea  of  Heliopolis,  and  ten  times  greater  than
that  of  the  Memphite  Phtah,"  and  yet  of  old,  in  the  earlier  times  of  history,

'  Cf.  what  ia  said  of  the  Syrian  Arisu,  supra,  440,  453.

'  The  donations  of  Ramses  III.,  or  rather  the  total  of  the  donations  made  to  the  gods  by  the  pre-
decessors of  tliat  Pharaoh,  and  confirmed  and  augmented  by  him,  are  enumerated  at  lengtli  in  the
Great  Earns  Papyrus,  Birch's  edit.,  pis.  10-66.  This  information  was  first  brought  to  notice  by
Ebman,  ^gypten  und  JSgyptisclies  Leben,  etc.,  pp.  415,  416,  and  subsequently  by  Beugsoh,  Die
JEgyptologie,  pp.  271-274.

'  An  abridgement  of  these  donations  occupies  seven  large  plates  in  the  Great  Harris  Papyrus,
Birch's  edit.,  pis.  67-74 ;  cf.  Erman,  Mgypten  und  JEgypiisches  Leben  im  Alterthum,  pp.  406-40S,
and  BuuGsOH,  Die  JEgyptologie,  p.  274.

*  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  Bikch's  edit.,  pi.  11,11.  4-11;  cf.  Eisenlohr-Birch,  ylnnaZs  ofEameses
ILL,  in  tlie  Mecords  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  p.  36;  Erjian,  JEgypiten,  etc.,  p.  409.

>  The  Great  Harris  Papyrus,  Birch's  edit.,  pi.  9, 11.  1-3;  cf.  Eisenlohr-Birch,  Aiinals  of  Barneses
IIL,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  vi.  pp.  33,  34,  and  p.  475  of  the  present  worli.

"  Cf.  the  comparative  table  drawn  up  by  Erman  from  the  information  in  the  Great  Harris
Papyrus,  in  his  ^gypten,  etc.,  p.  410.


THE  REVENUES   AND    PRIESTHOOD    OF  AMON.  559

Rii  and  Phtah  were  reckoned  the  wealthiest  of  the  Egyptian  gods.  It  is
easv  to  understand  the  influence  which  u  jrod  thus  endowed  with  the  croods
of  this  world  exercised  over  men  in  an  age  when  the  national  wars  had  the
same  consequences  for  the  immortals  as  for  their  worshippers,  and  when
the  defeat  of  a  people  was  regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  inferiority  of  its
patron  gods.  The  most  victorious  divinity  became  necessarily  the  wealthiest,
before  whom  all  other  deities  bowed,  and  whom  they,  as  well  as  their  subjects,
were  obliged  to  serve.

So  powerful  a  god  as  Amon  had  but  few  obstacles  to  surmount  before
becoming  the  national  deity  ;  indeed,  he  was  practically  the  foremost  of  the
gods  during  the  Ramesside  period,  and  was  generally  acknowledged  as
Egypt's  representative  by  all  foreign  nations.^  His  priests  shared  in  the
prestige  he  enjoyed,  and  their  influence  in  state  affairs  increased  pro-
portionately with  his  power.  The  chief  of  their  hierarchy,  however,  did  not
bear  the  high  titles  which  in  ancient  times  distinguished  those  of  Memphis
and  Heliopolis ;  he  was  content  with  the  humble  appellation  of  first
prophet  of  Amon.^  He  had  for  several  generations  been  nominated  by  the
sovereign,  but  he  was  generally  chosen  from  the  families  attached  hereditarily
or  otherwise  to  the  temple  of  Karnak,  and  must  previously  have  passed
through  every  grade  of  the  priestly  hierarchy.  Those  who  aspired  to  this
honour  had  to  graduate  as  "divine  fathers;"  this  was  the  first  step  in  the
initiation,  and  one  at  which  many  were  content  to  remain,  but  the  more
ambitious  or  favoured  advanced  by  successive  stages  to  the  dignity  of  third,
and  then  of  second,  prophet  before  attaining  to  the  higliest  rank.''  The
Pharaohs  of  the  XIX"'  dynasty  jealously  supervised  the  promotions  made  in
the  Theban  temples,  and  saw  that  none  was  elected  except  him  who  was  devoted
to  their  interests — such  as,  for  example,  Baiikiini-khonsii  and  Unuofri  under

'  From  the  XVIIl"'  dynasty,  at  least,  thu  first  iirojihet  of  Amon  had  taken  tho  precedence  of  the
higli  [jriests  of  Heliopolis  and  Mempliis,  as  is  proved  by  the  position  he  occupies  in  the  Egyptian
hierarchy  in  the  Hood  Papyrus;  cf.  MAsrERO,  Etuiks  Eijijptiennes,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-35,  and  BiiUG.scii,
Dili  Mgijplologie,  pp.  217,  218.

=  Masi'ebo,  £tuiles  tjjyptiennea,  vol.  ii.  pp.  53-55,  where  tlie  fact  and  tho  consequences  entailed
by  it  are  pointed  out  for  the  first  time.

'  What  we  know  on  this  subject  has  been  brought  to  light  mainly  by  the  inscriptions  on  the
statue  of  Baukuni-Klionafl  at  Munich,  published  and  commented  on  by  Dkvkuia,  Monument  bio-
(jraiihviue  de  Balcenldtunxm,  grand  preiro  d' Amman  et  architfcte  principal  de  Tliehes,  contemporain  de
Molse,  in  the  Mimoirm  de  I'lnslilut  Kgijplicn,  vol.  i.  pp.  701-751  (cf  Mg'moiree  et  Pragments,  vol.  i.
pp.  275-324),  and  by  Lavtu,  Der  Jlolupriester  und  Oberhaumeialcr  llolienchons,  ein  Zeitgcnosse
Mosis,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  der  Morgenl.  Gesellsctia/t,  vol.  xvii.  Brugsch  at  first  thought  that
the  personage  thus  chosen  was  submitted  to  freijuent  re-elections  (^liccueil  de  Mimuinents,  vol.  i.
p.  3'.>);  his  opinion  has  been  refuted  by  A.  Baii.let,  De  V Election  et  de  la  durife  dex  foncliima  da
Grand-Preire  d'Ammon  a  Thiben,  in  tlio  Revue  ArclKfaloijique,  1SG3,  vol.  vii. ;  cf.  Ehman,  JEgijpteu  und
JEgijpli»ehes  Lcbin,  p.  337,  et  seq.,  and  BiiUGSOU,  Die  JEgijptologie,  pji.  275-27S.  Tlie  cursus  honoriim
of  Rani&  shows  us  that  he  was  first  third,  then  second  prophet  of  .Vmon,  before  being  raised  to  the
pontificate  in  tho  reign  of  Minephtali.


560  THE   CLOSE    OF   THE    THEBAN  EMPIRE.

Kamses  11.^  Baukuni-khonsu  distinguished  himself  by  his  administrative
qualities ;  if  he  did  not  actually  make  the  plans  for  the  hypostyle  hall  at
Karnak,  he  appears  at  least  to  have  superintended  its  execution  and  decoration.
He  finished  the  great  pylon,  erected  the  obelisks  and  gateways,  built  the
hari  or  vessel  of  the  god,  and  found  a  further  field  for  his  activity  on  the
opposite  bank  of  the  Nile,  where  he  helped  to  complete  both  the  chapel
at  Qurneh  and  also  the  Eamesseum.  Ramses  II.  had  always  been  able  to
make  his  authority  felt  by  the  high  priests  who  succeeded  Baukuni-khonsu,
but  the  Pharaohs  who  followed  him  did  not  hold  the  reins  with  such  a  strong
hand.  As  early  as  the  reigns  of  Minephtah  and  Seti  II.  the  first  prophets,
Rai  and  Rama,  claimed  the  right  of  building  at  Karnak  for  their  own
purposes,  and  inscribed  on  the  walls  long  inscriptions  in  which  their  own
panegyrics  took  precedence  of  that  of  the  sovereign ;  they  even  aspired  to  a
religious  hegemony,  and  declared  themselves  to  be  the  "chief  of  all  the
prophets  of  the  gods  of  the  South  and  North."  ^  We  do  not  know  what  became
of  them  during  the  usurpation  of  Arisu,  but  Xakhtu-ramses,  son  of  Miribastit,
who  filled  the  office  during  the  reign  of  Ramses  III.,  revived  these  ambitious
projects  as  soon  as  the  state  of  Egypt  appeared  to  favour  them.  The  king,
however  pious  he  might  be,  was  not  inclined  to  yield  up  any  of  his  authority,
even  though  it  were  to  the  earthly  delegate  of  the  divinity  whom  he  reverenced
before  all  others;  the  sons  of  the  Pharaoh  were,  however,  more  accommodating,
and  Nakhtu-ramses  played  his  part  so  well  that  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  from
them  the  reversion  of  the  high  priesthood  for  his  son  Amenothes.  The
priestly  office,  from  having  been  elective,  was  by  this  stroke  suddenly  made
hereditary  in  the  family.^  The  kings  preserved,  it  is  true,  the  privilege
of  confirming  the  new  appointment,  and  the  nominee  was  not  considered
properly  qualified  until  he  had  received  his  investiture  from  the  sovereign.''
Practically  the  Pharaohs  lost  tiie  power  of  choosing  one  among  the  sons  of
the  deceased  pontiff ;  they  were  forced  to  enthrone  the  eldest  of  his  survivors,
and  legalise  his  accession  by  their  approbation,  even  when  they  would  have
preferred  another.  It  was  thus  that  a  dynasty  of  vassal  High  Priests  came  to
be  established  at  Thebes  side  by  side  with  the  royal  dynasty  of  the  Pharaohs.
The  new  priestly  dynasty  was  not  long  in  making  its  power  felt  in  Thebes.

'  Unnofri  is  known  to  u9  by  a  monument  in  the  Naples  Museum,  published  by  Vassali,  Di  alcuni
Mommenti  del  Museo  Egizio  di  Napoli,  pp.  25,  20,  and  pi.  iv.  b ;  cf.  Bbugsch,  Gesch.  ^gyptens,  p.  541.

'  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  200  a,  237  c;  Stern,  Ein  Eymnus  auf  Amon-Ea,  in  the  Zeitschnft,  1873,
pp.  74-70 ;  cf.  M ASPERO,  Les  Monties  Eoyales,  etc.,  in  M^m.  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  000, 067.

'  For  Nakhtil-ramses  and  AmeuOthes,  cf.  JlAsrERO,  Les  Monties  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  tlie
M^moires  da  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  067-071.

*  This  is  proved  by  the  Maunier  stele,  now  in  the  Louvre ;  it  is  there  related  how  the  high  priest
Manakh-pirri  received  his  investiture  from  the  Tanite  king  (Bbdgsoh,  Eecueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.
pi.  xxii.  pp.  39,  40,  and  Eeise  nach  der  Grossen  Oase  El-Khargeh,  pi.  xxii.  pp.  85,  88).


NAKHTU- RAMSES  AND    AMENOTHES.  561

Naklitu-ramses  and  Amenothes  lived  to  a  great  age — from  tlio  reicn  of
Eamses  III.  to  that  of  Ramses  X.,  at  the  least ;  they  witnessed  the  accession
of  nine  successive  Pharaohs,  and  the  unusual  length  of  their  pontificates  no
doubt  increased  the  alieady  extraordinary  prestige  which  they  enjoyed  through-
out the  length  and  breadtli  of  Egypt.  It  seemed  as  if  the  god  delighted
to  prolong  the  lives  of  his  representatives  beyond  the  ordinary  limits,  while
shortening  those  of  the  temporal  sovereigns.^  When  the  reigns  of  the  Pharaohs
began  once  more  to  reach  tlieir  normal  length,  the  authority  of  Amenothes
had  become  so  firmly  established  that  no  human  power  could  withstand  it
and  the  later  Earaessides  were  merely  a  set  of  puppet  kings  who  were  ruled
by  him  and  his  successors.  Not  only  was  there  a  cessation  of  foreign  expedi-
tions, but  the  Delta,  Memphis,  and  Ethiopia  were  alike  neglected,  and  the
only  activity  displayed  by  these  Pharaohs,  as  far  as  we  can  gather  from  their
monuments,  was  confined  to  tlie  service  of  Anion  and  Khonsu  at  Thebes.  The
lack  of  energy  and  independence  in  these  sovereigns  may  not,  however,  be
altogether  attributable  to  tlieir  feebleness  of  character ;  it  is  possible  that  they
would  gladly  have  entered  on  a  career  of  conquest  had  they  possessed  the  means.
It  is  always  a  perilous  matter  to  allow  the  resources  of  a  country  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  a  piiesthood,  and  to  place  its  military  forces  at  the  same  time  in  the
hands  of  the  chief  religious  authority.^  The  warrior  Pharaohs  had  always  had
at  their  disposal  the  spoils  obtained  from  foreign  nations  to  make  up  the  deficit
which  their  constant  gifts  to  tlie  temples  were  making  in  the  treasury.  The
sons  of  Kamses  III.,  on  the  other  hand,  had  suspended  all  military  efforts,
without,  however,  lessening  their  lavish  gifts  to  the  gods,  and  they  must,  in  the
absence  of  the  spoils  of  war,  have  drawn  to  a  considerable  extent  upon  the
ordinary  resources  of  the  country ;  their  successors  therefore  found  the  treasury
impoverished,  and  they  would  have  been  entirely  at  a  loss  for  money  had
they  attempted  to  renew  the  campaigns  or  continue  the  architectural  work
of  their  forefathers.  The  priests  of  Amon  had  not  as  yet  suffered  materially
from  this  diminution  of  revenue,  for  they  possessed  property  tliroughout
the  length  and  breadth  of  Egypt,  but  they  were  obliged  to  restrict  their
expenditure,  and  employ  tlie  sums  formerly  used  for  the  enlarging  of  the
tpiuples  on  the  maintenance  of  their  own  body.  Meanwhile  public  works
had  been  almost  everywhere  suspended ;  ailniinistrative  discipline  became
relaxed,  and  disturbances,  with  which  the  police  were  unable  to  cope,
were  increasing  in  all  the  important  towns.  Nothing  is  more  indicative  of
the  state  to  which  Egypt  was  reduced,  under  the  combined  influence  of  the

'  For  tlio,  complete  list  of  the  ilouljle  series  of  king.s  and  high  priests,  see  Maspeuo,  Le)  Momies
royale»  de  D€ir  el-Bahari,  in  the  MCtitoircK  dc  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  p.  662,  et  seq.

'  Ed.  Mkvkb,  Geschichte  yJ-.'gyplens,  p.  :i22,  ot  seq.,  where  the  effect  of  tlio  rapid  increase  of  the
holding  of  land  by  the  priesthood  is  forcibly  depicted.

2  0


5G2


THE   CLOSE   OF  TEE   TEEBAN  EMPIRE.


IvAMstS    IX.-


priesthood  and  the  Ramessides,  than  the  thefts  and  pillaging  of  which  the
Thebau  necropolis  was  then  the  daily  scene.  The  robbers  no  longer  confined
themselves  to  plundering  the  tombs  of  private  persons ;  they  attacked  the  royal

burying  -  places,  and  their  depredations
were  carried  on  for  years  before  they  were
discovered.  In  the  reign  of  Ramses  IX.,
an  inquiry,  set  on  foot  by  Amenothes,  re-
vealed the  fact  that  the  tomb  of  Sovkum-
saiif  I.  and  his  wife,  Queen  Nubkhas,  had
been  rifled,  that  tliose  of  Amenothes  I.  and
of  Antuf  IV.  had  been  entered  by  tunnelling,
and  that  some  dozen  other  royal  tombs  in
the  cemetery  of  Drah  abu'l  Neggah  were
threatened.^  The  severe  means  taken  to
suppress  the  evil  were  not,  however,  suc-
cessful; the  pillagings  soon  began  afresh,
and  the  reigns  of  the  last  three  Ramessides
were  marked  by  a  struggle  between  the
robbers  and  the  authorities,  in  which  the
latter  did  not  always  come  oft"  triumphant.  A  system  of  repeated  inspections
secured  the  valley  of  Biban  el-Moluk  from  marauders,^  but  elsewhere  the
measures  of  defence  employed  were  unavailing,  and  the  necropolis  was  given
over  to  pillage,  although  both  Amenothes  and  Hrihor  had  used  every  efibrt
to  protect  it.  Hrihor  appears  to  have  succeeded  immediately  after  Ameno-
thes, and  his  accession  to  the  pontificate  gave  his  family  a  still  more  exalted

'  The  principal  part  of  this  inquiry  constitutes  the  Ahiotl  Papyrus,  acquired  and  published  by  the
British  Museum  {Select  Papyri,  vol.  ii.  pis.  i.-viii),  first  examined  and  made  the  subject  of  study  by
Birch  (Birch-Chabas,  Le  Papyrus  Abbott,  in  the  Bevue  ArchfTologique,  1st  series,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  257-262),
translated  simultaneously  into  French  by  Maspero  (^Une  Enquete  judiciaire  a  Thebes,  etc.,  in  M^moires
de  VAcademie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Letlres,  vol.  iii.  p.  99,  et  seq.)  and  by  Chabas  {ildanges  Egypto-
logiques,  3rd  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-172),  into  German  by  Lauth  (Papyrus  Abbott,  in  the  Silzungsberichte
of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Munich,  1871,  vol.  i.  pp.  707-755),  by  Erman  (in  part  only,  in  the
Beitr'dge  zur  Kenntniss  des  JEgyptischen  Gericldsverfahrens,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1879,  pp.  Sl-83, 148-152,
and  in  JEgyplen  mid  JSgyptisches  Lehen,  pp.  190-193).  Other  papyri  relate  to  the  same  or  similar
occurrences,  such  as  the  Salt  and  Amherst  Papyri  published  by  Chabas  (Melanges  Egyptologiques,  3rd
series,  vol.  i.  pp.  173-201,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-26  :  cf.  Erman,  Beitrdge  zur  Kentniss  des  JEgypt.  Gerichis-
rerfahreii,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1879,  pp.  152,  153),  and  also  the  Liverpool  Papyri,  of  which  we  possess
merely  scattered  notices  in  tlie  writings  of  Goodwin  {Notes  on  unpublished  Papyri,  in  the  Zeitschrift,
1873,  pp.  39,  40,  and  Notes  on  the  Mayor  Papyri,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1874,  pp.  61-65),  and  particularly
in  those  of  Spiegelberg  (Studien  und  Materialen  zum  Eechtsicesen  des  Pharaonenreiches,  1892,  and
Translation  of  Hieratic  Papyri  Mayor  A-B).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  300,  No.  74;  cf.  Chajipollios,  Jlfon.  de
VEgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cclsix.  3,  4,  and  Koselllxi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pis.  viii.  37  and  xviii.  14.

•'  GrafiBti  which  are  evidences  of  these  inspections  have  been  drawn  on  the  walls  of  several  royal
tombs  by  the  inspectors.  Others  have  been  found  on  several  of  the  coffins  discovered  at  Deir  el-
Bahari,  e.g.  on  those  of  Seti  I.  and  Ramses  II. ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Beir  el-Bahari,
in  the  Memoires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  563,  567 ;  the  most  ancient  belong  to  the
pontificate  of  Hrihor,  others  belong  to  the  XXI*'  dynasty.


HRIEOR   AND    TEE  LAST    OF   THE  RAMESSIDES.


563


position  in  the  country.  As  his  wife  Nozmit  was  of  royal  blood,  he  assumed
titles  and  functions  to  wliich  his  father  and  grandfather  had  made  no  claim. ^
He  became  the  "  Royal  Son "  of  Ethiopia  and  commander-iu-cliief  of  the
national  and  foreign  troops ;  he  engraved
his  name  upon  the  monuments  he  decorated,
side  by  side  with  that  of  Ramses  XII. ;
in  short,  he  possessed  all  the  characteristics
of  a  Pharaoh  except  the  crown  and  the
royal  protocol.  A  century  scarcely  had
elapsed  since  the  abdication  of  Ramses
III.,  and  now  Tliebes  and  the  whole  of
Egypt  owned  two  masters :  one  the  em-
bodiment of  the  ancient  line,  but  a  mere
nominal  king ;  the  other  the  representative
of  Amon,  and  the  actual  ruler  of  the
count  ry.-

What  then  happened  when  the  last
Ramses  who  bore  the  kingly  title  was
gathered  to  his  fathers?  The  royal  lists
record   the  accession   after  his  death  of  a

new  dynasty  of  Tanitic  origin,  whose  founder  was  Nsbindidi  or  Smendes  ;■*
but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  gather  from  the  Theban  monuments  that  the  crown
was  seized  by  Hrihor,  who  reigned  over  the  southern  provinces  contem-
poraneously with  Smendes.  Hrihor  boldly  assumed  as  prenomen  his  title
■of  "  First  Prophet  of  Amon,"  and  his  authority  was  acknowledged  by  Ethiopia,
over  which  he  was  viceroy,  as  well  as  by  the  nomes  forming  the  temporal  domain
of  the  high  priests.  The  latter  had  acquired  gradually,  either  by  marriage
or  inheritance,  fresh  territory  for  the  god,  in  the  lands  of  the  princes  of  Nek-
habit,  Koptos,  Akhmim,  and  Abydos,  besides  the  domains  of  some  half-dozen

'  For  the  Queen  Nozmit,  and  for  the  position  which  she  occupies  among  the  members  of  the  sacer-
•Jotal  family,  cf.  Maspero,  Le»  Mamies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Franfaise,
vol.  i.  pp.  618-050,  677,  t!78 ;  her  mummy  and  coffin  are  described  on  pp.  369,  370  of  the  same  work.

'  E.  DE  Rouge,  Ftuih-  sur  ime  Stile  Fgi/ptienne  apparleuant  a  la  Bibliutheque  Impiriale,  pp.  197,
198,  and  Maspeho,  Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'Histoire,  in  the  Zeitsckrift,  1883,
pp.  75-17,  and  Les  Momies  royales  de  Dfir  cl-Vahari,  in  the  Mgmoires  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.
pp.  Col -653,  071,  072.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Champolliox,  Monuments  de  i'lCgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cclxxxi.
4;  KosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  x.,  No.  40;  Lepsius,  Dcnkm.,  iii.  300,  No.  75.

*  Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  reconcile  the  testimony  of  the  monuments  witli  that  of
Manctho,  by  Lepsids,  Ueler  die  XXll  ^-I'.'gyplische  Konigsdynaatie,  pi.  i.,  and  Kunigshuch,  pis.  xlii.-
xliii.,  Nos.  531-560,  and  again  in  1882,  Die  XXI  manelhoniscUe  Dynastie,  in  the  Zeitschrijt,  1882.
pp.  103-117,  151-159;  by  E.  de  Rouge,  Ktu.de  sur  une  Stile  Jigyptieime  appurtenant  a  la  Bibliolhique
Jmp^riale,  pp.  184,  193-205  ;  by  Uhugsch,  Disloire  d'ligypte,  pp.  210-218,  221,  222;  by  Wiede.mann,
JEgtj]ttische  Gcschiclde,  pp.  528-542  ;  the  subject  is  fully  discussed  in  Maspeuo,  Les  Momies  royales,
«tc.,  in  the  Mimoires  de  la  Mission  Fraufaise,  vol.  i.  p.  040,  et  seq.  Some  of  the  solutions  suggested
in  this  last-mentioned  work  have  since  had  to  be  modified.


564  TEE   CLOSE   OF   THE   THE  BAN  EMPIRE.

feudal  houses  who,  from  force  of  circumstances,  had  become  sacerdotal  families ;
the  extinction  of  the  direct  line  of  Kamessides  now  secured  the  High  Priests  the
possession  of  Thebes  itself,  and  of  all  the  lands  within  the  southern  provinces
which  were  the  appanage  of  the  crown.  They  thus,  in  one  way  or  another,
became  the  exclusive  masters  of  the  southern  half  of  the  Nile  valley,  from
Elephantine  to  Siut ;  beyond  Siut  also  they  had  managed  to  acquire  suzerainty
over  the  town  of  Khobit,  and  the  territory  belonging  to  it  formed  an  isolated
border  province  in  the  midst  of  the  independent  baronies.^  The  representative
of  the  dynasty  reigning  at  Tanis  held  the  remainder  of  Egypt  from  Siut  to
the  Mediterranean — the  half  belonging  to  the  Memphite  Phtah  and  the  Helio-
politan  Ea,  as  opposed  to  that  assigned  to  Amon.  The  origin  of  this  Tanite
sovereign  is  uncertain,  but  it  would  appear  that  he  was  of  more  exalted  rank
than  his  rival  in  the  south.  The  official  chronicling  of  events  was  marked  by
the  years  of  his  reign,  and  the  chief  acts  of  the  government  were  carried  out  in
his  name  even  in  the  Thebaid.^  Eepeated  inundations  had  caused  the  ruin  of
part  of  the  temple  of  Karnak,  and  it  was  by  the  order  and  under  the  auspices
of  this  prince  that  all  the  resources  of  the  country  were  employed  to  accomplish
the  much-needed  restoration.^  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  have
exercised  any  authority  over  so  rich  and  powerful  a  personage  as  Hi  ihor  had  he
not  possessed  rights  to  the  crown,  before  which  even  the  high  priests  of  Amon
were  obliged  to  bow,  and  hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  he  was  a  descendant
of  Kamses  II.  The  descendants  of  this  sovereign  were  doubtless  divided  into
at  least  two  branches,  one  of  which  had  just  become  extinct,  leaving  uo  nearer
heir  than  Hrihor,  while  another,  of  which  there  were  many  ramifications,  had
settled  in  the  Delta.  The  majority  of  these  descendants  had  become  mingled
with  the  general  population,  and  had  sunk  to  the  condition  of  private  indi-
viduals ;  they  had,  however,  carefully  preserved  tlie  tradition  of  their  origin,
and  added  proudly  to  their  name  the  qualification  of  royal  son  of  Ramses.
They  were  degenerate  scions  of  the  Eamessides,  and  had  neither  the  features

'  The  extent  of  tbe  principality  of  Tliebcs  under  tlie  high  priests  lias  been  determined  by  means
of  the  sacerdotal  titles  of  the  Theban  princesses,  by  Maspero,  Lee  Mamies  roijaUs  de  Delr  cl-Bahari,
in  tbe  M€moire.s  de  la  Mission  Fraur^aist,  vol.  i.  pp.  712-71S.

"  I  have  pointed  out  tliat  the  years  of  the  reign  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  the  high  priests
and  the  kings  of  the  sacerdotal  line  must  be  attributed  to  their  suzerains,  the  kings  of  Tanis  (Masi>ei!0,
02).  cit.,  in  the  Mifinoires,  vol.  i.  p.  723,  et  seq).  Hrihor  alone  seems  to  have  been  an  exception,  since
to  him  are  attributed  the  dates  inscribed  in  the  name  of  tlie  King  Siamon:  M.  Daressy,  however,
will  not  admit  this,  and  asserts  that  this  Siamon  was  a  Tanite  sovereign  who  must  not  be  identified
with  Hrihor,  and  must  be  placed  at  least  two  or  three  generations  later  than  the  last  of  the  Kamessides
{Cunlribution  it  V^tude  de  la  XXL  Dynastie  Egyptietme,  p.  8).

'  The  real  name  Nsbindidi  and  the  first  monument  of  the  Manethonian  Smendeswere  discovered
in  the  quarries  of  Dababieh,  opposite  Gebelen,  by  Daressy,  Les  Carriires  de  Gehilein  et  le  roi  Smendes,
in  the  Becneil  de  Travaux,  vol.  x.pp.  133-138  ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales,  etc.,  in  the  M^moires
de  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  G75-tJ77,  and  A  Stele  of  King  Smendes,  in  the  lieconls  of  the  Past,
2nd  series,  voh  v.  p|i.  17-24.


SMENDES    AND   RISE    OF    THE   XXF''   DYNASTY.


565


nor  the  energy  of  their  ancestor.^  Ouc=^  of  them,  Zodphtahaiifonklii,  whose
mummy  was  found  at  Deir  el-Bahaii,  appears  to  have  been  tall  and  vigorous,
hut  the  liead  lacks  the  haughty  refinement  which  characterizes  those  of  Seti  I.
and  Ramses  II.,  and  the  features  are  heavy  and  coarse,  having  a  vulgar,  common-
place expression.  It  seems  probable  that  one  branch  of  the  family,
endowed  with  greater  capability  than  the  rest,  was  settled  at
Tanis,  where  Sesostris  had,  as  we  have  seen,  resided  for  many
years;  Smendes  was  the  first  of  this  branch  to  ascend  the
throne.  The  remembrance  of  his  remote  ancestor,  Eamses  II ,
whicli  was  still  treasured  up  in  the  city  he  had  com-
pletely rebuilt,  as  well  as  in  the  Delta  into  which  he
had  infused  new  life,  was  doubtless  of  no  small  service  in
securing  the  crown  for  his  descendant,  when,  the  line  of
the  The  ban  kings  having  come  to  an  end,  the  Tanites  put
in  their  claim  to  the  succession.  We  are  unable  to  dis-
cover if  war  broke  out  between  the  two  competitors,  or  if
they  arrived  at  an  agreement  without  a  struggle ;  but,
at  all  events,  we  may  assume  that,  having  divided
Egypt  between  them,  neither  of  them  felt  himself
stronsr  enoush  to  overcome  his  rival,  and  contented
himself  with  the  possession  of  half  the  empire,  since
he  could  not  possess  it  in  its  entirety.  We  may  ^  '
fairly  believe  that  Smendes  had  the  greater  right
to  the  throne,  and,  above  all,  the  more  efficient
army  of  the  two,  since,  had  it  been  otherwise,
Hrihor  would  never  have  consented  to  yield  him
the  priority.

The  unity  of  Egypt  was,  to  outward  appearances,  preserved,  through  the
nominal  possession  by  Smendes  of  the  suzerainty;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  had
ceased  to  exist,  and  the  fiction  of  the  two  kingdoms  had  become  a  reality  for  the
first  time  within  the  range  of  history.  Henceforward  there  were  two  Egypts,
governed  by  different  constitutions  and  from  widely  remote  centres.  Theban
Egypt  was,  before  all  things,  a  community  recognizing  a  theocratic  government,
in  which  the  kingly  ofhce  was  merged  in  that  of  the  high  priest.  Separated
from  Asia  by  the  length  of  the  Delta,  it  turned  its  attention,  like  the  Pharaohs

'  For  tlicse  jjCTSonages  aud  for  the  various  liypotbeses  of  whicli  they  have  been  the  subject,  see
Urugscli  (GcsnhlMe  .Tiyyidem,  p.  GGO),  Haigh  (Itamosses  Messes,  Uonis  Horemheb,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t,
1871),  p.  154,  ot  seq.),  Lautli  (.Iks  .Eijijidniis  Vorzeit,  p.  408)  ;  of.  JlAsrERo,  Les  Momies  royales,  etc.,  in
the  M^nwiri'S  de  la  Mission  du  ('aire,  vol.  i.  pp.  718-723.

'  Drawu  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograph  by  Inainger ;  of.  Maspeho,  Les  Momies  niyates  de  Deir
el-Biihart,  iu  tlie  Md'moires  de  la  Mission  Fraiv;aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  572-574.


ZODPHTAIIAI  ImNKIII,    UUYAL
BON    OP   KAMSES."


56(')  THE   CLOSE    OF    THE    TIIEBAN  EMPIRE.

of  the  VI"'  and  XII"'  dynasties,  to  Ethiopia,  and  owing  to  its  distance  from  the
Mediterranean,  and  from  tiie  new  civilization  developed  on  its  shores,  it  became
more  and  more  isolated,  till  at  length  it  was  reduced  to  a  purely  African  state.
Northern  Egypt,  on  the  contrary,  maintained  contact  with  European  and
Asiatic  nations;  it  took  an  interest  in  their  future,  it  borrowed  from  them
to  a  certain  extent  whatever  struck  it  as  being  useful  or  beautiful,  and  when
the  occasion  presented  itself,  it  acted  in  concert  with  the  Mediterranean
powers.  There  was  an  almost  constant  struggle  between  these  two  divisions
of  the  empire,  at  times  breaking  out  into  an  open  rupture,  to  end  as  often
in  a  temporary  re-establishment  of  unity.  At  one  time  Ethiopia  would
succeed  in  annexing  Egypt,  and  again  Egypt  would  seize  some  part  of
Ethiopia;  but  the  settlement  of  affairs  was  never  final,  and  the  conflicting
elements,  brought  with  difficulty  into  harmony,  relapsed  into  their  usual
condition  at  the  end  of  a  few  years.  A  kingdom  thus  divided  against  itself
could  never  succeed  in  maintaining  its  authority  over  those  provinces  which,
even  in  the  heyday  of  its  power,  had  proved  impatient  of  its  yoke.  Asia  was
associated  henceforward  in  tlie  minds  of  the  Egyptians  with  painful  memories
of  thwarted  ambitions,  rather  than  as  offering  a  field  for  present  conquest.  They
were  pursued  by  the  memories  of  their  former  triumphs,  and  the  very  monu-
ments of  their  cities  recalled  what  they  were  anxious  to  forget.  Wherever  they
looked  within  their  towns  they  encountered  the  representation  of  some  Asiatic
scene;  they  read  the  names  of  the  cities  of  Syria  on  the  walls  of  their  temples ;
they  saw  depicted  on  them  its  princes  and  its  armies,  whose  defeat  was  re-
corded by  the  inscriptions  as  well  as  the  tribute  which  they  had  been  forced
to  pay.  The  sense  of  their  own  weakness  prevented  the  Egyptians  from
passing  from  useless  regrets  to  action ;  when,  however,  one  or  other  of  the
Pharaohs  felt  sufficiently  secure  on  the  throne  to  carry  his  troops  far  afield,
he  was  always  attracted  to  Syria,  and  crossed  her  frontiers,  often,  alas !
merely  to  encounter  defeat.


THE  BISE  OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


PHCENICIA    AND   THE   NORTHERN    NATIONS   AFTER    THE    DEATH   OF    RAMSES   III. THE    FIRST

ASSYRIAN    empire:    TIGLATH-PILESER    I. — THE    ARAM.EANS   AND    THE    KHATI.

27(6  continuance  of  Egyptian  influence  aver  Syrian  civilizatioit  after  the  death  of  Ramses
III. — Egijijlian  myths  in  Fluinirid  :  Osiris  and  Isis  at  Byblos — Horns,  That,  and  the  origin
of  the  Egyptian  alphabet — Tlie  tombs  at  Artiad  and  the  Kabr-Hiram ;  Egyptian  designs  in
Pli/jenician  glass  and  goldsmiths'  work — Commerce  with  Egypt,  the  withdrawal  of  Phoenician
colonies  in  the  ^gean  Sea  and  tlie  Achceans  in  Cypi-us ;  maritime  expeditions  in  the  Western
Mediterranean.

Northtrn  Syria:  the  decadence  uf  the  Hitlitcs  and  the  steady  groivth  of  the  Aramaean  tribes
— r/ie  decline  of  the  Babylonian  empire  under  the  Gosscean  kings,  and  its  relations  with  Egypt :
Assnruballit,  Mammdn-nirdri  I.  anil  the  first  Assyrian  conquests  —  Assyria,  its  climate,
2irovinces,  and  cities:  the  god  Assur  and  his  Ishtar — Tlte  tvars  against  Chaldasa  :  Shal-
maneser  I.,  Twkulti-ninip  I.,  and  fkc  taking  of  Babylon— Belchadrezzar  and  the  last  of
the  Cossa'atis.


Tlie  di/niistii  of  I'aslie:  Nebucliii,drez-^ir  I.,  his  disputes  with  Elam,  his  defeat  by  Assur-
rishislu — The  legend  of  Ihr  first  Assyrian  empire,  Ninos  and  Semiramis — The  Assyrians  and
their  political  constitution :  the  limmn,  the  king  and  his  divine  character,  his  hunting  and
his  wars — The  Assyrian  army  :  the  infantry  and  chariotry,   the  crossing  of  rivers,  mode  of


(     568     )

marching  in  the  plains  and  in  the  mountain  districts — Camps,  battles,  sieges ;  cruelty  shown
to  the  vanquished,  the  deslruction  of  towns  and  the  removal  of  the  inhabitants,  the  ephemeral
character  of  the  Assyrian  conquests.

Tiglath-pileser  I.  ;  his  canqMign  against  the  Miishku,  his  conquest  of  Kurkhi  and  of  thi
regioiu  of  the  Zab — The  petty  Asiatic  kingdoms  aiul  their  civilization :  art  and  mriting  in  the
old  Hittite  states — Tiglath-pileser  I.  in  Natri  aiul  in  Syria :  his  triumphal  stele  at  Sehbeneh-Su
— His  hdldings,  his  hunts,  his  conquest  of  Babylon — Merodach-nadin-ahki  and  the  dose  of  the
Pashe  dynasty — Assurbelkala  and  Samsi-rammdn  III.  :  the  decline  of  Assyria — Syria  iciihout
a  foreign  ruler  :  the  incapacity  of  the  Khdti  to  give  nnitij  to  the  country.


THE    rUINCIPAL    SOrRCE   OF    TMI-
TIGRIS.'


CHAPTER    VI.

THE     RISE     OF     THE     ASSYRIAN     EMPIRE.

Plueuicia  .and  the  northern  luitions  after  the  death  of  Kamses  III.— The  first  Assyrian
empire  :  Tiglath-pileser  I. — The  Aram^aiis  and  the  Khati.


rrilE  cessation  of  Egyptian  authority  over  countries


T


in  which  it  had  so  long  prevailed  did  not  at
once  do  away  with  the  deep  impression  which  it
had  made  upou  their  constitution  and  customs.
While  the  nobles  and  citizens  of  Thebes  were
adopting  tlie  imported  worship  of  Baal  and  Astarte,
and  were  introducing  into  the  spoken  and  written
language  words  borrowed  from  Semitic  speech,-  the
Syrians,  on  tlie  other  hand,  were  not  unreceptive  of
the  influence  of  their  conquerors.  They  had  applied
themselves  zealously  to  the  study  of  Egyptian  arts,
industrj-,  and  religion,  and  had  borrowed  from  these
as  much,  at  least,  as  tliey  had  lent  to  the  dwellers
on  the  Nile.  The  ancient  Babylonian  foundation
of  their  civilization  was  not,  indeed,  seriously  modifioil,  but  it   was  covered

'  Drawn  hy  liuuilier,  from  a  picture  in  ('iiesney's  ICxpcilitiuu  for  Ihn  Surrey  of  the  Hirers  Euphrates
and  Tiijris,  vol.  ii.  p.  207.  The  vijjnette  ia  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  from  Koyuujik,  now
in  the  Urilisli  Museum;  cf.  Lavaud,  The  Monumeiiti  of  Niiicveli,  vol.  i.  pis.  U,  20.

-  See  what  ie  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  -105,  4U0  of  the  present  work.


570


THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


5KtL^^i


over,  so  to  speak,  with  an  African  veneer  which  varied  in  depth  according
to  the  locality.^  Phoenicia  especially  assumed  and  retained  this  foreign
exterior.  Its  mercliants,  accustomed  to  establish  themselves  for  lengthened
periods  in  the  principal  trade-centres  on  the  Nile,  had  become  imbued  therein
with  something  of  the  religious  ideas  and  customs  of  the  land,^  and  on
returning  to  their  own  country  had  imported  these  with  them  and  propagated

them  in  their  neighbourhood.  They  were  not  content
with  other  household  utensils,  furniture,  and  jewel-
lery than  those  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed
on  the  Nile,  and  even  the  Phoenician  gods  seemed
to  be  subject  to  this  appropriating  mania,  for
they  came  to  be  recognised  in  the  indigenous
deities  of  the  Said  and  the  Delta.  There  was,  at  the
outset,  no  trait  in  the  character  of  Baalat  by  which
she  could  be  assimilated  to  Isis  or  Hathor :  she
was  fierce,  warlike,  and  licentious,  and  wept  for
her  lover,  while  the  Egyptian  goddesses  were
accustomed  to  shed  tears  for  tlieir  husbands  only.^
It  was  this  element  of  a  common  grief,  however,
which  served  to  associate  the  Phoenician  and  Egyp-
tian goddesses,  and  to  produce  at  length  a  strange
blending  of  their  persons  and  the  legends  concerning  them :  the  lady  of
Byblos  ended  in  becoming  an  Isis  or  a  Hathor,^  and  in  playing  the  part
assigned  to  the  latter  in  the  Osirian  drama.  This  may  have  been  occasioned
by  her  city  having  maintained  closer  relationships  than  the  southern  towns
with  Buto  and  Mendes,  or  by  her  priests  having  come  to  recognise  a  funda-
mental agreement  between  their  theology  and  that  of  JEgypt.  In  any  case,  it
was  at  Byblos  that  the  most  marked  and  numerous,  as  well  as  the  most  ancient,
examples  of  borrowing  from  the  religions  of  the  Nile  were  to  be  found.  The
theologians  of  Byblos  imagined  that  the  cofRn  of  Osiris,  after  it  had  been
thrown  into  the  sea  by  Typhon,  had  been  thrown  up  on  the  land  somewhere

'  Most  of  the  views  put  forth  in  this  part  of  the  chapter  are  based  on  posterior  and  not  con-
temporary data.  As  to  the  mixture  of  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  inllueuces  on  Phoeniciiin  art,  see
Perrot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquitif,  vol.  iii.  pp.  121-123,  et  seq.,  2-11,  et  seq.,  403,
et  seq.,  etc.  The  most  ancient  monuments  which  give  evidence  of  it  show  it  in  such  a  complete  state
that  we  may  fairly  ascribe  it  to  some  centuries  earlier;  that  is,  to  the  time  when  Egypt  still  ruled  in
Syria,  the  period  of  the  XIX""  and  even  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.

'  As  to  the  sanctuaries  of  Astarte  and  other  Phceuieian  deities,  and  consequently  the  presumed
establishment  of  foreign  colonies  in  Egyptian  cities,  see  what  is  said  on  pp.  485,  486  of  the  present  work.

'  See  on  the  Baalut  of  Byblos,  p.  174,  et  seq.,  of  the  present  work.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  PuisSE  d'Avennes,  Monuments  de  VEgypte,  etc.,  1.  xxx. ;  cf.
Deveria,  QSuores  et  Frcujments,  vol.  i.  pp.  123-12G.

'  The  assimilation  must  have  been  ancient,  since  the  Egyptians  of  the  Theban  dynasties  already
accepted  Baalat  as  the  Hathor  of  Byblos ;  see  supra,  p.  174,  n.  6.


THE  TREE  GROWING  ON  THE
TOMB  OF  OSIRIS.''


EGYPTIAN  MYTHS   IN  PHCENICIA.  571

near  their  city  at  the  foot  of  a  tamarisk,  and  that  this  tree,  in  its  rapid  growth,
liad  gradually  enfolded  within  its  trunk  the  body  and  its  case.  King  Sial-
kander  cut  it  down  in  order  to  use  it  as  a  support  for  the  roof  of  his  palace :  a
marvellous  perfume  rising  from  it  filled  the  apartments,  and  it  was  not  long
before  the  prodigy  was  bruited  abroad.  Isis,  who  was  travelling  through  the
world  in  quest  of  her  husband,  heard  of  it,  and  at  once  realised  its  meaning  :
clad  in  rags  and  weeping,  she  sat  down  by  the  well  whither  the  women  of  Byblos
were  accustomed  to  come  every  morning  and  evening  to  draw  water,  and,  being
interrogated  by  them,  refused  to  reply ;  but  when  the  maids  of  Queen  Astarte  ^
approached  in  their  turn,  they  were  received  by  the  goddess  in  the  most
amiable  manner — Isis  deigning  even  to  plait  their  hair,  and  to  communicate
to  them  the  odour  of  myrrh  with  which  she  herself  was  impregnated.  Their
mistress  came  to  see  the  stranger  who  had  thus  treated  her  servants,  took  her
into  her  service,  and  confided  to  her  the  care  of  her  lately  born  son.  Isis
became  attached  to  the  child,  adopted  it  for  her  own,  after  the  Egyptian
manner,  by  inserting  her  finger  in  its  mouth ;  ^  and  having  passed  it  through
the  fire  during  the  night  in  order  to  consume  away  slowly  anything  of  a
perishable  nature  in  its  body,  metamorphosed  herself  into  a  swallow,  and  flew
around  the  miraculous  pillar  uttering  plaintive  cries.  Astarte  came  upon
her  once  while  she  was  bathing  the  child  in  the  flame,  and  broke  by  her
shrieks  of  fright  the  charm  of  immortality.  Isis  was  only  able  to  reassure
her  by  revealing  her  name  and  the  object  of  her  presence  there.  She  opened
the  mysterious  tree-trunk,  anointed  it  with  essences,  and  wrapping  it  in
precious  cloths,  transmitted  it  to  the  priests  of  Byblos,  who  deposited  it
respectfully  in  their  temple :  she  put  the  cofBn  which  it  contained  on  board
ship,  and  brought  it,  after  many  adventures,  into  Egypt.^  Another  tradition
asserts,  however,  that  Osiris  never  found  his  way  back  to  his  country :  he  was
bty-ied  at  Byblos,  tliis  tradition  maintained,  and  it  was  in  his  honour  that  the
festivals  attributed  by  the  vulgar  to  the  young  Adonis  were  really  celebrated.
A  marvellous  fact  seemed  to  support  this  view.  Every  year  a  head  of  papyrus,
thrown  into  the  sea  at  some  unknown  point  of  the  Delta,  was  carried  for  six
days  along  the  Syrian  coast,  buffeted  by  winds  and  waves,  and  on  the  seventh

'  Astarte  is  the  name  taken  by  the  queen  in  the  Phoenician  version  :  the  Egyptian  counterpart
of  the  same  narrative  substituted  lor  it  Nemanous  or  Saosis;  tliat  is  to  say,  the  two  principal  forms
of  Hatlior— the  Ilermopolitan  NalimaQit  and  the  Heliopnlitan  lusatlt  (see  Daioii  of  Civitizatiou,
p.  104);  (ivT-§  5t  01  fxfv  ' AaT&inriii  oi  Se  Sdaa-iy  ol  Se  Nefiai/ovf,  uwfp  Sv  "EA.Aj)^es  'A0-nvatBa  Trpuiretwoiff
(D<:  hide  el  Oniride,  §  15,  edit.  Paetuey,  p.  26).  It  would  appear  from  the  presence  of  these  nanies
that  tliere  must  have  Ijeen  in  Egypt  two  versions  at  least  of  tlie  Phoenician  adventures  of  Isis— the
one  of  Hermopolitan  and  the  other  of  Heliopolitan  origin,

^  Upon  this  detail  in  the  legend,  which  the  author  of  De  Iside,  etc.,  did  not  understand  (§  Id,  edit.
Parthey,  p.  'M),  see  supra,  pp.  487,  488  ;  Isis,  in  putting  lier  finger  in  tlie  moutli,  was  following  the
ordinary  rite  of  adoption.

'  Tliis  history  is  contained  in  chaps,  xv.-xvii.  of  De  Iside  et  OsiriJc  (edit.  Paktuev,  pp.  25-29);
cf.,  with  the  ordinary  reserve.  Movers,  Die  Phunizier,  jjp.  2.'!.')-238.


THE    THCENICIAN    HORUS.'


THE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EM  PI  RE.

was  thrown  up  at  Byblos,  where  the  priests  received
it  and  exhibited  it  solemnly  to  the  people.^  The
details  of  these  different  stories  are  not  in  every
case  very  ancient,  but  the  first  fact  in  them  carries
us  back  to  the  time  when  Byblos  had  accepted
the  sovereignty  of  the  Theban  dynasties,  and  was
maintaining  daily  commercial  and  political  rela-
tions with  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  valley."  The
city  proclaimed  Horus  to  be  a  great  god.^  El-
Kronos  allied  himself  with  Osiris  as  well  as  with
Adonis;  Isis  and  Baalat  became  blended  together
at  their  first  encounter,  and  the  respective  peoples
made  an  exchange  of  their  deities  with  the  same
light-heartedness  as  they  displayed  in  trafficking
with  the  products  of  their  soil  or  their  industry.
After  Osiris,  the  Ibis  Tbot  was  the  most  important  among  the  deities
who  had  emigrated  to  Asia.^  He  was  too  closely  connected  with  the  Osirian
cycle  to  be  forgotten  by  the  Phoenicians  after  they  had  adopted  his  com-
panions. We  are  ignorant  of  the  particular  divinity  with  whom  he  was
identified,  or  would  be  the  more  readily  associated  from  some  similarity  in
the   pronunciation   of  his   name:    we  know  only  that   he  still   preserved   in

'  J)e  Ded  Syria,  §  7.  In  the  later  Roman  period  it  was  letters  announcing  the  resurrection  of
Adonis-Osiris  that  the  Alexandrian  womeu  cast  into  the  sea,  and  these  were  carried  by  the  current
as  far  as  Byblos.  See  on  this  subject  the  commentaries  of  Cyril  of  Alexandria  and  Procoinus  of
Gaza  on  chap,  xviii.  of  Isaiah.

'  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Philo  gives  to  the  divinity  with  the  Egyptian  name  Taautos  the  part  in
the  ancient  history  of  Phoenicia  of  having  edited  the  mystic  writings  put  in  order  by  Sanchoniathon
at  a  very  early  epoch  (Fragm.  1,  §  i,  in  MC'Lleb-Didot,  Fragmeida  Historicorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  iii.

pp.  563,  5G4).

=  This  is  confirmed  by  one  of  the  names  inscribed  on  the  Tel  el-Amarna  tablets  as  being  that  of
a  governor  of  Byblos  under  Amenothes  IV.  This  name  was  read  Eiibimur  (Delattre,  Azirou,  iu  the
Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  219,  220),  Anrabimur,  or  Ilrabimur
(Halevt,  La  Correspondaucc  d' Am^nophis  III.,  etc.,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1891,  vol.  xviii.  pp.
171,  172),  and  finally  llurabihur  (Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  p.  131)  :  tbe  meaning  of  it  is,
"Muru  is  the  great  god,"  or  "  Horus  is  the  great  god."  Muru  is  the  name  which  we  find  in  an
appellation  of  a  Hittite  king,  Maurusaru,  "  Mauru  is  king"  (cf.  supra,  p.  355,  note  1).  On  an
Aramiean  cylinder  in  the  British  Museum,  representing  a  god  in  Assyrian  dress  fighting  with  two
gri  ffins,  there  is  the  inscription  "  Horkhu,"  Harmakhis  (M.  de  VogOe,  Me'langes  d'Archdblogie  Orientale,
p.  127,  and  pi.  vi.,  No.  24).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  an  intaglio  engraved  in  Cesnola,  Cyprus,  pp.  310,372;  cf.
PERKOT-CmriEZ,  Eistoire  de I'Art  dans  I' Antiquity,  vol.  iii.  p.  044.  The  Plia;nician  figures  of  Horus  and
Thot  which  I  have  reproduced  were  pointed  out  to  me  by  my  friend  I'lermont-Gauneau.

'  He  is  the  Taautos  of  Sanchoniathon  :  Taauros,  6s  flpe  tV  Tiir  TrpuTuv  cttoixs''"''  yptKpV",  o"
AiyvTTTioi  ij.fi'  &aiie,  'AAf^aySpeTs  Si  ©luM,  "EXATji-es  5e  'Ep^l.r)v  fKoAeirai'  (Phii.o  OF  Byblos,  Frag.  1,§  11,
in  Mi'LLER-DiDOT,  Frag.  Hist,  arxcorum,  vol.  iii.  p.  567 ;  cf.  Frag.  1,  §  4,  p.  564 :  Frag.  5,  p.  570 ;
Frag.  9,  pp.  571-573) ;  El,  having  conquered  the  world,  gave  Thot  as  a  king  to  the  Egyptians
(Philo  of  Bydlos,  Frag.  2,  §  27,  in  Mcller-Didot,  op.  cit,  vol.  iii.  p.  579).  The  principal  passages
in  ancient  authors  bearing  upon  this  god  have  been  collected  and  annotated  by  Movers,  Die
Phonizier,  pp.  500-502,  of.  pp.  89-92.


HO  BUS — THOT  AND    THE  ALPHABET.


573


THE    rHCEXlClAS    THOT.'


his  new  country  all  the  power  of  his  voice  and  all  the  subtilty  of  his
mind.  He  occupied  there  also  the  position  of  scribe  and  enchanter,  as  he
had  done  at  Thebes,  Memphis,  Thinis,  and  before  the  chief  of  each  Helio-
politan  Ennead.  He  became  the  usual  adviser  of  El-Kronos  at  Byblos,  as
he  had  been  of  Osiris  and  Horus  ;  lie  composed  charms
for  him,  and  formulae  which  increased  the  warlike  zeal
of  his  partisans ;  he  prescribed  the  form  and  insignia
of  the  god  and  of  his  attendant  deities,  and  came
finally  to  be  considered  as  the  inventor  of  letters.^  The
■epoch,  indeed,  in  which  he  became  a  naturalised
Phoenician  coincides  approximately  with  a  fundamental
revolution  in  the  art  of  writing — that  in  whicli  a  simple
and  rapid  stenography  was  substituted  for  tlie  compli-
cated and  tedious  systems  with  which  the  empires  of
the  ancient  world  had  been  content  from  their  origin.
Tyre,  Sidon,  Byblos,  Arvad,  had  employed  up  to  this  period  the  most  intricate
of  these  systems.  Like  most  of  the  civilized  nations  of  Western  Asia,  they  had
conducted  their  diplomatic  and  commercial  correspondence  in  the  cuneiform
character  impressed  upon  clay  tablets.  Their  kings  had  had  recourse  to  a  Baby-
lonian model  for  communicating  to  the  Amenothes  Pharaohs  the  expression
of  their  wishes  or  their  loyalty ;  we  now  behold  them,  after  an  interval  of  four
hundred  years  and  more^ — during  which  we  have  no  examples  of  their
monuments — po.ssessed  of  a  short  and  commodious  script,  without  the  encum-
brance of  ideograms,  determinatives,  polyphony  and  syllabic  sounds,  such  as
had  fettered  the  Egyptian  and  Chaldaean  scribes,  in  spite  of  their  cleverness  in
dealing  with  them.  Phonetic  articulations  were  ultimately  resolved  into  twenty-
two  sounds,  to  each  of  wliieli  a  special  sign  was  attached,  which  collectively
took  the  place  of  the  hundreds  or  thousands  of  signs  formerly  required.  This
was  an  alphabet,  the  first  in  point  of  time,  but  so  ingenious  and  so  pliable  that
the  majority  of  ancient  and  modern  nations  have  found  it  able  to  supply  all  their


'  The  part  of  counsellor  which  Thot  played  in  connexion  with  the  god  of  Byblos  was  described  at
some  length  in  the  writinsB  attributed  to  Sankhoniathon  (Philo  op  Byblos,  Frag.  2, §§11, 15,25-27,
in  MuLLER-DiDOT,  Frag.  Ilist.  Griec.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  567-569).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  an  intaglio  engraved  in  M.  de  VoGtJE,  Melanges  d'Archeblogic
Orientale,  pi.  i.,  No.  1,  pp.  106-108.

'  The  inscription  on  the  bronze  cup  dedicated  to  the  Baal  of  the  Lebanon,  and  reproduced  on  tho
next  page  (574),  goes  back  probably  to  the  time  of  Uiram  I.,  say  the  X"'  century  before  our  era
(^CorpuH  Inscriijtionum  Semilicarum,  \(i\.  i.  pi.  iv.  pp.  22-2G);  the  reasons  advanced  by  Winckler
(Geachichte  Israeli,  vol.  i.  p.  120)  for  dating!  it  in  the  time  of  Hiram  II.  have  not  been  fully  accepted
up  to  tho  present.  By  placing  the  introduction  of  the  alphabet  somewhere  between  Amenothes  IV.
in  the  XV"'  and  Hiram  I.  in  the  X"'  century  before  our  era,  and  by  taking  the  middle  date  between
them,  say  the  accession  of  tho  XXI"'  dynasty  towards  the  year  1100  B.C.  for  its  invention  or  adoption,
we  cannot  go  far  wrong  oue  way  or  the  other.


574


THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


needs — Greeks  and  Europeans  of  the  western  IMediterranean  on  the  one  hand,
and  Semites  of  all  kinds,  Persians  and  Hindus  on  the  other.  It  must  have
originated  between  the  end  of  the  XVIir"  and  the  beginning  of  the  XXP'
dynasties,  and  the  existence  of  Pharaonic  rule  in  Phoenicia  during  tliis  period
has  led  more  than  one  modern  scholar  to  assume  that  it  developed  under
Egyptian  influence.^   Some  affirm  that  it  is  traceable  directly  to  the  hieroglyphs.


while  others  seek  for  some  intermediary  in  tlie  shape  of  a  cursive  script,
and  find  this  in  the  Hieratic  writing,  which  contains,  they  maintain,  proto-
types of  all  the  Phoenician  letters.  Tables  have  been  drawn  up,  showing  at  a
glance  the  resemblances  and  differences  which  appear  respectively  to  justify
or  condemn  their  hypothesis.  Perhaps  the  analogies  would  be  more  evident
and  more  numerous  if  we  were  in  possession  of  inscriptions  going  back  nearer
to  the  date  of  origin.^     As  it  is,  the  divergencies  are  sufficiently  striking  to


'  The  hypothesis  of  an  Egyptian  origin,  suggested  casually  by  Champollion  QLettre  a  M.  Dacier,
p.  80 ;  of.  Salvolini,  Analyse  grammaticale  de  Vinscription  de  Rosette,  p.  86,  et  seq.),  lias  been  ably
•de.ilt  with  by  E.  de  Rouge'  (^ilgmoire  sur  Voriginc  ^gyptienne  de  V Alphabet  Phenicien,  read  at  the
Academy  of  Inscriptions  and  Belles-Lettres  in  1859,  criticised  iu  the  Comptes  Rendu$,  1859,  vol.  iii.
pp.  115-12-1,  and  published  in  1S74  by  E.  de  Kouge).  E.  de  Rouge'  derives  the  alphabet  from  the
Hieratic,  and  his  identifications  have  been  accepted  by  Lauth  ( Veber  den  j^gyptischen  Ursprung
unserer  Buchstaben  iind  Ziffern,  in  the  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Jlunich,  1867,
Tol.  ii.  pp.  8'1:-124),  by  Brugsch  (JJeber  Bildung  und  Entwiclielung  der  Schrift,  186G),  by  F.  Lenor-
mant  (Essai  sur  la  propagation  de  V Alphabet  Phenicien  dans  I'Ancien  Monde,  vol.  i.  pp.  85-97),  and  by
Isaac  Taylor  {Tlte  Alphabet,  vol.  i.).  Halevy  would  take  it  from  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics  directly
■without  the  intervention  of  the  Hieratic  (^Me'langes  d'Epigraphie  et  d' Archiologie  Se'mitiques,  pp.
168-183).  The  Egyptian  origin,  strongly  contested  of  late,  has  been  accepted  by  the  majority  of
scholars  :  cf  Ph.  Bergek,  Histoire  de  I'Ecriture  dans  V Antiquity,  pp.  115-122.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  heliogravure  in  the  Carpus  Inscr.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pi.  iv.  This
is  the  cup  of  the  Baal  of  the  Lebunon,  mentioned  in  the  preceding  page,  note  3.

^  The  table  on  the  next  page  (575)  contains  the  principal  identifications  proposed  by  E.  de  Rouge,

but  varies  from  it  in  a  few  minor  points.  I  derive  the  Phoenician  A  from  the  hieratic  ^»»  and  not
from  Q  :  the  form  '^vt  is  that  which  is  used,  in  fact,  to  express  the  Semitic  g  in  the  names  Megiddo
and  Gargamish,  and  a  hieratic  form  in  which  the  ring  is  reduced  to  a  simple  stroke  like  that  of  the
Phoenician  alphabet  is  common  in  all  Egyptian  epochs.  The  ^.  /.-,  comes  also  from  the  ^vt,  which
is  easily  explained,  the  Egyptians  having  but  one  sign  and  one  sound  for  the  g  and  k  of  Semitic
speech :  the  Phoenicians  must  have  taken  two  hieratic  variants  to  make  the  two  separate  letters
•equivalent  tu  their  G  and  k.  The  uy  appears  to  me  to  be  derived  from  the  Archaic  form  of  the  '•  owl,"
and  not  from  that  with  which  E.  de  Rouge'  identifies  it,  and  which  was  more  in  use  in  Theban  times.
I  accept,  as  others  do,  the  assumption  that  >y  and  h,  are  but  one  sign,  differentiated  to  mark  the


TEE  EGYPTIAN   ORIGIN   OF   THE  PE(ENICIAN   ALPHABET.        575

lead  some  scholars  to  seek  the  prototype  of  the  alphabet  elsewhere — either  in
Babylon,^  in  Asia  IMinor,^  or  even  in  Crete,  among  those  barbarous  hieroglyphs


c-.i;i;kk

HIERATIC

1

rilCEMICIAX

OUEEK

HIEKATIC

I'HCENICIAN

ALPHABET.

A

SIGNS.

ALPHABET.

ALPHABET.

A

SIGNS.

ALPHABET.

I

L

B

-5

^

M

X

r

r

A

n

N

—f

'j

A

■^

^

-

«^^

v<.

E

m

^

(J

o

F

^

/

n

%^

7

z

%

z       '

^

^

II

<:^

^H

o

^

f

(-)

^

&

p

^

1

1

H

A/

•±

%

w

K

A^

\\

T

V

hxt

which  are  attributed  to  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  the  island.''     It  is  no  easy
matter  to  get  at  the  truth  amid  these  conflicting  theories.     Two  points  only


rounds  of  the  zain  and  the  tsade ;  the  hieroglyph  3^  in,  indeed,  the  equivalent  of  ^^,  at  least  in
tlio  Thebiin  period,  and  answers  as  well  as  the  latter  to  the  zain  and  tsade  of  the  Semites.  Tlie  ^
and  the  V\  appear  to  mo  to  bo  the  same  character,  although  I  cannot  say  whetlier  the  former  came
from  the  latter  or  vice  versa.  I  have  preferred  to  use  in  my  comparison  the  hieratic  signs  in  the
manuscripts  of  the  XIX"'  ilynasty,  which  is  the  period  approximately  of  the  beginning  of  Phoenician
writing.  The  Greek  alphabet  is  given  merely  to  show  tlio  values  of  the  Egyptian  and  Phoenician
signs.

'  niis  position  was  taken  up  by  Deecke,  Die  Urspruiiij  des  allsemiiischen  Alphahets  aus  der  new
assyrisohen  KeiUchrifl,  in  the  Zeitseh.  der  D.  Morgenl.  Gesellschuft,  1S77,  pi).  102-154,  afterwards  by
Peteks,  2'/i(!  Buhijluniaii  Oriijin  of  Ihe  Fhceidciau  Alphabet,  in  the  I'roceedinija  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
vol.  vi.,  18S2-84,  and  by  Hosimel,  GmchirMc  Bahijlonima  mid  Assijriens,  pp.  50-55.

-  Eu.  Meyeh,  Gcschichte  des  Altertluims,  vol.  i.  p.  2158,  derives  it  from  the  Uittito  syllabary.

^  This  identification  was  i)ropo8e<l  by  Arthur  Evans,  Cretan  Fictotjraphs  and  yric-Phenician  Script,
pp.  92-103 ;  cf.  tlie  Journal  of  Ilellenic  Studies,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  3G1-372,  and  accepted  by  Beinach,


57G


THE   RISE    OF    THE  ASSYETAN  EMPIBE.


are  indisputable  :  first,  the  almost  unanimous  agreement  among  writers  of
classical  times  in  ascribing  the  first  alphabet  to  the
Pha3nicians ;  and  second,  the  Phoenician  origin  of  the
Greek,  and  afterwards  of  the  Latin  alphabet  which  we
employ  to-day.^

To  return  to  the  religion  of  the  Phceniciaus:  the  foreign
deities  were  not  content  with  obtaining  a  high  place  in
the  estimation  of  priests  and  people  ;  they  acquired  such
authority  over  the  native  gods  that  they  persuaded  them
to  metamorphose  themselves  almost  completely  into
Egyptian  divinities.  One  finds  among  tlie  majority  of
them  the  emblems  commonly  used  in  the  Pharaonie
temples,  sceptres  with  heads  of  animals,  head-dress  like  the
Psehent,  the  erux  ansata,  the  solar  disk,  and  the  winged
scarab.^  The  lady  of  Byblos  placed  the  cow's  horns  upon
her  head  from  the  moment  she  became  identified  with
Hathor.^  The  Baal  of  the  neighbouring  Arvad — probably
a  form  of  Kashuf — was  still  represented  as  standing
upright  on  his  lion  in  order  to  traverse  the  high  places  :
but  while,  in  the  monument  which  has  preserved  the
figure  of  the  god,  both  lion  and  mountain  are  given
according  to  Chaldfean  tradition,  he  himself,  as  the
illustration  shows,  is  dressed  after  the  manner  of  Egypt,
in  the  striped  and  plaited  loin-cloth,  wears  a  large  neck-
lace on  his  neck  and  bracelets  on  his  arms,  and  bears  upon
his  head  the  white  mitre  with  its  double  plume  and  the
Egyptian  uraeus."  He  brandishes  in  one  hand  the  weapon  of  tlie  victor,  and  is
on  the  point  of  despatching  with  it  a  lion,  whicli  he  has  seized  by  the  tail  with

Clironique  d'Orient,  No.  xxx.,  iiji.  G4,  63.  He  puts  reliance  on  a  Cretan  tradition,  wbic-li  has  been
preserved  by  Diodorus  Siculus :  <paiA  rois  *o/viKas  oiiK  f|  opx^s  (iipdv  aWa  tous  tIttovs  rHv  ypaixfi.a-ni>v
H^raQflvat  }ji6vov  (v.  74).

'  For  the  testimony  of  ancient  writers  on  this  subject,  see  F.  Lenormant,  Essai  sur  la  propagation
de  Valpliabet  phe'iiicieii,  vol.  i.  pp.  82,  83,  and  Ph.  Berger,  Hidoire  de  I'L'criture  dans  V Antiquity,
pp.  115,  120.  Some  ancient  as  well  as  certain  modern  writers,  notably  Winckler  {Geschichte  Israels,
vol.  i.  pp.  124-126),  have  repudiated  altogether  the  claim  of  the  Phoenicians  to  have  been  tlie
inventors  of  the  alphabet.

=  PERROT-CHiriEZ,  llhtoire  de  VArt  dans  VJnfiqu'itg',  vol.  iii.  p.  130,  Nos.  75,  407,  408,  410,  et  seq.

'  She  is  represented  as  Hathor  on  the  stele  of  lehav-nielek.  King  of  Byblos,  during  the  Persian
period  {Corpus  Inscript.  Semit.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  1,  and  p.  2)  ;  of.  the  bronze  belonging  to  the  former  Peretie'
collection,  reproduced  in  PERROT-CHiriEZ,  Hist,  de  VArt,  etc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  77, No.  26 ;  and  the  fragment
of  a  bas-relief  of  the  Saite  epoch,  published  in  Een.in,  Mission  de  FMaicie,  pp.  179,  180,  and  Corpus
Inscript.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  p.  2.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  re]iroduced  in  Ci.ermont-Gaxneau,  Mission  eii
Palestine  et  en  Thgnicie.  Fifth  Report,  pi.  vi.  A,  and  p.  129 ;  cf.  Peerot-Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans
I'Antiquitd',  vol.  iii.  p.  413.

^  This  monument,  which  belonged  to  the  Peretie'  collection,  was  found  near  Amrith,  at  the  place
called  Nahr-Abrek  (Clebmont-Ganneac,  Mission  en  Palestine,  etc.,  en  XSUl,  Fifth  Report,  p.  128).


RASHCF  ON   HIS   hlOS.'


EGYPTIAN  ELEMENTS  IN  PHCENICIAN  ABCHITECTURE.


57;


HCENICIAN


3  EGYPTIAN
SHHINE.'


the  other,  after  the  model  of  the  Pharaonic  hunters,

Amenothes   I.   and   Thiitmosis    III.     The   lunar

disk  floating  above  his  head  lends  to  him,  it  is      /

true,  a  Phcenician  character,  but  the  winged

sun   of    Heliopolis    hovering    above    the

disk  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  his  Egyptian

antecedents.'     The   worship,  too,  offered

to  these  metamorphosed  gods  was  as  much

changed  as  the  deities  themselves  ;    the

altars  assumed  something  of  the  Egyptian

form,   and   the   tabernacles    were   turned

into  shrines,  which  were  decorated  at  the

top  with  a  concave  groove,  or  with  a  frieze

made    up   of    repetitions   of  the   ura?us.''

Egyptian    fashions     had    influenced    the

better  classes  so  far  as  to  change  even  their  mode  of  dealing  with  the  dead,

of  which  we  find  in  not  a  few  places  clear
evidence.*  Travellers  arriving  in  Egypt  at
that  period  must  have  been  as  much
astonished    as  the  tourist  of   to-day

The  dress  and  bearing  are  so  like  those  of  the
Rasliuf  represented  on  Egypti;>n  monuments
(see  supra,  pp.  156,  158),  that  I  have  no  hesita-
tion in  regarding  this  as  a  representation  of  that
god.  He  may  be  compared  with  the  individual
represented  on  the  small  Egyptian  stele  pub-
lished by  Griffith,  The  God  Set  of  Harnesses  II.
and  nil  Egypto-Syrian  Deity,  in  the  Froceedings
of  tlie  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  p.  69,
the  liead-dress  of  whicli  has  tlie  floating  pennon
— in  this  case  a  serpent — of  the  Phcenician  god.
'  The  Phoenician  symbol  represents  the
i^rescent  moon  holding  the  darkened  portion  in
its  arms  (Cleumont-Ganneau,  Missivii  en  Pales-
line,  etc..  Fifth  Report,  p.  12S,  note  1),  like  the
symbol  reserved  in  Egypt  for  the  lunar  gods.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  p.  365  of
Renan's  Mission  de  Phinicie,  p.  365.

^  Renan,  Mission  de  Phinicie,  p.  69,  and
pi.  ix,,  where  one  of  the  shrines  of  Amrit  is
reproduced ;  the  urajus  frieze  crowning  it  must

have  been  the  origin  of  its   modern  naine,  Aiu  el-Hayyat,  the  "  Fountain  of  Serpents."     Cf.  the

similar  remains  pointed  out  by  Renan  at  Arvad  (Id.,  ihid.,  p.  '^9),  at  Sidon  {ibid.,  p.  305),  and    at

Tyre  (ihid.,  p.  561).

•  With  regard  to  the  Egyptian  aspect  of  the  necropoli.s  at  Adlun,  see  p.  16G,  note  .5,  of  tlie  present

volume.      Renan,  «p.   cit.,  \>.  421,  et  stq.,  insists  upon   the  resemblance  between   the  Phoenician

Taricheutica  and  the  Egyptian  tomij.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin;  cf.  R0.SELLINI,  Munumenti  Storici,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p.  110,  and  pi.  ii.  E.

This  monument  was  in  tlie  Louvre  Museum.     See  p.  101,  supra,  for  another  stele  of  the  same  series.

AnaIogou.>i  figures  of  gods  or  kings  holding  a  lion  by  the  tail  are  found  on  various  monuments  of

2  p


AMI-.NlJTllES    I.    SKIZINC.    A    LION."


578


THE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


by  the  monuments  \^llit■h  the  Egyptians  erected  for  their  dead.  The  pyramids
which  met  their  gaze,  as  soon  as  they  had  reached  the  apex  of  the  Delta,
must  have  far  surpassed  their  ideas  of  tliem,  no  matter  how  frequently  they

may  have  been  told  about  them,
and  they  must  have  been  at  a
loss  to  know  why  such  a  number  of
stones  should  have  been  brought
together  to  cover  a  single  corpse.
At  the  foot  of  these  colossal
monuments,  lying  like  a  pack
of  hounds  asleep  around  their
master,  the  mastabas  of  the  early
dynasties  were  ranged,  half  buried
under  the  sand,  but  still  visible,
and  still  visited  on  certain  days
by  the  descendants  of  their  in-
habitants, or  by  priests  charged
with  tlie  duty  of  keeping  them
up.  Chapels  of  more  recent
generations  extended  as  a  sort  of
screen  before  the  ancient  tombs,
affording  examples  of  the  two  archaic  types  combined — the  mastaba  more  or  less
curtailed  in  its  proportions,  and  the  pyramid  with  a  more  or  less  acute  point. -
The  majority  of  these  monuments  are  no  longer  in  existence,  and  only  one  of
them  has  come  down  to  us  intact — that  which  Amenothes  III.  erected  in  the
Serapeum  at  Memphis  in  honour  of  an  Apis  which  had  died  in  his  reign.
Phoenicians  visiting  the  Nile  valley  must  have  carried  back  with  them  to  their
native  country  a  remembrance  of  this  kind  of  burying-place,  and  have  suggested
it  to  their  architects  as  a  model.  One  of  the  cemeteries  at  Arvad  contains  a
splendid  specimen  of  this  imported  design. ■'     It  is  a  square  tower  some  thirty-

the  Theban  dynasties,  as  well  as  on  a  little  wooclen  vessel,  No.  292  in  the  Hoff.m.\xx  CoUectioc,
AntiqtMifs  Hijyptiennes,  pp.  81,  85.

'  Drawn  by  Fauchei-Gudin,  from  tlie  restoration  by  Thobois,  as  given  in  Kenan,  MUsioii  da
Phinicie,  pi.  xvi.  Tlie  cuttings  made  in  the  lower  stonework  appear  to  be  traces  of  unfinished
steps,  corresponding  to  the  steps  of  the  Egyptian  chapel  reproduced  on  p.  425,  mpra.  The  pyramid
at  tlie  top  is  no  longer  in  existence,  but  its  remains  are  scattered  about  the  foot  of  the  monument,
and  furnished  M.  Thobois  with  the  means  of  reconstriicting  with  exactness  the  original  form.

=  This  kind  of  tomb  is  described  at  p.  517,  siipni ;  the  chapel  of  Amenothes  III.— the  only
example  existing  a  few  years  ago — is  reproduced  ou  p.  -125,  supra.

'  Eenan,  J/fssiOH  ih  rheiiicii-,  pp.  80-90;  cf.  Perrot-Chipiez.  Hist,  de  VAit  dans  l'Antiquite\
vol.  iii.  pp.  23,  24,  145,  155,  loU.  Pielscbmann  (Gescliichte  der  Phoiiizier.  p.  19G,  note  2)  thinks  that
the  monument  is  not  older  than  the  Greek  epoch,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  cornice  is  not
such  as  we  usually  meet  with  in  Egypt  in  Theban  times  ;  nevertheless,  the  very  marked  resemblance
to  the  Theban  mastaba  shows  that  it  must  have  been  directly  connected  with  the  Egyptian  type
which  prevailed  from  the  XVIII"'  to  the  XX"'  dynasties.


A   PHCENICIAN    MASTABA    AT    ARVAD.'


TOMBS    OF  ARVAU    AND    Till-:   KABR-IIIRAM.

six  feet  high  ;  the  six  lower  courses  consist  of  blocks
each  some  sixteen  and  a  half  feet  long,  joined  to  each
other  without  mortar.     The  two  lowest  courses  pro-
ject  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of
pedestal     for     the     building.
The  cornice  at   the  top  con-
sists of  a  deep  moulding,  sur-
mounted by  a  broad  flat  band,
above  which  rises  the  pyramid,
which     attains    a    height    of
nearly  thirty  feet.     It  is  im-


J^'-'A.-


'»i—
->i,^


TWO    OF    THE    T05IBS    AT    ARVAli.'


possible  to  deny
that  it  is  con-
structed on  a
foreign  model ;  it
is  not  a  slavish
imitation,  how-
ever, but  rather
an  adaptation
upon  a  rational
plan  to  the  con-
ditions of  its  new  home.  Its  foundations  rest  on  nothing  but  a  mixture
of  soil  and  sand  impregnated  with  water,  and  if  vaults  bad  been  con-
structed beneath  this,  as  in  Egypt,  the  body  placed  there  would  soon  have
corrupted  away,  owing  to  the  infiltration  of  moisture.  The  dead  bodies  were,
therefore,  placed  within  the  structure  above  ground,  in  chambers  correspond-
ing to  tlie  Egyptian  chapel,  which  were  superimposed  the  one  upon  the  other.
The  first  storey  would  furnish  space  for  three  bodies,  and  the  second  would
contain  twelve,  for  which  as  many  niches  were  provided.  In  the  same
cemetery  we  find  examples  of  tombs  which  the  architect  has  constructed,  not
after  an  Egyptian,  but  a  Chaldajan  model.  A  round  tower  is  here  substi-
tuted for  the  square  structure  and  a  cupola  for  the  pyramid,  while  the  cornice
is  represented  by  crenellated  markings.  The  only  Egyptian  feature
about  it  is  the  four  lions,  which  seem  to  support  the  whole  edifice  upon
their    backs.^        Arvad    was,  among   I'hojnician  cities,  the  nearest   neighbour


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Guiliii,  froiu  a  water-culour  by  'I'liobois,  reprodiu-ed  in  Kenan',  Mifnion  de
I'li^nicie,  pi.  xi.

2  The  fellabin  in  the  neifjbbourliood  dill  these  two  moiiiinient.'i  the  Meghazil  or  " distaffs."
They  have  been  minutely  described  by  Rkxax,  o^-.  cit..  pp.  70-80,  and  pis  xi.-xiii. :  of.  rKititOT-
Chipikz,  Hist,  de  I'.lrl  dans  I'AiitiquiU,  vol.  iii.  pp.  HO-ir).").


580


THE  RISE   OF   THE   ASSYltlAN  EMPIRE.


to  the  kingdoms  on  the  Euphrates,  and  was  thus  the  first  to  experience  either
the  brunt  of  an  attack  or  the  propagation  of  fashions  and  ideas  from  these
countries.  In  the  more  southerly  region,  in  the  country  about  Tyre,  there
are  fewer  indications  of  Babylonian  influence,  and  such  examples  of  burying-
places  for  the  ruling  classes  as  the  Kabr-Hiram  and  other  similar  tombs
correspond  with  the  mixed  mastaba  of  the  Theban  period.'  We  have  the
same  rectangular  base,  but  the  chapel  and  its  crowning  pyramid  are  repre-
sented by  the  sarcophagus  itself  with  its  ridged  cover.     The  work  is  of  an


THE   KABR-HIRAM    NEAR    TVUE."


unfinished  character,  and  carelessly  wrought,  but  there  is  a  charming  simplicity
about  its  lines  and  a  harmony  in  its  proportions  which  betray  an  Egyptian
influence.

The  spirit  of  imitation  which  we  fiud  in  the  religion  and  architecture  of
Phoenicia  is  no  less  displayed  in  the  minor  arts,  such  as  goldsmiths'  work,
sculpture  in  ivory,  engraving  on  gems,  and  glass-making.  The  forms,  de-
signs, and  colours  are  all  rather  those  of  Egypt  than  of  Chaldaea.  The  many-
hued  glass  objects,  turned  out  by  tlie  manufacturers  of  the  Said  in  millions,
furnished  at  one  time  valuable  cargoes  for  thePhcenicians ;  they  learned  at  length
to  cast  and  colour  copies  of  these  at  home,  and  imitated  their  Egyptian  models

'  Eenan,  Mission  dc  Ph^nicie,  pp.  597-000,  and  pi.  xlvii. ;  ef.  F.  de  Saulct,   Voyage  en  Teire
Sainte,  IS65,  pp.  278,  279,  and  Perbot-Chii'iez,  Eist.  de  V Art,  etc.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  104-167.
■  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  by  Thobois,  reproduced  by  Renan,  op.  cit.,  pi.  xlvii.


EOTPTIAN  INFLUENCE   ON  GOLDSMITHS'    WORK.


581


EGYPTIAN   TREATMENT   OF  THE    COW    ON    A
PHCENICIAN    EOWI,.-


80  successfully  that  classical  antiquity  was
often  deceived  by  them.*  Their  engravers,
while  still  continuing  to  employ  cones
and  cylinders  of  Babylonian  form,
borrowed  the  scarab  type  also,  and
made  use  of  it  on  the  bezils  of  rings,
the  pendants  of  necklaces,  and  on
a  kind  of  bracelet  used  partly  for
ornament  and  partly  as  a  protec-
tive amulet.  The  influence  of  the
Egyptian  model  did  not  extend,
however,  amongst  the  masses,  and
we  find,  therefore,  no  evidence  of  it
in  the  case  of  common  objects,  such  as
thoseof  coarse  sand  or  glazed  earthen-
ware. Egyptian  scarab  forms  were  thus  confined  to  the  rich,  and  the  material
upon  which  they  are  found  is  generally  some  costly  gem,  such  as  cut  and
polished  agate,  onyx,  hasmatite,  and  lapis-lazuli.^  The  goldsmiths  did  not
slavishly  copy  the  golden  and  silver  bowls  which  were  imported  from  the
Delta ;  they  took  their  inspiration  from  the  principles  displayed  in  the  orna-
mentation of  these  objects,  but  they  treated  the  subjects  after  their  own  manner,
grouping  them  afresh  and  blending  them  with  new  designs.^  The  intrinsic
value  of  the  metal  upon  which  these  artistic  conceptions  had  been  impressed
led  to  their  destruction,  and  among  the  examples  which  have  come  down  to  us
I  know  of  no  object  which  can  be  traced  to  the  period  of  the  Egyptian  con-
quest. It  was  Theban  art  for  the  most  part  which  furnished  the  Phoenicians
with  their  designs.  These  included  the  lotus,  the  papyrus,  the  cow  standing
in  a  thicket  and  suckling  her  calf,  the  sacred  bark,  and  the  king  threatening  with
his  uplifted  arm  the  crowd  of  conquered  foes  who  lie  prostrate  before  him.  The
king's  double  often  accompanied  liim  on  some  of  the  original  objects,  impassive
and  armed  with  the  banner  bearing  the  name  of  Horus.  The  Phoenician  artist
modified  this  figure,  which  in  its  original    form  did    not  satisfy  his  ideas  of

'  Glass  manufacture  was  carried  to  such  a  degree  of  perfection  among  the  Phoenicians,  that  many
ancient  authors  attributed  to  them  the  invention  of  glass  (Plinv,  Nai.  Hut.,  v.  §  17 ;  cf.  xxxvi.  §  190).
As  to  Phoenician  glasswork,  see  Perrot-Ciiiviez,  Hist,  dc  I' Art,  etc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  733,  et  seq. ;  and  on  the
existence  of  numerous  glass  objects — some  of  eastern  and  others  of  local  manufacture — in  the  tombs
of  primeval  Greece,  see  Pebkot-Ciiipikz,  op.  cit.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  482,  550,  557,  715,  746,  S50,  943-947.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  after  Gmii,  Moiiumenii  di  Cm-  mdica,  pi.  x.  I ;  this  monument
ought  to  be  ascribed  apjiroxiniately  to  the  Saito  riitlier  than  the  Tanito  period.

'  A  detailed  notice  of  Phoenician  cylinders  and  seaniljs  is  given  in  PEUitor-CuiPiEi;,  Hist,  df  ('Art,
etc ,  vol.  iii.  p.  ()29,  et  seq.

'  l'"or  Phoenician  goldsmiths'  work,  and  the  various  influences  to  which  it  was  .■subjected  before
tlie  Greek  period,  see  Peurot-Ciiii'Ikz,  dp.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  751,  et  seq.


582  TEE   RISE    OF   THE  ASSYBIAN  EMPIRE.

)inmiin  nature,  by  transforming  it  into  a  protective  genius,  who  looks  with
approval  on  the  exploits  of  his  protege,  and  gathers  together  the  corpses  of
those  he  has  slain.  Once  these  designs  had  become  current  among  the  gold-
smiths, they  continued  to  be  supplied  for  a  long  j^ei'iod,  without  much  modi-
fication, to  the  markets  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  worlds.  Indeed,  it  was
natural  that  they  should  have  taken  a  stereotyped  form,  when  we  consider  that
the  Phoenicians  who  employed  them  held  continuous  commercial  relations  with
the  country  whence  they  had  come— a  country  of  which,  too,  they  recognised  the
supremacy.  Egypt  in  the  Ramesside  period  was,  as  we  have  seen,  distinguished
for  the  highest  development  of  every  branch  of  industry  ;  it  had  also  a  population
which  imported  and  exported  more  raw  material  and  more  manufactured  pro-
ducts than  any  other.  The  small  nation  which  acted  as  a  commercial  inter-
mediary between  Egypt  and  the  rest  of  the  world  had  in  this  traffic  a  steady
source  of  profit,  and  even  in  providing  Egypt  with  a  single  article — for  example,
bronze,  or  the  tin  necessary  for  its  preparation — could  realise  enormous  profits  ^
The  people  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  had  been  very  careful  not  to  alienate  the  good
will  of  such  rich  customers,  and  as  long  as  the  representatives  of  the  Pharaoh
held  sway  in  Syria,  they  had  shown  themselves,  if  not  thoroughly  trustworthy
vassals,  at  least  less  turbulent  than  their  neighbours  of  Arvad  and  Qodshu.
Even  when  the  feebleness  and  impotence  of  the  successors  of  Eamses  III.
relieved  them  from  the  obligation  of  further  tribute,  they  displayed  towards
their  old  masters  such  deference  that  they  obtained  as  great  freedom  of  trade
■with  the  ports  of  the  Delta  as  they  had  enjoyed  in  the  past.  They  maintained
with  these  ports  the  same  relations  as  in  the  days  of  their  dependence,  and
tlieir  ships  sailed  up  the  river  as  far  as  Jlemphis,  and  even  higher,  while  the
Egyptian  galleys  continued  to  coast  tlie  littoral  of  Syria.^  An  official  report
addressed  to  H  rib  or  by  one  of  the  ministers  of  the  Theban  Amon,  indicates  at
one  and  the  same  time  the  manner  in  which  these  voyages  were  accomplished,
and  the  dangers  to  which  their  crews  were  exposed.  Hrihor,  who  was  still  high
priest,  was  in  need  of  foreign  timber  to  complete  some  work  he  had  in  hand,
probably  the  repair  of  the  sacred  barks,  and  commanded  the  official  above
mentioned  to  proceed  by  sea  to  Byblos,  to  King  Zikarbal,^  in  order  to  purchase
cedars  of  Lebanon.     The  messenger  started  from  Tanis,  coasted  along  Kharu,

'  The  provision  of  brouze  aud  copper  for  Egypt  is  referred  to  at  p.  2S7,  $apra,  as  showing  the
relations  of  Alasia  and  Egypt  during  the  XVIII"'  dynasty.

'  Several  Egyptian  documents  of  the  XX'"  dyuasly  refer  to  tliese  Egyptian  and  foreign  vessels
voyaging  on  the  "Very  Green"  (Plkyte-Rossi,  Leu  Papyrus  de  Turin,  pi.  Ixx.xviii.  11.  9,  10,  aud
pi.  Ixxxix.  11.  1,  2);  see  pp.  407,  4(18,  supra,  where  there  i,  an  illustration  representing  the  arrival  of
Plioenieian  ships  at  Thebes.

=>  W.  Max  JltLLER,  Aden  und  Europa,  ]i.  39.5.  This  is  the  name  which  classical  tradition  ascribed
to  the  first  husband  of  Dido,  the  founder  of  Carthage— Sicharbsis,  Sichajus,  Acerbas  (Schroder,  Die
Vheniziu-he  Sprarhc,  pjp.  90,  100,  198).


Pn(F.yiCIAN   COMMERCE.

and    put    into    tlie    harbour  of  Dor,
which  then  belonged  to  the  Zak-
kahv  :  ^  while  he  was  revictual-
iing    his    ship,     one    of    the
sailoi's    ran    away    with    the
cash-box.     The  local    ruler,
Badilu,"    expressed   at   first
his  sympathy  at  this  misfor-
tune, and  gave  his  help  to
capture    the    robber;    tlien
unaccountably  chtauging  his
mind  he  threw  the  messengei
into  prison,  who  had  accordingly
lo  send  to  Egypt  to  procure  tresh
funds  for  his  liberation  and  the  iccom
plishment    of    his    mission.      Having
arrived    at   Byblos,    nothing    occurred
there    worthy    of    record.      The    wood

having  at  length  been  cut  and  put  on  board,  the  ship  set  sail  homewards.  Driven
by  contrary  winds,  the  vesstd  was  thrown  upon  the  coast  of  Alasia,  where  the  crew
were  graciously  received  by  the  Queen  Khatiba.*  We  have  evidence  every-
where, it  may  be  stated,  as  to  the  friendly  disposition  displayed,  either  with  or
without  the  promptings  of  interest,  towards  the  representative  of  the  Theban
pontiff.  Had  he  been  ili-nsed,  the  Phoenicians  living  on  Egyptian  territory
would  have  been  made  to  suffer  for  it.

Navigators  had  to  take  additional  precautions,  owing  to  the  presence  of
iEgean  or  Asiatic  pirates  on  the  routes  followed  by  the  mercantile  marine,  which
rendered  their  voyages  dangerous  and  sometimes  interrupted  them  altogether.


^^^p^^fy


THE    KING    AXD    HIS    DOUBLE   ON    A    PIICESICIAN
BOWL.^


'  For  the  establislimeut  of  the  Zakkalu  ou  tliu  (Janaanite  const  in  the  nei^hbourliood  of  Dor  and
Ciirmel,  Bee  p.  470,  supra.

'  The  name  Badilu,  Budilu,  Bodilu,  appears  to  be  an  apocopated  form  of  Abdilu,  "the  servant  of
Ilu,"  of  which  we  have  numerous  instances  in  such  Phoenician  names  as  Bodeslimun,  Bodashtoreth
=  BoSdiTTwp,  Bodmelkarth  =  Bm^iiAKas,  Bou^ui'Axop  (MAsrERO,  Sur  uu  Nom  Afiatique,  in  the  Hecueil
de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  p.  120).  Cf.  an  analogous  form  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Arvad,  Budibalu,
Bodbaal,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Assurbauipal  (Tkloni,  Varia,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fur  Keilforschung,
vol.  ii.  pp.  302,  303),  and  possibly  abso  in  that  of  the  King  of  .Vssyria,  Budilu,  Pudilu,  of  whom  there
will  be  something  to  say  on  p.  5110,  infra.

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  liy  LoNorERiEB,  Muste  Napolebn  III.,  pi.  xi.  The
imporlance  this  group  acquired  in  Phajnician  niythology,  and  its  possible  derivations  in  Greek  art
and  tradition,  wero  studied  especially  by  Ci.kumont-Ganneau,  Myiholngie  loonoyraiiliiqiie,  pp.  8,  9,
and  Perrot-Chii'Iez,  HUt.  ihi  I' Art,  etc.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  HO,  i)7,  772-774,  787-783,  802.

'  The  document  containing  an  account  of  these  events  was  discovered  by  Gole'nischeff  in  1891.
The  text  isunpublished.buttwobrief  summaries  of  it  exist :  Goleni^-cheff,  Kctmild'uiieletlre,  etc.,
in  the  Recueil  di:  Travnur,  vol.  xv.  |i.  8S,  and  W.  Max  jrCi.i.Eii,  Asieii  und  Ktirnpn,  pp.  388, 3S9,  395,396.


584  THE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

The  Syrian  coast-line  was  exposed  to  tliese  marauders  quite  as  mucli  as  the
African  had  been  during  the  sixty  or  eighty  years  which  followed  the  death  of
Eamses  II. ;  the  seamen  of  the  north — Achaeans  and  Tyrseni,  Lycians  and  Shar-
danians — had  pillaged  it  on  many  occasions,  and  in  the  invasion  which  followed
these  attacks  it  experienced  as  little  mercy  as  Naharaim,  the  Khati,  and  the
region  of  the  Amorites.    The  fleets  which  carried  the  Pliilistines,  the  Zakkala,
and  their  allies  had  devastated  the  whole  coast  before  they  encountered  the
Egyptian  ships  of  Ramses  III.  near  Magadil,  to  the  south  of  Carmel.     Arvad
as  well  as  Zahi  had  succumbed  to  the  violence  of  their  attack,  and  if  the  cities
of  Byblos,  Berytus,  Sidon,  and   Tyre  had  escaped,  their  suburbs  had   been
subjected  to  the  ravages  of  the  foe.^     Peace  followed  the  double  victory  of  the
Egyptians,  and  commerce  on  the  Mediterranean  resumed  once  more  its  wonted
ways,  but  only  in  those  regions  where  the  authority  of  the  Pharaoh  and  the  fear
of  his  vengeance  were  effective  influences.     Beyond    this  sphere  there  were
continual  warfare,  piracy,  migrations  of  barbaric  hordes,  and  disturbances  of  all
kinds,  among  which,  if  a  stranger  ventured,  it  was  at  the  almost  certain  risk  of
losing  his  life  or  liberty.     The  area  of  undisturbed  seas  became  more  and  more
contracted  in  proportion  as  the  memory  of  past  defeats  faded  away.     Cyprus
was  not  comprised  within  it,  and  the  a5!]geans,  who  were  restrained  by  the  fear
of  Egypt  from  venturing  into  any  region  under  her  survey,  perpetually  flocked
thither  in  numerous  bodies.     The  Achaeans,  too,  took  up  their  abode  on  this
island  at  an  early  date — about  the  time  when  some  of  their  bands  were  infest-
ing Libya,  and  offering  their  help  to   the   enemies  of  the  Pharaoh.     They
began  their  encroachments  on  the  northern  side  of  the  island — the  least  rich,  it
is  true,  but  the  nearest  to  Cilicia,  and  the  easiest  to  hold  against  the  attacks  of
their  rivals.^     The  disaster  of  Piriu  had  no  doubt  dashed  their  hopes  of  finding
a  settlement  in  Egypt :  ^  they  never  returned  thither  any  more,  and  the  current
of  emigration  which  had  momentarily  inclined  towards  the  south,  now  set
steadily  towards  the  east,  where  the  large  island  of  Cyprus  offered  au  unpro-
tected and  more  profitable  field  of  adventure.     We  know  not  how  far  they
penetrated  into  its  forests  and  its  interior.     The  natives  began,  at    length,
under  their  influence,  to  despise  the  customs  and  mode  of  existence  with  which
they  had  been  previously  contented  :  they  acquired  a  taste  for  pottery  rudely
decorated  after  the  Mycenean  manner,  for  jewellery,  and  for  the  bronze  swords
which  they  had  seen  in  the  hands  of  the  invaders.    The  Phoenicians,  in  order  to

'  See,  for  this  invasion,  pp.  465-168,  swpra.

-  I  am  forced  here,  by  the  exigencies  of  space,  to  leave  out  details.  I  confine  myself  to  the  facts
indispensable  for  a  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  East,  without  criticism  or  a  bibliography.

»  Cf.,  for  the  part  taken  by  the  Acha-aus  in  the  Libyan  war  against  Minephtah,  the  short  account
on  pp.  432-435,  supra.


TEE  PBaCNICJAXS  FORCED  TO  GIVE  UP  COLONIES  IN  THE  ^GEAN.     585

maintain  their  ground  against  the  intruders,  had  to  strengthen  their  ancient
posts  or  found  otliers — such  as  Carpasia,  Cerynia,  and  Lapathos  on  the  Achasan
coast  itself, Tamassos  near  the  copper-mines,  and  a  new  town,  Qart-hadashat,  which
is  perhaps  only  the  ancient  Citium  under  a  new  name.^    They  thus  added  to  their
earlier  possessions  on  the  island  regions  on  its  northern  side,  while  the  rest  either
fell  gradually  into  the  hands  of  Hellenic  adventurers,  or  continued  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  native  populations.    Cyprus  served  henceforward  as  an  advance-post
against  the  attacks  of  Western  nations,  and  the  Phoenicians  must  have  been
thankful  for  the  good  fortune  wh^ch  had  made  them  see  the  wisdom  of  fortifying
it.   But  what  became  of  their  possessions  lying  outside  Cyprus  ?   They  retained
several  of  them  on  the  southern  coasts  of  Asia  Minor,  and  Ehodes  remained
faithful  to  them,  as  well  as  Tiiasos,  enabling  them  to  overlook  the  two  extremities
of  the  Archipelago ;  -  but,  owing  to  tlie  movements  of  the  People  of  the  Sea  and
the  political  development  of  the   Mycenean  states,  they  had  to  give  up  the
stations  and  harbours  of  refuge  which  they  held  in  the  other  islands  or  on
the  continent.     They  still  continued,  however,  to  pay  visits  to  these  localities —
sometimes  in  the  guise  of  merchants  and  at  others  as  raiders,  according  to  their
ancient  custom.     They  went  from  port  to  port  as  of  old,  exposing  their  wares
in  the  market-places,  pillaging  the  farms  and  villages,  carrying  into  captivity
the  women  and  children  whom  they  could  entice  on  board,  or  whom  they  might
find  defenceless  on  the  strand  ;  but  they  attempted  all  this  with  more  risk  than
formerly,  and  with  less  success.     The  inhabitants  of  the  coast  were  jjossessed  of
fully  manned  ships,  similar  in  form  to  those  of  the  Philistines  or  the  Zakkala,
which,  at  the  first  sight  of  the  Phcenicians,  set  out  in  pursuit  of  them,  or^
following  tlie  example  set  by  their  foe,  lay  in  wait   for    them    behind  some
headland,  and  retaliated  upon  them  lor  their  cruelty.    Piracy  in  the  Archipelago
was  practised  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  there  was  no  islander  who  did  not  give
liimself  up  to  it  when  the  opportunity  offered,  to  return  to  his  honest  occu-
pations alter  a  successful  venture.     Some  kings  seem  to  have  risen  up  here
and  there  who   found   this   state   of    affairs  intolerable,  and  endeavoured  to
remedy  it  by  every  means  within  their  power :  they  followed  on  the  heels  of
the  corsairs  and  adventurers,  whatever  might  be  their  country;  they  followed
them  up  to  their  harbours  of  lefuge,  aud  became  an  efi'ective  police  force  in

'  It  is  mentioned  in  the  inscription  of  Buul  of  Lebanon  {Corpm  Imcr.  Semit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  25,  2G),.
and  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  of  the  VII"'  century  B.C.  (F.  Deutzsch,  Wo  lag  dot  Faradiee  f
pp.  292-294).

'  Tliis  would  appear  to  bo  the  case,  as  far  as  Rhodes  is  concerned,  from  the  traditions  which
ascribed  the  final  expulsion  of  the  Plucnicians  to  a  Doric  invasion  from  Argos;  cf.  Tuucydides,
viii.  57,  'PiiSioi  'Ap-yeioi  -j/evos.  The  somewhat  legendary  accounts  of  the  state  of  affairs  after  the
Hellenic  conquest  are  in  tlie  fragments  of  Ergias  and  I'olyzelos  (MtLLiort-DiDor,  Fraqm.  Hist.  Grxc.^
vol.  iv.  pp.  405,  400,  481;.


."iSG  THE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

all  parts  of  the  sea  where  they  were  able  to  carry  their  flag.  The  memory  of
such  exploits  was  preserved  in  the  tradition  of  the  Cretan  empire  which  Minos
liad  constituted,  and  which  extended  its  protection  over  a  portion  of  continental
•Greece.

If  the  Pliojuicians  had  had  to  deal  only  with  the  piratical  expeditions  of
the  peoples  of  the  coast  or  with  the  jealous  watchfulness  of  the  rulers  of  the
sea,  they  might  have  endured  the  evil,  but  they  had  now  to  put  up,  in  addition,
with  rivalry  in  the  artistic  and  industrial  products  of  which  they  had  long  bad
the  monopoly.  The  spread  of  art  had  at  length  led  to  the  establishment  of
local  centres  of  production  everywhere,  which  bade  fair  to  vie  with  those  of
Phoenicia.  On  the  continent  and  in  the  Cyclades  there  were  produced  statuettes,
intaglios,  jewels,  vases,  weapons,  and  textile  fabrics  which  rivalled  those  of
the  East,  and  were  probably  much  cheaper.  The  merchants  of  Tyre  and
Sidon  could  still  find  a  market,  however,  for  manufactures  requiring  great
technical  skill  or  displaying  superior  taste — such  as  gold  or  silver  bowls,  en-
graved or  decorated  with  figures  in  outline — but  they  had  to  face  a  serious
falling  off  in  their  sales  of  ordinary  goods.^  To  extend  their  commerce  they
had  to  seek  new  and  less  critical  markets,  where  the  bales  of  their  wares,
■of  which  the  yEgean  population  was  becoming  weary,  would  lose  none  of
their  attractions.  We  do  not  know  at  what  date  they  ventured  to  sail
into  the  mysterious  region  of  the  Hesperides,  nor  by  what  route  they  first
reached  it.  It  is  possible  that  they  passed  from  Crete  to  Cythera,  and
from  this  to  tlie  Ionian  Lslands  and  to  the  point  of  Calabria,  on  the  other
side  of  the  straits  of  Otranto,  whence  they  were  able  to  make  their  way
gradually  to  Sicily.'-  Did  the  fame  of  their  discovery,  we  may  ask,  spread  so
rapidly  in  the  East  as  to  excite  there  the  cupidity  and  envy  of  their  rivals  ?
Jlowever  this  may  have  been,  the  People  of  the  Sea,  after  repeated  checks  in
Africa  and  Syria,  and  feeling  more  than  ever  the  pressure  of  the  northern  tribes
•encroaching  on  them,  set  out  towards  the  west,  following  the  route  pursued
by  the  Phoenicians.  The  traditions  current  among  them  and  collected  after-
wards by  the  Greek  historians  give  an  account,  mingled  with  many  fabulous
details,  of  the  causes  which  led  to   their  migrations  and  of  the  vicissitudes

'  Ed.  Meyee,  Gesclriohtc  des  Alterthums,  vol.  ii.  pp.  3GS-370,  where  a  brief  summary  of  all  that  is
Ivnown  on  the  subject  is  given  ;  for  details,  see  Helbm,  VKpopie  liom^rique,  translated  by  Tr.^winski,
]<p.  28,  24,  27,  et  seq.

»  Ed.  JIeyer,  op.  cil.,  vol.  i.  pp.  235,  337-348,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  90,  689-690,  thinks  that  the  exten-
sion of  Pliccnician  commerce  to  the  Western  Mediterranean  goes  back  to  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  or,  at
the  latest,  the  XV"'  century  before  our  era.  Without  laying  undue  stress  on  tliis  view,  I  am  inclined
to  ascribe  with  him,  until  we  get  further  knowledge,  the  colonisation  of  the  West  to  the  period
immediately  following  the  movements  of  the  People  of  the  Sea  and  the  diminution  of  Phcenician
trade  in  the  Grecian  Archipelago.  Exploring  voyages  had  been  made  before  this,  but  the  founding
■of  colonies  was  not  earlier  than  this  epoch.


rnE  pna^xiciAKS  in  the  western  mediteriiankax.      587

which  they  experienced  in  the  course  of  them.  Daedalus  having  taken  flight
from  ( 'rete  to  Sicily,  Minos,  who  had  followed  in  his  steps,  took  possession  of
the  greater  part  of  the  island  witli  his  Eteocretes.'  lolaos  was  the  leader  of
Pelasgic  bands,  whom  he  conducted  first  into  Libya  and  finally  to  Sardinia.'^
It  came  also  to  pass  that  in  the  days  of  Atys,  son  of  Maues,  a  famine  broke  out
and  raged  throughout  Lydia :  the  king,  unable  to  provide  food  for  his  people,
had  them  numbered,  and  decided  by  lot  which  of  the  two  halves  of  the  popu-
lation should  expatriate  themselves  under  the  leadership  of  his  son  Tyrsenos.
Those  wlio  were  thus  fated  to  leave  their  country  assembled  at  Smyrna,  con-
structed ships  there,  and  having  embarked  on  board  of  them  what  was  necessary,
set  sail  in  quest  of  a  new  home.  After  a  long  and  devious  voyage,  they  at
length  disembarked  in  the  country  of  the  Umbrians,  where  they  built  cities,
and  became  a  prosperous  people  under  the  name  of  Tyrseni,  being  thus  called
after  their  leader  Tyrsenos.^  The  remaining  portions  of  the  nations  who  had
taken  part  in  the  attack  on  Egypt — of  which  several  tribes  had  been  planted
by  Eamses  III.  in  the  Shephelah,  from  Gaza  to  Carmel — proceeded  in  a  series
•of  successive  detachments  from  Asia  Minor  and  the  ^gean  Sea  to  the  coasts
of  Italy  and  of  the  large  islands  ;  the  Tursha  into  that  region  which  was  known
afterwards  as  Etruria,  the  Shardana  into  Sardinia,  the  Zakkala  into  Sicily,  and
along  with  the  latter  some  Pulasati,  whose  memory  is  still  preserved  on  the
northern  slope  of  Etna.''  Fate  thus  brought  the  Phoenician  emigrants  once
more  into  close  contact  with  their  traditional  enemies,  and  the  hostility  which
they  experienced  in  their  new  settlements  from  the  latter  was  among  the
influences  which  determined  their  further  migration  from  Italy  proper,  and
from  the  region  occupied  by  the  Ligurians  between  the  Arno  and  tiie  Ebro.

'  For  tlje  traditions  of  tlie  colonisation  of  Sicily  by  Cretans,  see  HiiOK,  Kreta,  vol.  i.  pp.  372-391,
rtuil  Holm,  Geschichle  SIcilieni',  vol.  i.  pp.  'M,  91.  [Tlie  Eteocretes  ure  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey,
Aix.  175. — Tii.]

'  For  the  traditions  as  to  the  original  inhabitants  of  Sardinia,  see,  with  njuch  reserve,  Moveh.s,
Van  Phonizische  Alterthum,  vol.  ii.  p.  502,  et  seq.

'  Heuodotcs,  I.  xciv.,  whence  all  the  information  of  other  classical  writers  is  directly  or  indirectly
taken.  Most  modern  historians  reject  this  tradition.  I  see  no  reason  for  my  own  part  why  they
should  do  so,  at  least  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge.  The  Etrurians  of  the  historical  period
were  the  result  of  a  fusion  of  several  difl'ercut  elements,  and  there  is  nothing  against  the  view
that  the  Tursha — one  of  these  elemenls — should  have  come  from  Asia  Minor,  as  Herodotus  says.
Properly  understood,  the  tradition  seems  well  founded,  and  the  details  may  have  been  added  after-
wards, either  by  the  Lydians  themselves,  or  by  the  Greek  historiau.s  who  collected  the  Lydinn
traditions.

*  This  view  was  put  forth  by  Maspero  in  the  Hemie  CriUquc,  1873,  vol,  i.  pp.  S4-Sti  ;  1878,  vol.  i.
p.  320;  1880,  vol.  i.  pp.  101),  110:  for  the  contrary  views,  which  make  the  tribes  mentioned  on  the
Egyptian  monuments  to  liave  come  from  Italy  and  Sicily,  see  pjj.  360,  note  2;  364,  432,  note  2,
tupra.  The  Pulasati  of  Sicily  are  known  only  from  a  jjassage  in  Appiau  :  Mera  Si  rovra  t^v  IloAoi-
aji)vuv  yriv  (Kfipi  (Bell.  Cio.,  V.  cxvii.),  which  Cluvier  and  most  geographers  after  him  have  corrected
into  tV  'AffaKaififui'  yfiv.  Movers  was  the  first  to  identify  these  Palestines  of  Sicily  with  the
Philistines  of  Syria,  and  saw  in  them  the  remains  of  a  Cretan  colony  (Uas  Ptiiimzhche  Alterthum,
vol.  ii.  pp.  318,  |319),  and  was  followed  with  some  reserve  by  Holm  (Gesch.  Sicilicm,  vol.  i.  pp.
i»l,37G).


588  THE  BISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

They  had  already  probably  reached  Sardinia  and  Corsica,  but  the  majority  of
their  ships  had  sailed  to  the  southward,  and  having  touched  at  Malta,  Gozo,
and  the  small  islands  between  Sicily  and  the  Syrtes,  had  followed  the  coast-line
of  Africa,  until  at  length  they  reached  the  straits  of  Gibraltar  and  the
southern  shores  of  Spain.^  No  traces  remain  of  their  explorations,  or  of  their
early  establishments  in  the  western  Jlediterranean,  as  the  towns  which  they
are  thought — with  good  reason  in  most  instances — to  have  founded  there
belong  to  a  much  later  date.  Every  permanent  settlement,  however,  is  pre-
ceded by  a  period  of  exploration  and  research,  which  may  last  for  only  a  few
years  or  be  prolonged  to  as  many  centuries.  I  am  within  the  mark,  I  think,
in  assuming  that  Phoenician  adventurers,  or  possibly  even  the  regular  trading
ships  of  Tyre  and  Sidou,  had  established  relations  with  the  semi-barbarous
chiefs  of  Ba'tica  as  early  as  the  XII"'  century  before  our  era,  that  is,  at  the
time  when  the  power  of  Thebes  was  fading  away  under  the  weak  rule  of  the
pontiffs  of  Amon  and  the  Tanite  Pharaohs.

The  Phifuicians  were  too  much  absorbed  in  their  commercial  pursuits
to  aspire  to  the  inheritance  which  Egypt  was  letting  slip  through  her
fingers.  Their  numbers  were  not  more  than  sufScient  to  supply  men  for
their  ships,  and  they  were  often  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  their  allies  or
to  mercenary  tribes — the  Leleges  or  Carians — in  order  to  provide  crews  for
their  vessels  or  garrisons  for  their  trading  posts ;  ^  it  was  impossible,  there-
fore, for  them  to  think  of  raising  armies  fit  to  conquer  or  keep  iu  check  the
rulers  on  the  Orontes  or  in  Naharaim.  They  left  this  to  the  races  of
the  interior — ^the  Amorites  and  Hittites — and  to  their  restless  ambition.
The  Hittite  power,  however,  had  never  recovered  from  the  terrible  blow
inflicted  on  it  at  the  time  of  the  Asianic  invasion.^  The  confederacy  of
feudal  chiefs,  which  had  been  brought  momentarily  together  by  Sapalulu
and  his  successors,  was  shattered  by  the  violence  of  the  shock,  and  the
elements  of  which  it  was  composed  were  engaged  henceforward  in  struggles
with  each  other.  At  this  time  the  entire  plain  between  the  Amanus  and  the
Euphrates  was  covered  with  rich  cities,  of  which  the  sites  are  represented
to-day  by  only  a  few  wretched  villages  or  by  heaps  of  ruins.  Arabian  and
Byzantine  remains  sometimes  crown  the  summit  of  the  latter,  but  as  soon  as
we  reach  the  lower  strata  we  find  in  more  or  less  abundance  the  ruins  of  build-
ings of  the  Greek  or  Persian  period,  and  beneath  these  those  belonging  to  a
still  earlier  time.     The  history  of  Syria  lies  buried  in  such  sites,  and  is  waiting

'  I  shall  have  to  return  later  on  to  the  Phceuician  colonies  in  Spain,  and  especially  to  the  founding-
of  Cadiz.

'  Cf.,  with  the  necessary  reserve,  Movers,  Das  PliSnizische  AUerthuin,  vol.  ii.  pp.  17-21.
'  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  466,  468-470,  475  of  the  present  work.


STBIA   AFTER    THE    WITHDRAWAL    OF   THE  EOYPTIAN   TROOPS.       589


''.,i;.S.  ■.>!;.<


AZAZ — ONE    OF   THU    TUMULI   ON    THE    ANCIENT    HITTITE   PLAIX.'

only  for  a  patient  and  wealthy  explorer  to  bring  it  to  light.'^  The  Khati  proper
were  settled  to  the  south  of  the  Taurus  in  the  basin  of  the  Sajur,  but  they
were  divided  into  several  petty  states,  of  which  that  which  possessed  Carchemish
was  the  most  important,  and  exercised  a  practical  hegemony  over  the  others.
Its  chiefs  alone  had  the  right  to  call  themselves  kings  of  the  Khati.^  The
Patinn,  who  were  their  immediate  neighbours  on  the  west,  stretched  right  up
to  the  Mediterranean  above  the  plains  of  Nabaraim  and  beyond  the  Orontes ;
they  had  absorbed,  it  would  seem,  the  provinces  of  the  ancient  Alasia.*
Aramaeans  occupied  the  region  to  the  south  of  the  Patinu  between  the  two
Lebanon  ranges,  embracing  the  districts  of  Hamath  and  Qobah.°  The  valleys
of  the  Amanus  and  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Taurus  included  within  them


'  UiiiHu  by  Boudier,  from  a  pbotcifjraph  by  M.  Barthe'lemy,  takeu  in  1895.

-  The  results  of  the  excavations  at  Zinjirli  are  evidence  of  what  liistoriciil  material  wu  may  hopo
to  find  in  these  tumuli.  See  the  account  of  the  earlier  results  in  F.  von  Lusciiak,  Ausgnihuiujfu
in  Sendechirll,  1893.

'  As  to  the  localisation  of  the  Khati  to  the  south  of  the  Taurus,  ami  the  restricted  use  of  their
name,  see  Scheader,  Keilinschri/ten  und  Geschichts/oreclning,  pp.  225-236 ;  F.  Dblitzsch,  M'o  lay
das  Paradiee  !  pp.  269-273 ;  F.  Lenormant,  hes  Origincs  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  267,  note  2 ;
Dei.attre,  L'Aeie  Occidinlale  dans  les  Inscriptions  Assyriennes,  pp.  31-30.

*  The  extension  of  the  Patinu  was  determined  by  Scuradek,  op.  eit.,  pp.  211-221 ;  cf.  F.  Delitzsch,
ll'o  lag  das  Paradies!  p.  27i,  and  Uelattjie,  op.  cit.,  pp.  45-50.

•  The  Aramasans  are  mentioned  by  Tiglath-pileser  I.  as  situated  between  the  Balikh,  the
Kuphrates,  and  the  Sajur  (Schrader,  op.  cit.,  p.  226,  note;  Delitzsch,  op.  cit.,  pp.  257-259;
Delattre,  op.  cit.,  p.  37).


5!)0  THE  lilSE    OF    THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

some  half-dozea  badly  defined  principalities  —  Samalla  on  the  Kara-Su,'
Gurgum  -  around  Marqasi,  the  Qui  ^  and  Khilakku^  in  the  classical  Cilicia,  and
the  Kasku  ®  and  Kummukh  "^  in  a  bend  of  the  Euphrates  to  the  north  and  north-
east of  the  Khati.  The  ancient  Mitanni  to  the  east  of  Carchemish,  which  was
so  active  in  the  time  of  the  later  Amenothes,  had  now  ceased  to  exist,  and
there  was  but  a  vague  remembrance  of  its  former  prowess.  It  had  foundered
probably  in  the  great  cataclysm  which  engulfed  the  Hittite  empire,  although
its  name  appears  inscribed  once  more  among  those  of  the  vassals  of  Egypt
on  the  triumphal  lists  of  Ramses  III.''  Its  chief  tribes  had  probably
migrated  towards  the  regions  which  were  afterwards  described  by  the  Greek
geographers  as  the  home  of  the  Matieni  on  the  Halys  and  in  the  nei<^h-
bourhood  of  Lake  Urmiah.^  Aram;ean  kingdoms,  of  which  the  greatest
was  that  of  Bit-Adini,'-'  had  succeeded  them,  and  bordered  the  Euphrates  on

'  Tlic  country  of  Samalla,  in  Egyptian  Samalua  (Mariette,  Karnah,  pi.  2,  No.  314 ;  of.  Tomkins,
On  the  Tnpogrnphy  of  Northern  Syria,  in  the  Transactions  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  p.  251),  extended
around  the  Tell  of  Zinjirll,  at  the  foot  of  the  Amanus,  in  the  valley  of  Marash  of  the  Arab  hi3lorian.s
(Saohau,  Zur  Historisclien  Geographie  von  Nonhyrien,  pp.  2,  7).

'  The  name  has  been  read  Gamgumu,  Gaugum  (Waldemar  Schmidt,  Asuyrieris  og  Mgypiens
Gamle  Historie,  p.  735,  who  places  it  near  Zeugma,  on  the  Euphrates;,  and  connected  by  Tomkins
(Notes  on  the  Geography  of  Northern  Syria,  in  the  Bahylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  iii.  pp.  3.  44)
with  the  Egyptian  Augama,  which  he  reads  Gagama,  in  the  lists  of  Thutmosis  III.  (Mariette,
Karnnli,  pi.  21,  No.  315).  The  Aramsean  inscription  on  the  statue  of  King  Panammu  sliows  that  it
must  be  read  Gurgumu,  and  Sachau  has  identified  this  new  name  witli  that  of  Jurjum,  which  was
the  name  by  which  the  province  of  the  Amanus,  lying  between  Baias  and  the  lake  of  Autioch,  was
known  in  the  Byzantine  period  (Zur  Historii'chen  Geographie  von  Nordsyrien,  pp.  2-17);  the  ancient
(iurgum  stretches  further  towards  the  north,  around  the  town  of  Marqasi,  which  Tomkins  (Notes  on
the  Geog.  of  Northern  Syria,  pp.  3,  44)  and  Sachau  (op.  cil.,  pp.  6,  7)  have  identified  with  Marash.

'  Tl)e  site  of  the  country  of  Qui  was  determined  by  Schrader  (Keilinschriften  and  Geschichts-
forschnng,  pp.  238-212) ;  it  was  that  part  of  the  Gilician  plain  which  stretches  from  the  Amanus  to  the
mountains  of  the  Ketis,  and  lakes  in  the  great  town  of  Tarsus.  F.  Lenormant  has  pointed  out  that
this  country  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Scriptures  (1  Kings  x.  28  and  2  Chron.  i.  16)  [The  Revised
A'ersion  does  not  support  this,  but  the  LXX.  gives  "of  Thecue,"  and  the  Vulgate  "de  Coha."— Tr.]
in  the  time  of  Solomon  (Les  Origines  de  VHistnire,  vol.  iii.  p.  0,  n.  2).  The  designation  of  the  country,
transformed  into  the  appellation  of  an  eponymous  god  (see  p.  355,  note  1,  supra),  is  found  in  the
name  Qauisaru,  "Qaui  is  king"  (F.  Lenoumant,  op.  cii.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  79.  273,  n.  6).

'  Khilakku,  the  name  of  which  is  possibly  the  same  as  the  Egyptian  Khalakka  (Maspeuu,  Notes  snr
quelques  2Mints  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1879,  p.  58),  is  the  Cilicia  Trachiea  of  classical
geographers  (Delitz.sch,  TI'o  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  215).

=  The  country  of  Kashku,  which  has  been  connected  with  Kashkisha.  which  takes  the  place  of
Karkisha  in  an  Egyptian  text  (see  p.  389,  note  4,  supra),  was  ttill  a  deiiendency  of  the  Hittites  in  the
time  of  Tiglath-pileser  (Annals,  ii.  1.  101).  It  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Uruniu,  whose  capital
seems  to  have  been  Urum,  the  Ourima  of  Ptolemy  (V.  xv.  §  14),  near  the  bend  of  the  Eui>hrate&
between  Sumeisat  and  Bircjik  ;  it  extended  into  the  Commagene  of  classical  times,  on  the  borders  of
Melitene  and  the  Tubal  (Delattre,  L'Asie  Occidentale  dans  les  Inscriptions  Asstjriennes,  pp.  (54,  (35,
and  Encore  un  mot  sur  la  GfTographie  Assyrienne,  pp.  27-31).

«  Kummukh  lay  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphrates  and  of  the  Upper  Tigris  (Delattre,  L'Asie
Occidentale,  etc ,  pp.  41-43) ;  it  became  gradually  restricted,  until  at  length  it  was  conterminous  with
the   Commagene  of  classical  geographers  (Schkader,  Keilinschriftrn,  etc.,  pp.  127-155,  181-213).

'  Di-MICHKN,  Historische  Inschriftcn,  vol.  i.  pi.  11,  where  Eamses  lU.  seems  to  have  simply  coi)ied
the  lists  of  Thiitmosis  III. ;  see  supra,  p.  470.

'  Theoiioke  Eeinach.  Vn  Peuple  ouhlie,  les  Maiiines,  in  the  Revue  des  Etudes  Grecques,  ISiM
pp.  217-318.

'  The  iirovince  of  Bit-Adini  was  specially  that  part  of  the  country  which  lay  between  the  Euphratea
and  tlie  Balikh  (Schradek,  Keilinschriften  und  Geschichfsforichung,  pp.  199,  200),  but  it  extended


THE    ^-EAKNKSS    OF    THE    COSS.EAX   KINGS    OF   BABYLOS.  ;")'.)!

each  side  as  far  as  the  Chains  aud  Balikh  respectively  ;  the  ancient  Havrau
belonged  also  to  them,  and  their  frontier  stretched  as  far  as  Hamatli,  and  to
that  of  the  Patinu  on  the  Orontes.  It  was,  as  we  have  seen,  a  complete
breaking  up  of  the  old  nationalities,  and  we  have  evidence  also  of  a  similar
disintegration  in  the  countries  to  the  north  of  the  Taurus,  in  the  direction  of
tlie  Black  Sea.  Of  tlie  mighty  Khati  with  whom  Thutmosis  III.  had  come
into  contact,  tliere  was  no  apparent  trace :  either  the  tribes  of  which  they  were
composed  had  migrated  towards  the  south,  or  those  who  had  never  left  their
native  mountains  had  entered  into  new  combinations  and  lost  even  the  remem-
brance of  their  name.  The  Milidu,  Tabal  (Tubal),  and  Mushku  (Mesliech)
stretched  behind  each  other  from  east  to  west  on  the  confines  of  the  Tokhma-Su,'-
and  still  further  away  other  cities  of  less  importance  contended  for  the  possession,
of  the  Upper  Saros  and  the  middle  region  of  the  Halys.  These  peoples,  at
once  poor  and  warlike,  had  been  attracted,  like  the  Hittites  of  some  centuries-
previous,  by  the  riches  accumulated  in  the  strongholds  of  Syria.  Eevolutions
must  have  been  frequent  in  these  regions,  but  our  knowledge  of  them  is  more
a  matter  of  conjecture  than  of  actual  evidence.  Towards  the  year  1170  B.C.
the  Mushku  swooped  down  on  Kummukh,  and  made  themselves  its  masters;
then  pursuing  their  good  fortune,  they  took  from  the  Assyrians  the  twa
provinces,  Alzi  and  Purukuzzi,  which  lay  not  far  from  the  sources  of  the  Tigris
and  the  Balikh.-  A  little  later  the  Kashku,  together  with  some  Aramu'ans,
broke  into  Shubarti,  then  subject  to  Assyria,  and  took  possession  of  a  part  of
it.^  The  majority  of  these  invasions  had,  however,  no  permanent  result :  they
never  issued  in  the  establishment  of  an  empire  like  that  of  the  Khati,  capable-
by  its  homogeneity  of  offering  a  serious  resistance  to  the  march  of  a  conqueror
from  the  south.  To  sum  up  the  condition  of  affairs:  if  a  redistribution  of
races  had  brought  about  a  change  in  Northern  Syria,  their  want  of  coliesioa
was  no  less  marked  than  in  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  wars;  the  first  enemy
to  make  an  attack  upon  the  frontier  of  one  or  other  of  these  tribes  was  sure

also  toother  Syrian  pruvinres  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Aprie  (Uelxtzsch,  Wo  laij  das  Faradies  f
pp.  2C3-'i05;  Delattke,  L'Asie  Occidentale  dans  les  Inscriptiuns  Assyriennes,  pp.  H,  18,  et  acq.).

'  "With  regaril  to  these  peoples,  see  Schrailer  {KeilinsKhrijlun.  etc.,  pp.  15.5-11)2),  F.  l,enormaQt
{Let  Origines  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  iii.  pp.  181-248),  and  afterwards  the  observations  of  Delattre  {op.  cit.^
pp.  G4-C.8,  and  by  the  same  writer,  Encore  un  mot  sur  la  Ogoijraphie  Asetjrienne,  pp.  27-:itJ),  who  has
succeeded  in  fixing  their  positions  on  tlie  map  better  than  any  of  his  predecessors.

-  Anniiln  of  Titjlath-pileser  /.,  col.  i.  11.  G2-70,  cd.  Lotz,  pp.  IG,  17.  The  king  places  their  invasion
(ifty  years  before  the  beginning  of  his  reign.  Kd.  Meyor  {Gesuhichte  des  Alli^rlhuim,  vol.  i.  pp.  318,
3111,  and  Oesehichle  /Eijypiem,  p.  312)  saw  a  connexion  between  this  and  the  inva.sion  of  the
I'eople  of  the  Sea,  which  took  place  under  Ramses  lU.  (of.  Wincklek,  Gcachichle  Bahijhmieus,  etc.,.
pp.  171,  172).  I  think  tliat  the  invasion  of  the  Mushku  was  a  purely  local  all'air,  and  luul  nothing
in  eonimon  with  the  general  catastrophe  oeoasionud  by  the  movement  of  the  Asiatic  armies  (see  supra,
p.  4GI,  et  sefj.).  As  to  the  site  of  Alzu,  see  Sayce,  The  Caneiforni  Inscriptions  of  Van  dtcyphered
and  translated,  in  the  /.  It.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  liSfS,  399;  the  Purukuzzi  must  liave  occupied  the
neighbouring  regicin  to  the  west  of  Diarbekr.

^  Aniuih  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  ii.  1.  100 — col.  iii.  I.  2.


.592  THE  RISE    OF    THE   ASSYRIAN    EMPIRE.

of  victory,  and  if  he  persevered  in  his  efforts  could  make  liimself  master  of  as
much  territory  as  he  might  choose.  The  Pharaohs  had  succeeded  in  welding
together  their  African  possessions,  and  their  part  in  the  drama  of  conquest
had  been  played  long  ago ;  but  the  cities  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Lower  Euphrates
— Nineveh  and  Babylon — were  ready  to  enter  the  lists  as  soon  as  they  felt
themselves  strong  enough  to  revive  their  ancient  traditions  of  foreign  conquest.
The  successors  of  Agumkakrime  were  not  more  fortunate  than  he  had
been  in  attempting  to  raise  Babylon  once  more  to  the  foremost  rank  ;  their
want  of  power,  their  discord,  the  insubordination  and  sedition  that  existed
among  tlieir  Cossa3an  troops,  and  the  almost  periodic  returns  of  the  Theban
generals  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  sometimes  even  to  those  of  the  Balikh
and  the  Khabur,  all  seemed  to  conspire  to  aggravate  the  helpless  state  into
which  Babylon  had  sunk  since  the  close  of  the  dynasty  of  Uruazagga.^  Elam
was  pressing  upon  her  eastern,  and  Assyria  on  her  northern  frontier,  and  their
kings  not  only  harassed  her  with  persistent  malignity,  but,  by  virtue  of  their
alliances  by  marriage  with  her  sovereigns,  took  advantage  of  every  occasion  to
interfere  both  in  domestic  and  state  affairs ;  they  would  espouse  the  cause  of
some  pretender  during  a  revolt,  they  would  assume  the  guardianship  of  such  of
their  relatives  as  were  left  widows  or  minors,  and,  when  the  occasion  presented
itself,  they  took  possession  of  the  throne  of  Bel,  or  bestowed  it  on  one  of  their
creatures.  Assyria  particularly  seemed  to  regard  Babylon  with  a  deadly  hatred.
The  capitals  of  the  two  countries  were  not  more  than  some  one  hundred  and
eighty-five  miles  apart,  the  intervening  district  being  a  flat  and  monotonous
alluvial  plain,  unbroken  by  any  feature  which  could  serve  as  a  natural  frontier.
The  line  of  demarcation  usually  followed  one  of  the  many  canals  in  the  narrow
strip  of  land  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  ;  it  then  crossed  the  latter,
and  was  formed  by  one  of  the  rivers  draining  the  Iranian  table-land, — either
the  Upper  Zab,  the  Radanu,  the  Turnat,  or  some  of  their  ramifications  in  the
spurs  of  the  mountain  ranges.  Each  of  the  two  states  strove  by  every  means
•in  its  power  to  stretch  its  boundary  to  the  farthest  limits,  and  to  keep  it
there  at  all  hazards.  This  narrow  area  was  the  scene  of  continual  war,  either
between  the  armies  of  the  two  states  or  those  of  partisans,  suspended  from  time
to  time  by  an  elaborate  treaty  vrhich  was  supposed  to  settle  all  difficulties,
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  satisfied  no  one,  and  left  both  parties  discontented
with  their  lot  and  jealous  of  each  other.  The  concessions  made  were  never
of  sufficient  impoitance  to  enable  the  conqueror  to  crush  his  rival  and  regain
for  himself  the  ancient  domain  of  Khammurabi ;  his  losses,  on  tlie  other  hand,
were  often  considerable  enough  to  paralyse  his  forces,  and  prevent  him  from
■extending  his  border  in  any  other  direction.     When  the  Egyptians  seized  on

'  Cf.  pp.  115-120  of  tlic  present  work.


THE  DELATIONS    OF  ASSTHIA    AXD    BABYLON    WITH  EGYPT.      593

Nalmraim,  Assyria  and  Babylon  each  adopted  at  the  outset  a  different  attitude
towards  tlie  conquerors.  Assyria,  which  never  laid  auy  permanent  claims  to
the  seaboard  provinces  of  the  Mediterranean,  was  not  disposed  to  resent  their
occupation  by  Egypt,  and  desired  only  to  make  sure  of  their  support  or  their
neutrality.  The  sovereign  then  ruling  Assyria,  but  of  whose  name  we  have  no
record,  hastened  to  congratulate  Thutmosis  III.  on  his  victory  at  Megiddo,  and
sent  him  presents  of  precious  vases,  slaves,  lapis-lazuli,  chariots  and  horses,  all
of  which  the  Egyptian  conqueror  regarded  as  so  much  tribute.^  Babylon,  on
the  other  hand,  did  not  take  action  so  promptly  as  Assyria ;  it  was  only  towards
the  latter  years  of  Thiltmosis  that  its  king,  Karaindash,  being  hard  pressed  by
the  Assyrian  Assurbelnishishu,  at  length  decided  to  make  a  treaty  with  the
intruder.^  The  remoteness  of  Egyp)t  from  the  Babylonian  frontier  no  doubt
relieved  Karaindash  from  any  apprehension  of  an  actual  invasion  by  the
Pharaohs ;  but  there  was  the  possibility  of  their  subsidising  some  nearer  enemy,
and  also  of  forbidding  Babylonish  caravans  to  enter  Egyptian  provinces,  and
thus  crippling  Chaldseau  commerce.^  Friendly  relations,  when  once  estab-
lished, soon  necessitated  a  constant  interchange  of  embassies  and  letters  between
the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates.  As  a  matter  of  tact,  the  Babylonian  king  could
never  reconcile  himself  to  the  idea  that  Syria  had  passed  out  of  his  hands.
While  pretending  to  warn  the  Pharaoh  of  Syrian  plots  against  him,^  the  Baby-
lonians were  employing  at  the  same  time  secret  agents,  to  go  from  city  to  city
and  stir  up  discontent  at  Egyptian  rule,  praising  the  while  the  great  Cossiean
king  and  his  armies,  and  inciting  to  revolt  by  promises  of  help  never  meant
to  be  fulfilled.  Assyria,  whose  very  existence  would  have  been  endangered  by
the  re-establishment  of  a  Babylonian  empire,  never  missed  an  opportunity  of
denouncing  these  intrigues  at  head-quarters  :  they  warned  the  royal  messengers
and  governors  of  them,  and  were  constantly  contrasting  the  frankness  and  honesty

•  Cf.  p.  262  of  the  present  work.

'  We  have  no  direct  testimony  in  support  of  tliis  hypothesis,  but  several  important  considera-
tions give  it  ])robal)ility.  As  no  tribute  from  Babylon  is  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Thutmosis  III.,
we  must  place  the  beginning  of  the  relations  between  Egypt  and  Chaldsea  at  a  later  date.  On  the
other  hand,  Burnaburiash  II.,  in  a  letter  written  to  Amcnothes  III.,  cites  Karaindash  as  the  first  of
hie  fathers,  who  had  established  friendly  relations  with  the  fathers  of  the  Pliaraoh  (Bezold-Budse,
Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  etc.,  Xo.  3,  p.  28,  11.  8-10,  and  p.  xxxi.),  a  fact  which  obliges  us  to  place  the
interchange  of  presents  before  the  time  of  Amenothes  III. :  as  the  reigns  of  Amenothes  II.  and  of
Thiitinnsia  IV.  were  both  short  (cf.  supra,  pp.  289-295),  it  is  probable  that  these  relations  began  in  the
latter  years  of  Thutmosis  III.

'  Cf.  p.  279,  et  seq.,  of  the  present  work.  Bumaburiasli  II.  had  taken  the  precaution  to  warn
Amenothes  IV.  of  what  the  Assyrians  might  say  of  him,  and  dissuaded  him  from  forming  an  alliance
with  them  (Bi;zoi,D-Bui)Gi;,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tahltts,  etc..  No.  2,  p.  7,11.31-35;  cf.  Zimmekn,  iJrj'e/e
au»  dem  Fumle  in  El- Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriolugie,  vol.  v.  pp.  152,  153;  Delattre.
Correspondance  d'Amenophin  III ,  in  the  Revue  dea  Questions  Ilistoriques,  vol.  liv.  p.  381.

'  This  was  done  by  Kurigalzu  I.,  according  to  a  letter  addressed  by  hia  son  Burnaburiash  to
Amenothes  IV.  (Bezold-Buijge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  etc..  No.  2,  p.  7,  11.  19-30 ;  cf.  Zimmekn,
Briefe  aus  dem  Funde  in  El-Amarna,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  .issyriohgie,  vol.  v.  pp.  152,  153,  and
Delattke,  Letlres  de  Tell  cl-Amarna, in  I'roceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1890-91,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  2,  3),

2   Q


594  TEE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

of  their  owu  dealings  with  the  duplicity  of  their  rival.^  This  state  of  affairs
lasted  for  more  than  half  a  century,  during  which  time  both  courts  strove  to
ingratiate  themselves  in  the  favour  of  the  Pharaoh,  each  intriguing  for  the
exclusion  of  the  other,  by  exchanging  presents  with  him,  by  congratulations
on  his  accession,  by  imploring  gifts  of  wrouglit  or  unwrought  gold,  and  by
offering  him  the  most  beautiful  women  of  their  family  for  his  harem.  The  son
of  Karaindash,  whose  name  still  remains  to  be  discovered,  bestowed  one  of  his
daughters  on  the  young  Amenothes  III. :  Kallimasin,  the  sovereign  who  suc-
ceeded him,  also  sent  successively  two  princesses  to  the  same  Pharaoh.^  But
the  underlying  bitterness  and  hatred  would  break  tlirough  the  veneer  of  polite
formulae  and  protestations  when  the  petitioner  received,  as  the  result  of  his
advances,  objects  of  inconsiderable  value  such  as  a  lord  might  distribute  to  his
vassals,  or  when  he  was  refused  a  princess  of  solar  blood,  or  even  an  Egyptian
bride  of  some  feudal  house ;  at  such  times,  however,  an  ironical  or  haughty
epistle  from  Thebes  would  recall  him  to  a  sense  of  his  own  inferiority.

As  a  fact,  the  lot  of  the  Cossasan  sovereigns  does  not  appear  to  have  been
a  happy  one,  in  spite  of  the  variety  and  pomposity  of  the  titles  which  they
continued  to  assume.  They  enjoyed  but  short  lives,  and  we  know  that  at  least
three  or  four  of  them — Kallimasin,  Burnaburiash  I.,  and  Kurigalzu  I.  ascended
the  throne  in  succession  during  the  forty  years  that  Amenothes  III.  ruled  over
Egypt  and  Syria.^    Perhaps  tlie  rapidity  of  this  succession  may  have  arisen  from

'  Gf.  the  letter  of  Assuruballlt,  Kiug  of  Assyria,  to  Pharaoh  Amenothes  IV.,  in  Wdtokler-Abel,
Der  Tliontafelfund  von  El-Amarna,  No.  9,  p.  8.

"  See,  lor  example,  the  correspondence  between  Kallimasin  and  Amenothes  III.  (Wincklek-Abel,
Der  Thoida/etfund,  etc..  No.  1,  pi.  1,  and  Bezold-Budge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  etc.,  No.  1,  pp.  2-5,
and  pp.  xxv.-xxx.),  and  the  letters  of  Burnaburiash  to  Amenothes  IV.  (Winokler-Abel,  op.  cit.^
No.  3,  p.  3,  and  Bezold-Budge,  op.  cit..  No.  3,  pp.  S,  9,  and  pp.  xxsi.,  xxxii.).

'  WiNCKLER,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  p.  120.  The  copy  we  possess  of  the  Royal  Canon  of
Babylon  is  mutilated  at  this  point  (Pinches,  The  Sahylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  the
Transactions,  1883-84,  vol.  vi.  pp.  195,  196,  and  pi.  i.  col.  ii. ;  of.  Kncdtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den
Sonnengolt,  vol.  i.  pi.  60),  and  the  original  documents  are  not  sufficiently  complete  to  fill  the  gap.
About  two  or  three  names  are  missing  after  that  of  Agumkakrime  (cf.  p.  119,  note  1,  of  the  present
work,  for  the  list  of  the  first  seven  kings  of  the  Cossffian  dynasty),  and  the  reigns  must  have  been
very  short,  if  indeed,  as  I  think,  Agumkakrimi  and  Karaindash  were  both  contemporaries  of  the
earlier  Pharaohs  bearing  the  name  of  Thutmosis.  The  order  of  the  names  which  have  come  down
to  us  is  not  indisputably  established;  Hilprecht  {The  Bahijlonian  Expedition  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pp.  37,  38,  and  Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.  85-99)  and  Winckler  (Altorientalische
Forschungen,  pp.  109-139)  do  not  agree  on  the  subject  (of.  Tiele,  in  the  Zeitsclirift  fUr  Assyriologie,
vol.  X.  pp.  105-112).     The  following  order  appears  to  me  to  be  the  most  proliable  at  present : —

Kakaindash.  Kakakhakdash.

Kadashmankhakbe  I.

Kallimasin.  Nazibugash.

bcknabckiash  i.  kuuigalzu  ii.

KUEIGALZU    I.  NaZIMARCTTASH.

BURNAUUEIASU    II.  KADASBMANTUKOr.

This  is,  with  a  slight  exception,  the  classification  adopted  by  Wiuckler  (Altorientalische  Forschungen,
p.  133),  and  that  of  Hilprecht  {Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  p.  99)  difiers  from  it  ouly  in  the  intercalation  of
Kudurturgu  and  Shagaraktihuriash  between  Burnaburiash  II.  and  Kurakhardash.


ASSUBUBALLJT  AND   I^AMMAX-NIBAlil  I.  595

■some  iaternal  revolution  or  from  family  disturbances.  Tlie  Chaldseans  of  the
•old  stock  reluctantly  rendered  obedience  to  tliese  Cossa3an  kings,  and,  if  we  may
judge  from  the  name,  one  at  least  of  these  ephemeral  sovereigns,  Kallimasin,
appears  to  have  been  a  Semite,  who  owed  his  position  among  the  Cossrean
princes  to  some  fortunate  chance.^  A  few  rare  inscriptions  stamped  on  bricks,
one  or  two  letters  or  documents  of  private  interest,  and  some  minor  objects
from  widely  distant  spots,  have  enabled  us  to  ascertain  the  sites  upon  which
these  sovereigns  erected  buildings ;  Karaindash  restored  the  temple  of
Nana  at  Uruk,^  Burnaburiash  and  Kurigalzu  added  to  that  of  Shamash  at
Larsam,^  and  Kurigalzu  took  in  hand  that  of  Sin  at  Uru.*  We  also
possess  a  record  of  some  of  their  acts  in  the  fragments  of  a  document,
which  a  Ninevite  scribe  of  the  time  of  Assurbanipal  had  compiled,  or  rather
jumbled  together,^  from  certain  Babylonian  chronicles  dealing  with  tlie  wars
against  Assyria  and  Elam,  with  public  treaties,  marriages,  and  family  quarrels.''
We  learn  from  this,  for  example,  that  Burnaburiash  I.  renewed  with  Buzur-
assur  the  conventions  drawn  up  between  Karaindash  and  Assurbelnishishu.'
These  friendly  relations  were  maintained,  apparently,  under  Kurigalzu  I.  and

'  This  is  the  opiuion  of  Robert  W.  Rogers,  Outlines  of  the  History  of  Early  Babylonia,  p.  55,  and  I
propose  to  adopt  it  for  the  present.  I  ought,  however,  to  remarlc  that  Kallimatiin  may  have  been
•born  of  a  Cosssean  king  and  a  Babylonian  concubine,  which  would  explain  the  form  of  his  name
without  excluding  him  from  the  royal  line.

-  Brick  in  the  British  Museum  mentioned  in  R.^wlinsox,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  36,  No.  3;
.cf.  G.  Smith,  Early  History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  i.  p.  68,  and
WiNCKLEB,  Inschriften  von  Babylonisclien  Kassiten-Kiinirjen,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschriflliche  Bihliotheli,
vol.  lii.  pt.  1,  pp.  152,  153.

'  Brick  from  Senkereh,  in  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  i,  No.  xiii. ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Early
History  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions,  vol.  i.  p.  68,  and  Winokler,  Inschriften  von  Bahylonischen
Kassilen-KSnigen,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Biblioiliel;,  vol.  iii.  pp.  152,  153.  Nabonidus  stated
that  Burnaburiash  made  this  restoration  seven  hundred  years  after  Khammurabi  (Bezold,  Two
Inscriptions  of  Nabonidus,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  1888-89,  vol.  xi.  pp.  93,  94,
'98,  99,  and  Peiser,  Inschriften  Nahonid's,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  iii.  pt.  2,
pp.  88-91).

•  Brick  from  Mugheir  in  the  British  Museum,  see  Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  IK  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,
No.  xiv.  2,  3  ;  cf.  Smith,  Early  Hist,  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
vol.  i.  p.  70,  and  Winckler,  op.  cit.,  in  Schrader,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  p)>.  155,  15G.  For  the
works  undertaken  by  Kurigalzu  in  Agade,  see  the  inscription  on  the  cylinder  in  Rawlinson,  Cun.
Ills.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  69,  col.  ii.  11.  32-36 ;  cf.  Peiser,  Inschriften,  Nabonid's,  in  the  Keil.  Bibliothek,
vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  81,  85.

'  This  is  what  is  generally  called  the  "  Synchronous  History,"  the  principal  remains  of  which
were  discovered  and  published  by  H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  65,  No.  1,  and  vol.  iii.
pi.  3,  No.  3,  and  subsequently  by  Sa  yce.  Synchronous  Hist,  of  Assyria  and  Babylon,  in  the  Transactions
of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  119-145  (cf.  Itecords  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  iii.  pp.  29-36,  and
2nd  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  24-35),  and  again  by  Peiser- Winckler,  Die  Sogenaunte  Synchronistische
Geschichte,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  194-203.  It  is  a  very  unskilful  comiiilution,
in  which  Winckler  has  disi^overeil  several  blunders  (Alturientalischc  Forschungcn,  pp.  114-138,
122,  123).

'  One  of  these  Baliylonian  chronicles  has  been  found,  and  the  fragments  have  been  translated  by
Pinches,  An  Early  Tablet  of  the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  v.
pp.  106-114,  and  since  by  W i};cK.LEK,  Altorient.  Forachuugen,  pp.  115,  116,  122-124,  who  has  most
.skilfully  filled  in  several  of  the  lacume.

'  Synchronous  History,  col.  i.  11.  5-7.


596  TUE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN   EMPIRE.

Assur-uadin-akhi,  the  son  of  Buzurassiir  :  ^  if  Kurigalzu  built  or  restored  tb&
fortress,  long  called   after   him  Dur-Kurigalzu,^  at  one  of  the  fords  of  th&
Narmalka,  it  was  probably  as  a  precautionary  measure  rather  than  because  of
any  immediate  danger.     The  relations  between  the  two  powers  became  some-
what strained  when  Burnaburiasli  II.  and  Assuruballit  had  respectively  suc-
ceeded to  Kurigalzu  and  Assur-nadiu-aldii  ;=>   this  did  not,  however,  lead  to-
hostilities,  and  the  subsequent  betrothal  of  Karakhardash,  son  of  Buruaburiash
II.,  to  Muballitatserua,  daughter  of  Assuruballit,  tended  to  restore  matters  to
their  former  condition.     The  good  will  between  the  two  countries  became  still
more  pronounced  when  Kadashmankharbe  succeeded  his  father  Karakhardash.
The  Cosstean  soldiery  had  taken  umbrage  at  liis  successor  and  had  revolted,
assassinated  Kadashmankharbe,  and    proclaimed  king  in  his  stead  a  man  of
obscure  origin  named  Nazibugash.    Assuruballit,  without  a  moment's  hesitation,
took  the  side  of  his  new  relatives  ;  he  crossed  the  frontier,  killed  Nazibugash,
and  restored  the  throne  to  his  sister's  child,  Kurigalzu  II.,  the  youno-er.^     The
young  king,  who  was  still  a  minor  at  his  accession,  appears  to  have  met  with
no  serious  difiSculties ;  at  any  rate,  none  were  raised  by  his  Assyrian  cousins,
Belnirati  I.  and  his  successor  Budilu.'^     Towards  the  close  of  his  reio-n,  how-
ever, revolts  broke  out,  and  it  was  only  by  sustained  eflbrts  that  he  was  able
to  restore  order  in  Babylon,  Sippara,  and  the  Country  of  the  Sea.     While  the
king  was  in  the  midst  of  these  dilBculties,  the  Elamites  took  advantao-e  of
his  troubles  to   steal  from  him  a    portion   of  his   territory,  and  their  kino-,.
Khurbatila,  challenged  him  to  meet  his  army  near  Dur-Dungi.     Kurigalzu
accepted  the  challenge,  gained  a  decisive  victory,  took  his  adversary  prisoner,
and  released  him  only  on  receiving  as  ransom  a  jjrovince  beyond  the  Tio-ris  ■
he  even  entered  Susa,  and,  from  among  other  trophies  of  past  wars,  resumed
possession  of  an  agate  tablet  belonging  to  Dungi,  which  the  veteran  Kudurna-
khunta  had  stolen  from  the  temple  of  Nipur  nearly  a  thousand  years  previously.^

'  Assur-nadin-akhi  I.  is  meatioued  in  a  Tel  el-Amania  tablet  as  being  the  father  of  Assuruballit
(Winckler-Abel,  Der  Thontafel/und  von  El-Amarna,  No.  9,  p.  S,  11.  19-25).

^  This  is  the  present  Akerkuf,  as  is  proved  by  the  discovery  of  bricks  bearing  the  name  of
Kurigalzu  (Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  4,  xiv.,  No.  1 ;  cf.  Wisckler,  Inschri/ten  ron  bah.
Kassiten-Kenigen,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschri/t.  Bibliothek,  vo].  iii.pt.  1,  pp.  134,155);  but  perhaps
what  I  have  attributed  to  Kurigalzu  I.  must  be  referred  to  the  second  king  of  that  name.  For  mention
of  Dur-Kurigalzu,  cf.  the  documents  collected  by  Fr.  Delitzsch,  TTo  lag  das  Paradies  f  pp.  207,  208.

=  We  infer  this  from  the  way  in  which  Burnaburiash  speaks  of  the  Assyrians  in  tlie  correspon-
dence witli  Ameuothes  IV.  (Bezolb-Bcdge,  Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  No.  2,  p.  7, 11.  30-35) ;  cf  pj).  279,
et  seq.,  and  593,  note  1,  of  the  present  volume.

*  Synchronous  Mhtory,  col.  i.  11.  8-17,  in  which  the  errors  of  the  Assyrian  scribe  have  been
corrected  by  the  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  An  Early  Tablet  of  the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  in  the  Record/
of  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  v.  pp.  107,  lOS;  cf.  Wixckler,  Altorlentalische  Forschungen,  pp.  115,  116.
For  the  succession  of  the  Babylonian  kings  of  this  period,  cf.  Lehmann,  Inschrift  Kurigalzu's  II.,  in  the
Zeitschri/t/iirAssyriologie.  vol.  v.  pp.  417-419,  and  AVinckler,  Kurigalzu  sihru,  ibid.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  454-457.

=  The  Synchronous  History  erroneously  places  the  events  of  the  reign  of  Ramman-nirari  in  that  of

Belniruri  (AVinckler,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  pp.  115,  IIU).     Tlie  order  of  succession  of  Buzu-

rassur,  Assuruballit,  Belnirari,  and  Budilu,  has  been  established  by  tlie  bricks  of  Kalah-Shergat  (Fr.

Lenormant,  Inscriytions  cuneiformes  inidites,  in  the  Revue  ^rc/idj/ojijue,  1869,  vol.  xi.K.  pp.  3G0-367.

'  HiLPBECHT,  The  Babylonian  Expedition,  vol.  i.  p.  31 ;  and  p.  37,  note  3,  of  the  present  volume.


KUBIGALZU  Ii:S  FIRST  CONQUESTS.  597

This  victory  was  foUoweil  by  the  congratulations  of  most  of  his  neighbours,
with   the   exception    of    liamman-nirari   II.,   who    had   succeeded  Budilu    in
Assyria,  and  probably  felt  some  jealousy   or   uneasiness   at   tlie    news.     He
attacked  the  Cossajans,  and  overthrew  them  at  Sugagi,  on  the  banks  of  the
Salsallat ;   their  losses  were  considerable,  and  Kurigalzu   could  only   obtain
peace  by  the  cession  to  Assyria  of  a  strip  of  territory  the  entire  length  of  the
north-west  frontier,  from-  the  confines  of  the  Shubari  country,  near  the  sources
of  the  Khabur,  to  the  suburbs  of  Babylon  itself.'     Nearly  the  whole  of  Meso-
potamia thus  changed  hands  at  one  stroke,  but  Babylon  had  still  more  serious
losses  to  suffer.     Nazimaruttash,  who  attempted  to  wipe  out  the  disaster  sus-
tained by  his  father  Kurigalzu,  experienced  two  crushing  defeats,  one  at  Kar-
Ishtar  and  the  other  near  Akarsallu,^  and  the  treaty  which  he  subsequently
signed  was  even  more  humiliating  for  his  country  than  the  preceding  one.     All
that  part  of  the  Babylonian  domain  which  lay  nearest  to  Nineveh  was  ceded  to
Ihe  Assyrians,  from  Pilaski  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris  to  the  province  of
Lulume  in  the  Zagros  mountains.^     It  would  appear  that  the  Co?sa3an  tribes
who  had  remained  in  their  native  country,  took  advantage  of  these  troublous
times  to  sever  all  connection  witli  their  fellow-countrymen  established  in  the
cities  of  the  plain ;  for  we  find  them  henceforward  carrying  on  a  petty  warfare
for  their  own  profit,  and  leading  an  entirely  independent  life.    The  descendants
of  Gandish,  deprived   of  territories   in  the  north,  repulsed  in  the  east,  and
threatened  in  the  south  b)'  the  nations  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  never  recovered
their  former  ascendency,  and  their  authority  slowly  declined  during  the  century
which  followed  these  events.     Their  downfall  brought  about  the  decadence  of
the  cities  over  which  they  had  held  sway ;  and  the  supremacy  which  Babylon
had  exercised  for  a  thousand  years  over  the  countries  of  the  Euphrates  passed
into  the  hands  of  the  Assyrian  kings.

Assyria  itself  was  but  a  poor  and  insignificant  country  when  compared  with
her  rival.  It  occupied,  on  each  side  of  the  middle  course  of  the  Tigris,  the
territory  lying  between  the  35th  and  37th  parallels  of  latitude.*   It  was  bounded

'  Synnhroiwus  Jlislory,  col.  i.  11.  lS-2:i,  where  the  events  are  attributed  to  Belriirari  I. ;  cf.  Sayoe,
The  ^ynckromus  History,  in  the  Becords  of  the  Past,  2ud  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  28,  and  Peisek-Winoklek,
Die  sogeriannle  syiiclironistisclie  Geecliichtc,  in  Sciiradeh,  Keilinschriftliclie  liihlioiheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  19G,
197.  For  the  Sliubari  or  Shubarti,  and  the  territory  ceded  by  the  Babylonians,  cf.  Hommel,  Gesch.
Bah.  uml  Amjriens,  pp.  4G3,  500;  Jensen,  Vorsludien  zur  Entzifferuwj  des  Mitanni,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,
vol.  vi.  p.  59.  WiNCKLEE,  Altorientalische  Fvrsehunrjen,  pp.  153-155,  and  Geschichte  Bab.  uiul  Ans.'
pp.  173,  331,  diHtint;ui8hcs  between  Sliubari  and  the  Shubarti,  which  appears  to  be  a  province  near
Melitene,  along  tlio  Tokhma-su.

'  The  names  of  Nazimaruttash  and  of  his  suucessora,  Kadashmankharbi,  Bibeiashu,  and  Kadash-
nianburiash,  were  read  by  Hii.riiEUUT,  Die  Voliv-Inschrift  eines  nicht  n-hannien  Kassitenkuiiiyi,  in  tlie
Zeiliehrijt  jiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  305-318  ;  cf.  Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.  85-9U.

'  Syiirhroiious  History,  col.  i.  11.  24-31 ;  cf.  Sayi'E,  The  Synchronous  History,  in  the  Records  of  tlie
Tast,  2nd  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  28,  23,  and  I'eiseb-'Winckleb,  Die  sogenannte  synchronistischc  Geschichte,
in  SciinADEK,  KeilimcUriftlichK  BiUiolhel;  vol.  i.  pp.  19G,  197.  For  the  frontier  line,  cf.  Hommel,
■  Gesch.  Bahylimiens,  jjp.  130,  437,  and  'Winckleb,  AUorientaliirhc  Forschuiigen,  p.  155.

•  These  are  appro.\imately  the  limits  of  the  first  .Vssyriau  empire,  as  giveu  by  the  monuments


598  TEE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

ou  the  east  by  the  hills  and  mountain  ranges  running  parallel  to  the  Zagros-
Chain — Gebel  Guar,  Gebel  Gara,  Zerguizavan-dagh,  and  Baravan-dagh,  with
their  rounded  monotonous  limestone  ridges,  scored  by  watercourses  and  destitute
of  any  kind  of  trees.  On  the  north  it  was  hemmed  in  by  the  spurs  of  the
Masios,  and  bounded  on  the  east  by  an  undefined  line  running  from  IMount
Masios  to  the  slopes  of  Singar,  and  from  these  again  to  the  Chaldasan  plain  j
to  the  south  the  frontier  followed  the  configuration  of  the  table-land  and  the
curve  of  the  low  cliffs,  which  in  prehistoric  times  had  marked  the  limits  of  the
Persian  Gulf ;  from  here  the  boundary  was  formed  on  the  left  side  of  the  Tigris
by  one  of  its  tributaries,  either  the  Lower  Zab  or  the  Kadanu.  The  territory
thus  enclosed  formed  a  compact  and  healthy  district:  it  was  free  from  extremes
of  temperature  arising  from  height  or  latitude,  and  the  relative  character  and
fertility  of  its  soil  depended  on  the  absence  or  presence  of  rivers.  The  eastern
part  of  Assyria  was  well  watered  by  the  streams  and  torrents  which  drained  the
Iranian  plateau  and  the  lower  mountain  chains  which  ran  parallel  to  it.  The
beds  of  these  rivers  are  channelled  so  deeply  in  the  alluvial  soil,  that  it  is
necessary  to  stand  on  the  very  edge  of  their  banks  to  catch  a  sight  of  their
silent  and  rapid  waters ;  and  it  is  only  in  the  spring  or  early  summer,  when
they  are  swollen  by  the  rains  and  melting  snow,  that  they  spread  over  the
adjacent  country.  As  soon  as  the  inundation  is  over,  a  vegetation  of  the
intensest  green  springs  up,  and  in  a  few  days  the  fields  and  meadows  are
covered  with  a  luxuriant  and  fragrant  carpet  of  verdure.  This  brilliant  growth
is,  however,  short-lived,  for  the  heat  of  the  sun  dries  it  up  as  quickly  as  it
appears,  and  even  the  corn  itself  is  in  danger  of  being  burnt  up  before
reaching  maturity.  To  obviate  such  a  disaster,  the  Assyrians  had  constructed,
a  network  of  canals  and  ditches,  traces  of  which  are  in  many  places  still
visible,  while  a  host  of  shadufs  placed  along  their  banks  facilitated  irrigation
in  the  dry  seasons.^  The  provinces  supplied  with  water  in  this  manner  enjoyed
a   fertility  which   passed   into   a   proverb,  and  was  well   known  among  the

(G.  Eawlinsoju,  The  Five  Great  Monarclius,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  ISO;  Hojimel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und'
Assyriens,  pp.  43(3,  437,  479;  Fk.  Delitzscii,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  f  p.  252);  from  tlie  Persian  epoch-
onwards,  tlie  name  was  applied  to  the  whole  course  of  the  Tigris  as  far  as  the  mountain  dis-
trict (Heuodot.,  i.  106,  192,  iii.  92 ;  cf.  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  viii.  26 ;  Stbaeo,  XYI.  i.  §  1,  p.  725,
who  applies  the  name  Aturia  especially  to  Nineveli).  The  ancient  orthography  of  the  name  is
Aushar  (H.  Kawlinson,  Cuit.  Ins.  TF.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  46,  2  c,  d,  and  vol.  iii.  pi.  2,  No.  5,  vol.  iv.
pis.  18,  32  b),  which  we  shall  meet  with  later  on  (p.  602  of  the  present  work)  as  applied  to  both
the  god  and  the  town.

»  For  the  irrigation  by  means  of  shadufs,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  764 ;  the  illustration  on
that  page  is  taken  from  an  Assyrian  monument.  The  course  of  an  Assyrian  canal  and  the  works
undertaken  to  keep  it  up  are  described  by  F.  Jones,  Topography  of  Nineveh,  iu  the  Journal  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  sv.  pp.  310,  311 ;  the  inscriptions  mention  the  opening  of  new  and  the  clean-
ing out  of  old  canals  {Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal  col.  iii.  1.  135,  and  Hunting  Inscriptions,  col.  ii.
11.  20-24).


TEE  PEOVINCES  AND    CLIMATE   OF  ASSYRIA.


599


ancients  ;  ^  tliey  yielded  crops  of  cereals  wliicli  rivalled  those  of  Babylonia,  and
included  among  their  produce  wheat,  barley,  millet,  and  sesame.  But  few  olive
trees  were  cultivated,  and  the  dates  were  of  inferior  quality ;  indeed,  in  the


L.ThniUier,  dulV


Greek  period,  these  fruits  were  only  used  for  fattening  pigs  and  domestic
animals.^  The  orchards  contained  the  pistachio,  the  apple,  the  pomegranate,
the  apricot,  the  vine,  the  almond,  and  the  fig,  and,  in  addition  to  the  essences
common  to  both  Syria  and  Egypt,  the  country  produced  cedrats  of  a  delicious
scent  which  were  supposed  to  be  an  antidote  to  all  kinds  of  poisons.^  Assyria
was  not  well  wooded,  except  in  the  higher  valleys,  where  willows  and  poplars
bordered  the  rivers,  and  sycamores,  beeches,  limes,  and  plane  trees  abounded,
besides  several  varieties  of  pines  and  oaks,  including  a  dwarf  species  of  the
latter,  from  whose  branches  manna  was  obtained.*   This  is  a  saccharine  substance,

'  Herod.,  i.  105;  Dionts.  Pebiegetes,  11.  992-1000,  and  the  commentary  of  Eustathius  on  thia
passage  in  Mlller-Didot,  Geographi  Grseci  minores,  vol.  ii.  pp.  167,  108,  and  pp.  388,  389;  Strabo,
XVI.  i.  §  14,  p.  742.

■  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  xiii.  4.

'  Pliny,  Nat.  Ilht.,  xii.  y.  For  the  history  of  this  species,  which  was  known  in  Egypt  in  the
time  of  Thutinosis  III.,  cf.  V.  LoRET,  Le  Cedratier  dans  VAnliquUi,  in  the  Annales  de  la  SocUle
Sotanique  de  Lyon,  1801,  vol.  xvii.

'  For  manna  and  the  various  ways  of  preparing  it,  cf.  Olivier,  Voijage  dans  V Empire  Oihoman,


600  THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

which  is  deposited  in  small  lumps,  and  is  found  in  greater  abundance  during  wet
years  and  especially  on  foggy  days.  When  fresh,  it  has  an  agreeable  taste  and
is  pleasant  to  eat ;  but  as  it  will  not  keep  in  its  natural  state,  the  women  prepare
it  for  exportation  by  dissolving  it  in  boiling  water,  and  evaporating  it  to  a
sweetish  paste,  which  has  more  or  less  purgative  qualities.  The  aspect  of
the  country  changes  after  crossing  the  Tigris  westward.  The  slopes  of  Mount
Masios  are  everywhere  furrowed  with  streams,  which  feed  the  Khabur  and  its
principal  affluent,  the  Kharmis ;  ^  woods  become  more  frequent,  and  the  vallej's
greea  and  shady.  The  plains  extending  southwards,  however,  contain,  like
those  of  the  Euphrates,  beds  of  gypsum  in  the  sub-soil,  which  render  the
water  running  through  them  brackish,  and  prevent  the  growth  of  vegetation.
The  effects  of  volcanic  action  are  evident  on  the  surface  of  these  great  steppes ;
blocks  of  basalt  pierce  through  the  soil,  and  near  the  embouchure  of  the
Kharmis,  a  cone,  composed  of  a  mass  of  lava,  cinders,  and  scoria',  known  as  the
Tell-Kokab,  rises  abruptly  to  a  height  of  325  feet.  The  mountain  chain  of
Singar,  which  here  reaches  its  western  termination,  is  composed  of  a  long  ridge
of  soft  white  limestone,  and  seems  to  have  been  suddenly  thrown  up  in  one  of
the  last  geological  upheavals  which  affected  this  part  of  the  country :  in  some
places  it  resembles  a  perpendicular  wall,  while  in  others  it  recedes  in  natural
terraces  which  present  the  appearance  of  a  gigantic  flight  of  steps.  The  summit
is  often  wooded,  and  the  spurs  covered  with  vineyards  and  tields,  which  flourish
vigorously  in  the  vicinity  of  streams ;  wlien  these  fail,  however,  the  table-land
resumes  its  desolate  aspect,  and  stretches  in  bare  and  sandy  undulations  to
the  horizon,  broken  only  where  it  is  crossed  by  the  Thartar,  the  sole  river  in
this  region  which  is  not  liable  to  be  dried  up,  and  whose  banks  may  be  traced
by  the  scanty  line  of  vegetation  which  it  nourishes.'-^

In  a  country  thus  unequally  favoured  by  nature,  the  towns  are  necessarily  dis-
tributed in  a  seemingly  arbitrary  fashion.  Most  of  them  are  situated  on  the  lett
bank  of  the  Tigris,  where  the  fertile  nature  of  the  soil  enables  it  to  support  a
dense  population.  They  were  all  flourishing  centies  of  population,  and  were  in
close  proximity  to  each  other,  at  all  events  during  the  centuries  of  Assyrian
hegemony.^    Three  of  them  soon  eclipsed  their  rivals  in  political  and  religious

vol.  ii.  pp.  359,  360;  Chesney,  Tht  Expedition  for  the  Survey  of  the  Rivers  Euphrates  and  Tigris,
vol.  i.  pp.  123,  124.

'  The  Kharmis  is  the  MygJonios  of  Greek  geogra pliers,  the  Hiniias  of  the  Arabs ;  the  latter
name  may  be  derived  from  Kharmis  (ti.  Eawlinson,  Xlte  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  87,  note  2  ;
SouRADER,  Keilinschriften  und  Oeschichtfforschun(i,  pp.  141,  note  2,  582;  Hom.mel,  Geschichte  Bahylo-
niens  und  Assyriens,  p.  577,  note  2),  or  it  may  be  that  it  merely  presenls  a  fortuitous  resemblance  to
it  (NoLDEKF,  in  the  Zeitschrift  der  Deut.  Morgenl.  Ges.,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  328).

'  For  the  countries  to  the  west  of  the  Tigris,  cf.  Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  1!)9,  et  seq.,
where  the  author  describes  his  journey  to  the  Khabur  and  his  return  to  Koynujik.

'  We  find,  for  example,  in  the  inscription  of  Bavian  (H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  IP.  ^.s-.,  vol.  iii.
pi.  14),  a  long  enumeration  of  towns  and  villages  tituafed  almost  within  the  suburbs  of  Nineveh,  on
the  banks  of  the  Khoser  (Pognon,  L'Jnscripiion  de  Bavian,  pp.  8,  9,  ll(J-llit)-


THE  ASSYRIAN   CITIES.  GOl

importance;  these  were  Kalakh  and  2sin;i  on  the  Tigris,  and  Arbailu,  lying

beyond  the  Upper  Zab,  in  (he  broken  plain  which  is  a  continuation  eastwards  of

the  lirst  spurs  of  the  Zagros.'     On  the  right  bank,  however,  we  find  merely

some    dozen    cities   and

towns,    scattered    about

in    places    where    there

was    a    supply  of   water

sufficient  to  enable   the

iuhabitauts   to   cultivate

the  soil;  as,  for  example,

Assur  on  the   banks    of

the    Tigris    itself,     Sin-

°  THE  VOLCANIC   CONE   OF   KOKAB.^

gara  near  the  sources  of

the  Thartar,  and  Nazibina  near  those  of  the  Kharmis,  at  the  foot  of  the
Masios.^  Tiiese  cities  were  not  all  under  the  rule  of  one  sovereign  when
Thutmosis  III.  appeared  in  Syria,  for  the  Egyptian  monuments  mention,
besides  the  kingdom  of  Assyria,  that  of  Singara  *  and  Araphka  in  the  upper
basin  of  the  Zab.^  Assyria,  however,  had  already  asserted  her  supremacy  over
this  corner  of  Asia,  and  the  remaining  princes,  even  if  they  were  not  mere  vice-
gerents depending  on  her  king,  were  not  strong  enough  in  wealth  and  extent
•of  territory  to  hold  their  own  against  her,  since  she  was  undisputed  mistress
of  Assur,  Arbeles,  Kalakh,  and  Nineveh,  the  most  important  cities  of  the  plain.
Assur  covered  a  considerable  area,  and  the  rectangular  outline  formed  by  the
remains  of  its  walls  is  still  discernible  on  the  surface  of  the  soil.  Within
the  circuit  of  the  city  rose  a  mound,  which  the  ancient  builders  had  trans-
formed, by  the  addition  of  masses  of  brickwork,  into  a  nearly  square  jjlatform,
surmounted  by  the  usual  palace,  temple,  and  ziggurat ;  it  was  enclosed  within  a
wall  of  squared  stone,  the  battlements  of  which  remain  to  the  present  day.*

'  The  name  of  Arbeles  is  written  in  a  form  which  appears  to  signify  "  the  town  of  the  four  gods  "
{mba-ilu)  ;  of.  the  analogous  orthography  of  Arab-hha, "  tuo  town  of  the  four  fish,"  which  the  Assyrians
use  for  the  name  of  the  country  of  Arrapakhiti3(Fii.  Delitzsch,  Wolag  das  Paradiest  pp.  124, 125,  256).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  cut  in  Layakd,  Ninemh  and  Babylon,  p.  274.

"  For  Singara  and  its  ruins,  cf.  Layaud,  op.  cit.,  pp.211,  212;  for  Nazibina (Nisibie) and  its  ruins,
cf.  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  39,  109,  110.

'  This  kingdom  of  Singara  is  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  lists  of  Thutmosis  III.  (W.  Max  MCller,
Asien  mid  Europa,  etc.,  p.  279),  Sclirader  was  doubtful  as  to  its  existence  {Keilimrhrijten  und
Geschichtrforschunrj,  pp.  473-475,  note),  but  one  of  its  kings  is  mentioned  in  a  letter  from  the  King  of
Alasia  to  Amenuthcs  IV.  (BezoldBluue,  Tell  elAmarna  Tablets,  No.  5,  p.  13,  1.  49,  and  p.  xxxv.
note  2);  according  to  Niebuhr  (Sludieu  und  Bemerkungen,  etc.,  p.  91,  et  acq.),  the  state  of  which
Singara  was  the  capital  must  have  been  identical,  at  all  events  at  one  period,  witli  the  Mitanni  of  tlie
Egyptian  texts  (cf.  what  is  said  of  Mitanni  on  p.  140,  note  2,  of  tlie  present  volume).

*  The  Arapakha  of  the  Egyptian  monuments  has  been  identified  with  the  Arrapakhitis  of  the
Greeks  by  Brugsch  (Gcog.  Inschri/len,  vol.  ii.  pp.  52,  5(J).

'  Layaiii),  Xineveh  and  its  Remains,  vcjl.  i.  p.  5,  and  voh  ii.  pp.  4S-G4.  Ainswortli  (Journal  of  the
Geographical  Society,  vol.  xi.  p.  5)  states  the  circumference  of  the  principal  mound  of  Kalali-Shergat
to  be  4U85  yards,  which  would  make  it  one  of  the  most  extensive  ruins  in  tlie  whole  country.


602  THE  BISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

The  whole  pile  was  known  as  the  "  Ekharsagkurkurra,"  or  the  "  House  of  the
terrestrial  mountain,"  ^  the  sanctuary  in  whose  decoration  all  the  ancient
sovereigns  had  vied  with  one  another,  including  Samsiramman  I.  and  Irishum,
who  were  merely  vicegerents  dependent  upon  Babylon.-  It  was  dedicated
to  Aushar,  that  duplicate  of  Anu  who  had  led  the  armies  of  heaven  in  the
struoffrle  with  Tiamat ;  the  name  Anshar,  softened  into  Aushar,  and  sub-
sequently  into  Ashshur,  was  first  applied  to  the  town  and  then  to  the  whole
country.^  The  god  himself  was  a  deity  of  light,  usually  represented  under
the  form  of  an  armed  man,  wearing  the  tiara  and  having  the  lower  half  of  his
body  concealed  by  a  feathered  disk.  He  was  supposed  to  hover  continually
over  the  world,  hurling  fiery  darts  at  the  enemies  of  his  people,  and  protecting
his  kingly  worshippers  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings.*  Their  wars  were  his
wars,  and  he  was  with  them  in  the  thick  of  the  attack,  placing  himself  in  the
front  rank  with  the  soldiery,^  so  that  when  he  gained  the  victory,  the  bulk
of  the  spoil — precious  metals,  gleanings  of  the  battle-field,  slaves  and  pro-
ductive lands — fell  to  his  share.  The  gods  of  the  vanquished  enemy,
moreover,  were,  like  their  princes,  forced  to  render  liim  homage.  In  the
person  of  the  king  he  took  their  statues  prisoners,  and  shut  them  up  in  his
sanctuary ;  sometimes  he  would  engrave  his  name  upon  their  figures  and
send   them   back   to    their   respective    temples,    where    the    sight   of    them

'  For  the  "  terrestrial  mountain,"  cf.  wliat  is  said  in  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  543,  544.  The
name  of  this  temple  is  met  with  for  the  first  time  in  the  inscription  of  Ramman-nirari  I.,  discovered
by  G.  Smith  (H.  EA-nLTNSON,  Can.  Ins.  W.  Ae.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  45,  verso,  1.  28).

"  Briclis  in  the  British  Museum  found  at  Kalah-Shergat,  bearing  the  names  of  Samsiramman
(H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  his.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  Nos.  1,  2)  and  of  Irishum  (H.  Rawlinson,  op.  cil.,
vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  2 ;  cf.  Schrader,  AUeste  Assyrische  Inschri/ten,  in  the  Keil.  BihUothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  2,  3).

»  Another  name  of  the  town  in  later  times  was  Palbeki,  •'  the  town  of  the  old  empire,"  "  the  ancient
capital,"  or  Shauru  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  Jag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  254,  255).  Mauy  Assyriologists  believe
that  the  name  Ashur,  anciently  written  Aushar,  signified  "the  plain  at  tlie  edge  of  the  water,"
a  +  mhar ;  and  that  it  must  have  been  applied  to  the  town  before  being  applied  to  the  country  and  the
god  (Fb.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  252-254  ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Sab.  und  Assyriens,  pp.  280.
479).  Others,  on  the  contrary,  think,  with  more  reason,  that  it  was  the  god  who  gave  his  name  to  the
town  and  the  country  (Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  35-37) ;
they  make  a  point  of  the  very  ancient  play  of  words,  which  in  Assyria  itself  attributed  the  meaning
"  good  god  "  to  the  word  Ashur  (Oppert,  Grande  Inscription  du  Palais  de  Khorsabad,  in  the  Journal
Asiatique,  1S65,  vol.  vi.  p.  237).  Jensen  was  tlie  first  to  state  that  Asliur  was  the  god  Anshar  of  the
account  of  the  creation  {Ueber  einige  Sumero-Akkadische  und  Bah.-Assyrische  Gotternamen,  in  the-
Zeitschrift,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-7,  and  Die  Kosmologie,  p.  275).  Against  this  opinion,  cf.  Schrader,  Bemer-
kungen  zu  D''  Jensen,  etc.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  i.  pp.  209-217;  Schrader  had,  however,  traced  the
same  connection  in  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  36.  Jensen's  opinion  has
been  adopted  by  Hommel  {Gesoh.  Bab.  und  Assyriens,  p.  492,  note  2),  by  Sayee  (The  Religion  of  the
Ancient  Babylonians,  pp.  125,  126),  and  by  Tiele  (Gesch.  der  Religion  im  Altertum,  vol.  i.  p.  186).

*  See  the  picture  of  Assur,  drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin  at  tlie  head  of  the  present  chapter,  p.  567  ;,
cf.  Layard,  The  Monuments  of  Kineneh,  vol.  i.  pi.  21.  I  have  used,  in  describing  the  god,  the  very
words  of  the  inscriptions,  pulkhu  adiru  milam  Ashur,  "  the  fear  inspired  by  the  splendour  of  Ashur  "
(Inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser  I,  col.  ii.  1.  38),  namrisi  Ashur,  "the  fearful  brightness  of  Assur"
(Annals  of  Assurbanipal,  Rassam  Cylinder,  col.  i.  1.  48).

^  In  one  of  the  pictures,  for  instance,  representing  the  assault  of  a  town,  we  see  a  small  figure  of
the  god,  hurling  darts  against  the  enemy  (Layabd,  Momtme7its  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  19).  The  inscrip-
tions also  state  that  the  peoples  "are  alarmed  and  quit  their  cities  before  the  arms  of  Assur,  the
powerful  one"  (Annals  of  Samsiramman,  col.  iii.  11.  28-30).


TEE    GOD    ASSUR   AND    EIS  ISETAR.


003


woukl  remind  their  worshippers  of  his  own  omnipoteuce.'  The  goddess
associated  with  him  as
his  wife  had  given  her
name,  Nina,  to  Nine-
veh," and  was,  as  the
companion  of  the  Chal-
daean  Bel,  styled  the
divine  lady  Belit;  she
was,  in  fact,  a  chaste  and
warlike  Ishtar,  who  led
the  armies  into  battle
with  a  boldness  charac-
teristic of  her  father.^
These  two  divinities
formed  an  abstract  and
solitary  pair,  around
whom  neither  story  nor
myth  appears  to  have
gathered,  and  who  never
became  the  centre  of
any  complex  belief.
Assur  seems  to  have
had   no  parentage  assigned  to  him,  no  statue  erected   to  him,  and    he  was

'  As,  for  instance,  the  statues  of  the  gods  taken  from  the  Arabs  in  the  time  of  Esarhaddon  {Cijlinden-
A  and  C,  col.  iii.  11.  7-12).  Tiglath-pileser  I.  had  carried  away  twenty-five  statues  of  gods  taken  from
the  peoples  of  Kurkhi  and  Kummukh,  and  had  placed  them  in  tlie  temples  of  Beltis,  Ishtar,  Auu,  and
Ramman  (Annals,  col.  iv.  11.  32-30);  ho  mentions  other  foreign  divinities  who  had  been  similarly
treated,  in  the  Aimals,  col.  ii.  1.  31,  col.  iii.  1.  106,  col.  iv.  1.  23,  col.  vi.  11.  8-10.

-  The  ideogram  of  the  name  of  tlio  goddess  Nina  serves  to  write  the  name  of  the  town  Nineveli
(Oppekt,  Sur  qudques-unea  des  Inscriptions  cun€lformes  dt^coiivertes  en  Chald&,  in  the  Acles  da  Cungres
de  Leyden,  vol.  ii.  p.  G28).  The  name  itself  has  been  interpreted  by  Sclirader  as  '■  station,  habitation  "
(Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alls  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  102),  in  tlie  Semitic  languages,  and  by
Fr.  Delitzsch  "repose  of  the  god  "  (cf.  Hommel,  Die  Semilischen  VSlker  und  Spraehe.  vol.  i.  pp.  382,
492,  493,  and  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Assijriens,  p.  2S0).  an  interpretation  whicli  Delitzsch  himself  repudiated
later  on  (Wo  lag  das  Paradies!  p.  200).  It  is  probable  that  the  town,  which,  like  Assur,  was  a
Chaldsean  colony,  derived  its  name  from  the  goddess  to  wliom  it  was  dedicated,  and  whose  temple  existed
there  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  vicegerent  Samsiramman  (G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  247-249).

'  Belit  is  called  by  Tiglath-pilesL-r  I.  "  tlio  great  spouse  beloved  of  Assur"  (/lHHa?.s  col.  iv.  11.34, 35;
cf.  K,  100,  1.  5,  in  Sayce,  The  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Babylonians,  p.  128,  note),  but  Belit,  "  the  lady."
is  here  merely  an  epithet  used  for  Islitar  (Delitzscu-.Muudter,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,
pp.  108,  109).  For  the  Chaldaiaii  Islitar,  see  Dawn  of  i'idlizaiion,  pp.  G58,  G70,  072,  693,  et  seq. :  the
Assyrian  Ishtar,  Ishtar  of  Assur  (Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  iv.  1.  3G,  col.  vi.  11.  86,  87),  Ishtar
of  Nineveh  (Annals  of  Assurnazirpal,  col.  iii.  11.  91,  92).  or  rather— especially  from  tlie  timo  of  the
Sargonids^Ishtar  of  Arbeles,  is  almost  always  a  fierce  and  warlike  Ishtar,  the  "  lady  of  combat,  who
ilirccts  battles"  (Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  /,col.  i.  II.  13, 14),  "  whose  heart  incites  her  to  the  combat
and  the  struggle"  (A}inals  of  Assurlianipal,  Cylinder  B,  col.  v.  II.  52-76).  Sayce  thinks  that  the
union  of  Ishtar  and  Assur  is  of  a  more  recent  date  (The  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Babylonians,  pp.  1 23,
12G,  127,  271,  et  seq.).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  squeezes  brought  back  by  M.  de  Morgan ;  cf.  J.  dk  RIohgan,


ISHTAR    AS   A    WAKUIOU    BUIXGING    riilSONEES   TO   A    CONQUEIilXG    KING.'


•(J04  rnS  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

not  associated  with  the  crowd  of  other  divinities ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  called
their  lord,  their  "  peerless  king,"  and,  as  a  proof  of  his  supreme  sovereignty  over
them,  his  name  was  inscribed  at  the  head  of  their  lists,  before  those  of  the
triads  constituted  by  the  Chaldasan  priests — even  before  those  of  Ann,  Bel,  and
Ea.'  The  city  of  Assur,  which  had  been  the  first  to  tender  him  allegiance  for
many  years,  took  jirecedence  of  all  the  rest,  in  spite  of  the  drawbacks  with
ivhich  it  had  to  contend.  Placed  at  the  very  edge  of  the  Mesopotamian
desert,  it  was  exposed  to  the  dry  and  burning  winds  which  swept  over  the
plains,  so  that  by  the  end  of  the  spring  the  heat  rendered  it  almost  intolerable
as  a  residence.  The  Tigris,  moreover,  ran  behind  it,  thus  leaving  it  exposed
to  tlie  attacks  of  the  Babylonian  armies,  unprotected  as  it  was  by  any  natural
fosse  or  rampart.  The  nature  of  the  frontier  was  such  as  to  afford  it  no  safe-
guard ;  indeed,  it  had,  ou  the  contrary,  to  protect  its  frontier.  Nineveh,  on  the
other  hand,  was  entrenched  behind  the  Tigris  and  the  Zab,  and  was  thus  secure
from  any  sudden  attack.  Northerly  and  easterly  winds  prevailed  during  the
summer,  and  the  coolness  of  the  night  rendered  the  heat  during  the  day  more
bearable.  It  became  the  custom  for  the  kings  and  vicegerents  to  pass  the  most
trying  months  of  the  year  at  Nineveh,  taking  up  their  abode  close  to  the  temple
of  Nina,  the  Assyrian  Ishtar,  but  they  did  not  venture  to  make  it  their  habitual
residence,  and  consequently  Assur  remained  the  official  capital  and  chief  sanc-
tuary of  the  empire.  Here  its  rulers  concentrated  their  treasures,  their  archives,
their  administrative  offices,  and  the  chief  staft'  of  the  army ;  from  tliis  town  they
set  out  on  their  expeditions  against  the  Cossseans  of  Babylon  or  the  mountaineers
of  the  districts  beyond  the  Tigris,  and  it  was  in  this  temple  that  they  dedicated
to  the  god  the  tenth  of  the  spoil  on  their  return  from  a  successful  campaign.^

The  struggle  with  Chaldsea,  indeed,  occupied  the  greater  part  of  their
energies,  though  it  did  not  absorb  all  their  resources,  and  often  left  them
times  of  respite,  of  which  they  availed  themselves  to  extend  their  domain
to  the  north  and  east.  We  cannot  yet  tell  which  of  the  Assyrian  sove-
reigns added  the  nearest  provinces  of  the  Upper  Tigris  to  his  realm ;  but
when  the  names  of  these  districts  appear  in  history,  they  are  already  in  a
state  of  submission  and  vassalage,  and  their  principal  towns  are  governed
by  Assyrian  officers  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  Singara  and   Nisibe.

Miesion  scientifique  en  Perse,  vol.  ii.  p.  109.  It  is  a  mouument  of  Anubanini,  King  of  Lulum€,
mentioned  on  p.  (>06  of  the  jiresent  volume.

'  For  the  kino-ly  character  of  the  god  Assur,  cf.  Sayce.  The  IteUgion  of  the  Ancient  Bahijloniant,
pp.  122-129,  where  he  is  couipared  with  the  lahveh  of  the  Israelites  ;  DEHizscH-MvKUTEii,  Gesch.  Bah.
mid  Ass.,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  lOil-lOS,  and  Tiele,  Gesch.  der  Religion  im  Allcrtum,  vol.  i.  pp.  185-lSS.

'  Wc  owe  nearly  all  our  information  witli  regard  to  the  local  history  of  Niiieveli  during  this  ancient
period  to  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Uiscoveries,  pp.  242-252.  The  majority  of  scholurs  now  admit  tliat  the
town  of  Niua,  mentioned  by  Gudea  and  tlie  vicegerents  of  Telloh,  was  a  quarter  of,  or  ueighbouring
boroufh  of,  Lagajh  (cf.  Daicii  of  Cirilization,  p.  C03,  note  5),  and  had  nothing  in  common  with  Nineveh,
in  spite  of  Hommel's  assumption  to  the  contrary  (Gesch.  Bah.  und  Asf.,  ])p.  2S0,  327,  328,  4S9,  490,
where  the  name  of  the  goddess  is  read  Ghanna,  and  that  of  the  town  Ghanna-l^i).


WARS  AGAINST  CHALDJEA.


605.


A    VILLAGE   IN    THE   MOIXTAIN    lilSTIilCTS   OF   THE    OLD    ASSYKIAN    KINC.UOII.'


Assuruballit,  the  conqueror  of  the  Cossseans,  had  succeeded  in  establish-
ing his  authority  over  the  turbulent  hordes  of  Shubari  which  occupied  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Masios,  between  the  Khabur  and  the  Balikh,  and  ex-
tended perhaps  as  far  as  the  Euphrates ;  at  any  rate,  he  was  considered
by  posterity  as  the  actual  founder  of  the  Assyrian  empire  in  these  districts.'-
Belnirari  had  directed  his  efforts  iu  another  direction,  and  had  conquered
the  petty  kingdoms  established  on  the  slopes  of  the  Iranian  table-land,  around
the  sources  of  the  two  Zabs,  and  those  of  the  Radanu  and  the  Turnat.''  Like
Susiana,  this  part  of  the  country  was  divided  up  into  parallel  valleys,  separated
from  each  other  by  broken  ridges  of  limestone,  and  watered  by  the  tributaries
of  the  Tigris  or  their  afHuents.  It  was  thickly  strewn  with  walled  towns  and
villages ;  the  latter,  perched  upon  the  precipitous  mountain  summits,  and
surrounded  by   deep  ravines,  owed  their  security   solely    to   their   position,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  drawing  by  Ptre  Durand,  lent  by  P&re  Scheil.

^  It  is  called,  in  an  inscription  of  liis  great-grandson,  Ramman-nirari  I.,  the  powerful  king  "  who
reduced  to  servitude  the  forces  of  the  vast  country  of  Shubari,  and  who  enlarged  tlie  territory  and
limits"  of  Assur  (H.  Rawlinson,  Cua.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  44,  recto,  11.  32-:!4 ;  Soueil,  IincHption
de  Itanimannirari  /.,  in  the  Itecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xv.  p.  139,  11.  23,  24  ;  and  .1.  Jastrow,  The  two
Oipies  of  Ilammaniiirari's  Inscription,  in  the  Zcitschrijt,  vol.  x.  pp.  35-48 :  cf.  I'oGNON,  Inscription  de
iIgrou-n€rar  I.,  King  o/  Assyria,  pp.  12,  10,  78,  79;  Pelseu,  Die  Sieinplallcninschrifl  liammun-
nirdri's  I.,  in  the  Kciliuscltri/tiichc  liibliolhcl:,  vol.  i.  pp.  G,  7 ;  Oppert,  Adadnirar  roi  d'Ellassar,
Extrait  des  C'otnptes  rendus  de  I'Acadi'mie  des  Inscripiions,  1893,  pp.  9,  13).  For  (he  country  of
Shubari,  Shubartu,  see  p.  59G,  note  3,  of  the  present  work.

'  The  inscription  of  Rainmiln-nirari  I.  styles  him  the  prince  '•  who  crushes  tlie  army  of  tlie  Cossajans,
he  whose  hand  unnerves  the  enemy,  and  who  enlarges  the  territory  and  its  limits"  (lleoln,  II.  24-27).
The  Cossteans  mentioned  in  this  passage  are  usually  taken  to  be  the  Cossajan  kings  of  Babylon
(HoMMEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Asi.,  pp.  499,  500),  and  not  the  mountain  tribes.


■606  THE  niSE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

and,  indeed,  needed  no  fortiticatiou.  The  country  abounded  in  woods  and
pastures,  interspersed  with  cornlands ;  access  to  it  was  gained  by  one  or  two
passes  on  the  eastern  side,  whicli  thus  permitted  caravans  or  armies  to  reach
the  districts  lying  between  the  Erythraean  and  Caspian  Seas.  The  tribes  who
inhabited  it  had  been  brought  early  under  Chakh-ean  civilization,  and  had
adopted  the  cuneiform  script;  such  of  their  monuments  as  are  still  extant
resemble  the  bas-reliefs  and  inscriptions  of  Assyria.^  It  is  not  always  easy
to  determine  the  precise  locality  occupied  by  these  various  peoples;  the  Guti
were  situated  near  the  upper  courses  of  the  Turnat  and  the  Radanu,  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Kashshu ;  -^  the  Lulume  had  settled  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Batir,  to  the  north  of  the  defiles  of  Zohab;^  the  Namar  separated  the
Lulume  from  Elam,  and  were  situated  half  in  the  plain  and  half  in  the  moun-
tain,* while  the  Arapkha  occupied  both  banks  of  the  Great  Zab.  Budilu  carried
his  arms  against  these  tribes,  and  obtained  successes  over  the  Turuki  and  the
Nigimkhi,  the  princes  of  the  Guti  and  the  Shuti,  as  well  as  over  the  Akhlami
and  the  lauri.^  The  chiefs  of  the  Lulume  had  long  resisted  the  attacks  of
their  neighbours,  and  one  of  them,  Anubanini,  had  engraved  on  the  rocks
■overhanging  the  road  not  far  from  tlie  village  of  Seripul,  a  bas-relief  cele-
brating his  own  victories.  He  figures  on  it  in  full  armour,  wearing  a  turban
on  his  head,  and  treading  underfoot  a  fallen  foe,  while  Ishtar  of  Arbeles  leads

'  Pinches  has  published  an  inscription  of  a  king  of  Khani,  named  Tukultimir,  eon  of  Ilushaba,
•written  in  Chaldeo-Assyrian,  and  found  in  the  temple  of  Shamash  at  Sippara,  where  the  personage
himself  had  dedicated  it  {Babylonian  Art  illustrated  hij  M.  A.  Rassam's  latest  discoveries,  in  the
Transactions  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  351-353).  Winckler  gives  another  inscription  of
a  king  of  the  Guti  (Eine  neu-veroffentliclite  Inschrijt  eines  unbekannten  Konigs,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,
vol.  iv.  p.  40tj),  wliich  is  also  in  Semitic  and  in  cuneiform  character.

'  The  name  is  written  sometimes  Qiiti,  at  others  Guti,  which  induced  Pognon  to  believe  that  they
were  two  diiferent  peoples  {Inscription  de  M€rou-n€rar  I,  p.  7S,  note  1)  :  the  territory  occupied  by
-this  nation  must  have  been  originally  to  the  east  of  the  Lesser  Zab,  in  the  upper  basins  of  the  Adhera
and  the  Diyaleh  (Dehtzsch,  TTo  lag  das  Paradies  i  pp.  233,  231).  Oppert  proposes  to  recognise  in
these  Guti  "  the  ancestors  of  the  Goths,  who.  fifteen  hundred  years  ago,  pushed  forward  to  the  Russia
of  the  present  day  :  we  find  "(he  adds),  "in  this  passage  and  in  others,  some  of  which  go  back  to  tlie
third  millennium  before  the  Christian  era,  the  earliest  mention  of  the  Germanic  races"  {Adad-nirar,
King  of  Ellassar,  p.  IS).

^  The  people  of  Lulume-LuUubi  have  been  pointed  out  as  living  to  the  east  of  the  Lesser  Zab  by
^a\iKd.QX  {KeilinscUriften  und  Geschichtsforschiing,  pp.  270,  271);  their  exact  position,  together  witli
that  of  Mount  Padir-Ballr  in  whose  neighbourhood  they  were,  has  been  determined  by  Pere  Scheil
{Les  deux  Steles  de  Zohdb,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  101,  105).

<  For  the  locality  of  Namar,  see  the  observations  of  Boscawes,  The  Horses  of  Namar,  in  the
hahylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.  pp.  139,  110.

'  Inscription  of  Rammdn-nirdri  I,  recto,  11.  11-22.  For  the  Guti,  see  supra,  note  2  of  this  page  ;
the  Shutu  or  Shuti,  who  are  always  found  in  connection  with  the  Guti,  appear  to  have  been  the
inhabitants  of  the  lower  mountain  slopes  which  separate  the  basin  of  the  Tigris  with  the  regions  of
Elam,  to  the  south  of  Turnat  (Fr.  Delitzsoh,  ITo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  231,  235).  The  Akhlamc
were  neighbours  of  the  Shuti  and  tlie  Guti;  they  were  settled  partly  in  the  Mesopotamian  plain  and
partly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Turnat  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  132).  The  territory  of  the
lauri  is  not  known ;  the  Turuki  and  the  Nigimkhi,  the  latter  of  whom  are  called  Nisikhkhi  by
Oppekt,  Adad-nirar,  roi  d'Ellassar,  pp.  9,  13,  and  Nigimti  by  AVI^'C&LEK,  Gesch.  Bah.  U7id  Ass.,  p.  15S,
were  probably  situated  somewhere  to  the  east  of  the  Great  Zab  :  in  the  same  way  that  Oppert  connects
the  Goths  with  the  Guti,  so  Hommel  sees  in  the  Turuki  the  Turks  of  a  very  early  date  {Gesch.  Bab.
und  Assyriens,  p.  501).


(i07
The


SAMMAN-XIBARI   AND    SHALMANESER    I.

towards  him  a  long  file  of  naked  captives,  bound  ready  for  sacrifice.'
resistance  of  the  Lulume  was,  however,  finally  overcome  by
Ramman-nirari,  the  son  of  Budilu ;  he  strengthened  the  suzerainty
gained  by  his  predecessor  over  the  Guti,  the  Cossseans,  and  the
Shubarti,  and  he  employed  the  spoil  taken  from  them  in  beau-
tifying the  temple  of  Assur.'-'  He  had  occasion  to  spend  some
time  in  the  regions  of  the  Upper  Tigris,  warring  against  the
Shubari,  and  a  fine  bronze  sabre  belonging  to  him  has  been  found
near  Diarbekir,  among  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Amidi,  where,  no
doubt,  he  had  left  it  as  an  offering  iu  one  of  the  temples.'^

He  was  succeeded  by  Shalmanuiisharid,*  better  known  to  us
as  Shalmaneser  I.,  one  of  the  most  powerful  sovereigns  of  this
heroic  age  of  Assyrian  history.  His  reign  seems  to  have  beeu
one  continuous  war  against  the  various  races  then  in  a  state  of
ferment  on  the  frontiers  of  his  kingdom.  He  appears  in  the
main  to  have  met  with  success,  and  in  a  few  years  had  doubled
the  extent  of  his  dominions.^  His  most  formidable  attacks  were
directed  against  the  Aramaeans  of  Mount  Masios,  whose  numerous
tribes  had  advanced  on  one  side  till  they  had  crossed  the  Tigris,
while  on  the  other  they  had  pushed  beyond  the  river  Balikli,  and


'  MOBGAN-ScHEiL,  ics  deux  Slelcs  de  Zohah,  in  tlie  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.
pp.  100-107 ;  cf.  Heczey,  Sculpture  rupestre  de  Cheikh-hhan  reler^e  par  le  Capi-
taine  Leon  Serger,  in  the  JRevue  d' Assyriologie  et  d'  Archdtilogie  Oritntale,  vol.  ii.
pp.  115-120.

^  Inscription  of  Ramman-nirari  I.,  recto,  II.  3-5;  cf.  Pognon,  Inscription  de
Merou-ngrar  J.,  pp.  8,  19 ;  Peiser,  Die  Steinplatleninschrift  Eammdn-nirdri's  J.,  in
tLe  Keilinsckriftliche  Bihliotlielc,  vol.  i.  pp.  4,  5  ;  Oppert,  Adad-nirar,  etc.,  pp.  9,  12,
18.  The  docuiuL-nt  which  has  preeerveil  the  record  of  these  facts  mentions  the
restoration  of  two  of  the  gates  of  the  temple  of  Assur  (recto,  11.  35,  36,  verso,  11.  1-8).  f^li' j

'  BoscAWEN,  Notes  on  au  Ancient  Assyrian  Bronze  Sword  hearing  a  Cuneiform
Inscription,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  347,  348.

'  Shalmauu-itsharicl,  or  Shulmanu-ashaiid,  signifies  "  the  god  Shulmauu  (Shal-
manu)  is  prince,"  as  Pinclies  was  the  first  to  point  out  {The  Bahylonian  Kings  of
the  Second  Period,  iu  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.   Arch.   Soc,  1882-84,   vol.   vi.
p.  198;  cf.  ScuiiADEii,  Der  Assyrische  Konigsname  Salmanasaar,  iu  the  Zeitschrl/t  fur        .p„j,  p^jjjjf*  Qp
Keilforschung,  vol.  ii.  pp.  197-204).  ramman-niieaiu  i.'

'  Some  of  (he  details  of  the-se  campaigns  have  beeu  preserved  ou  the  much-
mutilated  obelisk  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  published  in  H.  Rawlin.son,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,
vol.  i.  pi.  28,  and  vol.  iii.  pi.  4,  No.  1.  This  was  a  compilation  taken  from  the  Annals  of  Assyria  to
celebrate  the  important  acts  of  the  king's  ancestors.  The  events  recorded  in  the  third  column
(Pinches,  Guide  to  the  Kouyunjik  Galhry,  p.  122)  were  at  first  attribnted  to  the  reign  of  Tiglath-
pileser  I.  (G.  Sjiith,  On  Fragments  of  an  Inscription  giving  part  of  the  Chronolng ij,  etc.,  in  tho  Trans-
actions of  tho  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  3'JG,  3G7);  Fr.  Delitzscli  was  tlio  first  to  recognise  that
they  could  be  referred  to  the  reign  of  this  Shalmaneser  {Die  Sprachc  der  Kossieer,  p.  10,  note  9),  and
his  opinion  is  now  admitted  by  most  of  the  Assyriologists  who  have  studied  the  nuestiou  (IIojimei.,
Gesch.  Bab.  uud  Assyriens,  pp.  i'.'tl,  438,  005-508 ;  WiNCKLEii,  Alloricntalische  Forschungen,  pp.  110, 127,
129,  137;  lliLpiiECUT,  The  Bahylonian  Expedition  of  the  IInii>i:rsiti/  of  Pennsylcania,  vol.  i.  pp.  32,  33).

°  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  the  sketch  published  iu  the   Transactions  of  the  Bibl.   Arch.
Soc,  vol.  iv.,  plate  faciug  p.  347.


608  THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

had  probably  re.aclied  the  Euphrates.^  He  captured  their  towns  one  after
another,  razed  their  fortresses,  smote  the  agricultural  districts  with  fire  and
sword,  and  then  turned  upon  the  various  peoples  who  had  espoused  their
cause — the  Kirkhu,  the  Euri,  the  Kharrin,'-  and  the  Muzri,  who  inhabited
the  territory  between  the  basins  of  the  two  great  rivers ;  ^  once,  indeed,  he
even  crossed  tlie  Euphrates  and  ventured  within  the  country  of  Khanigalbat,
a  feat  which  his  ancestors  had  never  even  attempted.*  He  was  recalled  by  a
revolt  which  had  broken  out  in  the  scattered  cities  of  the  district  of  Dur-
Kurigalzu ;  he  crushed  the  rising  in  spite  of  the  help  which  Kadash-manburiash,
King  of  Babylon,  had  given  to  the  rebels,'  and  was  soon  successful  in  subduing
tlie  princes  of  Lulume.^  These  were  not  the  raids  of  a  day's  duration,  under-
taken, without  any  regard  to  the  future,  merely  from  love  of  rapine  or  adventure.
Shalmaneser  desired  to  bring  the  regions  which  he  annexed  permanently  under
the  authority  of  Assyria,  and  to  this  end  he  established  military  colonies
in  suitable  places,  most  of  which  were  kept  up  long  after  his  deathJ  He
seems  to   have  directed   the   internal  affairs  of  his  kingdom   with   the   same

'  The  identity  of  tlie  Arami  (wiitteu  also  Armaya,  Arumi,  Arimi)  with  the  Aramaeans,  admitted
by  the  earlier  Assyriologists,  Rawlinson,  Oppert,  Hincks,  Talbot  (cf.,  latterly,  NoRRis,  Auyrian  Did..
vol.  i.  p.  52,  and  FiNzi,  Ricercke  per  lo  Studio  iMV  Anlicliilh  Assira,  pp.  206-212),  is  still  universally
accepted  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  257,  258  ;  Houjiel,  Oesch.  Bed),  iind  Ass  ,  p.  507 ;
WiNCKLEh,  Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  136).

-  Tlie  people  of  the  country  of  Kilkhi,  or  Kirkhi,  the  Kurkhi,  occupied  the  region  between  the
Tigris  at  Diarbekir  aud  tlie  mountains  overlooking  the  lake  of  Urumiah  (Schrader,  Keilinschriften,
etc.,  pp.  145-147  ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  522).  The  position  of  the  Ruri  is  not  known,
but  it  is  certain  tliat  on  one  side  they  joined  the  Aramieans,  and  that  they  were  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Tushkhan  {Annals  of  Assurnazirpal.  col.  ii.  11.  2-fi).  Kharriin  is  the  Harran  of  the  Balikh,
mentioned  on  pp.  26,  27  of  the  present  work.

'  The  name  of  Muzri  frequently  occurs,  and  in  various  positions,  among  the  countries  mentioned
by  the  Assyrian  coni^uerors  (Oppert,  Histoire  des  Empires  de  Chaldge  et  d'Assyrie,  pp.  52,  109 ;
Fr.  Lenor.mant,  Sur  une  pr^endue  mention  de  VEgypie  dans  un  texte  assyrien,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1870,
pp.  21-24,  71,  72;  Sohrader,  Das  Baldrischc  Eamel  und  das  Bstliche  Land  Musri  der  Keilinschriften,
in  the  Zeits.  der  Deut.  Morgenl.  Ges.,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  436,  et  seq.,  and  Keilinschriften  und  Geschichtsforsclinng,
pp.  246-2S2) :  the  frequency  of  its  occurrence  is  easily  explained  if,  according  to  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bah.
U7id  Ass.,  p.  530,  note  2),  we  are  to  regard  it  as  a  purely  Assyrian  term  used  to  designate  the  military
confines  or  marches  of  the  kingdom  at  different  epochs  of  its  history.  Tlie  Muzri  here  in  question  is
the  borderland  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  Cilicia  (Tiele,  Bab.-Assyrische  Gesch.,  p.  201),  probably  the
Sophene  aud  the  Gumathene  of  classical  geographers :  AVinckler  appears  to  me  to  exaggerate  their
importauce  when  he  says  they  were  spread  over  the  whole  of  Northern  Syria  as  early  as  the  time  of
Shalmaneser  I.  {Alltestamentliche  XJntersuchungen,  p.  172).

*  Khanigalbat  is  the  name  of  the  province  in  which  Milidwas  placed  (Schrader,  Keilinschriften
und  Geschichtsforschung,  pp.  151,  et  seq.,  530,  531);  for  the  connection  which  has  been  attempted
between  this  name,  transcribed  Khani-raibat  and  translated  "  Khani  the  Great,"  and  that  of  the
Khati,  cf.  what  I  have  already  stated,  supra,  p.  353.

'  In  interpreting  this  passage  I  have  followed  the  tranBlation  of  G.  Smith  (0»  Fragments  of  an
Inscription  giving  part  of  the  Chronology,  etc.,  in  the  Transactions  of , the  .Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iii.
pp.  366,  367),  who  appears  to  have  read  the  text  when  in  a  less  mutilated  state  than  it  is  now  in
(Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Assyriens,  p.  437,  note  2).

"  This  campaign  against  the  people  of  Lulume  is  known  to  us  through  the  fragmentary  inscription
discovered  by  G.  Smith  nt  Kalah-Shergat  (Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  24S,  249 ;  cf.  Hommel,  Gesch.
Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  504-507).

■  More  than  five  centuries  after  the  time  of  Shalmaneser  I.,  Assurnazirpal  makes  mention  in  his
Annals  (col.  i.  11. 102, 103,  col.  ii.ll.  7, 8)of  one  of  these  colonies,  established  in  tliccountry  of  Diarbekir
at  Khabzilukha  (or  Khabzidipkha),  near  to  the  town  of  Damdamua,  not  far  from  the  sources  of  the
Sebbeneli-su  (Sourader,  Die  Keilinschriften  am  Eingange  dcs  Quellgrotte  des  Sebbeneh-Su,  pp.  20-24).


TUKULTI-NINJP   T.    TAKES    BABYLON.  009

lirmness  and  energy  which  he  disphiyed  in  his  military  expeditions.  It  was
no  light  matter  for  the  sovereign  to  decide  on  a  change  in  the  seat  of  govern-
ment; he  ran  the  risiv  of  offending,  not  merely  his  subjects,  but  the  god  who
presided  over  the  destinies  of  the  State,  and  neither  his  throne  nor  his  life
would  have  been  safe  had  he  failed  in  his  attempt.  Shalmaneser,  however,  did
not  hesitate  to  make  the  change,  once  he  was  fully  convinced  of  the  drawbacks
presented  by  Assiir  as  a  capital.  True,  he  beautified  the  cit}^  restored  its
temples,  and  permitted  it  to  retain  all  its  privileges  and  titles;  but  having  done
'so,  he  mio-rated  with  his  court  to  the  town  of  Kalakh,  where  his  descendants  con-
tinued  to  reside  for  several  centuries.  His  son  Tukulti-ninip  made  himself  master
of  Babylon,  and  was  the  first  of  his  race  who  was  able  to  claim  the  title  of  King
of  Sumir  and  Akkad.  The  Cossseans  were  still  suffering  from  their  defeat  at  the
hands  of  Kamman-niiari.  Four  of  their  princes  had  followed  Nazimaruttash
on  the  throne  in  rapid  succession^Kadashmanfurgu,  Kadashmanburiash,  who
was  attacked  by  Shalmaneser,a  certain  Isammeti  whose  name  has  been  mutilated,
and  lastly,  Shagaraktiburiash :  Bibeiasdu,  son  of  this  lattei",  w  as  in  power  at
the  moment  when  Tukulti-ninip  ascended  the  throne.  Wal-  broke  out  between
the  two  monarchs,  but  dragged  on  without  any  marked  advantage  on  one  side
or  the  other,  till  at  length  the  conflict  was  temporarily  suspended  by  a  treaty
similar  to  others  which  had  been  signed  in  the  couise  of  the  previous  two  or
three  centuries.'  The  peace  thus  concluded  might  have  lasted  longer  but  for
an  unforeseen  catastrophe  which  placed  Babylon  almost  at  the  mercy  of  her
rival.  The  Elamites  had  never  abandoned  their  efforts  to  press  in  every
conceivable  way  their  claim  to  the  supremacy,  which,  prior  to  Khammurabi,

'  The  passage  from  the  Synchronous  Hitlory  (col.  ii.  11.  1,  2),  republished  by  Winokler  (Unter-
euchungen  zur  Altorientaliechen  Geschicltte,  p.  152,  8"  recto,  11.  9,  10),  coiitains  the  terminatiou  of  the
mutilated  name  of  a  Babyloniaa  king  .  .  .  ashu,  which,  originally  left  undecided  by  Wiuckler  (Unter-
tuchuiKjen,  p.  ?'2),  has  been  restored  "  Bibeiashu  "  by  Hilprecht,  in  the  light  of  monuments  discovered
at  Nipur  {The  Bahijlonian  Expedition  nf  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  p.  11,  and  Assyriaca,
vol.  i.  p.  85,  et  seq.),  an  emendation  which  has  since  then  been  aooeptid  by  Winckler  (Altorientalische
Forschungen,  pp.  109,  110, 123).  Winckler,  on  his  part,  has  restored  the  passage  on  the  assumption  that
tlie  name  of  the  King  of  Assyria  engnged  against  Bibeiashu  was  Tukulti-ninip;  then,  combining  this
fragment  with  that  In  the  Pinches  Chronicle,  which  deals  with  the  taking  of  Babylon,  he  argues  that
Bibeiashu  was  the  king  dethroned  by  Tukulli-ninip  {Altorientalische  Forschungen,  pp.  123-127,  137).
An  e.\amination  of  the  dates,  in  so  f.ir  as  they  are  at  present  known  to  us  from  the  various  documouts,
seenjs  to  me  to  render  this  nrrangcment  inadmissible.  The  Pinches  Chronicle  practically  tolls  us  that
Tukulti-ninip  reigned  over  Babjlon  for  seven  years,  when  the  Clialdaians  revolted,  and  named  Ramman-
shumusur  king  (col.  iii.  11.  7-9).  Now,  the  Babyloniaa  Canon  gives  us  the  following  reigns  lor  this
epoch :  Bibeiashu  S  years,  Belnadinshumii  1  year  (J  months,  Kadashmankharbe  /  year  C  months,
Bammannadiushumu  (J  years,  RammiinshumuBur  JO  years,  or  9  years  between  the  end  of  the  reign
of  Bibeiashu  and  the  beginning  of  that  of  Ramnianshumusur,  instead  of  the  7  years  given  us  by  the
Pinches  Chronicle  for  the  length  of  the  reign  of  Tukulti-ninip  at  Babylon.  If  we  nckon,  as  the  only
documenta  known  n  quire  us  to  do,  seven  years  from  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  liammanshumusur
to  the  date  of  the  taking  of  Babyhm,  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  this  took  place  in  the  reign  of
Kadashmankharbe  II.,  and,  Consequently,  that  the  passage  in  the  Synchronous  llixtory,  in  which
mention  is  made  of  Bibeiashu,  must  be  interpreted  as  I  have  done  in  the  text,  by  the  hypothesis  of
a  war  prior  to  that  in  which  Babylon  (ell,  which  was  followed  by  a  treaty  between  this  prince  and
the  King  of  As.iyria.

2    R


610  THE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

had  been  exercised  by  their  ancestors  over  the  whole  of  Mesopotamia ;  they
swooped  down  on  Karduniash  with  an  impetuosity  like  that  of  the  Assyrians,
and  probably  with  the  same  alternations  of  success  and  defeat.  Their  king,
Kidinkhutrutash,  unexpectedly  attacked  Belnadinshumu,  son  of  Bibeiashu,
appeared  suddenly  under  the  walls  of  Nipur  and  forced  the  defences  of  Durilu
and  Etimgarkalamma :  Belnadinshumu  disappeared  in  the  struggle  after  a
reign  of  eighteen  mouths.  Tukulti-ninip  left  Belnadinshumu's  successor,  Ka-
dashmankharbe  II.,  no  time  to  recover  from  this  disaster  ;  he  attacked  him  in
turn,  carried  Babylon  by  main  force,  and  put  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  to
the  sword.  He  looted  the  palace  and  the  temples,  dragged  the  statue  of  Mero-
dach  from  its  sanctuary  and  carried  it  oW  into  Assyria,  together  with  the  badges
of  supreme  power;  then,  after  appointing  governors  of  his  own  in  the  various
towns,  he  returned  to  Kalakh,  laden  with  booty  :  he  led  captive  with  him
several  members  of  the  royal  family — among  others,  Rammanshumusur,  the
lawful  successor  of  Bibeiashu.

This  iirst  conquest  of  Chaldjea  did  not,  however,  produce  any  lasting  results.
The  fall  of  Babylon  did  not  necessarily  involve  the  subjection  of  the  whole
country,  and  the  cities  of  the  south  showed  a  bold  front  to  the  foreign  intruder,
and  remained  faithful  to  Kadashmankharbe ;  on  the  deatli  of  the  latter,  some
months  after  his  defeat,  they  hailed  as  king  a  certain  Rammanshumnadin,
who  by  some  means  or  other  had  made  his  escape  from  captivity.  Ramman-
shumnadin proved  himself  a  better  man  than  his  predecessors ;  when  Kidin-
khutrutash, never  dreaming,  apparently,  that  he  would  meet  with  any  serious
resistance,  came  to  claim  his  share  of  the  spoil,  he  defeated  him  near  Ishin,
drove  him  out  of  the  districts  recently  occupied  by  the  Elamites,  and  so
effectually  retrieved  his  fortunes  in  this  direction,  that  he  was  able  to  concen-
trate his  whole  attention  on  what  was  going  on  in  the  north.  The  effects  of
his  victory  soon  became  apparent :  the  nobles  of  Akkad  and  Karduniash
declined  to  pay  homage  to  their  Assyrian  governors,  and,  ousting  them  from
the  offices  to  which  they  had  been  appointed,  restored  Babylon  to  the  inde-
pendence which  it  had  lost  seven  years  previously.  Tukulti-ninip  paid  dearly
for  his  incapacity  to  retain  his  conquests  :  his  son  Assurnazirpal  I.  conspired
with  the  principal  officers,  deposed  him  from  the  throne,  and  confined  him  in  the
fortified  palace  of  Kar-Tukulti-ninip,  which  he  had  built  not  far  from  Kalakh,
where  he  soon  after  contrived  his  assassination.  About  tliis  time  Rammanshum-
nadin disappears,  and  we  can  only  suppose  that  the  disasters  of  these  last  years
had  practically  annihilated  the  Cossaean  dynasty,  for  Rammanshumusur,  who
was  a  prisoner  in  Assyria,  was  chosen  as  his  successor.  The  monuments  tell  us
nothing  definite  of  the  troubles  which  next  befell  the  two  kingdoms :  we  seem
to  gather,  however,  that  Assyria  became  the  scene  of  civil  wars,  and  that  the


BELKVDURUSUR  AND    TEE  LAST   OF   THE    COSS^'ANS.  611

sons  of  TukuUi-ninip  fought  for  the  crown  among  themselves.  Tukultia'^surljel,
who  gained  the  upper  hand  at  the  end  of  six  years,  set  Kammanshumusur  at
liberty,  probably  with  the  view  of  purchasing  the  support  of  the  Chaldaeans,  but
he  did  not  succeed  in  restoring  his  country  to  the  position  it  had  held  under
Shalmaneser  and  Tukulti-ninip  I.^  The  history  of  Assyria  presents  a  greater
number  of  violent  contrasts  and  extreme  vicissitudes  tlian  that  of  any  other
Eastern  people  in  the  earliest  times.  No  sooner  had  the  Assyrians  arrived,
thanks  to  the  ceaseless  efforts  of  five  or  six  generations,  at  tlie  very  summit
of  their  ambition,  than  some  incompetent,  or  perhaps  merely  unfortunate,  king
appeared  on  the  scene,  and  lost  in  a  few  years  all  the  ground  which  had  been
gained  at  the  cost  of  sucli  tremendous  exertions :  then  the  subject  races  would
rebel,  the  neighbouring  peoples  would  pluck  up  courage  and  reconquer  the
provinces  which  they  had  surrendered,  till  the  dismembered  empire  gradually
shrank  back  to  its  original  dimensions.  As  the  fortunes  of  Babylon  rose,  those
of  Nineveh  suffered  a  corresponding  depression  :  Babylon  soon  became  so
powerful  that  Eamm:inshumusur  was  able  to  adopt  a  patronising  tone  in
his  relations  with  Assurnirarl  I.  and  Nubodainani,  the  descendants  of  Tukul-
tiassurbel,  who  at  one  time  shared  tlie  throne  together.^  This  period  of
subjection  and  humiliation  did  not  last  long.  Belkudurusur,  who  appears
on  the  throne  not  long  after  Assurnirari  and  his  partner,  resumed  military
operations  against  the  Cossa;aus,  but  cautiously  at  first ;  and  tiiough  he
fell  in  the  decisive  engagement,  yet  Kammanshumusur  perished  with  him,
and  the  two  states  were  thus  simultaneously  left  rulerless.  Milishikhu  suc-
ceeded Eammanshumusur,  and  Ninipabalesharra  filled  the  place  of  Belku-
durusur ;  the  disastrous  invasion  of  Assyria  by  the  Chaldaeans,  and  their
subsequent  retreat,  at  length   led   to   an   armistice,  which,  while   it  afforded

'  The  sole  autliorily  for  all  these  events  is  the  Pinches  Chronicle  (col.  iii.  11.  3-23).  lu  classifying
them,  I  have  accepted,  in  addition  to  the  hypothesis  put  forward  on  p.  609,  supra,  Hommel's  con-
jecture, put  forward  by  Winokler,  Allorientalische  Forschungen,  pp.  138,  139.  The  scribo  must  have
divided  the  events  which  took  place  during  these  years  into  two  series.  He  first  relates  those  which
refer  to  the  relations  of  Babylon  with  Assyria  (U.  3-13),  then  he  comes  to  the  events  which  took
place  between  Babylonia  and  Elam  (11.  14-20).  I  have  restored  them  to  their  proper  order.  C.
Niebuhr  regards  the  name  of  Tukultlassurbel  as  being  that  of  the  Assyrian  liinmu,  under  wliich  the
events  of  the  sixth  year  took  [place ;  the  Babylonian  author,  unfamiliar  with  Assyrian  usages,  mis-
understood the  test  in  which  this  person  is  meutioned,  and  takes  him  to  be  a  king  (^Studien  uud
Bemerkungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Allen  Urients,  pp.  83-87).  Winckler,  Altorlentalische  Forschuiigen,
p.  2G9,  n.  1,  accepts  Xiebuhr's  conjecture.

'  All  that  we  know  of  these  two  kings  is  contained  in  the  copy,  executed  in  the  time  of  Assur-
banipal,  of  a  letter  addressed  to  them  by  Haniniaushumusur,  fragments  of  which  have  been  publi.shed
by  Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  4,  No,  5.  They  have  been  placed,  at  one  time  or  another,
either  at  the  beginning  of  Assyrian  history  before  Assurbelnishishu  (Menant,  Annales  des  roi»
d'Astyrie,  p.  21  ;  Wincklku,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Assyr.,  pp.  102,  103,  156,  157,  330,  331),  or  alter  Tiglath-
pileser  I.,  about  the  XI"'  or  X"',  or  even  the  VIII"'  century  before  our  era  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  und
Aisyr.,  pp.  156,  422,  n.  1,  030,  n.  1,  645,  646  ;  Tiele,  Bahyl.-Assyritche  Gesch.,  pp.  106,  177).  It  has
siuce  been  discovered  that  the  Rammaushumusur  who  wrote  this  letter  was  the  successor  of  TukuUi-
ninip  I.  in  Chaldffia  (Bezold,  Kurzge/asater  lleherhlick,  p.  20  ;  Bayce,  Becords  of  the  I'ad,  2nd  series,
vol.  ii.  p.  207,  vol.  V.  p.  Ill,  note  2;   Winokleu,  Aliorientalisclie  Forschungen,  pp.  124,  125,  136,  137).


612  THE  lilSE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIliE.

evidence  of  the  indisputable  superiority  of  Milishikhu,  proved  no  less  plainly
the  independence  of  his  rival.'  Merodachabaliddina  I.  replaced  Milishikhu,
Zamamashumiddin  followed  Merodachabaliddina :  Assurdau  I.,  son  of  Ninipaba-
lesharra,  broke  the  treaty,  captured  the  towns  of  Zaban,  Irria,  and  Akarsallu,
and  succeeded  in  retaining  them.  The  advantage  thus  gained  was  but  a
slight  one,  for  these  provinces  lying  between  the  two  Zabs  had  long  been
subject  to  Assyria,  and  had  been  wrested  from  her  since  the  days  of  Tukulti-
ninip :  however,  it  broke  the  run  of  ill  luck  which  seemed  to  have  pursued
her  so  relentlessly,  and  opened  the  way  for  more  important  victories.^  This
was  the  last  Cosssean  war ;  at  any  rate,  the  last  of  which  we  find  any  mention
in  history :  Beluadinshumu  II.  reigned  three  years  after  Zamamashumiddin,
but  when  he  died  there  was  no  man  of  his  family  whom  the  priests  could
invite  to  lay  hold  of  the  hand  of  Merodach,  and  his  dynasty  ended  with  him.
It  included  thirty-six  kings,  and  had  lasted  five  hundred  and  seventy-six
years  and  six  months.^  It  had  enjoyed  its  moments  of  triumph,  and  at  one
time  had  almost  seemed  destined  to  conquer  the  whole  of  Asia;  but  it
appears  to  have  invariably  failed  just  as  it  was  on  the  point  of  reaching  the
goal,  and  it  became  completely  exhausted  by  its  victories  at  the  end  of  every
two  or  three  generations.  It  had  triumphed  over  Elam,  and  yet  Elam  re-
mained a  constant  peril  on  its  right.  It  had  triumphed  over  Assyria,  yet
Assyria,  after  driving  it  back  to  the  regions  of  the  Upper  Tigris,  threatened  to
bar  the  road  to  the  IMediterranean  by  means  of  its  Masian  colonies  :  were  they
once  to  succeed  in  this  attempt,  what  hope  would  there  be  left  to  those  who
ruled  in  Babylon  of  ever  after  re-establishing  the  traditional  empire  of  the
ancient  Sargon  and  Khammurabi  ?

The  new  dynasty  sprang  from  a  town  in  Pashe,  the  geographical  position

'  The  Synchronous  History,  col.  ii.  11.  3-5;  cf.  Sayoe,  Tlie  Synchronous  History  of  Assyria  and
Balylonia,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2ud  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  29,  and  Peiser-Winckler,  Die  sofjenannte
synchronistische  Geschichte,  in  Schuader,  Eeilinschriftliche  Bihliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  196,  197,  and
WiNCKLER^  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  pp.  134,  135,  whose  interpretation  I  have  here  adopted.

'  The  Synchronous  History,  col.  ii.  11.  9-12 ;  cf.  Peiser-Wincklee,  Die  sogenannte  synchronistische
Geschichte,  pp.  196,  197.

The  followin- is  a  list  of  some  of  the  kings  of  this  dynasty  according  to  the  canon  discovered  by
Pinches  {The  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  tlie  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
1883-84,  vol.  vi.  p.  196 ;  cf.   Fb.   Delitzsch,  Assyrische  MisceUen,  in  the  Berichte  of  the  Academy  of
Sciences  of  Saxony,  1893,  p.  18G,  and  Knodtzon,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonnengott,  vol.  i.  p.  60).
Kadashmanburiash  .     .     .      2  years  EammXnnadInshumu     .     .     .      6  years

Isamue[  .  .  .  ]ti    .     .     .     .      6  years  ]       RammInshumusur    ....     30  years


Shagarakibdeiash    ...  13  years

BiBEiASHC 8  years

Belnadinshcmu  I.     .     .     .  1  year  6  months

Kadashmanehaeee  II.  .     .  1  year  6  months


Milishikhu 15  years

Merodachabaliddina  I.  .     .  13  years

ZA5i.iMASuuMiDDiN    ....  1  year

BelnadInsuomu  II 3  years


Hilprecht  (The  Babylonian  Expedition  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pp.  37,  38)  and
VfmcMer  (Altorientalische  Forschungen,  -p.  133)  agree  entirely  in  the  restorations  of  this  list.  For
the  earlier  part  of  it,  see  the  incomplete  tables  given  on  pp.  119  and  594,  supra.  Beluadinshumu
must  have  died  about  1150  b.c  ,  within  twenty  years  or  so.


TEIE   DYNASTY    OF   PASITj':.  61. '5

of  which  is  uot  kuowu.^  It  was  of  Babylonian  origin,  and  its  members  placed,
at  the  beginning  of  their  protocols,  formuL-e  which  were  intended  to  indicate,
in  the  clearest  possible  manner,  the  source  from  which  they  sprang:  they
declared  themselves  to  be  scions  of  Babylon,  its  vicegerents,  and  supreme
masters.-  Tiie  names  of  the  first  two  we  do  not  know :  the  third,  Nebuchad-
rezzar, shows  himself  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men  of  all
those  who  flourished  during  this  troubled  era.^  At  no  time,  perhaps,  had
Chaldtea  been  in  a  more  abject  state,  or  assailed  by  more  active  foes.  The
Elamite  had  just  succeeded  in  wresting  from  her  Namar,  the  region  from
whence  the  bulk  of  her  chariot-horses  were  obtained,*  and  this  success  had
laid  the  provinces  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris  ^  open  to  their  attacks.  They
had  even  crossed  the  river,  pillaged  Babylon,  and  carried  away  the  statue  of
Bel  and  that  of  a  goddess  named  Eria,  the  patroness  of  Khussi : "  "  Merodach,

'  The  term  Dynasty  of  Pashe  occurs  iu  the  Eoyal  Canon  (Pinches,  Babylonian  Kings  of  the
Hecond  Period,  in-the  Proceedingsol  H'M.  Arch.  Soc,  1SS3-S4,  vol.  vi.  p.  19G).  From  a  passage  in  the
list  published  by  Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  53, 1.  13  a,  Sayce  is  led  to  think  that  Pashe
was  one  of  the  names  of  Ishin  (The  Dynastic  Tablets  aiid  Chronicles  of  the  Babylonians,  in  the
Hecords  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  17).

'  HoMMEL,  Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  451.

'  The  names  of  the  first  eight  kings  have  disappeared  from  the  only  copy  we  possess  of  the  Royal
Canon  (Pinches,  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  p.  196).  Nebuchadrezzar  I.'s  place  in  the
aeries  has,  therefore,  been  the  subject  of  much  controversy.  Several  Assyriologists  were  from  the
first  inclined  to  place  him  in  the  first  or  second  rank,  some  being  iu  favour  of  the  first  (Huji.mel,
Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  44S,  451 ;  M,  .Tastrow,  A  Cylinder  of  Marduhtabihzirim,  in
the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  317,  318),  others  preferring  the  second  (Oppkut,  La  Non-
ideutif^  de  •Phid  et  de  Tiglathphalasar,  prouc^e  par  les  texles  cun€iformes,  in  the  Revue  d'Asfyriohigie,
vol.  i.  pp.  169,  170) ;  Delitzsch  put  him  int.j  tlie  fifth  place  (DELiTzscii-JIcRDTEa,  Geschichle  Babylo-
niens und  Assyriens,  2nd  edit.,  Tabelle),  and  Winckler,  without  pronouncing  definitely  on  the  position
to  be  assigned  him,  thought  he  must  come  in  about  half-way  down  the  dynasty  QUntersuehungen
zur  allot ientalischen  Geschichle,  pp.  28,  211,  and  Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  94).  Hil-
precht,  on  taking  up  the  questions,  adduced  reasons  for  supposing  him  to  have  been  the  founder  of
the  dynasty  {The  Babylonian  Ej-pedilion  of  the  Unioersity  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  pp.  39-44,  and
Assyriaca,  vol.  i.  pp.  20-32),  and  his  conclusions  have  been  adopted  by  Oppert(LnJ'on(?a((oKco7jsacre'e
n  (a  d^esse  Nina,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vii.  pp.  361-366) ;  they  have  been  disputed  by
T\iAe  {Zeitschrift  fiir  Aastjriologie,  yo\.  X.  yf.  107-110),  who  wishes  to  put  the  king  back  to  fourth
or  fifth  in  order,  and  by  Winckler,  who  places  him  fourth  or  fifth  {AUurientalische  Forschuugen,
pp.  130,  131,  138,  266-268;  cf.  Rogers,  Outlines  of  the  History  of  Early  Babylonia,  p.  64).  It  is
difficult,  however,  to  accept  Hiiprecht's  liypothesis,  plausible  though  it  is,  so  long  as  Assyriologists
who  have  seen  the  original  tablet  (Pinohe.s,  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  p.  196  '■
SciiBADER,  Die  Keitinscltriftliche  Bubylunische  Kiinigsliste,  iu  tiio  Sitzungsberichle  of  the  Berlin
Academy  of  Sciences,  1887,  vol.  x.xxi. ;  Bezold,  in  the  Zeitschr.  fiir  Ass.,  vol.  iv.  p.  317,  note  1;  Fu.
Delitzsch,  Atsyritche  Miscellen,  in  the  Berichle  of  the  Leipzig  Academy  of  Sciences,  1893,  p.  186  ;
Knudtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sunnengott,  vol.  i.  p.  60)  agree  in  declaring  that  tlie  name  tif  the
first  king  began  with  the  sign  of  Merudach  and  not  with  that  of  Nebo,  as  it  ought  to  do,  were  this
prince  really  our  Nebuchadrezzar.

*  As  to  the  breed  of  horses  referred  to,  cf.  Boscawen,  The  Horses  of  Namar,  in  the  Babylonian  and
Oriental  Record,  vol.  vi.  pp.  139,  140.

"  These  facts  are  manifest  from  the  events  recorded  in  the  Donation  to  Ritlimerodach,  published  by
II.  Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pis.  55-57,  translated  and  annotated  by  IIilpkecht,  Freibrief
Xebukadnezar's  1.,  1883;  by  Pinch ES-Bu doe,  On  an  Edict  of  Nebuchadnezzar  I.,  about  B.C.  1150,  iu
the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1883-84,  vol.  vi.  pp.  144-170;  and  by  Peisek,  Inschriften
Nabukadnezar' s  I.,  iu  Scuradeh,  Kcilimchriftliche  Bibliothel;  vol.  iii.  pt.  2,  pp.  161-171.

°  All  this  seems  to  bo  deduoiblo  from  the  facts  mentioned  in  the  Donation  to  Shumuu  and  Shumai,
published  by  Aldek-Smitu,  Assyrian  Letters,  iv.  pis.  viii.,  ix.,  translated  and  annotated  by  Meissner,


614  TEE  BISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

sore  angered,  held  himself  aloof  from  the  country  of  Akkad ; "  the  kings
could  no  longer  "  take  his  hands "  on  their  coming  to  the  throne,  and  were
obliged  to  reign  without  proper  investiture  in  consequence  of  their  failure  to
fulfil  the  rite  required  by  religious  laws.*  Nebuchadrezzar  arose  "  in  Babylon,
— roaring  like  a  lion,  even  as  Ramman  roareth, — and  his  chosen  nobles  roared
like  lions  with  him. — To  Merodach,  lord  of  Babylon,  rose  his  prayer : — ■'  How
long,  for  me,  shall  there  be  sighing  and  groaning  ? — How  long,  for  my  land,
weeping  and  mourning  ? — How  long,  for  my  countries,  cries  of  grief  and
tears  ?  Till  what  time,  O  lord  of  Babylon,  wilt  thou  remain  in  hostile
regions  ? — Let  thy  heart  be  softened,  and  make  Babylon  joyful, — and  let
thy  face  be  turned  toward  Esbaggil  which  thou  lovest ! '  "  Merodach  gave
ear  to  the  plaint  of  his  servant :  he  answered  him  graciously  and  promised
his  aid.^  Namar,  united  as  it  had  been  with  Chaldffia  for  centuries,  did
not  readily  become  accustomed  to  its  new  masters.  The  greater  part  of  the
land  belonged  to  a  Semitic  and  Cossfeau  feudality,  the  heads  of  which,
while  admitting  their  suzerain's  right  to  exact  military  service  from  them,
refused  to  acknowledge  any  further  duty  towards  him.  The  kings  of  Susa
declined  to  recognise  their  privileges :  they  subjected  them  to  a  poll-tax,
levied  the  usual  imposts  on  their  estates,  and  forced  them  to  maintain  at  their
own  expense  the  troops  quartered  on  them  for  the  purpose  of  guaranteeing
their  obedience.^  Several  of  the  nobles  abandoned  everything  rather  than
submit  to  such  tyranny,  and  took  refuge  with  Nebuchadrezzar :  others  entered
into  secret  negotiations  with  him,  and  promised  to  support  him  if  he  came  to
their  help  with  an  armed  force.''  He  took  them  at  their  word,  and  invaded
Namar  without  warning  in  the  month  of  Tamuz,  while  the  summer  was  at  its
height,  at  a  season  in  which  the  Elamites  never  even  dreamt  he  would  take
the  field.  The  heat  was  intense,  water  was  not  to  be  got,  and  the  army  suffered
terribly  from  thirst  during  its  forced  march  of  over  a  hundred  miles  across  a

Ein  Freibrief  Nebukadnezar's  II.,  in  the  Zeittclirift  fiir  Assyriohgie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  259-267  ;  afterwards
by  Peiser,  InscliHften  Nebuladnezar's  I,  in  Schradek,  KeiUnschri/tliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,
pp.  172,  173.  Meissner  bad  assigned  this  document  to  Nebuchadrezzar  II. ;  Winekler  restored
it  to  Nebuchadrezzar  I.  (4«s  einem  Briefe  C.  Bezold.  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Aifyriologie,  vol.  iv.
pp.  403,  404).

'  In  regard  to  this  ceremony,  see  what  has  been  said  above  on  p.  24.  The  Donation  to  Shamud
and  SJmmai,\\.  11,  12,  informs  us  that  Nebuchadrezzar  "took  the  hands  of  Bel"  as  soon  as  he
regaiued  possession  of  the  statue  ;  cf.  Wincklek,  Aus  einem  Briefe  an  C.  Bezold,  in  the  Zeitschrift
fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  403,  404,  and  on  p.  015,  suma.

'  A.  BoissiER,  XebulMdnezar  I\  in  the  Revue  Semitique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  76-78.  The  tablet  K  3126,
which  is  given  in  Buissier's  text,  is  a  copy  executed  in  the  time  of  Assurbanipal.

'  8hamua  and  Shamal  "fled  in  like  m:iuner  towards  Karduiiiash,  before  the  King  ofElam"
(Donation  to  Shamud  and  Shamai,  11.  1-16)  ;  it  would  seem  that  RittimeroJacli  had  entered  into  secret
negotiations  with  Nebuchadrezzar,  though  this  is  nowhere  explicitly  stated  in  tlie  text.

«  Donation  to  Rilflmerodach,  col.  i.  11.  45-60,  and  col.  ii.  11.  1-5,  wiiere  the  immunities  granted
to  nobles  by  the  Babylonian  kings  who  occupied  Namar  are  enumerated;  these  must  evidently
have  been  withdrawn  by  the  Elamite  king,  since  Nebuchadrezzar  found  it  necessary  to  restore
them.


NEBUCHADREZZAR    I.  615

parched-up  country.  One  of  the  malcontents,  Rittimerodach,  lord  of  Bitkarzi-
abku,  joined  Nebuchadrezzar  with  all  the  men  he  could  assemble,  and  together
they  penetrated  as  far  as  Ulai.  Tlie  King  of  Elam,  taken  by  surprise,  made  no
attempt  to  check  their  progress,  but  collected  his  vassals  and  awaited  their
attack  on  the  banks  of  the  river  in  front  of  Susa.  Once  "the  fire"  of  the
combat  "  had  been  lighted  between  the  opposing  forces,  the  face  of  the  sun
grew  dark,  the  tempest  broke  forth,  the  whirlwind  raged,  and  in  this  whirl-
wind of  the  struggle  none  of  the  characters  could  distinguish  the  face  of  his
neighbour."  Nebuchadrezzar,  cut  off  from  his  own  men,  was  about  to  sur-
render or  be  killed,  when  Kittimerodach  flew  to  his  rescue  and  brought  him  off
safely.  In  the  end  the  Chaldseans  gained  the  upper  hand.^  Tlie  Elamites
renounced  their  claims  to  the  possession  of  Namar,  and  restored  the  statues  of
the  gods :  Nebuchadrezzar  "  at  once  laid  hold  of  the  hands  of  Bel,"  and  thus
legalised  his  accession  to  the  throne.'-*  Other  expeditions  against  the  peoples
of  Lulumu  and  against  the  Cossaeans  restored  his  supremacy  in  the  regions
of  the  north-east,  and  a  campaign  along  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  opened
out  the  road  to  Syria.^  He  rewarded  generously  those  who  had  accompanied
him  on  his  raid  against  Elam.  After  issuing  regulations  intended  to  maintain
the  purity  of  the  breed  of  horses  for  which  Namar  was  celebrated,''  he  rein-
stated in  their  possessions  Shamua  and  his  son  Shamai,  the  descendants  of  one
of  the  priestly  families  of  the  province,  granting  them  in  addition  certain
domains  neai  Upi,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Turnat.  He  confirmed  Eittimerodach
in  possession  of  all  his  property,  and  reinvested  him  with  all  the  privileges  of
whicii  the  King  of  Elam  had  deprived  him.  From  that  time  forward  the
domain  of  Bitkarziabku  was  free  of  tlie  tithe  on  corn,  oxen,  and  slieep ;  it  was
no  longer  liable  to  provide  horses  and  mares  for  the  exchequer,  or  to  afford
free  passage  to  troops  in  time  of  peace ;  the  royal  jurisdiction  ceased  on  the
boundary  of  the  fief,  the  seignorial  jurisdiction  alone  extended  over  the  inha-
bitants and  their  property.     Clialdajan  prefects  ruled  in  Namar,  at  Khalman,'*

'  Donation  to  Riltimerodach,  col.  i.  11.  12-43.  The  description  of  the  battle  as  given  in  this  docu-
ment-is generally  taken  to  be  merely  symbolical,  and  I  have  followed  the  current  usage.  But  if  \>o
bear  in  mind  that  the  text  lays  emphasis  on  tlie  drought  and  severity  of  the  season,  we  are  tempted
to  agree  with  Pinches  and  Budge  (On  an  Edict  of  Nehuohadnezzar  I.,  in  the  Proceedings,  1883-84,
vol.  vii.  p.  145)  that  its  statements  should  bu  taken  literally.  Tlie  aifair  may  have  been  begun  in  a
cloud  of  dust,  and  have  ended  in  a  downpour  of  rain  so  lieavy  as  to  partly  blind  the  combatants.
The  king  was  probably  <irawu  away  from  hi.t  men  in  the  confusion ;  it  was  probably  then  that  lie  was
in  danger  of  being  made  prisoner,  and  that  Rittimerodach,  suddenly  coming  up,  delivered  him  from
the  foea  who  surrounded  him.

-  Donation  to  Shamua  and  SImmai,  11.  7-14;  of.  p.  613,  note  4,  supra.

'  Donation  to  Ilitlimerodarli,  col.  i.  11.  9,  10 ;  cf.  Hommel's  remarks  ou  this  passage  in  the
Chaldsean  text  {Gerddchte  Balii/louiens  und  Aesijriens,  pp.  451,  452).

'  BoscAWEN,  The  Horses  of  Namar,  in  the  Hahijluniau  and  Oriental  Itecord,  vol.  vi.  pp.  139,  140.

'  The  Chalda;,in  prefect  of  Namar  and  the  prefect  of  Khalman  are  mentioned  in  the  Donation  to
Kittimerodach,  col.  i.  11.  52-55,  and  col.  ii.  11.  10,  22,  23,  28.


616  TEE   RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYSIAN  EMPIRE.

Mad  at  the  foot  of  the  Zagros,  and  Nebuchadrezzar  no  longer  found  any  to
oppose  him  save  the  King  of  Assyria.

The  long  reign  of  Assurdan  in  Assyria  does  not  seem  to  liave  been  dis-
tinguished by  any  event  of  importance  either  good  or  bad :  it  is  true  lie  won
several  towns  on  the  south-east  from  the  Babylonians,  but  then  he  lost  several
others  on  the  north-west  to  the  Mushku,^  and  the  loss  on  the  one  side  fully
balanced  the  advantage  gained  on  tlie  other.  His  son  Mutakkilnusku  lived
in  Assur  at  peace,"  but  his  grandson,  Assurishishi,  was  a  mighty  king,  con-
queror of  a  score  of  countries,  and  the  terror  of  all  rebels ;  he  scattered  the
hordes  of  the  Akhlame  and  broke  up  their  forces  ;  then  Ninip,  the  champion
of  the  gods,  permitted  him  to  crush  the  Lulume  and  the  Guti  in  tlieir  valleys
and  on  their  mountains  covered  with  forests.^  He  made  his  way  up  to  the
frontiers  of  Elam,^  and  his  encroachments  on  territories  claimed  by  Babylon
stirred  up  the  anger  of  the  Chaldseans  against  him  ;  Nebuchadrezzar  made
ready  to  dispute  their  ownership  with  him.  The  earlier  engagements  went
against  the  Assyrians  ;  they  were  driven  back  in  disorder,  but  the  victor  lost
time  before  one  of  their  strongholds,  and,  winter  coming  on  before  lie  could  take
it,  he  burnt  his  engines  of  war,  set  fire  to  his  camp,  and  returned  home.  Next
year,  a  rapid  march  carried  him  right  under  the  walls  of  Assur;  then  As-
surishishi came  to  the  rescue,  totally  routed  his  opponent,^  captured  forty  of
his  chariots,  and  drove  him  flying  across  the  frontier.  The  war  died  out  of
itself,  its  end  being  marked  by  no  treaty  :  each  side  kept  its  traditional  position
and  supremacy  over  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  basins  of  the  Turnat  and  Radanu.

'  HoJiMEL,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  510,  has  proved,  by  a  very  simple  calculation,
that  Assuidaii  must  have  been  the  king  in  whose  reign  the  Musbku  made  the  inroad  into  the  basin
of  the  Upper  Tigris  and  of  the  Balikb,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  i.
11.  62-69;  of.  what  is  said  on  this  point  on  p.  591,  supra.  These  Annals,  col.  vii.  11.  49-54,  are  our
authority  for  stating  that  Assurdau  was  on  the  throne  for  a  long  period,  though  the  exact  length  of
his  reign  is  not  known.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  vii.  11.  45-48.  Mutakkilnusku  himself  has  only  left  us  one
inscription,  in  which  he  declares  that  he  had  built  a  palace  in  tlie  citj'  of  Assyria  (G.  Smith,  Assyrian
Discoveries,  pp.  142,  251).

^  Votive  Inscription  of  Assurishishi,  11.  6,  7;  cf  H.  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  3,
No.  6,  and  Schkadee,  Inschri/'t  Aschur-risch-ischt's,  in  the  Keilinschrifiliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.
pp.  12,  13.

*  Smith  discovered  certain  fragments  of  Annals  (afterwards  published  by  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  4,  Nos.  1-5),  which  lie  attributed  to  Assurishishi  (Assyrian  Discoveries,  p.  232) ;
his  view  has  been  adopted  by  Homhel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  itnd  Assyriens,  pp.  511-513  :  cf.  Assyria-
logical  Notes,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1893-94,  vol.  xvi.  p.  211.  The  longest  of
these  tell,  as  we  shall  see,  later  on,  of  a  campaign  against  Elam.  Lotz  attributed  them  to  Tiglath-
pileser  I.  (Jnschr.  Tiglath-pileser' s  I,  193,  194),  and  is  supported  in  this  by  moat  Assyriologists  of
the  day  (Wincklek,  Die  Inschriften  Tiglath-pileser' s  I,  vol.  i.  pp.  26-29  ;  Meissner,  Der  Elamitiache
Feldzug  Tiglatpiteser's  I,  in  the  Zeilsclirift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ix.  pp.  101-104).

'  Synchronous  History,  col.  ii.  U.  1-13  of  the  principal  tablet ;  cf.  Peisee-Winckler,  Die  sogen-
nannte  synchronistische  Geschichte,  in  Sohradek,  Knlinschriftliehe  Bihliothelt,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199,  and
Satce,  Tlie  Synchronous  History  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,
vol.  iv.  p.  30.


THE  LEOEND    OF   NINOS   AND    SEMIBAMIS.  GI7

The  same  names  reappear  iu  line  aftei-  line  of  these  mutilated  Annals,  and  the
same  definite  enumerations  of  rebellious  tribes  who  have  been  humbled  or
punished.  These  kings  of  the  plain,  both  Ninevite  and  Babylonian,  were
continually  raiding  the  country  up  and  down  for  centuries  without  ever  arriving
at  any  decisive  result,  and  a  detailed  account  of  their  various  campaigns  would
be  as  tedious  reading  as  that  of  the  ceaseless  struggle  between  the  Latins  and
Sabiues  which  fills  the  opening  pages  of  Roman  history.  Posterity  soon  grew
weary  of  them,  and,  misled  by  the  splendid  position  which  Assyria  attained
when  at  the  zenith  of  its  glory,  set  itself  to  fabricate  splendid  antecedents  for
the  majestic  empire  established  by  the  later  dynasties.  The  legend  ran  that,
at  the  dawn  of  time,  a  chief  named  Ninos  had  reduced  to  subjectiou  one  after
the  other  —  Babylonia,  Media,  Armenia,  and  all  the  provinces  between  the
Indies  and  the  Mediterranean.  He  built  a  capital  for  himself  on  the  banks  of
the  Tigris,  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  measuring  a  hundred  and  fifty  stadia
in  length,  ninety  stadia  in  width ;  altogether,  the  walls  were  four  hundred  and
eighty  stadia  in  circumference.  In  addition  to  the  Assyrians  who  formed  the
bulk  of  the  population,  he  attracted  many  foreigners  to  Nineveh,  so  that  iu  a
few  years  it  became  the  most  flourishing  town  in  the  whole  world.  An  inroad
of  the  tribes  of  the  Oxus  interrupted  his  labours :  Ninos  repulsed  the  invasion,
and,  driving  the  barbarians  back  into  Bactria,  laid  siege  to  it ;  here,  in  the
tent  of  one  of  his  captains,  he  came  upon  Semiramis,  a  woman  whose  past  was
shrouded  in  mystery.  She  was  said  to  be  the  daughter  of  an  ordinary  mortal
by  a  goddess,  the  Ascalonian  Derketo.  Exposed  immediately  after  her  birth,
she  was  found  and  adopted  by  a  shepherd  named  Simas,  and  later  on  her  beauty
aroused  the  passion  of  Oannes,  governor  of  Syria.  Ninos,  amazed  at  the
courage  displayed  by  her  on  more  than  one  occasion,  carried  her  off,  made  her
his  favourite  wife,  and  finally  met  his  death  at  her  hands.  No  sooner  did  she
become  queen,  than  she  founded  Babylon  on  a  far  more  extensive  scale  than
that  of  Nineveli.  Its  walls  were  three  hundred  and  sixty  stadia  in  length,
with  two  hundred  and  fifty  lofty  towers,  placed  here  and  there  on  its  circuit,
the  roadway  round  the  top  of  the  ramparts  being  wide  enough  for  six  chariots
to  drive  abreast.  She  made  a  kind  of  harbour  in  the  Euphrates,  threw  a  bridge
across  it,  and  built  quays  one  hundred  and  sixty  stadia  in  length  .along  its
course  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  town  she  raised  a  temple  to  Bel.  This  great  work
was  scarcely  finished  when  disturbances  broke  out  iu  Media ;  these  she  promptly
repressed,  and  set  out  ou  a  tour  of  inspection  through  the  whole  of  her  pro-
vinces, with  a  view  to  preventing  the  recurrence  of  similar  outbreaks  by  her
presence.  Wherever  she  went  she  left  records  of  her  passage  beliind  her,
cutting  her  way  through  mountains,  quarrying  a  pathway  through  the  solid


THE   DOVE-GODDESS.


THE  EISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

rock,  making  broad  highways  for  herself,  bringing
rebellious  tribes  beneath  her  yoke,  and  raising
tumuli  to  mark  the  tombs  of  such
of  her  satraps  as  fell  beneath  the
blows  of  the  enemy.  She  built
Ecbatana  in  Media,  Semiramocarta
on  Lake  Van  in  Armenia,  and  Tarsus  in
Cilicia ;  then,  having  reached  the  confines  of
Syria,  she  crossed  the  isthmus,  and  conquered
Egypt  and  Ethiopia.  The  far-famed  wealth  of  India  recalled  her  from  the
banks  of  the  Nile  to  those  of  the  Euphrates,  en  route  for  the  remote  east,  but
at  this  point  her  good  fortune  forsook  her  :  she  was  defeated  by  King  Strato-
bates,  and  returned  to  her  own  dominions,  never  again  to  leave  them.  She
bad  set  up  triumphal  stelae  on  the  boundaries  of  the  habitable  globe,  in  the
very  midst  of  Scythia,  not  far  from  the  laxartes,  where,  centiiries  afterwards,
Alexander  of  Macedon  read  the  panegyric  of  herself  which  she  had  caused
to  be  engraved  there.  "  Nature,"  she  writes,  "  gave  me  the  body  of  a  woman,
but  my  deeds  have  put  me  on  a  level  with  the  greatest  of  men.  I  ruled  over
the  dominion  of  Ninos,  which  extends  eastwards  to  tbe  river  Hinaman,  south-
wards to  the  countries  of  Incense  and  Myrrh,  and  northwards  as  far  as  the
Sacae  and  Sogdiani.  Before  my  time  no  Assyrian  had  ever  set  eyes  on  the
sea  :  I  have  seen  four  oceans  to  which  no  mariner  has  ever  sailed,  so  far  remote
are  they.  I  have  made  rivers  to  flow  where  I  would  have  them,  in  the  places
where  they  were  needed  ;  thus  did  I  render  fertile  the  barren  soil  by  watering
it  with  my  rivers.  I  raised  up  impregnable  fortresses,  and  cut  roadways  through
the  solid  rock  with  the  pick.  I  opened  a  way  for  the  wheels  of  my  chariots  in
places  to  which  even  the  feet  of  wild  beasts  had  never  penetrated.  And,
amidst  all  these  labours,  I  yet  found  time  for  my  pleasures  and  for  the  society
of  my  friends."  On  discovering  that  her  son  Ninyas  was  plotting  her  assassina-
tion, she  at  once  abdicated  in  his  favour,  in  order  to  save  him  from  committing
a  crime,  and  then  transformed  herself  into  a  dove ;  this  last  incident  betrays
the  goddess  to  us.  Ninos  and  Semiramis  are  purely  mythical,  and  their  mighty
deeds,  like  those  ascribed  to  Ishtar  and  Gilgames,  must  be  placed  in  the  same
category  as  those  other  fables  with  which  the  Babylonian  legends  strive  to  fill
up  the  blank  of  tbe  prehistoric  period.'-^

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  sketch  published  in  Longpekiek,  (Eucres,  vol.  i.  p.  276,  Sohltjm-
berger's  edition;  cf.  Pekkot-Chipiez,  Bisloire  de  VArt  dans  VAntiqxdU,  vol.  ii.  p.  58t.

'  The  legend  of  Ninos  and  Semiramis  is  taken  from  Diodorus  Sicdlus,  ii.  1-20,  who  reproduces,
often  word  for  word,  tlie  version  ofCtesiiis  {Ctesiie  Cnidii  Fragmeuta,  ed.  Muller-Didot,  pp.  12-33).
As  to  the  relation  of  Semii  amis  to  the  Babylonian  legend,  cf.  the  antiquated  work  by  Fn.  Lexormant,
La  Legende  de  Semiraviis,  1872  ;  this  ought  to  be  now  brought  up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  what  we
know  concerning  tlie  adventures  of  Islitar  with  Gilgames  and  other  Chalda;an  demigods  (cf.  what  la
said  on  this  point  by  Maspero,  Daion  of  Ch-Uization,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  580-582).


THE   J} ACE   AND    ITS    POLITICAL    CONSTITUTION.


;i'j


AN    ASSYKIAN.'


The  real  facts  were,  as  we  know,  I'ar  less
brilliant  and  less  extravagant  than  those  sup-
plied by  popular  iuiagination.  It  would  be  a
mistake,  however,  to  neglect  or  despise  them
on  account  of  their  tedious  monotony  and
the  insignificance  of  the  characters  who  appear
on  the  stage.  It  was  by  dint  of  fighting  her
neighbours  again  and  again,  without  a  single
day's  respite,  that  Rome  succeeded  in  forging
the  weapons  witli  which  she  was  to  conquer
the  world  ;  and  any  one  who,  repelled  by  their
tedious  sameness,  neglected  to  follow  the  his-
tory of  her  early  struggles,  would  find  great
difficulty  in  understanding  how  it  came  about
that  a  city  tvhieh  had  taken  centuries  to  subjugate
her  immediate  neighbours  should  afterwards  overcome
all  the  states  on  the  Mediterranean  seaboard  with  such
magnificent  ease.  In  much  the  same  way  the  ceaseless
struggles  of  Assyria  with  the  Chaldseans,  and  with  the  mountain  tribes  of
the  Zagros  Chain,  were  unconsciously  preparing  her  for  those  lightning-like
campaigns  in  which  she  afterwards  overthrew  all  the  civilized  nations  of  the
East  one  after  another.  It  was  only  at  the  cost  of  unparalleled  exertions  that
she  succeeded  in  solidly  welding  together  the  various  provinces  within  her
borders,  and  in  kneading  (so  to  speak)  the  many  and  diverse  elements  of  her  vast
population  into  one  compact  mass,  containing  in  itself  all  that  was  needful  for
its  support,  and  able  to  bear  the  strain  of  war  for  several  years  at  a  time  without
giving  way,  and  rich  enough  in  men  and  horses  to  provide  the  material  for  an
effective  army  witliout  excessive  impoverishment  of  her  trade  or  agriculture.
Tlie  race  came  of  an  old  Semitic  strain,  somewhat  crude  as  yet,  and  almost
entirely  free  from  that  repeated  admixture  of  foreign  elements  which  had
marred  the  purity  of  the  Babylonian  stock.  The  monuments  show  us  a  type
similar  in  many  respects  to  that  which  we  find  to-day  on  the  slopes  of  Singar,
or  in  the  valleys  to  the  east  of  Mossul.'-^  The  figures  on  the  monuments  are
tall  and  straight,  broad-shouldered  and  wide  in  the  hips,  the  arms  well  developed,
the  legs  robust,  with  good  substantial  feet.  The  swell  of  the  muscles  on  the
naked  limbs  is  perhaps  exaggerated,  but  this  very  exaggeration  of  the  modelling
suggests  the  vigour  of  the  model ;  it  is  a  heavier,  more  rustic  type  than  the

Drawn  by  Bouclier,  from  a  painted  buB-relicf  given  in  Layaud,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  \)\.  92.
^  As  to  tliese  inodoru  Clialdmans  and  tlie  type  wliioli  they  now  represent,  of.  wiiat  is  said  by  one
of  the  lirst  travellers  to  come  in  I'outact  with  Ihcin  dnring  the  present  century,  A,  Kicu,  Ilesidence  in.
K<(nlisla7i,  vol.  i.  p.  278.


620  TEE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

Egyptian,  piomising  greater  streDgth  and  power  of  resistance,  and  in  so  far  an
indisputable  superiority  in  the  great  game  of  war.  The  head  is  somewhat
small,  the  forehead  low  and  flat,  the  eyebrows  heavy,  the  eye  of  a  bold  almond
shape,  with  heavy  lids,  the  nose  aquiline,  and  full  at  the  tip,  Avith  wide  nostrils
terminating  in  a  hard  well-defined  curve ;  the  lips  are  thick  and  full,  the  chin
bony,  while  the  face  is  framed  by  the  coarse  dark  wavy  hair  and  beard,  which
fell  in  curly  masses  over  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  breast.  The  expression
of  the  face  is  rarely  of  an  amiable  and  smiling  type,  such  as  we  find  in  the
statues  of  the  Theban  period  or  in  those  of  the  Memphite  empire,  nor,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  did  the  Assyrian  j^ride  himself  on  the  gentleness  of  bis  manners  :
he  did  not  overflow  with  love  for  his  fellow-man,  as  the  Egyptian  made  a
pretence  of  doing ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  stiff-necked  and  proud,  without  pity
for  others  or  for  himself,  hot-tempered  and  quarrelsome  like  his  cousins  of
Chaldsea,  but  less  turbulent  and  more  capable  of  strict  discipline.  It  mattered
not  whether  he  had  come  into  the  world  in  one  of  the  wretched  cabins  of  a
fellah  village,  or  in  the  palace  of  one  of  the  great  nobles ;  he  was  a  born  soldier,
and  his  whole  education  tended  to  develop  in  him  the  first  qualities  of  the
soldier — temperance,  patience,  energy,  and  unquestioning  obedience  ;  he  was
enrolled  in  an  army  which  was  always  on  a  war  footing,  commanded  by  the  god
Assur,  and  under  Assur,  by  the  king,  the  vicegerent  and  representative  of  the
god.  His  life  was  shut  in  by  the  same  network  of  legal  restrictions  which  con-
fined that  of  the  Babylonians,  and  all  its  more  important  events  had  to  be  re-
corded on  tablets  of  clay ;  the  wording  of  contracts,  the  formalities  of  marriage
or  adoption,  the  status  of  bond  and  free,  the  rites  of  the  dead  and  funeral
ceremonies,  had  either  remained  identical  with  those  in  use  during  the  earliest
years  of  the  cities  of  the  Lower  Euphrates,  or  differed  from  them  only  in  their
less  important  details.*  The  royal  and  municipal  governments  levied  the  same
taxes,  used  the  same  procedure,  employed  the  same  magistrates,  and  the  grades
of  their  hierarchy  were  the  same,  with  one  exception.  After  tiie  king,  the
highest  office  was  filled  by  a  soldier,  the  tartan  who  saw  to  the  recruiting  of
the  troops,  and  led  them  in  time  of  war,  or  took  command  of  the  staff-corps
whenever  the  sovereign  himself  deigned  to  appear  on  the  scene  of  action.^
The  more  influential  of  these  functionaries  bore,  in  addition  to  their  other  titles,
one  of  a  special  nature,  which,  for  the  space  of  one  year,  made  its  holder  the
most  conspicuous  man  in  the  country ;  they  became  limmu,  and  tliroughout

'  In  regard  to  all  these  points,  cf.  what  is  said  in  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  748,  et  seq.,
2ad  edit.

'  We  can  determine  the  rank  occupied  by  the  tartami  at  court  by  the  positions  they  occupy  in  the
lists  of  eponymous  limmu, :  they  invariably  come  next  after  the  king — a  fact  which  was  noticed  many
years  ago  (G.  Smith,  The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  pp.  21-26 ;  cf.  Tiele,  Babylonisch-Assyrische
Geechichte,  pp.  495,  496).


THE   KING    AND   HIS   DIVINITY.


621


their  term  of  office  their  names  appeared  ou  all  official  documents.  The
Chaldreans  distint^uislied  the  various  years  of  each  reign  by  a  reference  to
some  event  whicli  hud  taken  jihxce  in  each ;  the  Assyrians  named  them  after
the  Jimmu}     The  king  was  the  ex-officio  limmu  for  the  year  following  that  of


»  ->tis^'^;:::2


A    I.10N-HDNT.'

his  accession,  then  after  him  the  tartan,  then  the  ministers  and  governors  of
provinces  and  cities  in  an  onler  which  varied  little  from  reigu  to  reign.  The
names  of  the  limmu,  entered  in  registers  and  tabulated — just  as,  hxter  on,  were
those  of  the  Greek  archons  and  Roman  consuls — furnished  tlie  annalists  witli  a
rigid  chi'onological  system,  under  which  the  facts  of  history  might  be  arranged
with  certainty.^

'  Aa  to  the  system  adopted  by  the  Cbaldajaii  Uinga  in  naming  the  years,  of.  what  is  said  in
Maspebo,  Dawn  of  Civilhaiion,  pp.  730,  731.  According  to  Dulitzsch.  the  term  limu  or  limmu
{Aisijrisches  HandwSrterbuch,  p.  879,  s.  v.)  meant  at  first  any  given  period,  then  later  more  especially
the  year  during  which  a  magistrate  filled  his  office ;  in  the  opinion  of  most  other  Assyriologists  it
referred  to  the  magistrate  himself  as  eponymous  archon.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  bas-relief  in  the  British  Museum  ;  cf.  Layakd,  The  Monuments  of
Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  31.

'  Tlio  first  list  of  limmu  was  discovered  by  H.  Hawlinson  (The  Atheuimtm,  1S(J'2,  p.  724 ;  cf.  OrrcKT,
Les  Inscriptions  amyriennes  den  Sarijnnides  et  Ifs  FuKtcs  de  Ninive,  pp.  4-7,  15-18).  The  cuneilbrm
originals  are  given  by  H.  Kawi,in.son,  Cun.  Inf.  \V.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pis.  C8,  (id,  vol.  iii.  pi.  1,  and  in
Fit.  Dklitzsch,  Atnjrisehe  LesestiicUe,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  87-94 ;  the  translation  of  the  whole,  in  so  far  aa
it  was  known  twenty  years  ago,  lias  been  given  by  G.  Sjiitu,  The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  pp.  29-71,
and  more  recently  by  Scuradeh,  Die  Assyrische  Eponymenlisle,  in  the  Keilinschrifllichd  Bibliothek,
vol.  i.  pp.  204-215,  and  vol.  iii.  pt,  2,  pp.  142-147.  The  ])ortious  which  liave  been  preserved  extend
from  the  year  893  to  the  year  (JGti  li.c.  without  a  break.  In  the  periods  previous  and  subsenuont  to
this  we  have  only  names  scattered  hero  and  there  wliich  it  has  not  been  po.ssible  to  clussify  :  the
earliest  limmu  known  at  present  llourisbed  under  Kamman-nirari  I.,  and  was  named  Mukhurilani


622


THE  RISE    OF   TBE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


/


p^


W^^


t^:4f  "*^v


The  king   still    retained   the  sacerdotal  attributes  with  which  Chaldajan
monarcbs  had  been  invested  from    the  earliest  times,  but  contact  with  the

Egyptians  had  modified  the
popular  conception  of  bis
personality.  His  subjects
were  no  longer  satisfied  to
regard  him  merely  as  a  man
superior  to  his  fellow-men  ;
they  had  come  to  discover
something  of  the  divine
nature  in  him,  and  some-
times identified  him — not
with  Assur,  the  master  of
all  things,  who  occupied  a
position  too  high  above  the
pale  of  ordinary  humanity
— but  with  one  of  the  demi-
gods of  the  second  rank,
Shamash,  the  Sun,  tiie  deity
whom  the  Pharaohs  pre-
tended to  represent  in  flesh
and  blood  here  below.  His
courtiers,  therefore,  went  as
far  as  to  call  him  "  Sun "
when  they  addressed  him,  aud  he  himself  adopted  this  title  in  his  inscrip-
tions.^ Formerly  he  had  only  attained  this  apotheosis  after  deatl),  later  on  he
was  permitted  to  aspire  to  it  during  his  lifetime.^  The  Chaldseans  adopted
the  same  attitude,  aud  in  both  countries  the  royal  authority  shone  with  the


LION'    TRANSFIXED   BY    AN    AKKOW.'


1


(Peisek,  Die  Steinplatteriinschrift  Rammdn-nirdri's  I.,  ia  the  KeiUnschriftliche  Bibliothelc,  vol.  i.
pp.  8,  9).  Three  different  versions  of  the  canon  liave  come  down  to  us.  In  the  most  important  one
the  names  of  tho  eponymous  officials  are  written  one  after  another  without  titles  or  any  mention  of
important  events  ;  in  the  otlier  two,  tlie  titles  of  each  personage,  and  any  important  occurrences  which
took  place  during  his  year  of  office,  are  entered  after  the  name.

'  Drawu  hy  Bomlier,  from  a  haa-relief  in  the  British  Museum;  cf.  Layaud,  The  Monuments  of
Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  10.

'  Nebuchadrezzar  I.  of  Bibylou  assumes  the  title  o(  Shamash  mati-shu,  the  "Sun  of  his  country"
(Donation  to  Riilimerodaih,  col.  i.  1.  5),  and  Hilprccht  rightly  sees  in  this  expression  a  trace  of  Egyptian
influences  {The  Babijhmiau  Exp.  of  the  Univ.  of  Penn.,  vol.  i.  p.  42);  later  on,  Assurnazirpal,  King  of
Assyria,  similarly  describes  himself  as  Shamshu  hishshat  nishi,  the  "  Sun  of  all  mauldud  "  (Annals,
col.  i.  1.  10;  cf.  Peiser,  Inschriflen  Aschur-ndsir-alal's,  in  Schradek,  KeiUnschriftliche  Ribliotheh;
vol.  i.  pp.  54,  55).  Tiele  is  of  opinion  that  these  expressions  do  not  necessarily  point  to  any  tlieory
of  the  actual  incarnation  of  the  god,  as  was  the  case  in  Egypt,  but  that  they  may  be  mere  rhetorical
figures  (Bahijlonisch-Assyrisuhe  Geschichte,  p.  492).

^  In  regard  to  the  apotheosis  of  the  Chaldajan  kings  after  their  death,  cf.  Scheie,  Le  Culte  de  Gudea,
in  the  Recne.il  de  Traraux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  64-74,  where  evidence  of  the  worship  of  Gudea  and  Dungi
is  put  forward.


EUNTINO    THE  LION  AND    URUS.


623


borrowed  lustre  of  divine  omnipotenco.  With  these  exceptions  life  at  court
remained  very  much  the  same  as  it  had  been ;  at  Nineveh,  as  at  Babylon,
we  find  harems  filled  with  foreign  princesses,  who  had  either  been  carried
off  as  hostages  from  the  country  of  a  defeated  enemy,  or  amicably  obtained
from  their  parents.  In  time  of  war,  the  command  of  the  troops  and  the
dangers  of  the  battle-field ;  in  time  of  peace,  a  host  of  religious  ceremonies


A  uitrs-inNT.'


and  judicial  or  administrative  duties,  left  but  little  leisure  to  the  sove-
reign who  desired  to  perform  conscientiously  all  that  was  required  of  him.'-^
His  chief  amusement  lay  in  the  hunting  of  wild  beasts :  the  majority  of
the  princes  who  reigned  over  Assyria  had  a  better  right  than  even  Amen-
othes  III.  himself  to  boast  of  the  hundreds  of  lions  which  they  had  slain.^
They  set  out  on  these  hunting  expeditions  with  quite  a  small  army  of
charioteers  and  infantry,  and  were  often  away  several  days  at  a  time,  provided
urgent  business  did  not  require  their  presence  iu  the  palace.  They  started
their  quarry  with  the  help  of  large  dogs,*  and  followed  it  over  hill  and  dale  till
they  got  within  bowshot :  if  it  was  but  slightly  wounded  and  turned  on  them,
they  gave  it  the  finishing  stroke  with  their  lances  witliout  dismounting.
Occasionally,  however,  they  were  obliged  to  follow  their  prey  into  places  where


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  baa-relict'  in  the  British  Museum ;  cf.  Layard,  Tlie  Monuinrnls  of
Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  H.

'  As  to  the  private  ami  public  life  of  Clmlilaean  monarchs  of  the  First  Empire,  ef.  what  i.s  .■laid  iu
Mabpero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  2nd  edit.,  p.  70^,  ot  acq.

'  Cf.  what  ia  written  on  p.  29S,  eupra,  in  regard  to  the  lion-hunts  of  Amenothes  IIL  The
facts  connected  with  the  hunting  expeditious  of  tho  Assyrian  kings  have  been  collected  by
G.  Bawlinson,  The  Fite  Great  Monarchieg,  2uil  edit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  344,  345,  354-3G1,  505-523.

*  Place,  ^inive  el  VAssyrie,  vol.  iii.  pis.  50'''',  51,  52'"*,  where  the  kind  of  dog  used  is  clearly
shown  ;  cf.  Houghton,  On  the  Mammalia  of  the  Assyrian  Sculptures,  iu  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  vol.  V.  pj).  52-G2.


624


THE   RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


horses  could  not  easily  penetrate ;  then  a  hand-to-hand  conflict  was  inevitable.
The  lion  would  rise  on  its  hind  quarters  and  endeavour  to  lay  its  pursuer
low  with  a  stroke  of  its  mighty  paw,  but  only  to  fall  pierced  to  the  heart  by  his
lance  or  sword.^  This  kind  of  encounter  demanded  great  presence  of  mind
and  steadiness  of  hand ;  the  Assyrians  were,  therefore,  trained  to  it  from  their


LIBATION   POCKED   OVEU   THE   I.IONS   ON    THE   KETUKS    FKOM    THE    CUASE."

youth  up,  and  no  hunter  was  permitted  to  engage  iu  these  terrible  encounters
without  long  preliminary  practice.  Seeing  the  lion  as  they  did  so  frequently,
and  at  such  close  quarters,  they  came  to  know  it  quite  as  well  as  the  Egyptians,
and  their  sculptors  reproduce  it  with  a  realism  and  technical  skill  which  have
been  rarely  equalled  iu  modern  times.  But  while  the  Theban  artist  generally
represents  it  in  an  attitude  of  repose,  the  Assyrians  prefer  to  show  it  in  violent
action  in  all  the  various  attitudes  which  it  assumes  during  a  struggle,  either
crouching  as  it  prepares  to  spring,  or  fully  extended  in  the  act  of  leaping ;
sometimes  it  rears  into  an  upright  position,  with  arched  back,  gaping  jaws,  and
claws  protruded,  ready  to  bite  or  strike  its  foe ;  at  others  it  writhes  under  a
spear-thrust,  or  rolls  over  and  over  in  its  dying  agonies.  In  one  instance,  an
arrow  has  pierced  the  skull  of  a  male  lion,  crashing  through  the  frontal  bone
a  little  above  the  left  eyebrow,  and  protrudes  obliquely  to  the  right  between
his  teeth  :  under  the  shock  of  the  blow  he  has  risen  on  his  hind  legs,  with
contorted  spine,  and  beats  the  air  with  his  fore  paws,  his  head  thrown  back  as


'  Layakd,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  11,  and  Place,  Ninive  et  VAuyrie,  vol.  iii.
pis.  50,  50"-,  51,  52''",  55,  57,  62  ;  cf.  Houghton,  On  the  Mammalia  of  the  Assyrian  Sculptures,  iu  the
Transactions  of  tlie  Blbl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  v.  pp.  322-326.

-  Drawn  by  Fauolier-Guilin,  from  a  photograph  by  Hommel,  Zioei  Jagdinschri/ten  Assurhanipals ;
cf.  Place,  Ninive  <t  I'Assyrie,  vol.  iii.  pi.  57.  The  pouring  out  of  the  libation  on  the  iirus  is  also
shown  in  Latabd,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  12.


Tn.iXK-OFFl'fllXGS   AFTER    THE   CHASE.  625

tbongh  to  free  himself  of  tlic  fatal  shaft.     Not  far  from  him  the  liouess  lies
stretched  out  upon  its  back  iu  tiie  rigidity  of  deatli.^

The  "rimu,"  or  urus,  was,  perhaps,  evea  a  more  formidable  animal  to
encounter  than  any  of  the  felida',  owing  to  the  irresistible  fury  of  his  attack.
No  one  would  dare,  except  in  a  case
of  dire  necessity,  to  meet  him  on  foot.  '
The  loose  flowing  robes  which  tlio  kinu
and  the  nobles  never  put  aside — not
even  iu  sucli  perilous  pastimes  as  tliese
— were  ill  fitted  for  the  quick  move-
ments required  to  avoid  the  attack  of
such  an  animal,  and  those  who  were
unlucky  enough  to  quit  their  chariot
ran  a  terrible  risk  of  being  gored  or
trodden  underfoot  in  the  encounter.
It  was  the  custom,  therefore,  to  attack
the  beast  by  arrows,  and  to  keep  it
at  a  distance.  If  the  animal  were
able  to  come  up  with  its  pursuer,
the  latter  endeavoured  to  seize  it  bv
the  horn  at  the  moment  when  it
lowered  its  head,  and  to  drive  bis
dagger  into  its  neck.  If  the  blow  were  adroitly  given  it  severed  the  spinal  cord,
and  tlie  beast  fell  in  a  heap  as  if  struck  by  lightning.'*  A  victory  over  sucli
animals  was  an  occasion  for  rejoicing,  and  solemn  thanks  were  offered  to  Assur
and  Ishtar,  the  patrons  of  the  chase,  at  the  usual  evening  sacrifice.  The
slain  beasts,  whether  liun  or  urus,  were  arranged  in  a  row  before  the  altar,
while  the  king,  accompanied  by  his  flabelhi-  and  umbrella-bearers,  stood  along-
.side  them,  holding  his  bow  in  his  left  hand.  While  the  singers  intoned  the
hymn  of  tlianksgiving  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  harp,  the  monarcli  took  the
Lowl  of  sacred  wine,  touched  his  lips  with  it,  and  then  poured  a  portion  of  the
contents  on  the  heads  of  tiie  victims.  A  detailed  account  of  each  hunting
exploit   was  preserved   fur  posterity  either  in  inscriptions  or  on   bas-reliefs.*


TWO    Aj.SYUIAN    AUCUJiKs.-


'  !?ee  the  cut  of  a,  liun  vomiliug  blooil  on  ji.  iJS  of  Ike  Dawn  of  Civilizalion.

'  Drawn  by  Fiiuclier-Gudin  ;    see  tlio  initial  letter  at  tlio  beginning  of  chap,  vi.,  on  p.  5()i),  mpra.

'  As  to  the  "  riiun,"  see  Dawn  of  Cioilizaliun,  pp.  559,  5G0.

'  Annuh  of  Tigliilli-jjikser  J.,  col.  vi.  11.  55-81,  where  the  king  counts  the  number  of  hia  victims  :
4  urus,  10  njule  elephants,  120  lions  slain  in  single  combat  on  foot,  800  lions  killed  by  arrows  lei,
lly  from  his  chariot;  cf.  The  BroUen  ObilM;  col.  i.  11.  1-12  (LoTZ,  Die  Imchriften  Tiglatk-piU»er'»  I.,
pp.  54-57,  lUU,  iy7);  Annals  of  Aasuriiazirpal,  Layabd,  Inscripliont  in  the  Cuneiform  Characttr,
[>\.  i:i,  11.  12-21,  in  which  the  king  boasts  of  having  slain  30  elephants,  250  urus,  and  370  lions.

2  s


626


TEE   RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


Tlie  chase  w  as  iu  those  days  of  great  service  to  the  rural  population ;  the  kings
also  considered  it  to  be  one  of  the  duties  attached  to  their  office,  and  on  a
level  with  their  obligation  to  make  war  on  neighbouring  nations  devoted  by  the
will  of  Assur  to  defeat  and  destruction.

The  army  charged  to  carry  out  the  will  of  the  god  had  not  yet  acquired


AX    ASSYRIAN    WAll-CHARIOT    CHARGING    THE    FOE.'


the  homogeneity  and  efficiency  which  it  afterwards  attained,  yet  it  had  been
for  some  time  one  of  the  most  formidable  in  the  world,  and  even  the  Egyptians
themselves,  in  spite  of  their  long  experience  in  military  matters,  could  not  put
into  the  field  such  a  proud  array  of  effective  troops.  We  do  not  know  how
this  army  was  recruited,  but  the  bulk  of  it  was  made  up  of  native  levies,  to
which  foreign  auxiliaries  were  added  in  numbers  varying  with  the  times.^  A
permanent  nucleus  of  troops  was  always  in  garrison  in  the  capital  under  the
"  tartan,"  or  placed  in  the  principal  towns  at  the  disposal  of  the  governors.'
The  contingents  wliich  came  to  be  enrolled  at  these  centres  on  the  first  rumour


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Maiisell,  taken  in  the  British  Museum.

'  Everything  bearing  on  the  military  affairs  of  the  country  is  dealt  with  in  detail  in  G.  Kawi.in-
SON,  Tlie  Fire  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  406-4S4  ;  cf.  Tiele,  Bahylonisch-Assyrische
Geschichte,  pp.  .501-503 ;  DELlTZSCH-BIiJKDTEii,  Geschichle  Bahyloniens  mid  Assyriens,  2nd  edit,,  pp.  113-
116;  WiNCKLER,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  mid  Assyriens,  pp.  219, 220.  We  have  no  bas-relief  represent-
ing the  armies  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  Everything  in  the  description  which  follows  is  taken  from  the
monuments  of  Assurnazirpal  and  Shalmaneser  II.,  revised  as  far  as  possible  by  tlie  inscriptions  of
Tiglath-pileser ;  the  armament  of  both  infantry  and  chariotry  must  have  been  practically  the  same  iu
the  two  periods.

^  This  is  based  on  the  account  given  in  the  Ohelish  of  Shalmaneser,  where  the  king,  for  example,
after  having  gathered  his  soldiers  together  at  Kalakh  [Calah],  put  at  their  head  Duinassur  the
arian,  "the  master  of  his  innumerable  troops"  (11.  146-149;  cf.  11.  141,  142,  175,  176).


A   PIKEMAN.'


THE  ASSYRIAN  IX  FAN  TRY.

of  war  may  have  beeu  taken  from  among  the  feudal  militia,
as  was  the  custom  in  the  Nile  valley,  or  the  wliole  popu-
lation may  have  had  to  render  personal  military  service,
each  receiving  while  with  the  colours  a  certain  daily  pay.
The  nobles  and  feudal  lords  were  accustomed  to  call  their
own  people  together,  and  either  placed  themselves  at  their
liead  or  commissioned  an  officer  to  act  in  their  behalf.*
These  recruits  were  subjected  to  the  training  necessary  for
their  calling  by  exercises  similar  to  those  of  the  Egyptians,
but  of  a  rougher  sort  and  better  adapted  to  the  cumbrous
character  of  their  equipment.  The  blacksmith's  art  had
made  such  progress  among  the  Assyrians  since  the  times
of  Thutmosis  III.  and  Kamses  II.,  that  both  the  character
and  the  ma-terials  of  the  armour  were  entirely  changed.
While  the  Egyptian  of  old  entered  into  the  contest  almost
naked,  and  without  other  defence  than  a  padded  cap,  a  light  shield,  and  a

leather  apron,  the  Assyrian  of  the  new
age  set  out  for  war  almost  cased  in
metal.^  The  pikemen  and  archers  of
whom  the  infantry  of  the  line  was  com-
posed wore  a  copper  or  iron  helmet,
conical  in  form,  and  having  cheek-
pieces  covering  the  ears ;  they  were  clad
in  a  sort  of  leathern  shirt  covered  with
plates  or  imbricated  scales  of  metal,
which  protected  the  body  and  the  upper
part  of  the  arm ;  a  quilted  and  padded
loin  -  cloth  came  over  the  haunches,
while  close-fitting  trousers,  and  buskins  laced  up  in  the  front,  completed  their
attire.     The   pikemeu  were   armed  with  a  lance   six   feet  long,  a  cutlass  or


llAIiNESS   OF    THE    UORSES.-"


'  The  assembling  of  foot-soldiers  and  chariots  is  often  described  at  the  beginning  of  each  campaign
(Obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  11.  22-25,  141,  \M,  157);  i\\cDonation  of  Jiittimerodach  brings  before  iis
a  great  feudal  lord,  who  leads  his  contingent  to  the  King  of  Chaldiea  (of.  pp.  GU,  615,  supra),  and
anything  which  took  place  among  the  Babylonians  had  its  counterpart  among  the  Assyrians.  Some-
times the  king  lind  need  of  all  the  contingents,  and  then  it  was  said  he  "assembled  the  country"
(Obeiieli  of  SUalmaneter  II.,  1. 91).  Auxiliaries  are  mentioned,  for  example,  in  the  Annals  of  Assirma-
zirpal,  col.  iii.  11.  58-77,  where  the  king,  in  his  passage,  rallies  one  after  the  other  the  troops  of  iiit-
Bakhiani,  of  Azalli,  of  Bit-Adini,  of  Garganish,  and  of  the  Patiuu.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  G.  Rawi.inson's  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  i.  p.  438.

'  For  the  armament  of  the  armies  of  the  Thutmosis  and  Ramses,  see  supra,  pp.  21 1-2M,  218-220 ;
for  that  of  the  Assyrians,  see  the  careful  examination  of  the  subject  in  (i.  I!awlinson,  op.  cit.,  2nd
edit.,  pp.  42S-tG2.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  (i.  Uawlinson's  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  i.  p.  .150.


G28  THE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

short  sword  passed  through  the  girdle,  and  an  enormous  shield,  sometimes
round  and  convex,  sometimes  arched  at  the  top  and  square  at  the  bottom.
The  bowmen  did  not  encumber  themselves  with  a  buckler,  but  carried,  in
addition  to  the  bow  and  quiver,  a  poignard  or  mace.  The  light  infantry
consisted  of  pikemen  and  archers — each  of  whom  wore  a  crested  helmet  and  a
round  shield  of  wicker-work — of  slingers  and  club-bearers,  as  well  as  of  men
armed  with  the  two-bladed  battle-axe.  The  cliariots  were  heavier  and  larger
than  those  of  the  Egyptians.     They  had    high,  strongly  made  wheels   with


CROSSING    A    niVEB   IN    BOATS    AND   ON    INFLATED   SKINS.'

eight  spokes,  and  the  body  of  the  vehicle  rested  directly  on  the  axle ;  the-
panels  were  of  solid  wood,  sometimes  covered  with  embossed  or  carved  metal,
but  frequently  painted ;  they  were  further  decorated  sometimes  with  gold,
silver,  or  ivory  mountings,  and  with  precious  stones.  The  j^ole,  which  was
long  and  heavy,  ended  in  a  boss  of  carved  wood  or  incised  metal,  repre-
senting a  flower,  a  rosette,  the  muzzle  of  a  lion,  or  a  horse's  head.  It  was
attached  to  tlie  axle  under  the  floor  of  the  vehicle,  and  as  it  had  to  bear  a
great  strain,  it  was  not  only  fixed  to  this  point  by  leather  thongs  such  as  were
employed  in  Egypt,  but  also  bound  to  the  front  of  the  chariot  by  a  crossbar
shaped  like  a  spindle,  and  covered  with  embroidered  stuff — an  arrangement
which  prevented  its  becoming  detached  when  driving  at  full  speed.  A  pair  of
horses  were  harnessed  to  it,  and  a  third  was  attached  to  them  on  the  right  side
for  the  use  of  a  supplementary  warrior,  who  could  take  the  place  of  his  comrade
in  case  of  accident,  or  if  he  were  wounded.  The  trappings  were  very  simple:
but  sometimes  there  was  added  to  these  a  thickly  padded  caparison,  of  which
the  various  parts  were  fitted  to  the  horse  by  tags  so  as  to  cover  the  upper
part  of  his  head,  his  neck,  back,  and  breast.  The  usual  complement  of
charioteers  was  two  to  each  vehicle,  as  in  Egypt,  but  sometimes,  as  among  the-

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-GuJin,  from  Lavaku';^  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pis.  15,  IG.


THE   ASSYRIAN   CHARIOT.


(;2!l


Klu'iti,  there  were  three — one  on  the  left  to  direct  the  horses,  a  warrior,  ami  an
attendant  who  protected  the  other  two  with  his  shield ;  on  some  occasions  a
fourth  was  added  as  an  extra  assistant.  The  equipment  of  the  charioteers  was
like  that  of  the  infantry,  and  cpnsisted  of  a  jacket  with  imbricated  scales  of


MAKING   A    BlllDGE    FOK   THE   I'ASSAGE   OP   THE    CHARIOTS.'

metal,  bow  and  arrows,  and  a  lance  or  javelin.^  A  standard  which  served  as  a
rallying-point  for  the  chariots  in  the  battle  was  set  up  on  the  front  part  of
each  vehicle,  between  the  driver  and  the  warrior ;  it  bore  at  the  top  a  disk
supported  on  the  heads  of  two  bulls,  or  by  two  complete  representations  of
these  animals,  and  a  standing  figure  of  Assur  letting  fly  his  arrows.^  The
chariotry  formed,  as  in  most  countries  of  that  time,  the  picked  troops  of  the
service,  in  which  the  princes  and  great  lords  were  proud  to  be  enrolled.  Upon
it  depended  for  the  most  part  the  issue  of  the  conflict,  and  the  position  assigned
to  it  was  in  the  van,  the  king  or  commander-in-chief  reserving  to  himself  the
privilege  of  conducting  the  charge  in  person.  It  was  already,  however,  in  a
state  of  decadence,  both  as  regards  the  number  of  units  composing  it*  and  its


'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-tludin,  from  a  bas-reliuf  on  the  bronzo  gates  of  Balawlt.

'  G.  Kawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2ud  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  40G-422,  where  the  details  of
construction  and  the  armament  of  the  chariot  are  fidly  described.

'  Layauii,  The  Monuments  oj  Nineveh,  su\.\.\i\s.l\,'ri;  cf.  tlie  gem  engraved  ou  the  title  of  the
preecnt  work.

'  Tiglath-pileser  is  seen,  for  instance,  setting  out  on  a  campaign  in  a  mountainous  country  with
only  thirty  chariots  {AnnaU,  col.  ii.  11.  G3-G'J).


630


THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


methods  of  manoeuvring ;  the  infantry,  on  the  other  hand,  had  increased  in
numbers,  and  under  the  guidance  of  abler  generals  tended  to  become  the  most
trustworthy  force  in  Assyrian  campaigns.

Notwithstanding  the  weight  of  his  equipment,  the   Assyrian  foot-soldier
was  as  agile  as  the  Egyptian,  but  he  had  to  light  usually  in  a  much  more


THE    KINGS    CHARIOT    CIIOSSING    A    BRIDGE.'


difficult  region  than  that  in  which  tlie  Pharaoh's  troops  were  accustomed  to
manoeuvre.  The  theatre  of  war  was  not  like  Syria,  with  its  fertile  and  almost
unbroken  plains  furrowed  by  streams  which  oifered  little  obstruction  to  troops
throughout  the  year,  but  a  land  of  marshes,  arid  and  rocky  deserts,  mighty
rivers,  capable,  in  one  of  their  sudden  floods,  of  arresting  progress  for  days,
and  of  jeopardising  the  success  of  a  campaign  ; "-  violent  and  ice-cold  torrents,
rugged  mountains  whose  summits  rose  into  "  points  like  daggers,"  and  whose
passes  could  be  held  against  a  host  of  invaders  by  a  handful  of  resolute  men.^*
Bands   of  daring  skirmishers,  consisting  of  archers,  slingers,  and  pikemeii,


^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  tbe  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

=  Sennacherib  was  obliged  to  arrest  liis  march  against  Elam,  owing  to  Lis  inability  to  cross  the
torrents  swollen  by  the  rain  (Taylor  Prism,  col.  iv.  11.  74-79);  a  similar  contretemps  must  have  met
Assurbanipal  on  the  banks  of  the  Midi  {Annals,  col.  v.  11.  95-103).

^  The  Assyrian  monarclis  dwell  with  pleasure  on  tlie  difficulties  of  the  country  which  they  have
to  overcome;  see,  for  instance,  what  Tiglath-pileser  I.  savs  in  his  JdHa/s,  col." ii.  11.  G-10,  09-77
col.  iii.  U.  11-29,  41-60,  col.  iv.  11.  13-17,  5;_;-70.


TEE   CROSSING    OF  RIVERS.


G:51


cleared  the  way  fm-   the   mass  of  infantry  marching    in    columns,  and   for

the  chariots,  it   the  midst  of  which  the  king   and   his  household  took  up

their  station ;    the   baggage  followed,  together  with  the  prisoners  and  their

escorts.^     If  they  came  to  a  river  where  there  was  neither  ford  nor  bridge,

they  were  not  long  in  effecting  a  passage.     Eacli  soldier  was  provided  with

a  skin,  wliicli,  having   inflated  it   by  the   strength   of  his  lungs  and  closed

the  aperture,  he   embraced    in    his  arms  and   cast  himself  into  the  stream.

Partly  by  floating  and

partly  by  swimming,  a

whole   regiment    could

soon    reach    the    other

side.        The      chariots

could    nbt    be    carried

over  so  easily.     If  the

bed   of    the    river    was

not  very  wide,  and  the

current  not  too  violent,

a    narrow    bridge    was

constructed,    or    rather


TUE    Ar^SVUIAX    INTANTICY    CliOSSlXG    TUE    MOL'NTAIXS.-


an     improvised     dyke

of  large  stones  and  rude  gabions  filled  witli  clay,  over  which  wns  spread
a  layer  of  branches  and  earth,  supplying  a  sufficiently  broad  passage  for
a  single  chariot,  of  which  the  horses  were  led  across  at  walking  pace.^  But
when  the  distance  between  the  banks  was  too  great,  and  the  stream  too
violent  to  allow  of  this  mode  of  procedure,  boats  were  requisitioned  from  tlie
neighbourhood,  on  which  men  and  chariots  were  embarked,  while  the  horses,
attended  by  grooms,  or  attached  by  their  bridles  to  the  flotilla,  swam  across
the  river.*  If  the  troops  had  to  pass  through  a  mountainous  district  intersected
by  ravines  and  covered  by  forests,  and  thus  impracticable  on  ordinary
occasions  for  a  large  body  of  men,  the  advance-guard  were  employed  in  cutting
a  passage  through  the  trees  with  the  axe,  and,  if  necessary,  in  making
witli  the  pick  pathways  or  rough-hewn  steps  similar  to  those  met  with  in  the


'  Assurbauipal  relates,  for  instance,  tliat  be  put  under  his  escort  a  tribe  wbicli  bad  surrender!  d
tbemselves  as  prisoners  {Rasmm  Cylinder,  co\.  yii.  11.  77-81).

-  Drawn  by  Faucber-iludin,  from  a  bas-rolief  on  tbe  bronze  gates  of  lialawat.

'  Flying  bridges,  titiirati,  were  mentioned  as  far  back  as  the  lime  of  Tiglnth-pileser  I.  (Anttals,
col.  iv.  11.  G9,  70;  cf.  I.,OTZ,  Die  Innchriflen  Tiglath-pileser's  I.,  p.  144).  Those  represented  on
pp.  629,  630  belong  to  ihe  time  of  Shalmaneser  II.

*  It  was  iu  this  manner  that  Tiglath-pileser  I.  crossed  the  Euphrates  on  his  way  to  the  attack
of  Carcliemiflh  (Annah,  col.  v.  II.  57,  58).


C32


THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


Lebanon  on  the  Pbcenician  coast.'  The  troops  advauced  in  narrow  columns,
sometimes  even  in  single  file,  along  these  improvised  roads,  always  on  the
alert  lest  they  should  be  taken  at  a  disadvantage  by  an  enemy  concealed
in  the  thickets.     In  case  of  attack,  the  loot-soldiers  had  each  to  thiuk  of

himself,  and  endeavour  to
give  as  many  blows  as  he
received ;  but  the  chario-
teers, encumbered  by  their
vehicles  and  the  horses,
found  it  no  easy  matter
to  extricate  themselves
from  the  danger.  Once  the
chariots  had  entered  into
the  forest  region,  the  driver
descended  from  his  vehicle,
and  led  the  horses  by  the
head,  while  the  warrior  and
his  assistant  were  not  slow
to  follow  his  example,  in
order  to  give  some  relief
to  the  animals  by  tugging
at  the  wheels.  The  king
alone  did  not  dismount,
more  out  of  respect  for  his
dignity  than  from  indifference  to  the  strain  upon  the  animals ;  for,  in  spite
of  careful  leading,  he  had  to  submit  to  a  rough  shaking  from  the  inequali-
ties of  this  rugged  soil ;  sometimes  he  had  too  much  of  this,  and  it  is  related
of  him  in  his  annals  that  he  had  crossed  the  mountains  on  foot  like  an
ordinary  mortal.^  A  halt  was  made  every  evening,  either  at  some  village,
whose  inhabitants  were  obliged  to  provide  food  and  lodging,  or,  in  default  of
this,  on  some  site  which  they  could  fortify  by  a  hastily  thrown  up  rampart  of
earth.  If  they  were  obliged  to  remain  in  any  place  for  a  length  of  time,  a
regular  encircling  wall  was  constructed,  not  square  or  rectangular  like  those

'  See  the  account  of  the  Tyrian  Ladder  at  p.  139,  supra.  Tiglath-iiileser  I.  speaks  on  several
occasions,  and  not  without  pride,  of  the  roads  that  he  had  made  for  himself  witb  bronze  hatchets
through  the  forests  and  over  the  mountains  (Annals,  col.  ii.  11.  7-10,  col.  iv.  II.  (56,  B7).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Mansell,  taken  in  the  British  Museum.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  G9-77,  col.  iii.  11.  45-47,  col.  vi.  11.  51,  52.  The  same  fact
is  found  in  the  accounts  of  every  expedition,  but  more  importance  is  attached  to  it  as  we  approach
the  end  of  the  Ninevite  empire,  when  the  kings  were  not  so  well  able  to  endure  hardship.  Senna-
cherib mentions  it  on  several  occasions,  with  a  certain  amount  of  self-pity  for  the  fatigue  he  bad
undergone,  but  witli  a  real  pride  iu  his  own  eudurance  {Taylor  Prism,  col.  i.  11.  (J6-G9,  col.  iii.
11.  71-S2).


THE   KING    CROSSING    A   310VMTAI.S    IS    HIS   CHARIOT.-


TIIK  FOUTIFIKD    CAMPS.


033


of  the  E^yptiiius,  but  round  or  oval.^  It  was  made  of  dried  brick,  and  pro-
vided with  towers  like  an  ancient  oity ;  indeed,  many  of  these  entrenched
camps  survived  the  occasion  of  their  formation,  and  became  small  fortified
towns  or  castles,  whence  a  permanent  garrison  could  command  the  neiglibour-
ing  country.  The  interior  was  divided  into  four  equal  parts  by  two  roads,
intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles.     The  royal  tents,  with  their  walls  of


AN    ASSYIUAN    CAMl'.-


felt  or  brown  linen,  resembled  an  actual  palace,  which  could  be  moved  from
place  to  place;  they  were  surrounded  with  less  2)retentious  buildings  reserved
for  the  king's  household,  and  the  stables.  The  tent-poles  at  the  angles  of
these  habitations  were  plated  with  metal,  and  terminated  at  their  upper
extremities  in  figures  of  goats  and  other  animals  made  of  the  same  material.
The  tents  of  the  soldiers  were  conical  in  form,  and  each  was  maintained  in  its
position  by  a  forked  pole  placed  inside.  They  contained  the  ordinary  require-
ments of  the  peasant — bed  and  head-rest,  table  with  legs  like  those  of  a
gazelle,  stools  and  folding-chairs;  the  household  utensils  and  the  provisions
hung  from  the  forks  of  the  support.  The  monuments,  whicli  usually  five
few  details  of  humble  life,  are  remarkable  for  their  complete  rejiroductions  of
the  daily  scenes  in  the  camp.  We  see  on  them  the  soldier  making  his  bed,
grinding  corn,  dressing  the  carcase  of  a  sheep  which  he  has  just  killed,  or
jiouring  out  wine ;  the  pot  boiling  on  the  fire  is  watched  by  the  vigilant  eye
of  a  trooper  or  of  a  woman,  while  those  not  actively  employed  are  grouped

'  'I'lie  oval  iucHucB  towanls  u  square  form,  witli  rouudud  coruors,  on  tlie  bas-reliefs  of  the  broiizo
gates  of  Slialmaneser  II.  at  Halawat.

'  Drawn  by  liondier,  from  Layahd's  Monumentt  of  Xineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  30 ;  cf.  vol.  i.  pis.  G3,  77,  and
vol.  ii.  pp.  24,  3U,  50,  whore  tlie  usual  scene  of  the  sacriUcu  before  the  two  royal  standards  is  depicted.


g:u


THE  BISE   OF  THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


together  in  twos  and  threes,  eating,  drinking,  and  chatting.  A  certain  number
of  priests  and  soothsayers  accompanied  the  army,  but  tiiey  did  not  bring  the
statues  of  their  gods  with  them,  the  only  emblems  of  the  divinities  seen  in
battle  being  the  two  royal  ensigns,  one  representing  Assur  as  lord  of  the
territory,  borne  on  a  single  bull  and  bending  his  bow,  while  the  other  depicted
him  standing  on  two  bulls  as  King  of  Assyria.^     An  altar  smoked  before  the


A    FORTIFIED   TOWX.'


chariot  on  which  these  two  standards  were  planted,  and  every  night  and
morning  the  prince  and  his  nobles  laid  offerings  upon  it,  and  recited  prayers
before  it  for  the  well-being  of  the  army.

Military  tactics  had  not  made  much  progress  since  the  time  of  the  great
Egyptian  invasions."  The  Assyrian  generals  set  out  in  haste  from  Nineveh  or
Assur  in  the  hope  of  surprising  their  enemy,  and  they  often  succeeded  in
penetrating  into  the  very  heart  of  his  country  before  he  had  time  to  mobilise
or  concentrate  his  forces.  The  work  of  subduing  him  was  performed  piecemeal ;
they  devastated  his  fields,  robbed  his  orchards,  and,  marching  all  through  the
night,"*  they  would  arrive  with  such  suddenness  before  one  or  other  of  his  towns,
that  lie  would  have  no  time  to  organise  a  defence.  Most  of  their  campaigns
were  mere  forced  marches  across  plains  and  mountains,  without  regular  sieges
or  pitched  battles.     Should  the  enemy,  however,  seek  an  engagement,  and  the


'  It  is  possible  tliat  each  of  these  standards  corresponded  to  some  dignity  of  the  sovereign;  the
first  belonged  to  him,  inasmuch  as  he  was  sliar  hishshati,  "king  of  the  regions,"  and  the  other,  by
virtue  of  his  office,  of  shar  Ashshui;  "King  of  Assyria"  (Billereeck-Jeeemias,  Der  Untergang
Nineveh's,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  p.  167).

-  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Mansell,  (akeu  in  the  British  Museum.  The
inhabitants  of  the  town  who  have  been  taken  prisoners,  are  leaving  it  with  their  cattle  under  the
conduct  of  Assyrian  soldiers ;    cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  039,  040  of  the  present  work.

^  For  Egyptian  military  tactics  of  the  time  of  Tliutmosis  III.,  see  siyjra,  pp.  220-'2'2S,  and  pp.
458,  459,  for  those  of  the  time  of  Kamses  III.

'  Assurnazirpal  mentions  several  night  marches,  which  enabled  him  to  reach  the  heart  of  the
enemy's  country  QAnnah.  col.  ii.  11.  48,  49,  53-55).


WABS  AND   BATTLES.


(JoO


men  be  dmwu  up  iu  liuc  to  meet  him,  the  action  woukl  be  opened  by  archers
and  light  troops  armed  with  slings,  who  would  be  followed  by  the  chariotry  and
heavy  infantry  for  close
attack ;  a  reserve  of  veterans
would  await  around  the
commandinn;  -  general  the
crucial  moment  of  the  en-
gagement, when  they  would
charge  in  a  body  among
the  combatants,  and  decide
the  victory  by  sheer  strength
of  arm.^  The  pursuit  of
the  enemy  was  never  car-
ried to  any  considerable
distance,  for  the  men  were
needed  to  collect  the  spoil,
despatch  the  wounded,  and
carry  oti'  the  trophies  of
war.  Such  of  the  prisoners
as  it  was  deemed  useful  or
politic  to  sjiare  were  sta-
tioned in  a  safe  place  under
a  guard  of  sentries.  The
remainder  were  condemned  to  death  as  they  were  brought  in,  and  their
execution  took  place  without  delay  ;  they  were  made  to  kneel  down,  with
their  backs  to  tiie  soldiery,  their  heads  bowed,  and  their  hands  resting
on  a  flat  stone  or  a  billet  of  wood,  in  which  position  they  were  despatched
with  clubs.  The  scribes,  standing  before  their  tent  doors,  registered  the
number  of  heads  cut  off;  each  soldier,  bringing  his  quota  and  throwing  it
upon  the  heap,  gave  in  his  name  and  the  number  of  his  company,  and  then
withdrew  in  the  hope  of  receiving  a  reward  proportionate  to  the  number  of  his


THE    BRINGING    OF   HEADS    AFTEK    A    BATTLE.-


'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  G14,  615,  for  the  account  of  the  battle  in  which  Nebuchadrezzar  I.  vaiiiiui.she>l  the
Edomites.  Tiglath-pileeer  I.  mentions  a  pitched  battle  agninst  the  Muskhii,  who  numbered  20,000
ineu  (Annals,  col.  i.  II.  02-82);  and  another  ag;iin8t  Kiliteshub,  King  of  Kummukh  (col.  ii.  11.  1G-2S),
in  his  first  campaign.  In  one  of  the  following  campaigns  he  overcame  the  people  of  Saraush  (col.  iii.
U.  80-84)  and  those  of  Mnruttush  (col.  iii.  11.  102,  lO^i),  and  also  0000  Sugi  (col.  iv.  11.  9-21) ;  later  on
he  defeated  23  allied  kings  of  Xairi,  and  took  from  them  120  chariots  (col.  iv.  11.  71-96)  and  20,000
jjeople  of  Kumauu  (eol.  v.  11.  8U-'JG).  The  other  ware  arc  little  more  than  raids,  during  which  he
encountered  merely  those  who  were  incapable  of  oliering  him  any  resistance.

«  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layakd,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  22;  cf.  vol.  ii.
pis.  19,  29,  (il,  45.  On  p.  227  of  the  present  work  will  be  found  a  corresponding  scene  after  an
Egyptian  battle,  with  the  collection  oi phalli  and  hands  cut  from  the  dead  bodies  of  the  enemy  ;  this
episode  is  taken  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefa  representing  the  victories  of  Eamses  III.  at  Medinct-Hubu.


€36


THE  lilSE   OF   THE  ASSTBIAN  EM  PISE.


victims.!  "When  the  king  happened  to  accompany  the  army,  he  always  presided
at  this  scene,  and  distributed  largesse  to  those  who  had  shown  most  bravery ;
in  liis  absence  he  required  that  the  heads  of  the  enemy's  chiefs  should  be  sent

to  him,  in  order  that  they
might   be    exposed    to   his
subjects  on  the  gates  of  his
capital.  Sieges  were  lengthy
and   arduous  undertakings.
In  the  case  of  towns  situ-
ated on  the  plain,  the  site
was   usually   chosen   so   as
to  be  protected  by  canals,
or  an  arm  of  a  river  on  two
or  three  sides,  thus  leaving
one    side    only   without   a
natural  defence,  which  the
inhabitants  endeavoured  to
make  up  for  by  means  of
double  or  treble  ramparts.-
These     fortifications    must
have    resembled    those    of
the    Syrian  towns ;    the    walls    were    broad    at    the    base,    and,    to    prevent
scaling,  rose  to  a  height  of  some  thirty  or  forty  feet :  there  were  towers  at
intervals  of  a   bowshot,  from  which   the   archers  could    seriously  disconcert
parties  making  attacks  against  any  intervening   points  in   the  curtain  wall;
the  massive  gates  were  covered  with  raw  hides,  or  were  plated  with  metal
to  resist  assaults  by  fire  and  axe,*  while,  as  soon  as  hostilities  commenced,
the    defence   was  further    completed   by   wooden    scaffolding.      Places    thus
fortified,  however,  at  times   fell  almost  without  an  attempt    at   resistance ;
the  inhabitants,  having  descended  into  the  lowlands  to  rescue  their  crops  from
the  Assyrians,  would  be  disbanded,  and,  while  endeavouring  to  take  refuge
within  their  ramparts,  would   be   pursued   by  the    enemy,  who  would  gain
admittance  with  them  in  the  general  disorder.^     If  the  town  did  not  fall  into

'  The  details  of  this  bringing  of  heads  are  known  to  us  by  representations  of  a  later  period ;  one
of  them  is  reproduced  on  p.  635.  The  allusioua  contained  in  the  Annals  of  Tiglath-pUeser  I.,  col.  i.
11.  81,  82,  col.  vi.  11.  4-6,  shows  that  the  custom  was  in  full  force  under  the  early  Assyrian  conquerors.

'  The  town  of  Tela  had  three  containing  walls  (Annals  of  Assurnazirpal,  col.  i.  11.  113,  114),  that
of  Shingisha  had  four  (ibid.,  col.  ii.  11.  98,  99),  and  that  of  Pitura  two  (ibid.,  col.  ii.  11.  104,  105).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Latard,  The  Monuments  of  Nineieh,  vol.  i.  pi.  17;  scenes  of
attack  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  same  work  in  vol.  i.  pis.  29,  63,  68,  and  vol.  ii.  pi.  31.

'  For  the  system  of  fortification  employed  in  the  towns  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  of.
DiEULAFOT,  VAcTopole  de  Suse,  pp.  140,  ct  seq.,  171,  et  seq.,  and  Billekbeck-Jeeemias,  Der  Untergang
Hineveh's,  in  the  Beitrdrje  snr  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  153-166.

'  As,  for  example,  the  town  of  Maruttash  in  the  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  iii.  II.  102-105.


THE   KING    LETS   FLY   ARROWS   AT    A    litSlLGEL    TOWN.''


TEE   SIEGES    OF    11 '.17?.


(•)87


ASSYRIAN   SAPPERS.-


their  hands  by  some  stroke  of  good  fortune,  tliey  would  at  once  attempt,
by  an  immediate  assault,  to  terrify  the  garrison  into  laying  down  their
arms.i  The  archers  and  slingers  led  the  attack  by  advancing  in  couples
till  they  were  within  the  prescribed  distance  from  the  walls,  one  of  the  two
takino-  careful  aim,  while  the  other  sheltered  his  comrade  behind  his  round-
topped  shield.  The  king
himself  would  sometimes
alight  from  his  chariot  and
let  fly  liis  arrows  in  the
front  rank  of  the  archers,
while  a  handful  of  resolute
men  would  rush  against
the  gates  of  the  town  and
attempt  either  to  break
them  down  or  set  them
alight  witli  torches.  An-
other party,  armed  witii
stout  helmets  and  quilted
jerkins,  which  rendered
them  almost  invulnerable
to  the  shower  of  arrows  or  stones  poured  on  them  by  the  besieged,  would  attempt
to  undermine  the  walls  by  means  of  levers  and  pick-axes,  and  while  thus  en-
gaged would  be  protected  by  mantelets  fixed  to  the  face  of  the  walls,  resembling
in  shape  the  shields  of  the  archers.  Often  bodies  of  men  would  approach  the
suburbs  of  the  city  and  endeavour  to  obtain  access  to  the  ramparts  from  the  roofs
of  the  houses  in  close  proximity  to  the  walls.  If,  however,  tliey  could  gain
admittance  by  none  of  these  means,  and  time  was  of  no  consideration,  they  would
resign  themselves  to  a  lengthy  siege,  and  the  blockade  would  commence  by
a  systematic  desolation  of  the  surrounding  country,  in  which  the  villages
scattered  over  the  plain  would  be  burnt,  the  vines  torn  up,  and  all  trees
cut  down.  The  Assyrians  waged  war  with  a  brutality  which  the  Egyptians
would  never  have  tolerated.  Unlike  the  I'haraohs,  their  kings  were  not  content
to  imprison  or  put  to  death  the  principal  instigators  of  a  revolt,  but  their  wrath
would  fall  upon  the  entire  population;  As  long  as  a  town  resisted  the  efforts
of  their  besieging  force,  all  its  inhabitants  bearing  arms  who  fell  into  their
hands  were  subjected  to  the  most  cruel   tortures  ;    they  were   cut  to   pieces

'  Assiiriiazirpal,  in  this  I'usUiou,  took  tbo  town  of  riturain  two  diiys,  in  spite  of  its  strong  double
rumparts  (^Annals  of  As^urnuziipal,  col.  ii.  11.  10-1-107J.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-CJudin,  Iroin  Lay.vkd,  The  Monuments  of  Nineneli,  vol.  i.  pi.  19;  for  other
BceDcs  repreBcntiug  the  tapping  of  walls,  cf.  Layakd,  The  Monmnenls  of  Nineceli,  vol.  i.  pis.  20,  29,
06,  and  vol.  ii.  pi.  !"•.


6  38


TEE  BISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


or  impaled  alive  on  stakes,  which  were  planted  in  the  ground  just  in  front
of  the  lines,  so  that  the  besieged  should  enjoy  a  full  view  of  the  sufferings
of  their  comrades.  Even  during  the  course  of  a  short  siege  this  line  of
stakes  would  be  prolonged  till  it  formed  a  bloody  pale  between  the  two
contending  armies.^  This  horrible  spectacle  had  at  least  the  effect  of
shaking  the  courage  of  the  besieged,  and  of  hastening  the  end  of  hostilities.
When  at  length  the  town  yielded  to  the  enemy,  it  was  often  razed  to  the
ground,^  and  salt  was  strewn  upon  its  ruins,"  while  the  unfortunate  inhabitants


iiiiHirt  wMnri^wiii<Twi8riijti"iiii"**^      i


•f^^^'vl


A    TOWN    TAKEN    UY    SCALING.'


were  either  massacred  or  transplanted  en  masse  elsewhere.^  If  the  bulk  of  the
population  were  spared  and  condemned  to  exile,  the  wealtliy  and  noble -were
shown  no  clemency ;  they  were  thrown  from  the  top  of  the  city  towers,  their
ears  and  noses  were  cut  off,  their  hands  and  feet  were  amputated,  or  they  and
their  children  were  roasted  over  a  slow  fire,  or  flayed  alive,  or  decapitated,  and
their  heads  piled  up  in  a  heap.  The  victorious  sovereigns  appear  to  have
taken  a  pride  in  the  ingenuity  with  which  they  varied  these  means  of  torture,
and  dwell  with  complacency  on  the  recital  of  their  cruelties.  "  I  constructed  a
pillar  at  the  gate  of  the  city,"  is  the  boast  of  one  of  them  ;  "  I  then  flayed  the
chief  men,  and  covered  the  post  with  their  skins;  I  suspended  their  dead  bodies


'  For  these  linea  of  men  empaled,  see  tlie  representations  of  sieges  in  Layaed,  The  Monuments
vf  Nineivh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  21.

=  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  J.,  col.  ii.  11.  34,  35,  col.  iii.  11.  87-89,  col.  iv.  11.  2-4,  col.  v.  11.  2-4,
95-99.  col.  vi.  11.  27-30.

'  This  is  what  we  seem  to  gather  from  a  passage  iu  the  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  vi.  11.  13,
14,  in  which  Peiser  sees  iu  the  ideogram  Zipa,  though  not  without  hesitation,  the  word  for  rock-salt.

■*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  bronze  gate  of  Balawat.  The  two
soldiers  who  represent  the  Assyrian  army  carry  their  shields  before  them  ;  llames  appear  above  the
ramparts,  showing  that  the  conquerors  have  burnt  the  town.

^  Annals  of  Tiglalh-pileser  I.,  col.  iii.  11.  02-68,  84-86,  col.  iv.  11.  2,  3,  col.  v.  11.  1,  2,  59-63.


THE  DEPORTATION   OF  POPULATION.  (339

from   this   same  pilliir,  I  impaled  others  ou  the  summit  of  the  jiilhxr,  aud  1
ranged  others  on  stakes  around  tlie  pillar."  '

Two  or  three  executions  of  this  kind  usually  sufficed  to  demoralise  the
enemy.  The  remaining  inhabitants  assembled  :  terrified  by  the  majesty  of
Assur,  and  as  it  were  blinded  by  the  brightness  of  his  countenance,  they
sunk  down  at  the  knees  of  the  victor  aud   embraced  his  feet."     The  peace


''™i*'JWf.59pS8Bl^HJg«e;T35wat>«rt,._,,y«»vi^i


3c;:!uk%^i  1 1  ij  \  \  \l


TOHTDBK.S   INFLICTED    ON   PKISONEns    AFTflt    THE
TAKING    OF   A   TOWN.^


secured  at  the  price  of  their  freedom  left  them  merely  with  their  lives  and  such
of  their  goods  as  could  not  be  removed  from  the  soil.  The  scribes  thereupon
surrounded  the  spoil  seized  by  the  soldiery,  and  drew  up  a  detailed  inventory
of  the  prisoners  and  their  property  :  everything  worth  carrying  away  to  Assyria
was  promptly  registered,  and  despatched  to  the  capital.  The  contents  of  the
royal  palace  led  the  way ;  it  comprised  the  silver,  gold,  aud  copper  of  the
vanquished  prince,  his  caldrons,  dishes  aud  cups  of  brass,  the  women  of  his
harem,  the  maidens  of  his  household,  his  furniture  and  stuffs,  hoises  and
chariots,  together  with  his  men   and  women  servants.^     The  enemy's  gods,

'  Annah  of  AHurnazirpal, col.  i.  U.  89-91 ;  cf.  Peisek,  Insclm'ften  Aschur-nasir-ahal'e,  in  Schrader,
KeUinschriftliche  Bihliothelc,  vol.  i.  pp.  66,  67.  Other  similar  examples  of  cruelty  are  found  iu  the
same  Annah,  col.  ii.  11.  107-111,  col.  iii.  11.  107-109, 111-llH,  etc.  The  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser
mention  but  few  of  these  wholesale  executions,  and  rarely  allude  to  the  barbarous  scenes  which
accompanied  them ;  the  conqueror,  however,  speaks  of  the  heaps  of  heads  which  lie  had  eollecteil
near  the  towns  of  Kummukh  (Annuls,  col.  i.  11.  81,  82).

'  These  are  the  very  expressions  used  in  the  Assyrian  texts :  "  The  terror  of  my  strength  over-
threw them,  they  feared  the  combat  and  they  embraced  my  feet "  {Annah  of  Tighith-pilcscr  I.,  col.  iii.
11.  4-6);  and  again  :  "  The  briglitiicss  of  Assur,  my  lord,  overturned  them  "  {ibid ,  col.  ix.  11.  TA,  74).
This  latter  image  is  explained  by  tlie  presence  over  the  king  of  the  winged  figure  of  Assur  directing
the  battle ;  cf.  the  subject  reproduced  above  the  talkie  of  contents  ou  p.  5il7  of  the  present  work.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-(iuilin,  from  one  uf  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  bronze  gates  of  lialawat ;  on  the
right  the  town  is  seeji  in  flames,  and  on  the  walls  ou  either  side  hangs  a  row  of  heads,  one  above
another,

*  AnnaU  of  Tiglallt-pileger  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  25-33,  44-53,  col.  iii.  1.  106,  col.  iv.  1.  U;  Aniuds  of  Assiir-
nazirpal,  col.  i.  11.  83-88,  col.  ii.  II.  66-68,  119-125,  col.  iii.  11.  21-23,  72-76,  etc.


C40


TEE  BISE    OF    TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


like  his  kings,  were  despoiled  of  their  possessions,  and  poor  and  rich  suffered
alike.  The  choicest  of  their  troops  were  incorporated  into  the  Assyrian
regiments,  and  helped  to  fill  the  gaps  which  war  had  made  in  the  ranks  ;^
the  peasantry  and  townsfolk  were  sold  as  slaves,  or  were  despatched  with
their  families  to  till  the  domains  of  the  king  in  some  Assyrian  village.*
The    monuments   often    depict    the   fxodus    of    these   unfortunate    wretches,

They  are  represented  as
proceeding  on  their  way
in  the  charge  of  a  few
foot-soldiers — each  of  the
men  carrying,  without  any
sign  of  labour,  a  bag  of  pro-
visions, while  the  women
bear  their  young  children
on  their  shoulders  or
in  tlieir  arms:  herds  of
cows  and  flocks  of  goats
and  sheep  follow,  chariots
drawn  by  mules  bringing
up  the  rear  with  the  bag-
gage. While  the  crowd  of
non-combatants  were  con-
ducted in  irregular  columns
without  manacles  or  chains,
the  veteran  troops  and  the  young  men  capable  of  bearing  arms  were  usually
bound  together,  and  sometimes  were  further  secured  by  a  wooden  collar
placed  on  their  necks.  Many  perished  on  the  way  from  want  or  fatigue,,
but  such  as  were  fortunate  enough  to  reacli  the  end  of  the  journey  were
rewarded  with  a  small  portion  of  land  and  a  dwelling,  becoming  henceforward
identified  with  the  indigenous  inhabitants  of  the  country.  Assyrians  were
planted  as  colonists  in  the  subjugated  towns,  and  served  to  maintain  there
the  authority  of  the  conqueroi'.*  The  condition  of  the  latter  resembled  to  a
great  extent  that  of  the  old  Egyptian  vassals  in  Phoenicia  or  Southern  Syria.
They  were  allowed  to  retain  their  national  constitution,  rites,  and  even  their

'  Tiglath-pileser  I.  in  this  manner  incorporated  120  chariots  of  the  Kashki  and  tlie  Urumi  into
the  Assyrian  chariotry  {AnnaU,  col.  iii.  11.  7-9).

-  Annah  of  Tiglath-pileser  1.,  col.  i.  11.  S4-SS  (where  the  number  transported  is  given  as  GOOO),
col.  iii.  11.  7-10.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layahd,  Tlte  Monumenia  of  Nineceh,  vol. ^ii.  pi.  So;  cf.  the
representation  of  other  convoys  of  prisoners  in  tbe  same  work,  vol.  i.  pis.  5S,  GO,  74,[and  vol.  ii.  pis.  2i;,.
29-31,  34,  37,  42.

*  Cf.  what  is  said  of  these  Assyrian  colonies  on  pp.  608,  609,  666-668  of  the  present^work.


A    CONVOY    OF    TRISOXEKS   ANU    CAl'TtVES   AKTKR    THE    TAKISli
OF  A    TOWN.'


THE   INSTABILITY  OF   THE  EARLIER  ASSYRIAN  CONQUESTS.      641

sovereigns ; '  wlien,  for  instance,  after  some  rebellion,  one  of  these  princes
had  been  impaled  or  decapitated,  his  successor  was  always  chosen  from
among  the  members  of  his  own  family,  usually  one  of  his  sons,  who  was
enthroned  almost  before  his  father  had  ceased  to  breathe.  He  was  obliged
to  humiliate  his  own  gods  before  Assur,  to  pay  a  yearly  tribute,-  to  render
succour  in  case  of  necessity  to  the  commanders  of  neighbouring  garrisons,  to


CUSVOY    OK   riilSONEHS    BOUND    IN    VARIOUS    WAYS/


send  his  troops  wiien  required  to  swell  the  royal  army,*  to  give  his  sous
or  brothers  as  hostages,'  and  to  deliver  up  his  own  sisters  and  daughters,  or
those  of  his  nobles,  for  the  liarem  or  the  domestic  service  of  the  conqueror.''
The  imfortunate  prince  soon  resigned  liimself  to  this  state  of  servitude ;
he  would  collect  around  him  and  reorganise  his  scattered  subjects,  restore
them  to  their  cities,  rebuild  their  walls,  replant  the  wasted  orchards,  and
sow  the  devastated  fields.  A  few  years  of  relative  peace  and  tranquillity,
during  which  he  strove  to  be  forgotten  by  his  conqueror,  restored  prosperity
to  his  country  ;  the  population  increased  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  and
new  generations  arose  who,  unconscious  of  the  disasters  suffered  by
their  predecessors,  had  but  one  aim,  that  of  recovering  their  independence.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  upon  the  condition  of  the  princes  and  peoples  subject  to  the  Pharaohs  on  p.  27!
of  tlio  pri'sent  work.  For  those  who  placed  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  the  Assyrians  and  submitted
to  pay  trihute,  cf.  tho  Annuls  o/  Tirjlath-pileser  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  53-55, 89-99,  col.  iii.  11.  70,  SO,  91,  col.  iv.
11.  27-31,  col.  V.  11.  8-21,  20-29,  37-11,  7S-S1.

2  Jnna;«,etc.,col.ii.  11.  83, 84, 90-90, col.  iii.  11.  7G,92-95,col.iv.lI.  29-31, col.  V.  11.19,20,39-41, 80,81.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-(  i  udin,  from  a  bas-relief  of  one  of  the  gates  of  Balawat.

*  Annals  of  Astturnazirpul,  col.  iii.  11.  09,  77.

'  Annals  of  Tiijlath-pitetcr  /.,  col.  ii.  11.  47,  48,  col.  v.  11.  17,  18  ;  Aiumli'  nf  Asuurnaziri'id,  eol.  i.
11.  100,  101,  col.  ii.  11.  11,  12.

"  Anruils  nf  Aasuriiazirjxd,  col.  ii.  11.  124,  125,  col.  iii.  I.  70.

2t


642  THE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

We  must,  however,  beware  of  thinking  that  the  defeat  of  these  tribes  was  as
crushing  or  their  desolation  as  terrible  as  the  testimony  of  the  inscriptions
would  lead  us  to  suppose.  The  rulers  of  Nineveh  were  but  too  apt  to
relate  that  tliis  or  that  country  had  been  conquered  and  its  people  destroyed,
when  the  Assyrian  army  had  remained  merely  u  week  or  a  fortnight  within  its
territory,  had  burnt  some  half-dozen  fortified  towns,  and  taken  two  or  three
thousand  prisoners.^  If  we  were  to  accept  implicitly  all  that  is  recorded
of  the  Assyrian  exploits  in  Nairi  or  the  Taurus,  we  should  be  led  to  believe
that  for  at  least  half  a  century  the  valleys  of  the  Upper  Tigris  and  Middle
Euphrates  were  transformed  into  a  desert ;  each  time,  however,  that  they  are
subsequently  mentioned  on  the  occasion  of  some  fresh  expedition,  they  appear
once  more  covered  with  thriving  cities  and  a  vigorous  population,  whose
generals  offer  an  obstinate  resistance  to  the  invaders.  "NYe  are,  therefore,
forced  to  admit  that  the  majority  of  these  expeditious  must  be  regarded  as
mere  raids.  The  population,  disconcerted  by  a  sudden  attack,  would  take
refuge  in  the  woods  or  on  the  mountains,  carrying  with  them  their  gods,  whom
they  thus  preserved  from  captivity,  together  with  a  portion  of  their  treasures
and  cattle ;  ^  but  no  sooner  had  the  invader  retired,  than  they  descended
once  more  into  the  plain  and  returned  to  their  usual  occupations.  The
Assyrian  victories  thus  rarely  produced  the  decisive  results  which  are  claimed
for  them ;  they  almost  always  left  the  conquered  people  with  sufficient  energy
and  resources  to  enable  them  to  resume  the  conflict  after  a  brief  interval,
and  the  supremacy  which  the  suzerain  claimed  as  a  result  of  his  conquests
was  of  the  most  ephemeral  nature.  A  revolt  would  suffice  to  shake  it,  while
a  victory  would  be  almost  certain  to  destroy  it,  and  once  more  reduce  the
empire  to  the  limits  of  Assyria  proper.

Tukultiabalesharra,  familiar  to  us  under  the  name  of  Tiglath-pileser,^  is  the
first  of  the  great  warrior-kings  of  Assyria  to  stand  out  before  us  with  any  definite
individuality.  We  find  him,  in  the  interval  between  two  skirmishes,  engaged
in  hunting  lions  or  in  the  pursuit  of  other  wild  beasts,  and  we  see  him  lavishing
offerings  on  the  gods  and  enriching  their  temples  with  the  spoils  of  his
victories ;  these,  however,  were  not  the  normal  occupations  of  this  sovereigu,
for  peace  with  him  was  merely  an  interlude  in  a  reign  of  conflict.     He  led  all

'  For  example,  Tiglath-piloser  I.  conquers  the  Kummukli  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  burning,
destroying,  and  depopulating  the  towns,  and  massacring  "  the  remainder  of  the  Kummukli "  who  had
taken  refuge  in  the  mountains  {Annah,  col.  i.  1.  S9,  col.  ii.  11.  16,  5ti-5S),  after  which,  in  his  second
campaign,  he  again  pillages,  burns,  destroys,  and  depoimlates  the  towns,  and  again  massacres  the
remainder  of  the  inhabitants  hiding  in  themounteuns  (JH»a/s,  col.  iii.  11. 11-35).  He  makes  the  same
statements  with  regard  to  most  of  the  other  countries  and  peoples  conquered  by  him,  but  we  find
them  reappearing  with  renewed  vigour  on  the  scene,  soon  after  their  supposed  destruction.

''  Annals  of  Tiglatli-pileser  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  39-12,  col.  iii.  11.  lU-25,  72-75.

'  Tiglath-pileser  is  one  of  the  transcriptions  given  in  the  LXX.  for  the  Hebrew  version  of  tho
name  :  it  signilies,  "  The  child  of  Esharra  is  my  strength."  By  "the  child  of  Esharra"  the  Assyrians,
like  the  Chaldseans,  understood  the  child  of  Xinib  (Lotz,  Die  ImchrifteH  Tujlath-pileser  s  I.,  pp.  1-3)-


THE    CAMPAIGN   OF   TIGLATH-riLESER   I.   AGAINST   THE  MVSEKU.     043

his  expeditions  in  person,  undeterred  by  any  consideration  of  fatigue  or  danger,
and  scarcely  liad  he  rt'turned  from  one  arduous  campaign,  than  he  proceeded
to  sketch  the  plan  of  that  for  the  following  year ;  in  short,  he  reigned  only
to  wage  war.*  His  father,  Assurishishi,  had  bequeathed  him  not  only  a  pros-
perous kingdom,  but  a  well-organised  army,  which  he  placed  in  the  field
without  delay.  During  the  fifty  years  since  the  Mushku,  descending  through
the  gorges  of  the  Taurus,  had  invaded  the  Alzi  and  the  Purukuzzi,'-  Assyria
had  not  only  lost  possession  of  all  the  countries  bordering  the  left  bank  of
the  Euphrates,  but  the  whole  of  Kummukh  had  withdrawn  its  allegiance  from
her,  and  had  ceased  to  pay  tribute.  Tiglath-pileser  had  ascended  the  tiirone
only  a  few  weeks  ere  he  quitted  Assur,  marched  rapidly  across  Eastern
Mesopotamia  by  the  usual  route,  through  Singar  and  Kisib,  and  climbing
the  chain  of  the  Kashiara,  near  Mardin,  bore  down  into  the  very  heart  of
Kummukh,  where  twenty  thousand  Mushku,  under  the  command  of  five  kings,
resolutely  awaited  him.  He  repulsed  them  in  the  very  first  engagement,  and
pursued  them  hotly  over  hill  and  vale,  pillaging  the  fields,  and  encircling  the
towns  with  trophies  of  human  heads  taken  from  the  prisoners  who  had  fallen  into
his  hands ;  the  survivors,  to  the  number  of  six  thousand,  laid  down  their  arms,
and  were  despatched  to  Assyria.-^  The  Kummukh  contingents,  however,  had
been  separated  in  the  rout  from  the  Mushku,  and  had  taken  refuge  beyond
the  Euphrates,  near  to  the  fortress  of  Shirisha,  where  they  imagined  them-
selves in  safety  behind  a  rampart  of  mountains  aud  forests.  Tiglath-pileser
managed,  by  cutting  a  road  for  his  foot-soldiers  and  chariots,  to  reach
their  retreat :  he  stormed  the  place  without  apparent  difficulty,  massacred
the  defenders,  and  then  turning  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Kurkhi,*  who  were  on

'  We  possess  two  different  documeuts  aa  materials  for  a  study  of  the  reign  of  Tiglatli-pileser  :  let.
Tlie  Annals  of  liis  first  live  years,  of  wliicli  there  are  lour  copies  published  in  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pis.  9-li),  and  also  in  Winckleh,  Samiitluiuj  von  Keihchriftlexten  I.,  pp.  1-25,  translated
in  1857  by  four  Assyriologists  under  the  title  otlnscripliunuf  Ti(jlaih-FUeser  I.,  King  of  Assyria,  B.C.
11.50,  as  translated  by  tiir  II.  liawUnson,  Fox  Talbot,  Dr.  Hindis  and  Dr.  Oppert,  and  also  iu  IStjS  by
Oppebt  aloue,  Histoire  des  Empires  de  Clialdie et  d'Assyrie, etc.,  pp.  44-59,  tianscribed,  translated,  and
commented  on  by  LoTZ,  Die  Inschr.  Tiglath-pileser' s  I.,  pp.  12-lSS,  and  finally  transcribed  and  trans-
lated by  AViNCKLER,  Inschr.  Tiglath-Pilener's  I,  in  Scuradku,  Keil.  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  14-47.  2udly.
The  Annals  of  his  first  ten  years,  at  first  attributed  to  Assurishishi  (cf.  supra,  p.  016,  n.  4),  published
by  H.  Rawlinsun,  Cun.  Ins.  JV.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  5,  \os.l  5, and  again  by  Wincklek,  Sammluug  von  Keil-
schrifltexien  I.,  pp.  20,  27,  annotated  by  LoTZ,  Vie  Inschr.  Tiglath-pileser' s  /.,  pji.  V3'i,  194,  and  more
completely  by  Meissner,  Der  Elamit.  Feldzug  Tiglath-pileser' s  I.,i\i  Zeits.  fUr  Assyr.,vol.  ix.  pp.  101-101.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  .591,  (JIG.

'  Annals  (if  Tigluth-  pileser  I,  col.  i.  U.  G2-88  ;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Inschr  if  ten  Tiglath-pileser's  I.,  pji.  1(5-19.
The  king,  starting  from  Atsur,  must  have  followed  the  route  through  Sindjar,  Nisib,  Mardin,  and
Diarbekir— a  road  used  later  liy  the  Romans,  and  still  iu  existence  at  the  present  day.  As  he  did
not  penetrate  that  year  as  far  as  the  provinces  of  Alzi  and  Purukuzzi,  he  must  have  halted  at  the
commencement  of  the  mountain  district,  aud  have  beaten  the  allies  in  the  plain  of  Kuru-tchai,  before
Diarbe£ir,  in  tlie  m  ighljourhood  of  Iho  Tigris.

'  The  country  of  the  Kurkhi  appears  to  have  included  at  this  period  the  provinces  lying  between
the  SebLeueh-Su  aud  the  mountains  of  I'judi,  probably  a  portion  of  the  Sophene,  the  Auzanene  and
tho  Gordyene  of  classical  authors  (Schrader,  Keilinschriften  nnd  Gesdtiehtsforschung,  p|).  145-147,  note,
188,  189);  for  the  reading  Kurti  of  this  name,  cf.  IIom.mel,  Oeseh.  Hub.  und  Assy.,  p.  522,  note  3,  524.


I


C44  THE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

their  way  to  reinforce  the  besieged,  drove  their  soldiers  into  the  Nami,
whose  waters  carried  the  corpses  down  to  the  Tigris.  One  of  their  princes,
Kiliteshub,  son  of  Kaliteshub-Sarupi,^  had  been  made  prisoner  during  the
action.  Tighith-pileser  sent  him,  together  with  his  wives,  children,  treasures,
and  gods,"  to  share  tlie  captivity  of  tlie  Mushku ;  then  retracing  his  steps,
he  crossed  over  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and  attacked  the  stronghold
of  Urrakhinas  which  crowned  the  summit  of  Panari.  The  people,  terror-
stricken  by  the  fate  of  their  neighbours,  seized  their  idols  and  hid  themselves
within  the  thickets  like  a  flock  of  birds.  Their  chief,  Shaditeshub,  son  of
Khatusaru,^  ventured  from  out  of  his  hiding-place  to  meet  the  Assyrian
conqueror,  and  prostrated  himself  at  his  feet.  He  delivered  over  his  sous
and  the  males  of  his  family  as  hostages,  and  yielded  up  all  his  possessions
in  gold  and  copper,  together  with  a  hundred  and  twenty  slaves  and  cattle  of
all  kinds ;  Tiglath-pileser  thereupon  permitted  him  to  keep  his  principality
under  the  suzerainty  of  Assyria,  and  sucii  of  his  allies  as  followed  his  example
obtained  a  similar  concession.  Tlie  king  consecrated  the  tenth  of  the  spoil
thus  received  to  the  use  of  his  god  Assur  and  also  to  Ramman ;  *  but  before
returning  to  his  capital,  he  suddenly  resolved  to  make  an  expedition  into
the  almost  impenetrable  regions  which  separated  him  from  Lake  Van.  This
district  was,  even  more  than  at  the  present  day,  a  confused  labyrinth  of  wooded
mountain  ranges,  through  which  the  Eastern  Tigris  and  its  affluents  poured
their  rapid  waters  in  tortuous  curves.  As  hitherto  no  army  had  succeeded
in  making  its  way  through  this  territory  with  sutficient  speed  to  surprise
the  fortified  villages  and  scattered  clans  inhabiting  the  valleys  and  mountain
slopes,  Tiglath-pileser  selected  from  his  force  a  small  troop  of  light  infantry
and  thirty  chariots,  with  which  he  struck  into  the  forests ;  but,  on  reaching

'  The  names  of  these  princes  have  been  read  Kiliauterus,  Kalianteius.  and  lower  down  Shadian-
terus.  Fr.  Lenormant  connected  them  with  the  Asiatic  names  ending  in  -andros, — Maiaiidros,
Scamandros ;  he  identified  in  the  same  way  the  first  element  of  the  Lydian  name  Sadyaltes  with
Shadianterus,  and  traced  back  Sadiandros  (ies  antiquiUs  de  la  Troade,  etc.,  i.  pp.  65,  G6,  and  Les
Origines  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  76 ;  cf.  SATCE,,!r/(e  Monuments  of  the  Hittites,  in  the  Transact  ions  of
the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vul.  vii.  p.  291).  Briianow  has  shown  that  we  ought  to  recognise  in  the  second
element  the  name  of  the  god  Tesbub,  Tessupas,  Tisubu,  Teshupu  (cf.  supra,  p.  355,  note  I),  and  read
Kiliteslmb,  Kaliteshub,  Shaditesliub  (Jen-'en,  Grundlagen  fiir  eine  Entzifferung  der  Hutischen  oder
Cilicischen  Iiisrhriften,  p.  165).

*  Annals  of  Tiijlath-pilese.r  I.,  col.  i.  11.  S9-94,  col.  ii.  11.  1-35;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Inschri/ten  Tiglath-
pileser's  I.,  pp.  18-21.  According  to  what  is  said  on  p.  664,  note  3,  the  vanquished  must  have  crossed
the  Tigris  below  Diarbekir  and  have  taken  refuge  beyond  Mayafarrikin,  so  that  Shirisha  must  be  sought
for  between  the  Silvan-dagh  and  the  Ak-dagb,  in  the  biisin  of  the  Batman-tchai.  the  present  Xami.

^  The  name  of  this  chiefs  father  has  always  been  read  Khatukhi :  it  is  a  form  of  tlie  name
Khatusaru  borne  by  the  Hittite  king  in  the  time  of  Ramses  II.     Cf.  supra,  p.  589,  note  3.

•  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  36-62  ;  cf.  I.OTZ,  Die  Inschri/ten  Tiglalh-pileser's  I.,  pp.  20-23.
Tiie  site  of  Urrakhinas — read  by  VVinckler  Urartinas  (Inschr.  Tiijlulh-pilestr's  I.,  in  ScHii.^DEK,  Keilin-
schriftUche  Bihliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  20,  21) — is  very  uncertain  :  the  town  was  situated  in  a  territory
which  could  belong  equally  well  to  the  Kummukh  or  to  the  Kurkhi,  and  the  mention  of  the  crossing
of  the  Tigris  seems  to  indicate  that  it  was  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  probably  in  the  mountain
group  of  Tur-Abdin,


TEE    CONQUEST   OF   THE  KURKUI  AND    THE    UPPER   ZAD.        645

the  Aruuia,  he  was  forced  to  abandon  his  ehariutry  and  {jroceed  with  the
loot-soldiers  only.  The  Jlildish,  terrified  hy  his  sudden  appearance,  fell  an
easy  prey  to  the  invader :  the  king  scattered  the  troops  hastily  collected  to
oppose  him,  set  fire  to  a  few  fortresses,  seized  the  peasantry  and  tlieir  flocks,
and  demanded  liostages  and  the  usual  tribute  as  a  condition  of  peace.^  In
his  first  campaign  be  thus  reduced  the  upper  and  eastern  half  of  Kummukh,
namely,  the  part  extending  to  the  north  of  the  Tigris,  while  in  the  following
campaign  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  regions  bounded  by  the  Euphrates
and  by  the  western  spurs  of  the  Kashiari.  The  Alzi  and  the  Purukuzzi  had
been  disconcerted  by  his  victories,  and  had  yielded  him  their  allegiance  almost
without  a  struggle.'-^  To  the  southward,  the  Kashku  and  the  Urumi,  who  had,
to  the  number  of  four  thousand,  migrated  from  among  the  Khati  and  compelled
the  towns  of  the  Shubarti  to  break  their  alliance  with  the  Ninevite  kings,
now  made  no  attempt  at  resistance  ;  they  laid  down  their  arms  and  yielded
at  discretion,  giving  up  their  goods  and  their  hundred  and  twenty  war-
chariots,  and  resigning  themselves  to  the  task  of  colonising  a  distant  corner
of  Assyria.^  Other  provinces,  however,  were  not  so  easily  dealt  with ;  the
inliabitants  entrenched  themselves  within  their  wild  valleys,  from  whence
they  had  to  be  ousted  by  sheer  force;  in  the  end  they  always  had  to  yield,
and  to  undertake  to  pay  an  annual  tribute.  The  Assyrian  empire  thus  re-
gained on  this  side  the  countries  which  Shalmaneser  I.  had  lost,  owing  to
the  absorption  of  his  energies  and  interests  in  the  events  which  were  taking
place  in  Chaldaja.^

In  his  third  campaign  Tiglath-pileser  succeeded  in  bringing  about  the
pacification  of  the  border  provinces  which  shut  in  the  basin  of  the  Tigris  to
the  north  and  east.  The  Kurkhi  did  not  consider  themselves  conquered
by  the  check  they  had  received  at  the  Nami ;  several  of  their  tribes  were
stirring  in  Kharia,  on  the  highlands  above  tlie  Arzania,  and  their  rest-
lessness threatened  to  infect  such  of  their  neighbours  as  had  already
submitted  themselves  to  the  Assyrian  yoke.  "  My  master  Assur  commauded
me  to  attack  their  proud  summits,  which  no  king  has  ever  visited.  I
assembled  my  chariots  and  my  foot-soldiers,  and  I  passed  between  the  Idni
and  the  Aia,  by  a  difticult  country,  across  cloud-capped  mountains  whose
peaks  were  as  tlic   puiot   of   a  dagger,  and    unfavourable   to   the  progress  of

'  A nnals  of  Tiqlath-pileHer  I.,  col.  ii.  11.  G3-S4  ;  cf.  Lotz,  Dk  Insdirl/ten  Tajlath-pihiur's  I.,  l>y.  22-25.
The  Mililisli  of  oiir  inscription  is  to  be  identified  with  the  country  of  Mount  Umildish,  meutioued  by
Sargon  of  Assyria  (Oreat  Imcripti'on,  1.  :17).  Hommel  appears  to  me  to  place  it  too  far  north  :  if,  as
lie  says  (Gesch.  liah.  und  Am.,  p.  .'523,  noto  2),  the  troops  had  touched  at  Arzania  and  Lalce  Van,  I
tliinlc  the  king  would  not  have  omitted  to  mention  the  fact.

»  Anmih,  col.  ii.  11.  8i)-9(; ;  cf.  Lotz,  Vie  Jnschrifien  Tiglaili-piUeer's  L,  pp.  24,  25.

'  AnnaU,  etc.,  col.  ii.  11.  9G-1(J2,  col.  iii.  11.  1-0;  cf.  Lotz,  „p.  cit.,  pp.  24-27.  See  what  is  aaid,
siqim,  p.  591,  upon  this  invasion  of  the  Kashku  and  tlie  Urumi  into  the  country  of  Shubarti.

'  AnnaU,  etc.,  col.  iii.  U.  7-31 ;  cf.  Lotz,  op.  cil.,  pp.  26-211.


G46  THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

my  chariots ;  I  therefore  left  my  chariots  in  reserve,  and  I  climbed  these
steep  mountains.  The  community  of  the  Kurkhi  assembled  its  numerous
troops,  and  in  order  to  give  me  battle  they  entrenched  themselves  upon
the  Aznbtagish ;  on  the  slopes  of  the  mountain,  an  incommodious  position,
I  came  into  conflict  with  them,  and  I  vanquished  them."  This  lesson  cost
them  twenty-five  towns,  situated  at  the  feet  of  the  Aia,  the  Shuira,  the  Idni,
the  Shizu,  the  Silgu,  and  the  Arzanabiu  ^ — all  twenty-five  being  burnt  to  the
ground.  The  dread  of  a  similar  fate  impelled  the  neighbouring  inhabitants
of  Adaush  to  beg  for  a  truce,  which  was  granted  to  them  ;  -  but  the  people
of  Saraush  and  of  Ammaush,  who  "from  all  time  had  never  known  what  it
was  to  obey,"  were  cut  to  pieces,  and  their  survivors  incorporated  into  the
empire — a  like  fate  overtaking  the  Isua  and  the  Daria,  who  inhabited
Khoatras.-^  Beyond  this,  again,  on  the  bunks  of  the  Lesser  Zab  and  the
confines  of  Lulume,  the  principalities  of  Muraddash  and  of  Saradaush  refused
to  come  to  terms.  Tiglath-pileser  broke  their  lines  within  sight  of  Muraddash,
and  entered  the  town  with  the  fugitives  in  the  confusion  which  ensued ;  this
took  place  about  the  fourth  hour  of  the  day.  The  success  was  so  prompt  and
complete,  that  the  king  was  inclined  to  attribute  it  to  the  help  of  Eamman,
and  he  made  an  offering  to  the  temple  of  this  god  at  Assur  of  all  the  copper,
whether  wrought  or  in  ore,  which  was  found  among  the  spoil  of  the  vanquished.^
He  was  recalled  almost  immediately  after  this  victory  by  a  sedition  among
the  Kurkhi  near  the  sources  of  the  Tigris.  One  of  their  tribes,  known  as
the  Sugi,  who  had  not  as  yet  suffered  from  the  invaders,  had  concentrated
round  their  standards  contingents  from  some  half-dozen  cities,  and  the  united
force  was,  to  the  number  of  six  thousand,  drawn  up  on  Mount  Khirikha.
Tiglath-pileser  was  again  victorious,  and  took  from  them  twenty-five  statues
of  their  gods,  which  he  despatched  to  Assyria  to  be  distributed  among  the
sanctuaries  of  Belit  at  Assur,  of  Anu,  Eamman,  and  of  Ishtar.^  ^Viuter  obliged
him  to  suspend  operations.     When  he  again  resumed  them  at  the  begiunin"

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  Z,  col.  iii,  11.  39-60 ;  cf.  Lotz,  Die  Inschri/ten  Tiglath-pileser' s  I.,  pp.
28-31.  For  the  site  of  Kharia,  cf.  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bah.  unci  Ass.,  p.  521 ;  it  must  be  sought  for
probably  between  tlie  sources  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Batman-tchai.

'  Annals,  etc.,  col.  iii.  11.  70-76 ;  cf.  Lotz,  op.  cit.,  pp.  30, 31.  According  to  the  context,  the  Adaush
ought  to  be  between  the  Kharia  and  the  Saraush  ;  possibly  between  the  Batman-tchai  and  the  Bohtaii-
tchaS,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mildish.

"  Annals,  etc.,  col.  iii.  11.  77-106,  col.  iv.  11.  1-6;  cf.  Lotz,  op.  cit.,  pp.  30-35.  As  Tiglath-pileser
was  forced  to  cross  Mount  Aruma  (see  supra,  p.  611)  in  order  to  reach  the  Ammaush  and  the  Saraush,
these  two  countries,  together  with  Isua  and  Daria,  cannot  bo  far  from  Mildi.'sli ;  Isua  is,  iudeed',
mentioned  as  near  to  Anzitene  in  an  inscription  of  Shalmaueser  II.,  which  obliges  us  to  place  it
somewhere  near  the  sources  of  the  Batman-tchai  (Sayce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  the
J.  R.  As.  Soc.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  398).  The  position  of  Muraddash  and  Saradaush  is  indirectly  pointed  out
by  the  mention  of  the  Lower  Zab  and  the  Lulume  ;  the  name  of  Saradaush  is  perhaps"  preserved  in
that  of  Surtash,  borne  by  the  valley  through  which  runs  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Lower  Zab.

*  Annals,  etc.,  col.  iv.  11.7-39;  cf.  Lotz,  Die  Inschriften  Tiglath-pileser' s  I,  pp.  31-37.  For  the
site  of  the  Sugi,  cf.  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  untl  Ass.,  p.  525.


THE  PETTY  ASIATIC  KINODOMS   AND    THEIR    CIVILIZATION.      (Ml


of  bis  third  year,  botii  the  Kiniimukh  and  the  Kurkhi  were  so  peaceably
settled  that  he  was  able  to  carry  his  expeditions  without  fear  of  danger
further  north,  into  the  regions  of  the  Upper  Euphrates  between  the  Halys
and  Lake  Van,  a  district  then  known  as  Nairi.  He  marched  diagonally
across  the  plain  of  Diarbekir,  penetrated  through  dense  forests,  climbed
sixteen  mountain  ridges  one  after  the  other  by  paths  hitherto  considered  •
impracticable,  and  finally  crossed  the  Euphrates  by  improvised  bridges,  this
being,  as   far  as  we  know,  the   first  time   that  an   Assyrian   monarch  had


-■"         -      ■     -•'at.


%i^^^:^^^^


GEKERAL   VIEW   OF   THE    UUINS   OF    EUVUK.'


ventured  into  the  very  heart  of  those  countries  which  had  formerly  constituted
the  Hittite  empire.

He  found  them  occupied  by  rude  and  warlike  tribes,  who  derived  con-
siderable wealth  from  working  the  mines,  and  possessed  each  their  own  special
sanctuary,  the  ruins  of  which  still  appear  above  ground,  and  invite  the
attention  of  the  explorer.  Their  fortresses  must  have  all  more  or  less
resembled  that  city  of  the  Pteriuns  which  flourished  for  so  many  ages  just
at  the  bend  of  the  Halys;-  its  site  is  still  marked  by  a  mound  rising  to
some  thirty  feet  above  the  plain,  resembling  the  platforms  on  which  the
Chalilsean  temples  were  always  built — a  few  walls  of  burnt  brick,  and  witliin

'  Drawn  liy  Boudier,  from  a  pholo-rapb  :  fl'.  PEiiiiOT-CiiiPiEZ,  Uisloire  de  I'Arl,  vol.  iv.  p.  OGl.

'  For  thu  city  of  the  Pteriaris,  tlic;  present  Euyuk,  cf.  Perrot-Ciiipiez,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  (J5G-G86.
The  remains  of  the  palace  of  Euyuk  are  probahly  later  than  the  reign  of  Ti.;,'lath-pilescr,  ami  may  be
attributed  to  the  X""  or  IX"'  century  before  our  era ;  they,  however,  probably  ^ivc  a  very  fair  idea  of
what  the  towna  of  the  Cappadocian  regiou  were  like  at  the  time  of  the  first  Asayriau  invasions.


(348


TEE  RISE   OF   TEE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


an  enclosure,  among  the  debris  of  rudely  built  houses,  the  ruins  of  some
temples  and  palaces  consisting  of  large  irregular  blocks  of  stone.  Two  colossal
sphinxes  guard  the  gateway  of  the  principal  edifice,  and  their  presence  proves
with  certainty  how  predominant  was  Egyptian  influence  even  at  this  con-
siderable distance  from
the  banks  of  the  Nile.
They  are  not  the  ordinary
sphinxes,  with  a  human
head  surmounting  the
body  of  a  lion  couchant
on  its  stone  pedestal ;  but,
like  tlie  Assyrian  bulls,
they  are  standing,  and,  to
judge  from  the  Hathoriau
locks  which  fall  on  each
side  of  their  countenances,
they  must  have  been  in-
tended to  represent  a  pro-
tecting goddess  rather
than  a  male  deity.'^  A
remarkable  emblem  is
carved  on  the  side  of  the
upright  to  which  their
bodies  are  attached;  it
IS   none    other  than    the


THK   SrilIN.\    ON    THE    ICIGHT   OF    EUYUK.'


double-headed  eagle,  the
prototyi)e  of  which  is  not  infrequently  found  at  Telloli  in  Lower  Chaldsea,
among  remains  dating  from  the  time  of  the  kings  and  vicegerents  of
Lagash.^  The  court  or  hall  to  which  this  gate  gave  access  was  decorated
with  bas-reliefs,  which  exhibit  a  glaring  imitation  of  Babylonian  art ;  we
can  still  see  on  these  the  king,  vested  in  his  long  flowing  robes,  praying
before  an  altar,  while  further  on  is  a  procession  of  dignitaries  following  a
troop  of  rams  led  by  a  priest  to  be  sacrificed ;  another  scene  represents  two
individuals  in  the  attitude  of  worship,  wearing  short  loin-cloths,  and  climbing
a  ladder  whose  upper  end  has  an  uncertain  termination,  while  a  third  person
applies   his   hands   to   his   mouth    in   the   performance   of  some    mysterious

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.  This  is  the  sphinx  seen  on  the  right  of  the
illustration  on  p.  647;  the  sphinx  to  the  left  is  reproduced  in  Peruot-Cbipiez,  Elsloire  de  I'Art,
vol.  iv.  p.  G65.

■  Pebuot-Chipiez,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  667,  668.

^  For  the  Chaldocan  emblem  of  the  double-headed  eagle,  cf.  the  illustration  on  pp.  603,  604  of  the
Daivn  of  Cimlizalion.


TEE  ART  AND    WJUTJNG    OF   TEE  ANCIENT  EITTITE  STATES.      G49

ceremony ;  beyond  these  are  priests  and  priestesses  moving  in  solemn  file  as  if
in  the  measured  tread  of  some  sacred  dance,^  while  in  one  corner  we  find  tlie
figure  of  a  woman,  probably  a  goddess,  seated,  holding  in  one  hand  a  flower,
perhaps  the  full-blown  lotus,  and  in  the  other  a  cup  from  which  she  is  about
to  drink.  The  costume  of  all  these  figures  is  that  which  Chaldsean  fashion
had    imposed   upon    tho  wliole  of  Western    Asia,  and  consisted  of  tlie  long


^^^•LJpt


TWO    IILOCKS    CUVEKEJ)    WITH    IiAS-Utl,lEF.S    IN    TUli    ELVLK   l'AL,A(jE.-


liea\  y  robe,  falling  from  the  shoulders  to  the  feet,  drawn  in  at  the  waist  by
a  girdle ;  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  both  sexes  are  shod  witli  the  turned-up
shoes  of  the  Hittites,  and  that  the  women  wear  high  peaked  caps.  The
composition  of  the  scenes  is  rude,  the  drawing  incorrect,  and  the  general
technique  reminds  us  rather  of  the  low  reliefs  of  the  Memphite  or  Theban
sculptors  than  of  the  high  projection  characteristic  of  the  artists  of  the  Lower
Euphrates.  These  slabs  of  sculptured  stone  formed  a  facing  at  the  base  of
the  now  crumbling  brick  walls,  the  upper  surface  of  which  was  covered  with
rough  plastering;^  Here  and  there  a  few  iuscriptions  reveal  the  name,  titles,
and  parentage  of  some  once  celebrated  personage,  and  mention  the  god  in
whose  honour  he  had  achieved  the  work.  The  chai-acters  in  which  these
inscriptions  are  written  are  not,  as  a  rule,  incised  in  the  stone,  but  arc  cut
ill   ii'lief  upon   its   surface,  and  if  some  few  of  them  may  remind  us   of  the

'  1'euuot.  J'!xploration  arch^oJocjiqiie  de  la  Galatie,  pis.  Ixi.,  Ixiii.,  Ixiv.,  and  llistoire  de  VArt  daiiK
r Antiquilc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  *;7il,  (J75,  G7!t.

-  Driiwn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograpli ;  cf.  Pkuhot-Cuipiez,  Ilidoiru  dc  I'Arl  dani'
VAiilhiuilif,  vol.  iv.  pp.  072,  (i7B.

'  I'KRUOT-CmriKZ,  op.  ci7.,  vol.  iv.  ]i.  tJCO.


G50


THE  RISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


MYSTIC    SCENE    AT    EUYUK.'


Egyptian  hieroglyplis,  the
majority  are  totally  unlike
them,  both  in  form  and  exe-
cution. A  careful  exami-
nation of  them  reveals  a
medley  of  human  and  animal
outlines,  geometrical  figures,
and  objects  of  daily  use,
which  all  doubtless  corre-
sponded to  some  letter  or
syllable,  but  to  which  we
have  as  yet  no  trustworthy
key.  This  system  of  writing
is  one  of  a  whole  group  of
Asiatic  scripts,  specimens  of  which  are  common  in  this  part  of  the  world
from  Crete  to  the  banks  of  the
Euphrates  and  Orontes.^  It  is
thought  that  the  Khati  must  have
already  adopted  it  before  their  ad-
vent to  power,  and  that  it  was  they
who  propagated  it  in  Northern  Syria.
It  did  not  take  the  place  of  the
cuneiform  syllabary  for  ordinary
purposes  of  daily  life  owing  to  its
clumsiness  and  complex  character,
but  its  use  was  reserved  for  monu-
mental inscriptions  of  a  royal  or
religious  kind,  where  it  could  be
suitably  employed  as  a  framework  to
scenes  or  single  figures.  It,  how-
ever, never  presented  the  same  grace-
ful appearance  and  arrangement  as
was  exhibited  in  the  Egyptian  hiero-
glyphs, the  signs  placed  side  by  side
being  out  of  proportion  with  each
other  so  as  to  destroy  the  general
harmony  of  the  lines,  and  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  script  still  in  process  of

'  Drawn  by  Paucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph ;  cf.  Pebkot-Chipiez,  Bist.  dc  VArl,  vol.  iv.  p.  671.

^  For  the  Cretan  inscriptions,  see  above,  p.  4G3.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotcgraph  ;  cf.  Perrot-Ghipiez,  o^j.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  67S.


AN    ASIATIC   GODDESS.^


THE  BAS-BELIEFS   OF  FliAKHTIN  AND   IB  BIZ.


G51


formation  and  not  yet  emerged  from  infancy.^  Every  square  yard  of  soil  turned
up  among  the  ruins  of  the  iiouses  of  Euyuk  yields  vestiges  of  tools,  coarse  pottery,
terra-cotta  and  bronze  statuettes  of  men  and  animals,  and  other  objects  of  a  not
very  high  civilization.  The  few  articles  of  luxury  discovered,  whether  in  furni-
ture or  utensils,  were  not  indigenous  products,  but  were  imported  for  the  most


"#-J'-'*S«^?i^'^'^


TlIK    ASIAIIL'    INSI'ltlPTION'    OF    KOI.ITOLI  -VAILA.'


part  from  Chaldaea,  Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  perhaps  from  Egypt ;  some  objects,,
indeed,  came  from  the  coast-towns  of  the  iEgean,  thus  showing  that  Western
influence  was  already  in  contact  with  the  traditions  of  the  East.  All  the
various  races  settled  between  the  Halys  and  the  Orontes  were  more  or  less-
imbued  with  this  foreign  civilization,  and  their  monuments,  though  not  nearly


'  Sayoe,  who  was  the  firat  to  attempt  to  decipher  it,  was  struck  by  certain  resembhxaces  in  its  signs-
with  those  of  the  Cypriote  syllabary  (T/ie  Monuments  of  the  Hittiles,  in  tlie  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  viii.  p.  253,  et  seq.) ;  Conder,  on  the  other  hand,  claimed  to  have  discovered  certain
analogies  with  the  hieroglyphs  {Hamatli  Inscriptions,  in  the  Palestine  Kxploratio^i  Fund,  Quarterly-
Statements,  1S83,  pp.  133,  134,  189-192).  Since  these  first  attempts,  many  tentative  efforts  have  been
made  to  under.stand  the  texts  written  in  this  script :  Ilale'vy  was  opposed  to  the  usual  tlieory  that
they  were  Hittite,  and  proposed  to  call  them  .'Vnatolian  (^Introduction  au  dichiffrement  des  inscriptions
pseudo-hittites  ou  anatoliennes,  in  the  Revue  s^mitique,  vol.  i.  ]ip.  5o-G2,  126-137).  Jensen,  following
Halevy's  theory,  proposed  to  regard  both  tlie  writing  and  the  language  as  those  of  Ciliciau  tribes
(Orundlagen  fiir  eine  Entzijfermiij  der  Ilatischen  oder  Cilicischen  Inschriften,  in  tho  Z  der  D.  Mor(jcnl.
Ges.,  vol.  xlviii.).  The  Cappadocian  tablets  studied  by  Fii.  Delitzsch,  Beitrdije  zur  Entzifferumj  und
ErMixrxmg  der  Kappadokisnhen  KeilschriJ'ttafcln  (in  the  Ahkandlumjen  of  tho  Saxon  Academy  of
Sciences,  Philology  and  Hist.  Section,  vol.  xiv.,  \o.  -1,  pp.  207-270),  probably  belong  to  the  period
before  or  after  Tiglath-pileser  I. ;  .Jensen,  however,  Iwlieves  tliat  they  sliould  be  attributed  to  the
earliest  times  of  AHsyrian  history,  before  tho  XX"'  century  B.C.  {Die  JCappadoldschen  Keilschri/t-
tS/elchen,  in  the  /litschri/t  fiir  Assyrioloijie,  vol.  x.  pp.  79-81).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Hogarth;  cf.  Ra.msav  and  Hou.MtTU,  I're-
hellenic  Monuments  of  Cappadocia,  in  the  llecucil  de  Traiaux,  vol.  xiv.  pi.  v.


•<')o2


THE   mSE    OF    THE   ASSTIUAN   EMPIRE.


SO  numerous  as  those  of  the  Pharaohs  and  Ninevite  kings,  bear,  nevertheless,
an  equally  striking  evidence  of  its  power.  Examples  of  it  have  been  pointed
out  in  a  score  of  different  places  in  the  valleys  of  the  Taurus  and  on  the  plains
of  Cappadocia,  in  bas-reliefs,  stela?,  seals,  and  intaglios,  several  of  which  must
•be  nearly  contemporaneous  with  the  first  Assyrian  conquest.     One  instance  of


]10U1)LE    SCENE    OF    OFFERINGS    AT    FRAKHTIN.'


it  appears  on  the  rocks  at  Ibriz,  where  a  king  stands  in  a  devout  attitude  before
a  jovial  giant  whose  hands  are  full  of  grapes  and  wheat-ears,  while  in  another
bas-relief  near  Frakhtin  we  have  a  double  scene  of  sacrifice.  The  rock-carving
at  Ibriz  is,  perhaps,  of  all  the  relics  of  a  forgotten  woidd,  that  which  impresses
the  spectator  most  favourably.  The  concept  of  the  scene  is  peculiarly  naive  ;
indeed,  the  two  figures  are  clumsily  brought  together,  though  each  of  them,
when  examined  separately,  is  remarkable  for  its  style  and  execution.  The
king  has  a  dignified  bearing  in  spite  of  his  large  head,  round  eyes,  and
the  nnskilful  way  in  which  his  arms  are  set  on  his  body.  The  figure  of  the
god  is  not  standing  firmly  on  both  feet,  but  the  sculptor  has  managed  to
invest  him  with  an  air  of  grandeur  and  an  expression  of  vigour  and  lonhomie,
which  reminds  us  of  certain  types  of  the  Greek  Hercules.

Tiglath-pileser  was  probably  attracted  to  Asia  Minor  as  much  by  considera-
tions of  mercantile  interest  as  by  the  love  of  conquest  or  desire  for  spoil.  It
would,  indeed,  have  been  an  incomparable  gain  for  him  had  he  been  able,  if
not  to  seize  the  mines  themselves,  at  least  to  come  into  such  close  proximity
to   them    that   he  would   be  able  to  monopolise  tlieir  entire  output,  and  at


'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  llogartli ;  ef.  Ramsay  and  Hogarth,  Pre-helleiiic
Monuments  of  Cappadocia,  in  the  liecueil  de  Tramiix,  vol.  xiv.  pi.  vi.  It  will  be  remarked  that  botli
-altars  are  in  the  form  of  a  female  without  a  head,  but  draped  in  the  Assyrian  robe.


TIGLATll-riLKSKIl    I.    IX   yAlIil.


65:5-


the  same  time  to  lay  hands  on  the  great  commeroial  highway  to  the  trade
centres  of  the  west.^  The  eastern  terminus  of  this  route  hxy  already  witliin
his   domains,  namely,   that


which  led  to  Assur  by  way
of  Amid,  Nisibe,  Singar,
and  the  valley  of  the  Upper
Tigris ;  he  was  now  de-
sirous of  acquiring  that
portion  of  it  which  wound
its  way  from  the  fords  of
the  Euphrates  at  Malatiyeh
to  the  crossing  of  the  Halys.
Tlie  changes  which  had
just  taken  place  in  Kum-
mukh  and  Nairi  had  fully
aroused  the  numerous  petty
sovereigns  of  the  neigh-
bourhood. The  bonds  which
kept  them  together  had  not
been  completely  severed  at
the  downfall  of  the  Hit-
tite  empire,  and  a  certain
sense  of  unity  still  lingered
among  them  in  spite  of  their
continual  feuds ;  they  constituted,  in  fact,  a  sort  of  loose  confederation,  whose
members  never  failed  to  help  one  another  when  they  were  threatened  by
a  common  enemy.*  As  soon  as  the  news  of  an  Assyrian  invasion  reached
them,  they  at  once  put  aside  their  mutual  quarrels  and  combined  to  oppose
the  invader  with  their  united  forces.  Tiglath-pileser  iiad,  therefore,  scarcely-
crossed  the  Euphrates  before  he  was  attacked  on  liis  right  flank  by  twenty-
three  petty  kings  of  Nairi,^  while  sixty  other  chiefs  from  the  same  neigh-
bourhood bore  down  upon  him  in  front.  He  overcame  the  first  detachment
of  the  confederates,  thongli  not  without  a,  sharp  struggle ;  he  carried  carnage

'  For  this  commeroial  highway,  cf.  .v«^/n(,  pp.  iiGl-liBT.

-  Drawn  h_v  Fauchcr-(Ju(lin,  from  a  pliotograpli  by  llugartli ;  cf.  Ramsay  miuI  H<xi.\RTii,  Pre-
helUnic  Monuments,  etc.,  iu  tlu;  Heruvil  ih   Trumnx,  vol.  xiv.  pis.  lii.,  iv.,  No.  If.

^  This  is  to  he  gathered  from  a  careful  ir.\aminatiou  of  the  passages  relating  to  these  people  iu  the
Annals  nf  Tiglath-pileser  I.;  I  have  followed  the  interpretation  given  by  Delattrh,  Kncore  uii  Mot
sur  la  G^ograpliie  Asuyriennr,  pp.  ')-lS.

'  The  textof  tlie  Annals  of  the  X"'  year  give  thirty  instead  of  twenty-three  (Wincklioi:,  Inarlni/len
ri<jlutli-l'ilesf-r's  I.,  p.  28, 1.  Ill) ;  in  the  cour.se  of  live  or  six  years  the  numhers  have  already  become
exaggerated.


THE    BAS-UELIEF   OF    IBRIZ."


.i;54  THE  BISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

-intu  their  ranks,  "  as  it  were  the  whirlwind  of  Kammau,"  and  seized  a  hun-
dred and  twenty  of  the  enemy's  chariots.^  The  sixty  chiefs,  whose  domains
extended  as  far  as  the  "  Upper  Sea,"  -  were  disconcerted  by  tlie  news  of  the
•disaster,  and  of  their  own  accord  laid  down  their  arms,  or  offered  but  a  feeble
resistance.  Tiglath-pileser  presented  some  of  tliem  in  chains  to  the  god  Shamash ;
he  extorted  an  oath  of  vassalage  from  them,  forced  them  to  give  up  their  children
as  hostages,  and  laid  a  tax  upon  them  en  masse  of  1200  stallions  and  2000  bulls,
after  which  he  permitted  them  to  return  to  their  respective  towus.  He  had,
however,  singled  out  from  among  them  to  grace  his  own  triumph,  Smi  of
Dayaua,  the  only  chief  among  them  who  had  offered  him  an  obstinate  resistance  ;
but  even  he  was  granted  his  liberty  after  he  had  been  carried  captive  to  Assur,
and  made  to  kneel  before  the  gods  of  Assyria.^  Before  returning  to  the  capital,
Tiglath-pileser  attacked  Khanigalbat,  and  appeared  before  Milidia  :  as  the
town  attempted  no  defence,  he  spared  it,  and  contented  himself  with  levying
a  small  contribution  upon  its  inhabitants.^  Tiiis  expedition  was  rather  of  the
nature  of  a  reconnaissance  than  a  conquest,  but  it  helped  to  convince  the  king
oi  the  difficulty  of  establishing  any  permanent  suzerainty  over  the  country.
The  Asiatic  peoples  were  quick  to  bow  before  a  sudden  attack ;  but  no  sooner
had  the  conqueror  departed,  than  those  who  had  sworn  him  eternal  fealty
sought  only  how  best  to  break  their  oaths.  The  tribes  in  immediate  proximity
to  those  provinces  which  had  been  long  subject  to  the  Assyrian  rule,  were
intimidated  into  showing  some  respect  for  a  power  which  existed  so  close  to
their  own  borders.  But  those  further  removed  from  the  seat  of  government
felt  a  certain  security  in  their  distance  from  it,  and  were  tempted  to  revert  to  the
state  of  independence  they  had  enjoyed  before  the  conquest ;  so  that  unless
the  sovereign,  by  a  fresh  campaign,  promptly  made  them  realise  that  their
disaffection  would  not  remain  unpunished,  they  soon  forgot  their  feudatory
•condition  and  the  duties  which  it  entailed.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  iv.  11.  43-9G  ;  cf.  Lotz,  iJte  Ltschr.  Tiglath-pilesei-'s  I.,  pp.  30-41.

-  Tlie  site  of  the  "Upper  Sea"  has  furnished  material  for  much  iliscussion.  Some  believe  it  to
be  the  Caspian  Sea  (Menant,  Annales  des  rots  d'Assyrie,  p.  34)  or  the  Black  Sea  (Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.
des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  331),  others  take  it  to  be  Lake  Van  (Schbadek,  Die  Xamen  der  Meere  in  den
Assyn!<eheii  Iiisch.,  p.  ISl,  et  seq. ;  Tiele,  Bab.-Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  162,  103),  while  some  think  it  to  be
the  Mediterranean,  and  more  particularly  the  Gulf  of  Issus  between  Syria  and  Cilicia  (G.  Kawlixson,
The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  06;  Delattke,  Fsquisse  dc  Ggographie  assyrienne,  pp.  10-19;
HoiiMEL,  Gesch.  Bab.  uiid  Ass.,  pp.  528,  529).  At  the  present  day  several  scholars  have  returned  to
the  theory  which  makes  it  the  Black  Sea  (Tiele,  Bab.  Ass.  Gesch.,  p.  014;  Delattke,  Encore  un  Hut
sur  In  Ge'og.  Assyrienne,  pp.  3-15).

=  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  iv.  11.  96-101,  col.  v.  11.  1-32  ;  cf.  Lotz,  Die  Inschr.  TiglatU-
jiileser's  I.,  pp.  39-43.  Dayani,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Shalmaaeser  II.  (Inscription  from
KurJih,  col.  ii.  11.  46,  47),  has  been  placed  on  the  banks  of  the  Murad-su  by  Sohrader  (Keilinschri/ten
■und  Geschichtsjorschung,  p.  154),  and  more  particularly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jlelasgerd  by  Sayco
(Cuneiform  InscrijAions  of  Van,  in  /.  E.  As.  Soc,  vol.  siv.  p.  399) ;  Delattre  has  shown  that  it  was  the
last  and  most  westerly  of  tneuty -three  kingdoms  conquered  by  Tiglath-pileser  I.  (Encore  un  Mot,  etc.,
pp.  11,  12),  and  that  it  was  consequently  enclosed  between  the  Murad-su  and  the  Euphrates  proper.

*  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  iv.  11.  33-41;  cf.  Lotz,  Die  Inschr.  Tiglath-pileser' s  L,  pp.  42,  43,


TIGLATH-PILESER   J.   AT  CARCEEMISH  AND  IN  MUSRI.  655

Three  years  of  merciless  conflict  witli  obstinate  and  warlike  mountaiQ  tribes
had  severely  tried  the  Assyrian  army,  if  it  had  not  worn  out  the  sovereign  ;  the
survivors  of  so  many  battles  were  in  sore  need  of  a  well-merited  repose,  the  gaps
left  by  death  had  to  be  filled,  and  both  infantry  and  chariotry  needed  the  re-model-
ling of  their  corps.  The  fourth  year  of  the  king's  reign,  therefore,  was  employed
almost  entirely  in  this  work  of  reorganisation  ;  we  tind  only  the  record  of  a  raid  of
a  few  weeks  against  the  Akhlami  and  other  nomadic  Aramaeans  situated  beyond
the  Mesopotamian  stejjpes.  The  Assyrians  spread  over  the  district  between
the  frontiers  of  Sukhi  and  the  fords  of  Carchemish  for  a  whole  day,  killing  all
who  resisted,  sacking  the  villages  and  laying  hands  on  slaves  and  cattle.  The
fugitives  escaped  over  the  Euphrates,  vainly  hoping  that  they  would  be  secure
in  the  very  heart  of  the  Khati.  Tiglath-pileser,  however,  crossed  the  river
on  rafts  supported  on  skins,  and  gave  the  provinces  of  Mount  Bishri  over  to
fire  and  sword  : '  six  walled  towns  opened  their  gates  to  him  without  having
ventured  to  strike  a  blow,  and  he  quitted  the  country  laden  with  spoil  before
the  kings  of  the  surrounding  cities  had  had  time  to  recover  from  their  alarm.-
This  expedition  was  for  Tiglath-pileser  merely  an  interlude  between  two  more
serious  campaigns ;  and  with  the  beginning  of  his  fifth  year  he  reappeared  in
the  provinces  of  the  Upper  Euphrates  to  complete  his  conquest  of  them.  He
began  by  attacking  and  devastating  Musri,  which  lay  close  to  the  territory  of
Milid.  While  thus  occupied  he  was  harassed  by  bands  of  Kumani ;  he  turned
upon  them,  overcame  them,  and  imprisoned  the  remainder  of  them  in  the
fortress  of  Arini,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Aisa,  where  he  forced  them  to  kiss  his
feet.  His  victory  over  them,  however,  did  not  disconcert  their  neighbours.
The  bulk  of  the  Kumani,  whose  troops  had  scarcely  suffered  in  the  engage-
ment, fortified  themselves  on  Mount  Tala,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand  ;
the  king  carried  the  heights  by  assault,  and  hotly  pursued  the  fugitives  as  far
as  the  range  of  Kharusa  before  Musri,  where  the  fortress  of  Khunusa  afforded
them  a  retreat  behind  its  triple  walls  of  brick.  The  king,  nothing  daunted,
broke  his  way  through  them  one  after  another,  demolished  the  ramparts,  razed
the  houses,  and  strewed  the  ruins  with  salt ;  he  then  constructed  a  chapel  of

'  The  country  of  Bishri  was  situalud,  as  tbe  Anmds  poiut  out,  iu  the  immediate  neiglibourhood  of
Carchemish.  The  name  is  preserved  in  that  of  Tell  Basher  still  borue  by  the  ruins,  and  a  modern
village  on  the  banks  of  the  Sajur  (Fu.  Delitzsch,  II'd  lny  das  Paradies?  p.  268;  Schradek,  Keilin-
Hchri/teii  nml  GenchichUfnrschunij,  p.  226,  note  1  ;  WlNCKLEii,  Gescli.  Bab.  uiul  Ass.,  p.  o32).  The
(iebel  Bishri  t«  which  Hommel  alludes  (^Gesch.  Bab.  uitd  Ass.,  p.  -163,  note  4)  is  too  far  to  the  south  to
correspond  to  the  dcscriptiou  given  in  the  iusoription  of  Tiglath-pileser.

'  Aiiiiah  of  Tiijlath-piUiser  J.,  col.  v.  11.  44-63  ;  of.  LoTZ,  Dieluschr.'Tiijlath-pileser's  I.,  pp.  44,  4;").
Hommel  (_Gesch.  Bub.  und  Ass.,  pp.  463,  464)  has  brought  to  bear  on  this  campaign  the  information
furnished  by  the  Si/iichronom  History,  col.  iii.  11.  14-24  (cf.  PKiSEii-WiNCKLiiii,  Vie  eoijcnannte
synchroiiistische  Gcech.,  in  SeuuAUKR,  Keiliitschri/tliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  198, 199),  and  which
refers  to  a  second  expedition  undertaken  in  these  regions  prob.ibly  in  the  year  preceding  the  taking
of  Babylon  (cf.  jip.  656-65S  of  the  present  worlc).


fioG  THE  SISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

brick  as  a  sort  of  trophy,  and  dedicated  within  it  what  was  known  as  a  copper
thunderbolt,  being  an  image  of  the  missile  which  Rammjin,  the  god  of  thunder,
brandislied  in  the  face  of  his  enemies.  An  inscription  engraved  on  the
object  recorded  the  destruction  of  Kliunusa,  and  threatened  with  every  divine
malediction  the  individual,  whether  an  Assyrian  or  a  stranger,  who  should
dare  to  rebuild  the  city.  This  victory  terrified  the  Kumani,  and  their  capital,
Kibshuna,  opened  its  gates  to  the  royal  troops  at  the  first  summons.  Tiglath-
pileser  completely  destroyed  the  town,  but  granted  the  inhabitants  their  lives
on  condition  of  their  paying  tribute ;  he  chose  from  among  them,  however,
three  hundred  families  who  had  shown  him  the  most  inveterate  hostility,  and
sent  them  as  exiles  into  Assyria.^  With  this  victory  the  first  half  of  his  reign
drew  to  its  close ;  in  five  years  Tiglath-pileser  had  subjugated  forty-two
peoples  and  their  princes  within  an  area  extending  from  the  banks  of  the
Lower  Zab  to  the  plains  of  the  Khati,  and  as  far  as  the  shores  of  the  Western
Seas.^  He  revisited  more  than  once  tliese  western  and  northern  regions  in
which  he  had  gained  his  early  triumphs.  The  reconnaissance  which  he  had
made  around  Carchemish  had  revealed  to  him  the  great  wealth  of  the  Syrian
table-land,  and  that  a  second  raid  in  that  direction  could  be  made  more
profitable  than  ten  successful  campaigns  in  Nairi  or  upon  the  banks  of  the  Zab.
He  therefore  marched  his  battalions  thither,  this  time  to  remain  for  more  than
a  few  days.  He  made  his  way  through  the  whole  breadth  of  the  country,
pushed  forward  up  the  valley  of  the  Orontes,  crossed  the  Lebanon,  and  emerged
above  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  in  the  vicinity  of  Arvad.  This  is  the  first
time  for  many  centuries  that  an  Oriental  sovereign  had  penetrated  so  far  west ;
and  his  contemporaries  must  have  been  obliged  to  look  back  to  the  almost
fabulous  ages  of  Sargon  of  Agade  or  of  Khamraurabi,*  to  find  in  the  long  lists
of  the  dynasties  of  the  Euphrates  any  record  of  a  sovereign  who  had  planted
liis  standards  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  the  Setting  Sun."*     Tiglath-pileser

>  AnuaU  of  Tiglalh-yiJeser  I.,  col.  v.  11.  C7 -KlO,  col.  vi.  11.  1-3^  ;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Inschrifteu  Tighith-
pileser's  I.,  pp.  41-51.  The  country  of  tlie  Kumani  or  Kammanu  is  really  the  district  of  Comaua  iu
Cataonia  (Uel.ittre,  VAsieoccidentale  dans  les  Inscriptions  Assyiiennes, pp.  C.'),  66,  and  Encore  un  Mot
sur  la  Geoqraphie  Assijrienne,  pp.  31-33),  and  not  the  Comana  Pontica  or  the  Khanimauene  on  the
banks  of  the  Halys  (Schuadek,  Keilinscluiften,  etc.,  p.  153).  Delattre  thinks  tliat  Tiglath-pile.'ier
penetrated  into  this  region  by  the  Jihun,  and  consequently  seeks  to  identify  the  names  of  towns  and
mountains,  e.3.  Mount  Ilamuni  with  Jaur-dagh,  the  Kharusa  with  Shorsh-dagh.aud  the  Tala  with  the
Kermes-dagh  (Encore  un  Mot,  etc.,  pp.  45,  46);  but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that,  if  the  king  took  this
route,  he  would  not  mention  the  town  of  Marqasi-Marash,  which  lay  at  the  very  foot  of  the  Jaur-dagh,
and  would  have  stopped  his  passage.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  .\ssyrians,  starting  from  Melitene,
which  they  had  just  subdued,  would  have  followed  tlie  route  which  skirts  the  northern  slope  of  the
Taurus  by  Albistau ;  the  scene  of  the  conflict  in  this  case  would  probably  have  been  the  mountainous
district  of  Zeitun.

=  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  L,  col,  vi.  11.  o9-4S;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Inschr.  Tiglath-pileser  s  1.,  pp.  5li,  51.

'  For  the  campaigns  of  Sargon  on  the  shores  of  the  Jlediterranean  and  his  conquest  of  Cyprus,
see  DaiCH  of  CirUization,  p.  598  ;  for  the  jiresence  of  Kliammurabi  and  his  successors  in  Syria  and
Phcenicia,  cf.  supra,  pp.  47-50.

'  This  is  the  name  given  by  the  Assyrians  to  the  Mediterranean  ;  cf.  Sciikadek,  Die  Namen  der
Meere  in  den  Assyrischen  Inschriften,  p.  171,  et  seq.


TIGLATH-PILESER    I.    IN   SYRIA.


(357


SACRIFICE    OFFERED    BEFORE   THE    IIOYAL    STELE.-


embarked  ou  its  waters,  made  a  cruise  into  the  open,  and  killed  a  porpoise,  but
we  have  no  record  of  any  battles  fought,  nor  do  we  know  how  he  was  received
bv  the  Phrenician  towns.'  He  pushed  on,  it  is  thought,  as  far  as  the  Nahr  el-
Kelb,  and  the  sight  of  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  which  Ramses  had  caused
to  be  cut  there  three  centuries  previously  aroused  his  emulation.'^  Assyrian
conquerors  rarely  quitted
the  scene  of  their  exploits
without  leaving  behind
them  some  permanent  me-
morial of  their  presence.
A  sculptor  having  hastily
smoothed  the  surface  of  a
rock  cut  out  on  it  a  figure
of  the  king,  to  which  was
usually  added  a  commemo-
rative inscription.  In  front
of  this  stele  was  erected
an  altar,  upon  which  sacri-
fices were  made,  and  if  the
monument  was  placed  near  a  stream  or  the  seashore,  the  soldiers  were  accus-
tomed to  cast  portions  of  the  victims  into  the  water  in  order  to  propitiate  the
river-deities.  One  of  the  half-eflaced  Assyrian  stelaj  adjoining  those  of  the
Egyptian  conqueror  is  attributed  to  Tiglath-pileser.*  It  was  ou  his  return,
perhaps,  from  this  campaign  that  he  planted  colonies  at  Pitru  on  the  right,  and
at  Mutkinu  ou  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  in  order  to  maintain  a  watch  over
<  .'archemish,  and  the  more  important  fords  connecting  Mesopotamia  with  the
plains  of  the  Aprie  and  the  Oroutes.''  The  news  of  Tiglath-pileser's  expedition
was  not  long  in  reaching  the  Delta,  and  the  Egyptian  monarch  then  reigning
at  Tanis  was  thus  made  acquainted  with  the  fact  that  there  had  arisen  in  Syria
a  new  power  before  which  his  own  was  not  unlikely  to  give  way.  In  former  times
such  news  would  have  led  to  a  war  between  the  two  states,  but  the  time  had  gone

'  All  we  know  of  this  campaign  is  from  a  mention  of  it  on  the  Brohen  Obelisk,  col.  i.  U.  1-5 ;  cf.
Bawlinson,  Cun.  Inscr.  of  Wasterit  Asia,  vol.  i.  pi.  28;  hOTZ,  Die  Liisi^hn'flm  Ti<jlath-pilesir\  I.,
pp.  196,  197,  and  Peiser, /?(8<;/(ri7ftjt  Aschur-nuair-almVs,  in  Schkader,  Keilinschn'ftliche  BiUiolhd:,
vol.  i.  pp.  122-125.

'  VA.  pp.  389,  427,  mpra,  for  these  stelae  of  Ramses  II.  at  Xahr  el-Kelb.

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  tljo  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

•  Boscawen  {The  Monmiieiils,  etc.,  on  the  Hock  at  Nahr  d-Kdh,  in  the  Transactions  of  the.  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vi.  pp.  33G,  337)  thinks  that  we  may  attribute  to  Tiglatli-pileser  I.  the  oldest  of  tho
Assyrian  stelai  at  Nalir  el-Kelb ;  no  positive  information  has  as  yet  confirmed  this  hypothesis,  which
is  in  other  respects  very  probable.

»  The  existence  of  these  colonies  is  known  only  from  an  inscription  of  Slialmaiicscr  11.  (Monolith
of  Karhh,  col.  i.  11.  35-38;  in  Eawlinson,  Cun.  luscr.  uf  I)'.  Asia,  vol.  iii.  pi.  7)  ;  for  the  fords  of  the
Euphrates,  see  suj)ra,  pp.  H5,  140.

2  u


fi58


THE  EISE   OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


by  when  Egypt  was  prompt  to  take  up  arms  at  the  slightest  encroachment  on
her  Asiatic  provinces.  Her  influence  at  this  time  was  owing  merely  to  her
former  renown,  and  her  authority  beyond  the  isthmus  was  purely  traditional.'
The  Tanite  Pharaoh  had  come  to  accept  with  resignation  the  change  in  the
fortunes  of  Egypt,  and  he  therefore  contented  himself  with  forwarding  to  the


fel*£^bSS^


I'OUTIONS    OF    THE    SACRIFICIAL    VICTIMS    THROWN    INTO   THE    WATER.-


Assyrian  conqueror,^  by  one  of  the  Syrian  coasting  vessels,^  a  present  of  some
rare  wild  beasts  and  a  few  crocodiles.  In  olden  times  Assyria  had  welcomed
the  arrival  of  Thutmosis  III.  on  the  Euphrates  by  making  him  presents,  which
the  Theban  monarch  regarded  in  the  light  of  tribute  :  the  case  was  now
reversed,  the  Egyptian  Pharaoh  taking  the  position  formerly  occupied  by  the
Assyrian  monarch.  Tiglath-pileser  graciously  accepted  this  unexpected
liomage,  but  the  turbulent  condition  of  the  northern  tribes  prevented  his-
improving  the  occasion  by  an  advance  into  Phoenicia  and  the  land  of  Canaan.
Nairi  occupied  his  attention  on  two  separate  occasions  at  least ;  on  the  second
of  these  he  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  source  of  the  river  Subnat.
This  stream  had  for  a  long  period  issued  from  a  deep  grotto,  where  in  ancient
times  a  god  was  supposed  to  dwell.  The  conqueror  was  lavish  in  religious
offerings  here,  and  caused  a  bas-relief  to  be  engraved  on  the  entrance  iu
remembrance  of  his  victories.  He  is  here  represented  as  standing  upright,  the
tiara  on  his  brow,  and  his  right  arm  extended  as  if  iu  the  act  of  worship,  while

'  Ci".  pp.  483,  564,  565,  582,  583,  supra,  for  farther  details  on  this  subject.
-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  bronze  gates  of  Balaw&t.
=  Imcription  on  the  Broken  Obelisk,  col.  i.  11.  29,  30  ;  ef.  LoTZ,  DiV  Insclu:  Tiglath-pileser  s  I.,  p.  107.
'  See  pp.  582,  583,  supra,  for  an  account  of  the  voyage  undertaken  by  command  of  Hrihor,  which
shows  how  these  presents  could  reach  the  Assyrians  without  going  through  many  hands.


liUlLDINOS  EXECUTED    BY   TIGLATH-PILESER   I.


659


his  left,  the  elbow  brought  up  to  his  side,  holds  a  club.  The  inscription
appended  to  the  figure  tells,  with  an  eloquence  all  the  more  effective  from  its
brevity,  how,  "  with  the  aid  of  Assur,  Shamash,  and  Kamman,  the  great  gods,
my  lords,  I,  Tiglath-pileser,  King  of  Assyria,  son  of  Assurishishi,  King  of
Assyria,  son  of  Mutakkilnusku,  King  of  Assyria,  conqueror  from  the  great  sea,
the  j\[editerranean,  to  the  great  sea  of
Nairi,  I  went  for  the  third  time  to  Nairi."  ^
The  gods  who  had  so  signally  favoured
the  monarch  received  the  greater  part  of
the  spoils  which  he  bad  secured  in  his
campaigns.  The  majority  of  the  temples
of  Assyria,  which  were  founded  at  a  time
when  its  city  was  nothing  more  than  a
provincial  capital  owing  allegiance  to
Babylon,  were  either,  it  would  appear,
fixUiiig  to  ruins  from  age,  or  presented
a  sorry  exterior,  utterly  out  of  keeping
with  the  magnitude  of  its  recent  wealth.
The  king  set  to  work  to  enlarge  or  restore
the  temples  of  Ishtar,  Martu,  and  the
ancient  Bel ;  ^  he  then  proceeded  to  re-
build, from  the  foundations  to  the  summit,
that  of  Anu  and  Eamman,  which  the
vicegerent  Samsiramman,  son  of  Ismida-
gan,  had  constructed  seven  hundred  and
one  years  previously."*  This  temple  was  the  principal  sanctuary  of  the  city,
because  it  was  the  residence  of  the  chief  of  the  gods,  Assur,  under  his
appellation  of  Anu.^  The  soil  was  cleared  away  down  to  the  bed-rock,  upon
which  an  enormous  substructure,  consisting  of  fifty  courses  of  bricks,  was  laid,
and  above  this  were  erected  two  lofty  ziggurats,  whose  tile-covered  surfaces
shone  like  the  rising  sun  in  their  brightness  ;  the  completion  of  the  whole

'  Inscription  discovered  by  Taylor  in  1892,  and  published  by  H.  Rawlinson,  Cuu.  Ins.  W.  Asia,
vol.  iii.  pi.  4,  No.  vi.,  translated  in  the  first  place  by  Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften  am  Eimiangc  drr
Qwllgrntte  dcs  SehenwJi-Sa,  pp.  1-8,  27;  cf.  hoTZ,  Dir  Insrhriftm  Tiglath-pileser' s  I.,  pp.  190, 191,  and
WiNCKi.KK,  Inschr.  Tighillt-Fileser's  /.,  in  Schkader,  Kciliiischriffliche  Bihliolhel;,\o\.  i.  pp.  48,  49.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pihspr  I.,  col.  vi.  11.  8,')-93  ;  of.  I,oTZ,  Dii-  Inschr.  TiglatU-pilesi-r's  I.,  pp.  54,  5S.
'■  Bel  the  ancient,"  or  posaibly  "  the  ancient  master,"  appears  to  havo  been  one  of  the  names  of  Anu
(HoMMKL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Assijr.,  p.  518,  n.  2),  who  is  naturally  in  this  connexion  the  same  aa  Assur.

'  See,  for  what  little  we  know  of  this  first  Samsiramman,  p.  112,  n.  2,  supra.

'  Drawn  by  Kauclicr-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by  V.  Taylor,  in  G.  Rawlinson,  Thr  Fire  Great
Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  79.  A  squeeze  of  this  stele,  reproduced  in  S<;hradkr,  Die  Inschrijten  am
J'Jingange  der  QnellgmUe  des  iScliheneh-Su,  shows,  above  the  arm,  tlio  inscription  translated  above.

'  Annals  nj  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  vii.  11.  71-114;  of.  hoTZ,  Die  InschriflenTiglath-pileser's  I.,
pp.  00-03.     This  was  the  great  temple  of  which  the  ruins  still  exist  (cf.  p.  GOl,  supra).


THE   STELE    AT   SEBENNEH-SU.


GGO


TEE  RISE    OF   THE  ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


was  commemorated  by  a  magnificent  festival.  The  special  chapel  of  Eammaii
and  his  treasury,  dating  from  the  time  of  the  same  Samsiramman  who
had  raised  the  temple  of  Ann,  were  also  rebuilt  on  a  more  important
scale.^  These  works  were  actively  carried  on  notwithstanding  the  fact  that
war  was  raging   on   the  frontier ;    however  preoccupied   he    might    be   with


TKANSPOKT    0I-'   BllbUlNU    MATElilALS    BY    WATEK.'

warlike  projects,  Tiglath-pileser  never  neglected  the  temples,  and  set  to
work  to  collect  from  every  side  materials  for  their  completion  and  adorn-
ment. He  brought,  for  example,  from  Nairi  such  marble  and  hard  stone
as  might  be  needed  for  sculptural  purposes,  together  with  the  beams  of  cedar
and  cypress  required  by  his  carpenters.  The  mountains  of  Singar  and  of
the  Zab  furnished  the  royal  architects  with  building  stone  for  ordinary
uses,  and  for  those  facing  slabs  of  bluish  gypsum  on  which  the  bas-reliefs
of  the  king's  exploits  were  carved ;  the  blocks  ready  squared  were  brought
down  the  affluents  of  the  Tigris  on  rafts  or  in  boats,  and  thus  arrived  at  their
destination  without  land  transport.

The  kings  of  Assyria,  like  the  Pharaohs,  had  always  had  a  passion  for
rare  trees  and  strange  animals ; "  as  soon  as  they  entered  a  country,  they
inquired  what  natural  curiosities  it  contained,  and  they  would  send  back  to

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  viii.  11.  1-16  ;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Inschri/ten  Tiglath-pUeser's  I.,  pp.  64,
65.  The  British  Museum  possesses  bricks  bearing  the  name  of  Tigluth-pileser  I.,  brought  irom  this
temple,  as  is  shown  by  the  inscription  on  their  sides  (Rawldjson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  v. ;
cf.  Menant,  Annales  des  rots  d'Assyrie,  p.  33  ;  LoTZ,  op.  cit.,  pp.  190-192).  For  the  meaning  "  treasure  "
here  attributed  to  the  word  bit-Jihamri,  cf.  Fetjchtwang,  LexHialisches  zur  Prisma-Inschri/t,  etc.,  in
the  Zeiischrift  fur  Asuyriologie,  vol.  v.  p.  94.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  on  the  bronze  doors  at  Balaw&t.

'  Cf.  for  information  as  to  this  love  of  rarities  in  the  Pharaohs,  pp.  260,  201,  265,  of  the  Daien  of
Civilization.


TIGLATE-PILESEH'S  IIUXTIXG   EXPEDITIONS.


661


their  own  land  whatever  specimens  of  them  could  be  procured.  The  triumphal
cortege  which  accompanied  the  monarch  on  his  return  after  each  campaign
comprised  not  only  prisoners  and  spoil  of  a  useful  sort,  but  curiosities  I'rom  all
the  conquered  districts,  as,  for  instance,  animals  of  unusual  form  or  habits,
rhinoceroses  and  crocodiles,^  and  if  some  monkey  of  a  rare  species  had  been


BARE  AKIIIALS  BROUGHT  BACK   AS  TliOI'UlKS   BV   TUE  KING."


taken  in  the  sack  of  a  town,  it  also  would  find  a  place  in  the  procession,  either
held  in  a  leash  or  perched  on  the  shoulders  of  its  keeper.  The  campaigns
of  the  monarch  were  thus  almost  always  of  a  double  nature,  comprising  not
merely  a  conflict  with  men,but  a  continual  pursuit  of  wild  beasts.  Tiglath-pileser,
"  in  the  service  of  Ninib,  had  killed  four  great  specimens  of  the  male  urus  in
the  desert  of  Mitanni,  near  to  the  town  of  Araziki,  opposite  to  the  countries  of
the  Kbati ;  ^  he  killed  them  with  his  powerful  bow,  his  dagger  of  iron,  his
pointed  lance,  and  he  brought  back  their  skins  and  horns  to  his  city  of  Assur.
He  secured  ten  strong  male  elephants,  in  the  territory  of  Harran  and  upon  the

'  A  crocodile  sent  as  a  present  by  tbe  King  of  Egypt  is  mentioned  in  tlie  Inscription  of  the  Brolien
Ubelish;  col.  i.  1.  29 ;  cf.  LoTZ,  Die  Iiuchriflen  Tiglath-pileser's  I.,  pp.  198,  199,  and  also  p.  G58  of  the
present  work.  The  animal  is  called  namsuliha,  which  is  the  Egyptian  msulm  with  the  plural  article
»io,  and  the  origin  of  the  word  has  been  pointed  out  by  Pox  Talbot  in  the  /.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xix.
p.  i:i8.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  the  east  in  the  Louvre.  The  original  is  in  the  British  Museum,
forming  part  of  the  scene  reproduced  in  Layaud,  The  JUonumente  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  al.  It  is  from
the  famous  lilacit  Obelisk  of  Shalmaueser  11.,  of  which  mention  will  be  made  later  on.

"  The  town  of  Araziki  has  been  ideutilied  with  the  Eragiza  (Eraziga)  of  Ptolemy  (v.  15,  M)  by
Schradek,  Keilinschriflen  und  GetchiolUsfurschurig,  p.  228,  and  by  Fit.  Delitzscu,  Wo  lag  das  raradits  I
p.  270;  the  Eraziga  of  Ptolemy  was  on  the  right  banlc  of  tlie  Euphrates,  while  the  text  of  Tiglatli-
pileser  appears  to  place  Araziki  on  the  loft  bank.


(302


THE  BISE    OF   TEE  ASSTBIAN   EMPIRE.


banks  of  the  Kbabur,  and  he  took  four  of  them  alive  :    he  brought  back  their
skius  and  their  tusks,  together  with  the  living  elephants,  to  his  city  of  Assur."

He  killed  moreover,  doubt-
less also  in  the  service
of  Xiuib,  a  hundred  and
twenty  lions,  which  he
attaclied  on  foot,  despatch-
ing eight  hundred  more  with
arrows  from  his  chariot,^
all  within  the  short  space
of  five  years,  and  we  may
\\ell  ask  what  must  have
been  the  sum  total,  if  the
complete  record  for  his
whole  reign  were  extant.
We  possess,  unfortunately,
no  annals  of  the  later  years
of  this  monarch ;  we  have
reason  to  believe  that  he
undertook  several  fresh
expeditions  into  Kairi,-
and  a  mutilated  tablet
records  some  details  of
troubles  with  Elam  in  the
.  X""  year  of  his  reign.^    We

MONKEIS  BROUGHT  BACK  AS  TKIBUTE.'  •'  &

gather  that  he  attacked
a  whole  series  of  strongholds,  some  of  whose  names  have  a  Cossasan  ring
about  them,  such  as  Madkiu,  Sudrun,  Ubrukhundu,  Sakama,  Shuria,  Khirishtu,

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  col.  vi.  11.  58-81 ;  cf.  LOTZ,  Die  Inschriften  Tiglafh-pileaer's  I.,  pp.  52,
53.  The  account  of  the  hunts  in  the  AnnaU  is  supplemented  by  the  information  furnished  in  the  first
column  of  the  "  Brolien  Obelisk  "  (H.  Rawlixsox,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  28  ;  cf.  Lotz,  Inschriften
Tiglath-pileser' »  I,  pp.  19G-199,  and  Peisek,  Inschriften  Aschur-nasir-ahaV s,  in  Sohradek,  Keilin-
schriftliche  Sibliothe't,  vol.  i.  pp.  122-127).  The  monument  is  of  the  time  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  but  the
first  column  contains  an  abstract  from  an  account  of  an  anonymous  hunt,  which  a  comparison  of
numbers  and  names  leads  us  to  attribute  to  Tiglath-pileser  L  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Sab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  531-
534 ;  TiELE,  Bah.-Ass.  Geschichte,  p.  160)  ;  some  Assyriologists,  however,  attribute  it  to  Assur-nazir-pal
(Oppert,  Hist,  des  Empires  de  Chaldee  et  d'Assyrie,  p.  135).

=  The  inscription  of  Sebbeneh-Su  (cf.  supra,  p.  659)  was  erected  at  the  time  of  the  third  expedition
into  Nairi,  and  the  Annals  give  only  one  (cf.  supra,  p.  655) ;  the  other  two  expeditions  must,  therefore,
be  subsequent  to  the  V""  year  of  his  reign.

'  H.  Rawlixson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  5,  No.  4 ;  Winckleb,  Die  Inschriften  Tiglath-Pileser's  I.,
p.  29.  The  remains  of  this  text  have  been  translated  by  Hommel,  who  attributes  it  to  Assur-risliishi
{Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  511, 512)  ;  for  its  supposed  reference  to  the  campaigns  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,
cf.  Meissxek,  Der  elumitische  Feldzug  Tiglafpileser's  I.,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ix.
pp.  101-104,  and  also  supra,  p.  G16,  note  4,  and  643,  note  1.

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  bas-relief  in  Layakd,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  4(1.


MEHODACH-XADIN-AKm  AXD   END    OF   THE  DYNASTY   OF  PASHE.     (iCS


and  Andaria.  His  advance  in  this  direction  must  have  considerably  provoked
the  Chaldajans,  and,  indeed,  it  was  not  long  before  actual  hostilities  broke
out  between  the  two  nations.  The  first  engage-
ment took  place  in  the  valley  of  the  Lower  Zab,
in  the  province  of  Arzukhina,  without  any  decisive
result,  but  in  the  following  year  fortune  favoureil  '^MA  \T?t'S  'Wi\
the  Assyrians,  for  Dur-kurigalzu,  both  Sipparas,  tfllfe  'i%;--,^^^
Babylon,  and  Upi  opened  their  gates  to  them,  while
Akarsalln,  the  Akhlame,  and  the  whole  of  Sukhi
as  far  as  llapiki  tendered  their  submission  to
Tiglath-pileser.i  Merodach-nadiu-akhi,  who  was
at  this  time  reigning  in  Chaldffia,  was,  like  his
ancestor  Nebuchadrezzar  I.,  a  brave  and  warlike
sovereign :  he  appears  at  first  to  have  given  way
under  the  blow  thus  dealt  him,  and  to  have  ac-
knowledged the  suzerainty  of  his  rival,  who  there-
upon assumed  the  title  of  Lord  of  the  four  Houses
of  the  World,  and  united  under  a  single  empire
the  valleys  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates.  But
this  state  of  things  lasted  for  a  few  years  only  ;
Merodach-nadin-akhi  once  more  took  courage,
and,  supported  by  the  Chaldrean  nobility,  suc-
ceeded in  expelling  the  intruders  from  Sumir  and
Akkad.  The  Assyrians,  however,  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  driven  out
without  a  struggle,  but  fortune  turned  against  them ;  they  were  beaten,  and
the  conqueror  inflicted  on  the  Assyrian  gods  the  humiliation  to  which  they  had
so  often  subjected  those  of  other  nations.  He  took  the  statues  of  Eammau  and
Shala  from  Ekallati,  carried  them  to  Babylon,  and  triumphantly  set  them  up
within  the  temple  of  Bel.     There  they  remained  in  captivity  for  418  years.'^

'  Sytich.  Hut.,  col.  ii.  11.  H-24 ;  cf.  Peiseb-Winokler,  Die  soijenanide  sijnchronistische  Gesch.,  iu
ScuHADER,  Keiliusch.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199,  unil  Satoe,  The  Synchronous  Hist,  of  Ass.  and
Bab.,  iu  the  Records  nf  the  Fast,  2ud  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  30,  31.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-GuJin,  from  tUu  lieliogravure  m  Fu.  Lenormant,  La  Langue  primitice  de  la
ChahWe,  pi.  i.  p.  382.  The  original  is  iu  the  liritish  Museum.  It  is  one  of  the  boundary  stones
which  were  set  up  in  a  corner  of  a  fiuhl  to  mark  its  legal  limit :  the  text  of  it  has  been  tiauslateil
by  Oppert-Menant,  Les  Documents  juridiques,  p.  81,  et  seq.

'  We  know  this  fact  from  the  inscription  of  Baviau,  in  which  Sennacherib  boasts  of  haviug
brought  back  these  statues  to  Assyria  after  they  had  beeu  418  years  iu  the  possession  of  the  enemy
(H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  xiv.,  11.  18-00;  ef.  Pognon,  L'lnscription  de  Baviau,
pp.  18,  19,  89,  90).  I  have  followed  the  commonly  received  opiniou  (Homjjel,  Gcsch.  Bab.  and  Ass.,
pp.  1()1-1G3,  531),  which  phices  tlie  defeat  of  Tiglath-pileser  after  the  taking  of  Babylon  ;  others  think
that  it  preceded  the  clecisivo  victory  of  the  Assyrians  (Delitzscu-Mlrdter,  Oesch.  Bab.  uud  Ass.,
2nd  edit.,  pp.  155,  150  ;  Wixcklkr,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  97).  It  is  im[jrobahle  that,  if  the  loaij  of
the  statues  preceded  the  decisive  victory,  the  Assyrian  conquerors  should  have  left  their  gods
prisoners  in  a  Babylonian  temple,  and  should  not  have  brouglit  them  back  immediately  to  Ekallati.


meeodaoh-nadi  n-akhi.^


604  THE  RISE    OF   TEE  ASSYBIAN  EMPIRE.

Tiglath-pileser  did  not  long  survive  this  disaster,  for  he  died  about  the
year  1100  B.c.,^  and  two  of  his  sons  succeeded  him  on  the  throne.  The  elder,
Assur-belkala,^  had  neither  sufficient  energy  nor  resources  to  resume  the
offensive,  and  remained  a  passive  spectator  of  the  revolutions  which  distracted
Babylon.  Merodach-uadin-akhi  had  been  followed  by  his  son  Merodach-
shapik-ziiim,^  but  this  prince  was  soon  dethroned  by  the  people,  and  Kamman-
abaliddin,  a  man  of  base  extraction,  seized  the  crown.  Assur-belkala  not  only
extended  to  this  usurper  the  friendly  relations  he  had  kept  up  with  tlie  legiti-
mate sovereign,  but  he  asked  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and
the  rich  dowry  which  she  brought  her.  husband  no  doubt  contributed  to  the
continuation  of  his  pacific  policy.*  He  appears  also  to  have  kept  possession  of
all  the  parts  of  Mesopotamia  and  Kumraukh  conquered  by  his  father,  and  it
is  possible  that  he  may  have  penetrated  beyond  the  Euphrates.^  His  brother,
Samsi-ramman  III.,  does  not  appear  to  have  left  any  more  definite  mark  upon
history  than  Assur-belkala;''  he  decorated  the  temples  built  by  his  pre-
decessors,' but  beyond  this  we  have  no  certain  record  of  his  achievements.
We  know  nothing  of  the  kings  who  followed  him,  their  names  even  having
been  lost,  but   about  a  century  and  a  half  after  Tiglath-pileser,^    a  certain

'  The  death  of  Tiglath-pileser  must  have  followed  quicklj'  ou  the  victory  of  Babylon  ;  the  contents
of  the  inscription  of  Bavian  jiermit  us  to  fix  the  taking  of  Ekallati  by  the  Chaldfeaus  about  the  year
IIOS-IIOU  n.c.  (HOMMEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  402,  5.S1  ;  DELiTZSCH-MiiRDTEB,  2nd  edit.,  Gesch.
Bab.  itml  Ass.,  p.  158).  We  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  supposing  Tiglath-pileser  to  have  reigned  six
or  eight  years  after  his  defeat.

-  I  follow  the  usually  received  classification  (Tiele,  Bab.-Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  156, 165 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.
Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  535).  It  is,  however,  possible  that  we  must  reverse  the  order  of  the  sovereigns
(Sayce,  Synch.  Hist,  of  Ass.  and  Bah.,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  ii.  p.  132,  note  2 ;
DEUTZSCH-MiJRDTER,  Gcsch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.  p.  15G;  Winckleb,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  180).

'  The  name  of  the  Babylonian  king  has  been  variously  read  Merodach-shapik-zirat  (G.  Suith,
Early  Hist,  of  Babylonia,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  i.  p.  7-1),  Merodach-shapik-
kulhit  (Sayce,  Synch.  Hist,  of  Ass.  and  Bah.,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  ii.  p.  133 ;
AViNCKLER,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  98,  100),  Merodach-shapSk-zirmati  (Tiele,  Bab.-Ass.  Gesch.,
pp.  155,  156,  165;  DELiTzscH-MiiRUTER,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  156);  Hilprecht's  reading
of  it  is  Merodach-shapik-zlrim  (The  Bah.  Expedition,  vol.  i.  p.  41,  note  4 ;  cf.  Rogers,  Outlines  of  the
Hist,  of  Early  Babylonia,  p.  66).

*  Syncliro7ious  Hist.,  col.  ii.  11.  25-37;  cf.  Peiser-Winckler,  Die  sogenannte  Synclir.  Gesch.,  iu
SCHHADER,  KeiUnsch.  BibUothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  199,  and  Sayce,  Synchronous  Hist,  of  Ass.  and  Bab.,
ill  the  Becords  vf  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  31.

'  This  appears  to  be  the  case  from  a  passage  iu  the  inscription  published  by  H.  Kawlinson,  Gun.
Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  vi.,  where  he  invokes  the  gods  of  Martu ;  this  is  at  least  the  meaning
given  to  it  by  Sayce,  Synch:  Hist,  of  Ass.  and  Bab.,  in  the  Trattsactiotis  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  ii.
p.  132,  note  2,  and  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  536.  Boscawen  supposes  that  one  of  the  very
mutilated  inscriptions  of  the  Nahr  el-Kelb  may  belong  to  this  prince,  but  the  facts  he  alleges  are  too
vague  to  permit  of  us  adopting  his  hypothesis  with  auy  security  {The  Monuments  and  Inscriptions  at
the  Nahr  el-Kelb,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  338).

«  The  proof  that  he  was  the  brother  of  Assur-belkala  is  furnished  by  the  preamble  of  his  votive
inscriptions  (Rawlin.son,  Cu7i.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  3,  Xos.  9,  11),  where  he  calls  himself  son  of
Tiglath-pileser,  grandson  of  Assurilshishi,  and  great-grandson  of  Mutakkilnusku.

'  He  restored  the  palace  and  temple  of  Ishtar  at  Nineveh  (Rawlinso.n,  Can.  Ins.  JF.  As.,  vol.  iv.
pi.  3,  Xos.  9,  11 ;  cf.  G.  S.mith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  p.  252,  and  Homiiel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  537).

«  For  this  period,  cf.  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  538-540,  who  collected  and  annotated  with
the  utmost  care  all  the  documents  that  remain.    The  King  Assurirba  (Delitzsou-Murdter,  Geschichte


END    OF    THE   FASUE   DYNASTY.  665

Assurirba  seems  to  have  crossed  Northern  Syria,  and  following  in  the  footste2)s
of  his  great  ancestor,  to  liave  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Mediterranean  :  on  the
rocks  of  Mount  Amanus,  facing  the  sea,  he  left  a  triumphal  inscription  in  which
he  set  forth  the  mighty  deeds  he  had  accomplislied.^  This  is  merely  a  gleam
out  of  the  murky  night  which  envelops  his  history,  and  the  testimony  of  one
of  his  descendants  informs  us  that  his  good  fortune  soon  forsook  him :  the
Aramreans  wrested  from  him  the  fortresses  of  Pitru  and  Mutkiuu,  which  com-
manded both  banks  of  the  Euphrates  near  Carchemish.^  Nor  did  the  retrograde
movement  slacken  after  his  time  :  Assyria  slowly  wasted  away  down  to  the  end
of  the  X'"  century,  and  but  for  the  simultaneous  decadence  of  the  Chaldseans,
its  downfall  would  have  been  complete.  But  neither  Ramman-abaliddiu  nor
his  successor  was  able  to  take  advantage  of  its  weakness;  discord  and  want
of  energy  soon  brought  about  their  own  ruin.  The  dynasty  of  Pashe  dis-
appeared towards  the  middle  of  the  X"'  century,^  and  a  family  belonging  to
the  "  Countries  of  the  Sea  "  took  its  place :  it  had  continued  for  about  one
hundred  and  thirty-two  years,  and  had  produced  eleven  kings.*

Babyloniens,  p.  157;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  539;  Wincklek,  Gesc/jjc/i/t-
Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  lSl-332)  has  beea  variously  called  Assurmazur  (Kawlinson,  The
Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  pp.  49,  SI,  n.  12),  Assuirabamar  (G.  Smith,  Egyptian  Campaigns  of
Esarhaddon and  Assurlanipal,  In  the  Zeitschri/t,  1M6S,  p.  US  ;  Fk.  Lenokmant,  Lettres  Assyriologiqttef,
vol.  i.  p.  233),  and  Assurrabburi  (Tiele,  Babylonisch-Assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  167,  177,  178).

'  We  learn  this  from  the  fact  that  Shalmaneser  II.  mentions  the  stele  of  his  predecessor  {Inscrip-
tion at  Balaicat,  col.  ii.  11.  3,  4,  and  Inscription  on  the  Monolith  at  Karkh,  col.  ii.  1.  5,  et  seq.  ;  cf-
Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  540).

'  In  regard  to  the  occupation  of  these  two  towns,  see  what  is  said  on  p.  657,  supra.

'  The  Hat  of  the  early  Assyrian  dynasties,  starting  from  Samsiramman  I.  (cf.,  for  the  earlier  kings,
what  is  said  on  p.  112,  supra),  may  be  given  pretty  much  as  follows  :^


Samsiramman  I.
Igcbkapkapc.
Samsieamman  II.

Assubbelnishishu.

BcZCKASSDIt.
AsSUKOBALLiT.

Belnibari.
BudIlu.


KaMmInIKARI    I.  I     NiNIPABALESHARKA.
ShALMANESER   I.  ASSTJRDAN   I.

TUKULTININJP    I.  MUTAKKILNUSKU.

ASSURNAZIRPAL   I.  AsSUBiSHISHi.

TDKULTIASSURBEL.  TiGLATHPlLESER    I.

• ASSDRBELKALA.

ASSORNIRAEI  I.andNABODAINANI.     I     SAMSIRAMMAN    III.


Belchadrezzab.  Assurirba.

*  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  draw  up  an  exact  Hat  of  this  dynasty,  and  Hilprecht's  attempt  to  do  so
(77ie  Babylonian  Exp.  of  the  Univ.  of  Penn.,  vol.  i.  p.  44)  contains  more  than  one  doubtful  name  (see
what  is  said  on  this  point  on  p.  613,  note  3,  supra).  The  following  list  is  very  imperfect  and  doubtful,
but  the  best  that  our  present  knowledge  enables  us  to  put  forward  :

I.  Merodach[        ] 17  years        VII.  MERODACH-SHAPiKziRi.M

II 6  years  VIII.  Kammanabaliddin    ....     22  years

IIL  Nebcchadrezzar  1 13  years  IX.  Merodaoh-bel[        ]       1  year  6  mouths

IV ;        X.  Merodach-zir[        ]      ...     13  years

V.  BelnadInabai, I      XI.  N.\bushum[        ] 9  years


VI.  Merodaoh-nadin-akui


The  total  duration  of  tlic  dynasty  was,  according  to  the  Eoyal  Canon,  72  years  6  months.  Peiser  has
shown  that  tliis  is  a  mistake,  and  ho  proposes  to  correct  it  to  132  years  G  montlis  (^Zur  Babylonischc
Clironologie,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  2G8,  2G9),  and  this  is  accepted  by  most
Assyriologists  (Winckler,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  329,  and  Altorientalitche
Forschungen,  p.  131 ;  Hilpbkcmi',  The  Babylonian  F.xp.  of  the  Univ.  of  Venn  ,  vol.  i.  p.  43).


,;,;(;  THE   RISE    OF    THE   ASSYRIAN   EMPIRE.

^Yhat  were  the  causes  of  tliis  depression,  from  which  Babyloa  suffered  at
almost  regular  intervals,  as  though  stricken  with  some  periodic  malady  ?     The
main  reason  soon  becomes  apparent  if  we  consider  the  nature  of  the  country
and  the  material  conditions  of  its  existence.     Chaldaja  was  neither  extensive
enough  nor  sufficiently  populous  to  afford  a  solid  basis  for  the  ambition  of  her
princes.     Since  nearly  every  man  capable  of  bearing  arms  was  enrolled  in  the
army,  the  Chalda^an  kings  had  no  difficulty  in  raising,  at  a  moment's  notice,
a  force  which  could  be  employed  to  repel  an  invasion,  or  make  a  sudden  attack
on  some  distant  territory ;    it  was  in  schemes  which  required  prolonged  and
sustained  effort  that  they  felt  the  drawbacks  of  their  position.     In  that  age
of  hand-to-hand  combats,  the  mortality  in  battle  was  very  high,  forced  marches
throufh  forests  and  across  mountains  entailed  a  heavy  loss  of  men,  and  three
or  four  consecutive  campaigns  against  a  stubborn  foe  soon  reduced  an  army
to  a  condition  of  dangerous  weakness.     Eecruits  might  be  obtained  to  fill  the
earlier  vacancies  in  the  ranks,  but  they  soon  grew  fewer  and  fewer  if  time  was  not
given  for  recovery  after  the  opening  victories  in  the  struggle,  and  the  supply
eventually  ceased   if  operations  were    carried  on   beyond   a   certain   period.
A  reign  which  began  brilliantly  often  came  to  an  impotent  conclusion,  owing
to  the  king  having  failed  to  economise  his  reserves ;  and  the  generations  which
followed,  compelled  to  adopt  a  strictly  defensive  attitude,  vegetated  in  a  sort
of  ancemic  condition,  until  the  birth-rate  had  brought  the  proportion  of  males
up  to  a  figure  sufficiently   high  to  provide  the  material  for  a  fresh  army.
When  Nebuchadrezzar  made  war  upon  Assurishishi,  he  was  still  weak  from
the  losses  he  had  incurred  during  the  campaign  against  Elam,  and  could  not
conduct  his  attack  with  the  same  vigour  as  had  gained  him  victory  on  the
banks  of  the  Ulai ;  in  the  first  year  he  only  secured  a  few  indecisive  ad-
vantages, and  in  the  second  he  succumbed.    Merodach-nadin-akhi  was  suffering
from  the  reverses  sustained  by  his  predecessors  when  Tiglath-pileser  provoked
him  to  war,  and  though  he  succeeded  in  giving  a  good  account  of  an  adversary
who  was  himself  exhausted  by  dearly  bought  successes,  he  left  to  his  descendants
a  kingdom  which  had  been  drained  of  its  last  drop  of  blood.      The  same
reason  which  explains  the  decadence  of  Babylon  shows  us  the  cause   of  the
periodic   eclipses   undergone   by  Assyria  after  each  outburst  of  her  warlike
spirit.     She,  too,  had  to  pay  the  penalty  of  an  ambition  which  was  out  of  all
proportion  to  her  resources.   The  mighty  deeds  of  Shalmaneser  and  Tukulti-ninip
were,  as  a  natural  consequence,  followed  by  a  state  of  complete  prostration
under  Tukultiassurbel  and  Assurnirari :  the  country  was  now  forced  to  pay  for
the  glories  of  Assurishishi  and  of  Tiglath-pileser  by  falling  into  an  inglorious
state  of  languor  and  depression.     Its  kings,  conscious  that  their  rule  must  be


DECADENCE    OF   ASSYEIA    AND    CEALD.KA.  667

necessarily  precarious  as  long  as  they  did  not  possess  a  larger  stock  of  recruits
to  fall  back  on,  set  their  wits  to  work  to  provide  by  various  methods  a  more
adequate  reserve.     While  on   one   hand  they  installed   native  Assyrians    in
the  more  suitable  towns  of  conquered  countries,  on  the  other  they  imported
whole  liordes  of  alien  prisoners  chosen  for  their  strength  and  courage,  and
settled  them  down  in  districts  by  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Zab.     We
do  not  know  what  Kainmaiiirani  and  Shalmaneser  may  have  done  in  this  way,
but  Tiglath-pileser  undoubtedly   introduced  thousands    of  the   Mushku,   the
Urumseans,  the  people  of  Kummukh  and  Nairi,  and  his  example  was  followed
by  all  those  of  his  successors  whose  history  has  come  down  to  us.     One  might
have  expected  that  such  an  invasion  of  foreigners,  still  smarting  under  the
sense   of  defeat,  might   have  brought  with   it   an    element  of  discontent   or
rebellion;    far  from  it,  they  accepted  their  exile  as  a  judgment  of  the  gods,
which  the  gods  alone  had  a  right  to  reverse,  and  did  their  best  to  mitigate  the
hardness  of  their  lot  by  rendering  unhesitating  obedience  to  tlieir  masters.
Their  grandchildren,  born  in  the  midst  of  Assyrians,  became  Assyrians  them-
selves, and  if  tliey  did  not  entirely  divest  themselves  of  every  trace  of  their
origin,  at  any   rate    became   so   closely  identified  with   the  country   of  their
adoption,  that  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish  them  from  the  native  race.     The
Assyrians  who  were  sent  out  to  colonise  recently  acquired  })rovinces  were  at
times  exposed  to  serious  risks.     Now  and  then,  instead  of  absorbing  the  natives
among  whom  they  lived,  they  were  absorbed  by  theai,  which  meant  a  loss  of
so   much   lighting   strength   to  the   motlier   country  ;   even  under  the  most
favourable  conditions  a  considerable  time  must  have  passed  before  they  could
succeed  in  assimilating  to  themselves  the  races  amongst  whom  they  lived.     At
last,  however,  a  day  would  dawn  when  the  process  of  incorporation  was  accom-
plished, and  Assyria,  having  increased  her  area  and  resources  twofold,  found
lierself  ready  to  endure  to  the  end  the  strain  of  conquest.     In  the  interval,  she
suftered  from  a  scarcity  of  fighting  men,  due  to   the  losses  incurred  in  her
victories,  and  must  have  congratulated  herself  that  her  traditional  foe  was  not
in  a  position  to  take  advantage  of  this  fact.

The  first  wave  of  tiie  Assyrian  invasion  had  barely  touched  Syria ;  it  had
swept  hurriedly  over  the  regions  in  the  north,  and  then  flowed  southwards  to
return  no  more,  so  that  the  northern  races  were  able  to  resume  the  wonted
tenor  ui  tlieir  lives.  For  centuries  after  this  their  condition  underwent  no
change;  there  was  tlie  same  repetition  of  dissension  and  intrigue,  the  same
endless  succession  of  alliances  and  battles  without  any  signal  advantage  on
either  side.  The  llittites  still  held  Northern  .Syria:  Carchemish  was  their
capital,  and  more  than  one  town  in  its  vicinity  preserved  the  tradition  of  their


668  THE   RISE    OF    THE   ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.

dress,  their  language,  their  arts,  and  their  culture  in  full  vigour.  The  Greek
legends  tell  us  vaguely  of  some  sort  of  Cilician  empire  which  is  said  to  have
brought  the  eastern  and  central  provinces  of  Asia  Minor  into  subjection  about
ten  centuries  before  our  era.^  Is  there  any  serious  foundation  for  such  a  belief,
and  must  we  assume  that  there  existed  at  this  time  and  in  this  part  of  the
world  a  kingdom  similar  to  that  of  Sapalulu  ?  Assyria  was  recruiting  its
forces,  Chaldsea  was  kept  inactive  by  its  helplessness,  Egypt  slumbered  by  the
banks  of  its  river,  there  was  no  actor  of  the  first  rank  to  fill  the  stage ;  now
was  the  opportunity  for  a  second-rate  performer  to  come  on  the  scene  and  play
such  a  part  as  his  abilities  permitted.  The  Cilician  conquest,  if  this  be  indeed
the  date  at  which  it  took  place,  had  the  boards  to  itself  for  a  himdred  years
after  the  defeat  of  Assurirba.  The  time  was  too  short  to  admit  of  its  striking
deep  root  in  the  country.  Its  leaders  and  men  were,  moreover,  closely  related
to  the  Syrian  Hittites ;  the  language  they  spoke  was,  if  not  precisely  the  Hittite,
at  any  rate  a  dialect  of  it ;  their  customs  were  similar,  if,  perhaps,  somewhat
less  refined,  as  is  often  the  case  with  mountain  races,  when  compared  with  the
peoples  of  the  plain.  We  are  tempted  to  conclude  that  some  of  the  monuments
found  south  of  the  Taurus  were  their  handiwork,  or,  at  any  rate,  date  from  their
time.  For  instance,  the  ruined  palace  at  Sinjirli,  the  lower  portions  of  which
are  oi'namented  with  pictures  similar  to  those  at  Pteria,"  representing  pro-
cessions of  animals,  some  real,  others  fantastic,  men  armed  with  lances  or  bend-
ing the  bow,  and  processions  of  priests  or  officials.  Then  there  is  the  great
lion  at  Marash,  which  stands  erect,  with  menacing  head,  its  snarling  lips
exposing  the  teeth ;  its  body  is  seamed  with  the  long  lines  of  an  inscription
in  the  Asiatic  character,  in  imitation  of  those  with  which  the  bulls  in  the
Assyrian  palaces  are  covered.  These  Cilicians  gave  an  impulse  to  the  civiliza-
tion of  the  Khati  which  they  sorely  needed,  for  the  Semitic  races,  whom
they  had  kept  in  subjection  for  centuries,  now  pressed  them  hard  on  all  the
territory  over  which  they  had  formerly  reigned,  and  were  striving  to  drive
them  back  into  the  hills.     The  Aramfeans  in  particular  gave  them  a  great

'  Solinus,  relying  on  the  indirect  evidence  of  Hecatseus  of  Miletus,  tells  us  that  Cilicia  extended
not  only  to  the  countries  afterwards  known  as  Cataonia,  Commagene,  and  Syria,  but  also  included
Lydia,  Media,  Armenia,  Pampliylia,  and  Cappadoeia ;  the  conquests  of  the  Assyrian  kings  must  have
greatly  reduced  its  area  {Pohjhhtor,  ed.  Mommsen,  p.  179,  c.  38,  §  1,  et  seq.)-  Mordtmann  had  already
applied  this  hypothesis  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Asiatic  monuments,  and  consequently  regarded
them  as  belonging  to  this  Cilician  empire  (La  Sceau  de  Tarlcoumdimyni,  rot  de  Tarsoas,  in  Guote,
Munzstudien,  iii.  pp.  130,  131);  his  theory  was  taken  up  by  Lehmann  (Wocheiischriflfiir  clastische
PMlologie,  1893,  No.  22),  and  has  been  worked  out  by  Jensen  in  his  Grundlagen  fiir  eine  enizifferttng
der  Hatischen  oder  CiUcischen  liischri/ten,  pp.  17-19.  I  am  of  opinion  that  tlie  tradition  preserved
by  HecatsBus  referred  both  to  the  kingdom  of  Sapalulu  aud  to  that  of  the  nionarchs  of  this  second
epoch.

-  In  regard  to  this  palace,  which  is  probably  later  than  the  X"'  century,  cf.  Pekrot-Chipiez,
Hisloire  de  I' Art  datis  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  533,  534.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  at  greater
length  of  Sinjirli  later  on.


THE   KHATI   AND    ARAMAEANS.


()G9


deal  of  trouble.      The  states  oa  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  had  found  them
awkward  neighbours  ;    was  this  the  moment  chosen  by  the  Pukudu,  the  liutu,

the  Gambulu,  and  a  dozen  other  Aramajan  tribes,
-■^^''^'^^.yS^^^^S^        *'^^"  '^  stealthy  march  across  the  frontier  of  Elam,

between    Durilu   and    the    coast?      The


LION"    AT   MAKASU.'


tribes  from  which,  soon  after,  the  Kaldi  nation'^  was  formed,  were  marauding-
round  Eridu,  Uru,  and  Larsa,  and  may  have  already  begun  to  lay  the  foundations
of  theif  supremacy  over  Babylon  :  it  is,  indeed,  an  open  question  wliether  those
princes  of  the  Countries  of  the  Sea  who  succeeded  the  Pashe  dynasty  did  not
come  from  the  stock  of  the  Kaldi  Aramaeans.^  While  they  were  thus  consoli-
dating on  the  south-east,  the  bulk  of  the  nation  continued  to  ascend  north-
wards, and  rejoined  its  outposts  in  the  central  region  of  the  Euphrates,  whicli
extends  from  the  Tigris  to  the  Khabur,  from  the  Khabur  to  the  Balikh  and
the  Apiie.  They  had  already  come  into  frequent  conflict  with  most  of  the
victorious  Assyrian  kings,  from  Kammanirari  down  to  Tiglath-pileser ;  the  weak-
ness of  Assyria  and  Chaldsea  gave  them  their  opportunity,  and  tliey  took  full
advantage  of  it.  They  soon  became  masters  of  the  whole  of  Mesopotamia ;  a
jiart  of  the  tabledand  extending  from  Carchemish  to  Mount  Amanus  fell  into

'  Drawn  by  lioudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  cast  8ho\vu  at  the  Paris  Exhibition  of  1S89;  of.
PuiLirPK  llEiiijui!,  UMoirc  dc  I'JScrilure  dans  V AnUqtiiU,  p.  1U7.

'  I  shall  have  occasion  to  return  to  tlio  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Kalili ;  for  the  present,  I
must  refer  the  reader  to  Dklatthk,  ie«  Chald^cus  jutqu'a  la  JnrmnlUm  de  I'empire  de  Nabuchodonosor,
2nd  edit.,  pp.  3,  4,  who  notes  the  existence  of  a  country  of  Chuldasa  under  Assuruuzirpal  in  the
first  half  of  tlio  IX"'  century  B.C.  In  placing  the  rise  of  this  state  at  the  end  of  the  XI""  or
beginning  of  the  X'"  century,  wo  are  merely  suggesting  a  niinimuni  date.

'  This  is  the  hypothesis  suggested  by  Winckler  (Uiilrnchmigcn  zur  altorientalischen  Oeschichte,
pp.  49,  50  ;  cf.  Geechichte  Babijloitiem  und  Auyriens,  ))p.  177-lSO).


,;7()  THE  RISE    OF    THE   ASSYRIAN   EMPIRE.

their  hands,  their  activity  was  still  greater  in  the  basin  of  the  Orontes,  and
their  advanced  guard,  coming  into  collision  with  the  Amorites  near  the
sources  of  tlie  Litany,  began  gradually  to  drive  farther  and  farther  southwards
all  that  remained  of  the  races  which  had  shown  so  bold  a  front  to  the
Egyptian  troops.  Here  was  an  almost  entirely  new  element,  gradually
eliminating  from  the  scene  of  the  struggle  other  elements  which  had  grown
old  through  centuries  of  war,  and  while  this  transformation  was  taking  place  in
Northern  and  Central,  a  similar  revolution  was  effecting  a  no  less  surprising
metamorphosis  in  Southern  Syria.  There,  too,  newer  races  had  gradually  come
to  displace  the  nations  over  which  the  dynasties  of  Thutmosis  and  Ramses
had  once  held  swav.  The  Hebrews  on  the  east,  the  Philistines  and  their  allies
on  the  south-west,  were  about  to  undertake  the  conquest  of  the  Kharu  and  its
cities.  As  yet  their  strength  was  inadequate,  tlieir  temperament  undecided,
their  system  of  government  imperfect ;  but  tliey  brought  with  them  the  quality
of  youth,  and  energies  which,  rightly  guided,  would  assure  the  nation  which
first  found  out  how  to  take  advantage  of  them,  supremacy  over  all  its  rivals,
and  the  strength  necessary  for  consolidating  the  whole  country  into  a  single
kingdom.  '


THE    HEBREWS    AND
THE    PHILISTINES-DAMASCUS.


THE  ISKAELITES  IK  THE  LAND  OF  CANAAN  :  THE  JUDGES — THE  PHILISTINES  AND  THE
HEBREW  KINGDOM — SAUL,  DAVID,  SOLOMON,  THE  DEFECTION  OF  THE  TEN  TRIBES — THE
XXI-'   EGYPTIAN    DYNASTY SHESHONQ   OR   SHISHAK — DAMASCUS.

Tlie  Hebrews  in  tite  desert :  tlieir  families,  dans,  aiyl  tribes — Tlie  Amorltes  and  the  Hebreirs
tin  the  left  bank  of  the  Jordan— Tlie  cimqitest  of  Canaan  and  the  natice  reaction  against  the
Hebrews — The  jvdges,  Ehud,  Deborah,  Jertdibaal  or  Gideon  and.  the  Manassite  supremaey  ;
A bimeleeh ,  .Teph  tlath.

The  Philistines,  flieir  political  onjanisation,  tlieir  armij  and  fleet — Jiidali,  Dan,,  and,  tlie
atorij  of  Samson — Benjamin  on  the  Philistine  frontier — Eli  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant —
Tlie  Philistine  dominion  over  Israel ;  Samnel,  Saul,  the  Benjamite  monarcliy — David,  his  retreat
to  the  desert  of  Judah  and  his  sojourn  at  Ziklaij — Tl\e  battle  of  Gilboa  and  the  death  of  Said —
Tlie  striKJijle  between  Ish-lioaheth  mid  lltiind — David  sole  kinij,  and  the  final  defeat  if  the
Philistines — Jernsalem  becomes  the  capital  ;  the  removal  of  the  ark — Wars  irilh  the  peoples
of  the  East — Absalom's  rebellion  :   the  coronation  of  Solomon.

Soliniiiin's  ijorerntneni  and  his  buildimjs — Phiunician  colonisation  in  iSjMtin:  Iliram  I.  and
the  enlargement  uf  Tyre — Tlie  voyages  to  Ophir  and  Tarshish — The  palace  at  Jerusalem,  the
temple  awl  its  dedication  :  the  priesthood  and  prophets — The  death  of  Solomon  ;  the  schism  of
the  ten  trilies  and  the  division  of  the  Hebrew  kingdom.


(      '^'2      )
7Vif  A'A'7"  Egyptian  ihiuastij :  thr   Tlulnui   hiyh  piicsts  am!   the   Tanite    PJutraohs—Tlie
Libyan  mercenaries  and  their  predominance  in  the  state  :  the  origin  of  the  XXII'"'  (Bidiastite)
<lil)M$ttj~Sheshonq  I.  as  Icimj  and  his  son  AHpAti  as  high  priest  of  Amon  ;  the  hiding-place  at
Deir  el-Bahart—Sheshonq's  expedition  against  Jerusalem.

The  two  Hehreu:  kingdoms  :  the  fidelitg  of  Judah  to  the  descendants  of  Solommi,  and  the
repeated  changes  of  dynasty  in  Israel— Asa  and  Baasha — The  kingdom  of  Damascus  and  its
origin— Bezon,  Tabrimmon,  Benhadad  I.  —  Omri  and  the  foundation  of  Samaria:  Ahab  and
ihe  Tyrian  alliance— The  successois  of  Hiram  I.  at  Tyre  :  Ithobaal  I.—Tlie  prophets,  their
struggle  against  Phcenician  idolatry,  the  story  of  Elijah  — The  imrs  between  Israel  and
Damascus  up  to  the  time  of  Ihe  Assyrian  invasion.


■'/


^app-*<


NABLUS,
THr    \NaENT    SHE(  HEM  '


-'^':y,  ^-^^^'-^


CHAPTEE    VII,


THE    HEBREWS   AND   THE    PH I  LISTI  N  ES— D  A  M  ASCUS.

The  Israelites  in  the  land  of  Canaan  :  the  judges— Tlie  Philistines  and  the  Hebrew
kingdom— Saul,  David,  Solomon,  tlie  defection  of  the  ton  tribes— the  XXI"'
Egyptian  dynasty — Shcshonq — Damascus.

A  FTER   reaching  Kadesli-barnea,  the  Israelites    in  their  wan-
^^     darings  had  come  into  contact  with  various  Bedawin  tribes —
Kenites,  Jerahmelites,  Edomites,  and  Midianite.s,  with  whom  they
had  in  turn  fought  or  alh'ed  themselves,  according  to  the  exi-
gencies of  their  pastoral  life.     Continual  skirmishes  had
taught  tliem  the  art  of  war,  tlieir  numbers  had  rapidly-
increased,  and  with  this  increase  came  a  consciousness
(if  tlieir  own  strength,  so  that,  after  a  lajjse  of  two  or
three  generations,  they  may  be  said  to  have  constituted
ii  considerable  nation.    Its  component  elements  were  not,
however,  firmly  welded  together ;  they  consisted  of  an
indefinite  number  of  clans,  which  were  again  subdivided

'  Drawn  by  I'auoher-Gudin,  from  a  plnjtngrapli  published  by  tlif  Uuo  w.  Lcynes,  Voyage  d'e.eplora-
tiim  a  la  mer  Morte,  pi.  22.  The  initial  letter  represents  an  armed  Phoenician  divinity,  probably  an
equivalent  of  the  Egyptian  god  Sit ;  it  is  drawn  by  Fancliei-Giidin,  from  a  bronze  statuette  now  iu
the  Louvre.

2  X


<;74  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

into  several  families.^     Each  of  these  families  had  its  chief  or  "ruler,"  to

whom  it   rendered  absolute   obedience,  while  the   united   chiefs  formed    an

assembly  of  elders  who  administered  justice  when  required,  and  settled  any

<lififerences  which  arose  among  their  respective  followers.^     The  clans  in  their

turn  were   grouped   into  tribes,^   according  to   certain  affinities   which  they

mutually  recognised,  or  which  may  have  been  fostered  by  daily  intercourse  on

a  common  soil,  but  the  ties  which  bound  them  together  at  this  period  were  of

the  most  slender  character.     It  needed  some  special  event,  such  as  a  projected

migration  in  search  of  fresh  pasturage,  or  au  expedition  against  a  turbulent

neighbour,  or  a  threatened  invasion  by  some  stranger,  to  rouse  the  whole

tribe  to  corporate  action ;  at  such  times  they  would  elect  a  "  nasi,"  or  ruler,

the  duration  of  whose  functions  ceased  with  the  emergency  which  had  called

him  into  office.*     Both  clans  and  tribes  were  designated  by  the  name  of  some

ancestor  from  whom  they  claimed  to  be  descended,  and  who  appears  in  some

cases  to  have  been  a  god  for  whom  they  had  a  special  devotion ;  some  writers

have  believed  that  this  was  also  the  origin  of  the  names  given  to  several  of

the  tribes,  such  as  Gad,  "  Good  Fortune,"  or  of  the  totems  of  the  hyena  and

the  dog,  in  Arabic  and  Hebrew,  "  Simeon  "  and  "  Caleb."  "^     Gad,  Simeon,  and

Caleb  were  severally  the  ancestors  of  the  families  who  ranged  themselves  under

their  respective  names,  and  the  eponymous  heroes  of  all  the  tribes  were  held

to  have  been  brethren,  sous  of  one  father,  and  under  the  protection  of  one

God.     He  was  known  as  the  Jahveh  with  whom   Abraham  of  old  had  made

a  solemn  covenant;^  His  dwelling-place  was  Mount  Sinai  or  Mount  Seir,  and

He  revealed  Himself  in  the  storm;'  His  voice  was  as  the  thunder  "which

shaketh  the  wilderness,"  His  breath  was  as  "  a  consuming  fire,"  and  He  was

decked  with  light  "  as  with  a  garment."     When  His  anger  was  aroused,  He

'  The  clan  was  called  mishpakhah  (Lev.  xxv.  10 ;  Numh.  iii.  30,  35 ;  Josh.  xiii.  15) ;  for  its  con-
stitution, cf.  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  396,  et  seq.

'  The  elders  were  called  zehen,  in  the  plural  zelienim  {Exod.  iii.  18,  sxiv.  14 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  28).

"  The  tribe  was  designated  by  two  words  signifying  "staff"  or  "branch;"  the  first  is  matteh
{Numb.  i.  49,  x.  16,  xxxiv.  13,  et  seq.,  xxxvi.  3),  the  second  shabet  {Exod.  xxiv.  4,  xxviii.  21 ;  Numb.
xxxvi.  3 ;  Josh.  iv.  5 ;  Judges  xviii.  1).

*  The  word  msi,  first  applied  to  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  {Exod.  xxxiv.  31  ;  Ijbv.  iv.  22  ;  Numb.  ii.  3),
became,  after  the  captivity,  tlie  title  of  the  chiefs  of  Israel,  who  could  not  be  called  kings  owing  to
the  foreign  suzerainty  {Esdras  i.  8).

'  For  this  ouomastic  procedure,  cf  Kobebtson  S.mith,  On  Animal  Worship  and  Animal  Tribes
amongst  the  Arabs  and  in  the  Old  Test.,  in  the  Journal  of  Philology,  vol.  ix.  p.  75,  et  seq.  For  its
applicability  to  the  clans  and  tribes  of  Israel,  see  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  403-409.
For  Gad,  see  suj)ra,  pp.  157,  158.  Simeon  is  derived  by  some  from  a  word  which  at  times  denotes  a
hyeua,  at  others  a  cross  between  a  dog  and  a  hyena,  according  to  Arab  lexicography  (Robertson
Smith,  On  Animal  Worship,  p.  80).  With  regard  to  Caleb,  Remm  prefers  a  different  interpretation ;
it  is  supposed  to  be  a  sliortened  form  of  Kalbel  (cf  KulheUm  in  the  Corpus  Tnscriptionum  Semilicarum,
vol.  i.  pp.  70,  71,  No.  49,  and  pp.  72, 73,  No.  52),  and  "  Dog  of  El "  is  a  strong  expression  to  denote  tlie
devotion  of  a  tribe  to  its  patron  god.

"  For  tlie  covenant  made  by  God  with  Abraham,  see  supi'a,  pp.  66,  67.

'  Cf.  the  graphic  description  of  tlie  signs  which  accompanied  the  manifestations  of  Jahveh  in  the
Song  of  Deborah  {Judges  v.  4,  5),  and  also  in  1  Kings  xix.  11-13.


I


THE  EKBEEWS  IN   THE  DESERT,    THEIR    CLANS  AND    TRIBES.      '375

withheld  the  dew  and  rain  from  watering  the  earth ;  but  when  His  wrath  was
appeased,  the  heavens  again  poured  their  fruitful  showers  ujjon  the  fields."  He
is  described  as  being  a  "jealous  God,"  brooking  no  rival,  and  "visiting  the
inicpiity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  uuto  the  third  and  fourth  o-enera-
tion."  We  hear  of  His  having  been  adored  under  the  figure  of  a  "  calf,"  -  and
of  His  Spirit  inspiring  His  prophets,  as  well  as  of  the  anointed  stones  which
were  dedicated  in  His  honour.^  The  common  ancestor  of  the  nation  was
acknowledged  to  have  been  Jacob,  who,  by  his  wrestling  with  God,  had
obtained  the  name  of  Israel ;  the  people  were  divided  theoretically  into  as
many  tribes  as  he  had  sons,  but  the  number  twelve  to  which  they  were
limited  does  not  entirely  correspond  with  all  that  we  know  up  to  the  present
time  of  these  "  children  of  Israel."  ^  Some  of  the  tribes  appear  never  to  liave
had  any  political  existence,  as  for  example  that  of  Levi,^  or  they  were  merged
at  an  early  date  into  some  fellow-tribe,  as  in  the  case  of  Eeuben  with  Gad ; "
others,  such  as  Ephraim,  IManasseh,  Benjamin,  and  Judah,  apparently  did
not  attain  their  normal  development  until  a  much  later  date.  The  Jewish
chroniclers  attempted  by  various  combinations  to  prove  that  the  sacred
number  of  tribes  was  the  correct  one.  At  times  they  included  heyi  in  the
list,  in  which  case  .Joseph  was  reckoned  as  one ; '  while  on  other  occasions
Levi  or  Simeon  was  omitted,  when  for  Joseph  would  be  substituted  his  two
sons  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.^  In  addition  to  this,  the  tribes  were  very
unequal  in  size :  Ephraim,  Gad,  and  Manasseh  comprised  many  powerful  and
wealthy  families ;  Dan,  on  the  contrary,  contained  so  few,  that  it  was  some-
times reckoned  as  a  mere  clan.

The    tribal   organisation    had    not   reached    its    full   development   at    the

'  See  1  Kings  xvii.,  xviii.,  where  the  conflict  between  Elijah  aud  the  prophets  of  Baal  for  the
obtaining  of  rain  is  described.

-  The  most  common  of  these  iinimal  forms  was  that  of  a  calf  or  bull  {Exod.  xxxii. ;  Deut.  ix.  21 ;
!ind  in  the  kingly  jieriod,  1  Kings  xii.  28-30 ;  2  Kings  x.  29) ;  we  are  not  told  the  form  of  tlie  image
of  Micah  the  lOphraimite  (Judges  xviii.  14,  17,  18,  20,  30,  31).  [The  ephods  mentioned  as  objects  of
reverence  in  Judfjes  viii.  27,  and  1  Sam.  xxi.  9,  cannot  come  under  this  category,  as  the  Hebrew  word
used  implies  tliat  tliere  was  no  figure  connected  with  tliem. — Ed.]

'  For  the  stones  which  marked  the  sites  of  the  appearances  of  .lahvcli,  cf.  sapra,  pp.  (jli,  G8,  09.
102-104.

*  For  Jacob-Israsl  and  his  twelve  sous,  and  for  the  division  of  their  descendants  into  twelve
tribes,  cf.  supra,  68-70.

'  Levi  appears  to  have  suffered  dispersion  after  the  events  of  which  there  are  two  separate  accounts
combined  in  Gen,  xxxiv.  In  conjunction  with  Simeon,  lie  appears  to  have  revenged  tlie  violation  of
his  sister  Dinah  by  a  massacre  of  the  Shcchemites,  and  the  dispersion  alluded  to  in  Jacol)'s  blessing
(Gen.  xlix.  .5-7)  is  mentioned  as  consequent  on  this  act  of  barbarism.  For  remarks  on  this  subject,
see  .Stade,  Gesch.  des  VuV:es  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  152-154.

"  In  the  IX"'  century  Mesha  of  Moabdoes  not  mention  the  Ileubenites,andBpeaksof  the  Gadites  only
as  inliabitiug  the  territory  formerly  occupii-d  by  them.  Tradition  attributed  the  misfortunes  of  the  tribe
to  tlie  crime  of  its  chief  in  liis  .seduction  (jf  liilhah,  liis  fatlior's  concubine  (Gen.  xlix.  :>,  4  ;  cf.  xxxv.  22).

'  As,  for  instance,  in  .Jacob's  blessing  (Gen.  xlix.  5-7)  and  in  the  enumeration  of  tlie  patriarch's
sons  at  the  time  of  his  journey  to  Egypt  (Gen.  xlvl.  9-20).

'  Numli.  i.  20,  et  seq.,  where  the  descendants  of  Levi  are  not  included  among  the  twelve,  and
iJeut.  xxxiii.  G-25,  where  (Simeon  is  omitted  from  among  the  tribes  blessed  by  Moses  before  his  death.


r)7(!  TltK   HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

time  of  the  sojourn  in  the  desert.  The  tribes  of  Joseph  and  Judah,  who
subsequently  played  such  important  parts,  were  at  that  period  not  held  in
any  particular  estimation;  Reuben,  on  the  other  hand,  exercised  a  sort  of
right  of  priority  over  the  rest.'  The  territory  which  they  occupied  soon
became  insufBcient  to  support  their  numbers,  and  they  sought  to  exchange
it  for  a  wider  area,  such  as  was  offered  by  the  neighbouring  provinces  of
Southern  Syria.  Pharaoh  at  this  time  exercised  no  authority  over  this
region,  and  they  were,  therefore,  no  longer  in  fear  of  opposition  from  his
troops ;  the  latter  had  been  recalled  to  Egypt,  and  it  is  doubtful  even  whether
he  retained  possession  of  the  Shephelah  by  means  of  his  Zakkala  and
Philistine  colonies ;  the  Hebrews,  at  any  rate,  had  nothing  to  fear  from  him
so  long  as  they  respected  Gaza  and  Ascalon.  They  began  by  attempting  to
possess  themselves  of  the  provinces  around  Hebron,  in  the  direction  of  the
Dead  Sea,  and  we  read  that,  before  entering  them,  they  sent  out  spies  to
reconnoitre  and  rejiort  on  the  country.^  Its  population  had  undergone
considerable  modifications  since  the  Israelites  had  quitted  Goschen.  The
Amorites,  who  had  seriously  suffered  from  the  incursions  of  Asiatic  hordes,  and
had  been  constantly  harassed  by  the  attacks  of  the  Aramaeans,  had  abandoned
the  positions  they  had  formerly  occupied  on  the  banks  of  the  Orontes  and
the  Litany,  and  had  moved  southwards,  driving  the  Canaanites  before  them ;
their  advance  was  accelerated  as  the  resistance  opposed  to  their  hordes  became
lessened  under  the  successors  of  Ramses  III.,  until  at  length  all  opposition  was
withdrawn.  They  had  possessed  themselves  of  the  regions  about  the  Lake
of  Genesareth,  the  mountain  district  to  the  south  of  Tabor,  the  middle  valley
of  the  Jordan,  and,  pressing  towards  the  territory  east  of  that  river,  had  attacked
the  cities  scattered  over  the  undulating  table-land.  This  district  had  not
been  often  subjected  to  incursions  of  Egyptian  troops,  and  yet  its  inhabitants
had  been  more  impressed  by  Egyptian  influence  than  many  others.  Whereas,
in  the  north  and  west,  cuneiform  writing  was  almost  entirely  used,  attempts
had  been  made  here  to  adapt  the  hieroglyphs  to  the  native  language.  The
only  one  of  their  monuments  which  has  been  preserved  is  a  rudely  carved
bas-relief  in  black  basalt,  representing  a  two-horned  Astarte,  before  whom
stands  a  king  in  adoration ;  the  sovereign  is  Ramses  II.,  and  the  inscriptions
accompanying  the  figures  contain  a  religious  formula,  together  with  a  name
borrowed  from  one  of  the  local    dialects.^     The  Amorites   were   everywhere

'  This  conclusion  is  drawn  from  the  position  of  eldest  son  given  to  him  in  all  the  genealogies
enumerating  the  children  of  Jacob.  Stade,  on  the  contrary,  is  inclined  to  believe  that  this  place  of
honour  was  granted  to  him  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  his  family,  to  prevent  any  jealousy  arising
between  the  more  powerful  tribes,  such  as  Ephraim  and  Judah  {Ges.  des  VoUccs  Isr.,  vol.  i.  pp.  151 ,  152).

-  Numb.  xiii.

=  This  is  the  "  Stone  of  Job  "  discovered  by  Sohuhmacher  (Zeitschrif't  des  Palastina-Vereins,  1888,
Vol.  xiv.  p.  1-12,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Ekman,  Der  Siohstein,  ibid.,  vol.  xv.  pp.  205-211).  The  inscription  appears
to  give  the  name  of  a  goddess,  Agana-Zaphon,  the  second  part  of  which  recalls  the  name  of  IJaal-Zephon.


THE  AMORITES   IN    THE  LAND    OF   CANAAN.


G77


THE   AMORITE    ASTAUTE."


victurious,  but  our  information  is  coutiued  to  this  bare  fact;  soon  after  their
victory,  however,  we  iind  the  territory  they  had  invaded  divided  into  two
kingdoms :  in  the  north  that  of  Bashan,  which  coin^^rised,  besides  the
Hauran,  the  plain  watered  by  the  Yarmuk ;  and  to  tlie  south  that  of  Heshbon,
containing  the  district  lying
around  the  Arnon,  and  the
Jabbok  to  the  east  of  the
Dead  Sea.^  They  seem  to  have
made  the  same  rapid  progress  in
the  country  between  the  Jordan
and  the  Mediterranean  as  else-
where. They  hud  subdued
some  of  the  small  Canaanite
states,  entered  into  friendly
relations  with  others,  and  pene-
trated gradually  as  far  south
as  the  borders  of  Sinai,  while
we  find  them  establishing  petty
kings  among  the  hill-country  of
Shechem  around  Hebron,  on  the  confines  of  the  Negeb,  and  the  Shephelah.''
When  the  Hebrew  tribes  ventured  to  push  forward  in  a  direct  line  northwards,
they  came  into  collision  with  the  advance  posts  of  the  Amorite  population,  and
suffered  a  severe  defeat  under  the  walls  of  Hormah.^  The  check  thus  received,
however,  did  not  discourage  them.  As  a  direct  course  was  closed  to  them,
they  turned  to  the  right,  and  followed,  first  the  southern  and  then  the  eastern
shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  till  they  reached  the'  frontier  of  Gilead.®  There  again
they  were  confronted  by  the  Amorite.s,  but  in  lesser  numbers,  and  not  so
securely  entrenched  within  their  fortresses  as  their  fellow-countrymen  iu  the

'  The  extension  of  the  Amorite  power  in  this  directiou  is  proved  by  the  facts  relating  to  the  king-
doms of  Sihou  uud  Og  {Deut.  i.  4,  ii.  24-37,  iii.  1-17).  For  the  whole  of  this  Amorite  migration,  cf.
WiNCKLEii,  Gesch.  leraels,  vol.  i.  pp.  51-54.

^  Drawn  by  I'iiuoher-Gudiu,  from  the  squeezes  and  sketches  published  in  the  Zeitschrift  den
I'aliielina-Vtrciiis,  vol.  xv.  pp.  20fc>,  207;  ef.  also  suynt,  p.  403,  note  3.

'  For  the  Amorite  occupation  of  the  Negeb  and  the  hill  country  of  Judab,  cf.  Numb.  xiii.  29 ;
Deut.  i.  7,  19— IG  ;  Josh.  x.  5,  U,  12,  xi.  3;  for  their  preseuce  in  the  Shcphelah,  ef.  Judges  i.  34-3(J.

•  See  the  long  account  iu  Numb,  xiii.,  xiv.,  which  terminates  with  the  mention  of  the  defeat  of  tlie
Israelites  at  Hormah  ;  and  cf.  iJeut.  i.  19-46.

'  The  itinerary  given  in  Numb.  xx.  22-29,  xxxi.,  xxxiii.  37-19,  and  repeated  iu  Deut.  ii.,  brings  tlie
Israelites  as  far  as  Ezion-geber,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  the  Midiauites  and  the  Mcjabites.  The
friendly  welcome  accorded  to  tliem  in  the  regions  situated  to  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  lias  been
accjuuted  for  eitlier  by  an  alliance  made  witli  Moab  and  Ammon  against  their  common  enemy,  the
Amorites  (Wellhavskn,  Ablins  di:r  Gercli.  Israels  und  Judas,  in  the  Skizzen  uiid  Vumrlieiten,  vol.  i.
p.  7,  and  with  more  reserve  by  Renan,  Uisl.  du  pcuple  d'Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  211,  ct  seii.),  or  by  the  fact
lluit  Ammon  and  Moab  did  not  as  yet  occupy  tliose  regions;  tlie  inhabilauts  in  that  ease  would  have
been  lid(jmite8  and  Hidianites,  who  were  iu  coutiiuial  warfare  witli  eacli  other  (Winokleh,  Gescli.
Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  40-51,  203-205).


(578


THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.


THE   TALLEY    OF    THK   JAEBOK,    XEAll    TO    ITS   CONFLUENCE    WITH    THE   JORDAN.


Negeb,  so  that  the  Israelites  were  able  to  overthrow  the  kingdoms  of  Heshbou
and  Bashan.^  Gad  received  as  its  inheritance  nearly  the  whole  of  the  territory
lying  between  the  Jabbok  and  the  Yarmuk,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
ancient  native  sanctuaries  of  Peunel,  Mahanaim,  and  Succoth,  associated  with
the  memory  of  Jacob.^  Eeuben  settled  in  the  vicinity,  and  both  tribes
remained  there  isolated  from  the  rest.  From  this  time  forward  they  took
but  a  slight  interest  in  the  aifairs  of  their  brethren :  when  the  latter  demanded
tlieir  succour,  "Gilead  abode  beyond  Jordan,"  and  "by  the  watercourses  of
Reuben  there  were  great  resolves  of  heart,"  but  without  any  consequent  action.*

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  photograph  No.  336  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.

-  War  against  Sihon,  King  of  Heahbon  (Numb.  xxi.  21-31 ;  Deut.  ii.  26-37),  and  against  Og,  King
of  Bashan  (Nuinb.  xxi.  32-35 ;  Deut.  iii.  1-13).  Ed.  Meyer  thinks  that  the  episode  of  Slhon  was
placed  by  mistake  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  (Der  Krieg  gegen  Siclien  und  die  zugfhSrigen  Abschiiitte,
in  t!ie  Zeitsclirift  fiir  alttestamenlliche  Wissensclm/t,  1885,  pp.  36-52,  and  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.
pp.  391,  392,  402) ;  according  to  him,  Sihon  was  King  of  Moab,  father  of  Meshah,  from  whom  Omri  of
Israel  took  Heshbon  at  the  beginning  of  the  IX"'  century  (of  Stade,  Gesch.  des  VolJtes  Israel,  vol.  i.
pp.  lie,  118,  521,  522).  Kuenen  has  refuted  this  hypothesis  {Hist.  Kritik  Onderzoelc,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.
§  13,  note  13),  and  his  opinion  is  now  accepted  by  most  historians.

'  For  these  ancient  sanctuaries,  cf.  supra,  pp.  tj8,  69, 163.  For  Gad  and  Keubeu,  cf.  Stade,  Gesch.
lies  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  148-152 ;  Gad  did  not  possess  the  districts  between  the  Jabbok  and  the
Arnon  till  the  time  of  the  early  kings,  and  retained  them  only  till  about  the  reign  of  Jehu,  as  we
gather  from  the  inscription  of  Mesa.

■■  These  are  the  very  expressions  used  by  the  author  of  the  Song  of  Deborah  in  Judges  v.  16,  17;
cf.  pp.  687,  GS8  of  this  present  volume.


THE   CONQUEST   OF   CAXAAX  JiY   THE  HEBnEWS.


G79


ONE   OF   THE    JIOl'NIiS   Of    AIN    ES-SULTAN,    THE    ANCIENT   JEllICHO.'


It  was  not  merely  due  to  indifference  on  their  part;  tlieir  resources  were  fully
tiixed  in  defending  themselves  against  the  Aramaeans  and  Bedawins,  and  from
the  attacks  of  Moab  and  Ammou.  Gad,  continually  threatened,  struggled
for  centuries  without  being  discouraged,  but  Reuben  lost  heart,-  and  soon
declined  in  power,  till  at  length  he  became  merely  a  name  in  the  memory
of  his  brethren.

Two  tribes  having  been  thus  provided  for,  the  bulk  of  tlie  Israelites
sought  to  cross  the  Jordan  without  further  delay,  and  establish  themselves
as  best  they  might  in  tlie  very  heart  of  the  Canaanites.  The  sacred  writings
speak  of  their  taking  possession  of  the  country  by  a  methodic  campaign,
undertaken  by  command  of  and  under  the  visible  protection  of  Jaliveh.'^
Jloses  had  led  them  from  Egypt  to  Kadesh,  and  from  Kadesh  to  the  land
of  Gilead ;  he  had  seen  the  promised  land  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Nebo,
but  he  had  not  entered  it,  and  after  his  death,  Joshua,  son  of  Nun,  became
their  leader,  brought  them  across  Jordan  dryshod,  not  far  from  its  moutli,
and  laid  siege  to  Jericho.  The  walls  of  the  city  fell  of  themselves  at  tiie
blowing  of  the   brazen   trumpets,*  and   its   capture    entailed    that  of  three

'  Drawn  by  BouJier,  from  a  photograph  brought  back  by  Lortet.

-  The  recollection  of  tlicse  ruids  by  Reuben  against  the  Beduiii  of  the  Syrian  desert  is  traceable
in  I  Chron.  v.  10, 18-22  ;  its  authenticity  is  vainly  contested  by  Stade,  Geschichte,  vol.  i.  p.  152,  n.  1.

'  The  liistory  of  the  conquest  is  to  bo  found  iu  tho  Booh  of  Joshua.  I  shall  not  attempt,  either  here
or  in  tho  other  passages  relating  to  tho  people  of  Israel,  to  enter  into  a  detailed  account  of  the  various
critical  studies  of  tho  Hebrew  text,  nor  to  give  an  exhaustive  bibliography  of  tlie  subject.

*  Jo8h.  i.-vi.


G80


THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


neighbouriug  towns,  Ai,  Bethel,  and  Shechem.  Shechem  served  as  a  rallyiug-
place  for  the  conquerors ;  Joshua  took  up  his  residence  there,  and  built  on
the  summit  of  Mount  Ebal  an  altar  of  stone,  on  which  he  engraved  the
principal  tenets  of  the  divine  Law.^  The  sudden  intrusion  of  a  new  element
naturally  alarmed   the   worshippers  of  the   surrounding   local  deities;   they


THE   JORDAN    IN    THE    NEIGHBOUEHOOD    OP   JERICHO."

at  once  put  a  truce  to  their  petty  discords,  and  united  in  arms  against  the
strangers.  At  the  instigation  of  Adoni-zedeck,  King  of  Jerusalem,  the
Canaanites  collected  their  forces  in  the  south;  but  they  were  routed  not
far  from  Gibeon,  and  their  chiefs  killed  or  mutilated.*  The  Amorites  in  the
north,  who  had  assembled  round  Jabin,  King  of  Hazor,  met  with  no  better
success ;  they  were  defeated  at  the  waters  of  Merom,  Hazor  was  burnt,  and
Galilee  delivered  up  to  fire  and  sword.*  The  country  having  been  thus  to
a  certain  extent  cleared,  Joshua  set  about  dividing  the  spoil,  and  assigned
to  each  tribe  his  allotted  portion  of  territory.^     Such,  in  its  main  outlines,

^  Josh,  vii.,  viii.    Mouut  Ebal  is  the  present  Gebel  Sulemiyeh.
=  Diawu'by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  in  Lortet,  La  Syrie  d'aujoiird'hui,  p.  451.
'  Josh.  X.     The  same  war  is  given  rather  differently  iu  Judges  i.  1-9,  where  the  kiu<r  is  called
Adoni-bezek ;  cf.  what  is  said  on  pp.  702,  703  of  the  present  volume.  °

*  Josh.  xi.  As  another  Jabiu  appears  in  the  history  of  Deborah  (cf.  p.  686  of  this  volume)  it
has  been  maintained  by  some  critics  that  there  is  a  double  rdle  assigned  to  one  and  the  same
person,  only  that  some  maintain  that  the  Jabin  of  Josh.  xi.  has  been  transferred  to  the  time  of  the
Judges,  while  others  make  out  that  the  Jabin  of  Deborali  was  carried  back  to  the  time  of  the  conquest
<Renan,  Eist.  du  peiiple  d' Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  307,  note  4).

*  The  lot  given  to  each  tribe  is  described  in  Josh,  xiii.-xxi.


THE  PARTITION  OF  THE  TRIBES  INTO  THBEE  ISOLATED  GROUPS.      CSl


is  the  account  given  by  the  Hebrew  chroniclers ;  but,  if  closely  examined,  it
wouki  appear  that  the  Israelites  did  not  act  throughout  with  that  unity  of
purpose  and  energy  which  we  might  at  first  sight  have  attributed  to  them.
They  did  not  gain  possession  of  the  land  all  at  once,  but  established  them-
selves in  it  gradually  by  detachments,  some  settling  at  the  fords  of  Jericho,^
others  more  to  the  north,  and  in  the  central  valley  of  the  Jordan  as  far  up  as
Shechem.'-*  The  latter  at  once  came  into  contact  with  a  population  having
a  higher  civilization  than  themselves,  and  well  equipped  for  a  vigorous
resistance;  the  walled  towns  which  had  defied  the  veterans  of  the  Pharaohs
had  not  much  to  fear  from  the
bands  of  undisciplined  Israelites
wandering  in  their  neighbour-
hood. Properly  speaking,  there
were  no  pitched  battles  between
them,  but  rather  a  succession
of  raids  or  skirmishes,  in  which
several  citadels  would  succes-
sively fall  into  the  hands  of
the  invaders.  Many  of  these
strongholds,  harassed  by  re-
peated attacks,  would  prefer  to
come  to  terms  with  the  enemy,
and  would  cede  or  sell  them  some  portion  of  their  territory ;  others  would
open  their  gates  freely  to  the  strangers,  and  their  inhabitants  would  ally
themselves  by  intermarriage  with  the  Hebrews.  Judah  and  the  remain-
ing descendants  of  Simeon  and  Levi  established  themselves  in  the  south ;
Levi  comprised  but  a  small  number  of  families,  and  made  no  important
settlements;  whereas  Judah  took  possession  of  nearly  the  whole  of  the
mountain  district  separating  the  Shephelah  from  the  western  shores  of
the  Dead  Sea,  while  Simeon  made  its  abode  close  by  on  the  borders
of  the  desert  around  the  wells  of  Beersheba.*  The  descendants  of  Kachel
and  her  handmaid  received  as  their  inheritance  the  regions  situated  more
to  the  centre  of  the  country,  the  house  of  Joseph  taking  the  best  domains


UI<li    ul'    THJi    WELLS   UF
BEEKSHEBA.'


'  Kenan,  Ei»t.  da  peuple  <V Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  2;J7-2;!9,  tliinks  that  tlio  priucipal  crousiug  must  have
taken  place  opposite  .lericho,  aa  is  apparent  from  the  account  iu  Joxh.  ii.,  iii.

'  Stade,  Gegch.  ilea  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  lt!7-H0;  Curl  Niehulir  (_Getch.  det:  Ebriiischen
Zeitaltere,  vol.  i.  p.  329,  et  seij.)  believes  that  he  has  discovered  the  exact  spot  at  the  ford  of
Admah,  near  Succoth.

'  Drawn  by  lioudier,  from  a  photograph  iu  Loiitet's  La  Syrie  d'aujourd'hui,  p.  835.

*  Welllianseu  has  remarked  (Art.  Israd,  in  the  Kncyclopi.dia  Vritannica,  p.  400'')  tliat  the  lot  of
Levi  must  not  be  sejiaruted  from  that  of  Simeou,  and,  as  the  remnant  of  Simeon  allied  tlieuiselves
witli  Judftli,  that  of  Levi  also  must  have  shared  the  patrimony  of  Judah.


682  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

for  its  branches  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  Ephraim  received  some  of  the
old  Canaanite  sanctuaries,  such  as  Eamah,  Bethel,  and  Shiloh,  and  it  was
at  the  latter  spot  that  they  deposited  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  Manasseh
settled  to  the  north  of  Ephraim,  in  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the  Carmel  group,
and  to  Benjamin  were  assigned  the  heights  which  overlook  the  plain  of
Jericho.*  Four  of  the  less  important  tribes,  Issachar,  Asher,  Naphtali,  and
Zebulon,  ventured  as  far  north  as  the  borders  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  behind  the
Phoenician  littoral,  but  were  prevented  by  the  Canaanites  and  Amorites  from
spreading  over  the  plain,  and  had  to  confine  themselves  to  the  mountains.
All  the  fortresses  commanding  the  passes  of  Tabor  and  Carmel,  Megiddo,
Taanach,  Ibleam,  Jezreel,'-^  Endor,  and  Bethshan  remained  inviolate,  and
formed  as  it  were  an  impassable  barrier-line  between  the  Hebrews  of  Galilee
and  their  brethren  of  Ephraim.  The  Danites  were  long  before  they  found  a
resting-place ;  they  attempted  to  insert  themselves  to  the  north  of  Judah,
between  Ajalon  and  Joppa,  but  were  so  harassed  by  the  Amorites,  that  they
had  to  content  themselves  with  the  precarious  tenure  of  a  few  towns  such  as
Zora,  Shaalbin,  and  Eshdol.^  The  foreign  peoples  of  the  Shephelah  and  the
Canaanite  cities  almost  all  preserved  their  autonomy ;  the  Israelites  had  no
chance  against  them  wherever  they  had  sufficient  space  to  put  into  the  field
large  bodies  of  infantry  or  to  use  their  iron-bound  chariots.  Finding  it
therefore  impossible  to  overcome  them,  the  tribes  were  forced  to  remain
cut  off  from  each  other  in  three  isolated  groups  of  unequal  extent  which
they  were  powerless  to  connect:  in  the  centre  were  Joseph,  Benjamin,  and
Dan  ;  in  the  south,  Judah,  Levi,  and  Simeon  ;  while  Issachar,  Asher,  Naphtali,
and  Zebulon  lay  to  the  north.

The  period  following  the  occupation  of  Canaan  constituted  the  heroic  age
of  the  Hebrews.  The  sacred  writings  agree  in  showing  that  the  ties  which
bound  the  twelve  tribes  together  were  speedily  dissolved,  while  their  fidelity
and  obedience  to  God  were  relaxed  with  the  growth  of  the  young  generations
to  whom  Moses  or  Joshua  were  merely  names.  The  conquerors  "  dwelt  among
the  Canaanites;  the  Hittite,  and   the  Amorite,  and   the  Perizzite,  and  the

'  For  the  territory  allotted  to  the  cliildren  of  Eacbel,  and  the  progressive  formation  of  the  tribes
into  which  they  were  divided,  of.  Wellhacsex,  Abriss  der  Gesch.  Israels  und  Juda's,  in  the  Skizzen
und  Vorarheiten,  vol.  i.  pp.  14,  15 ;  Stade,  GescU.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  160-165 ;  Kenan,  Hist,
du  peupU  d' Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  258-261.  Noldeko  is  of  opinion  that  the  constitution  of  the  tribe  of
Manasseh  is  not  older  than  the  times  of  Jerubbaal  and  Abimelech  (in  Scuexkel,  Bibel-Lexicoti,
vol.  vi.  p.  104,  et  seq.).

'  In  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  168-173,  will  be  found  the  documents  which
we  possess  dealing  with  the  tribes  settled  in  Galilee.  Jezreel  is  not  explicitly  mentioned  as
being  one  of  the  cities  which  remained  independent ;  it  is,  however,  probable  that  for  a  long
time  it  formed  one  of  the  group  of  autonomic  fortresses  (Bddde,  Die  Biicher  Bidder  und  Samuelis,
pp.  45-47).

^  For  Dan  and  its  subsequent  history,  cf.  Stade,  Oesch.  des  Vollies  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  165-168.


THE  REACTION  AGAISST   THE   HEBREWS — THE  JUDGES.


(58  3


Hivite,  and  the  Jebusite :  and  they  took  their  daughters  to  be  their  wives,
and  gave  their  own  daughters  to  their  sons,  and  served  their  gods.  And  the
children  of  Israel  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  their  God,
and  served  the  Baalim  and  the  Asheroth."  ^  When  they  had  once  abandoned
their  ancient  faith,  poli-
tical unity  was  not  long
preserved.  War  broke
out  between  one  tribe
and  another;  the  stronger
allowed  the  weaker  to
be  oppressed  by  the
heathen,  and  were  them-
selves often  powerless  to
retain  their  indepen-
dence. In  spite  of  the
tliousands  of  men  among
them,  all  able  to  bear
arms,  they  fell  an  easy
prey  to  the  first  comer ;
the  Amorites,  the  Am-
monites, the  Moabites,
and  the  Philistines,  all
oppressed  them  in  turn,
and  repaid  with  usury
the  ills  which  Joshua
had  inflicted  on  the
Canaanites.  "  Whither-
soever they  went  out,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  them  for  evil,  as  the
Lord  had  spoken,  and  as  the  Lord  had  sworn  unto  them :  and  they  were  sore
distressed.  And  the  Lord  raised  up  judges,  which  saved  them  out  of  the  hand
of  those  that  spoiled  them.  And  yet  they  hearkened  not  unto  their  judges,  for
tliey  went  a-whoring  after  other  gods,  and  bowed  themselves  down  unto  them  :
they  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the  way  wherein  their  fiitliers  walked  obeying
the  commandments  of  the  Lord  ;  but  they  did  not  so.  And  when  the  Lord
raised  them  up  judges,  then  the  Lord  was  with  the  judge,  and  saved  them
out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies  all  the  days  of  the  judge :  for  it  repented
the  Lord  because  of  their  groaning  by  reason  of  them  that  oppressed  them
and  vexed  them.     But  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  judge  was  dead,  that  they


'  Judgct  iii.  5-7  (U.V.).


<i84  THE  HEBREWS   AND    TEE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

turned  back,  und  dealt  more  corruptly  than  their  fathers,  in  following  other
gods  to  serve  them,  and  to  bow  down  unto  them ;  they  ceased  not  from  their
doings,  nor  from  their  stubborn  way."  ^  The  history  of  this  period  lacks  the
unity  and  precision  with  which  we  are  at  first  tempted  to  credit  it.  The
Israelites,  when  transplanted  into  the  promised  land,  did  not  immediately
lose  the  nomadic  habits  they  had  acquired  in  the  desert.  They  retained  the
customs  and  prejudices  they  had  inherited  from  their  fathers,  and  for  many
years  treated  the  peasantry,  whose  fields  they  had  devastated,  with  the  same
disdain  that  the  Bedawin  of  our  own  day,  living  in  tlie  saddle,  hmce  in  hand,
shows  towards  the  fellahin  who  till  the  soil  and  bend  patiently  over  the
plough.  The  clans,  as  of  old,  were  impatient  of  all  regular  authority ;  each
tribe  tended  towards  an  isolated  autonomy,  a  state  of  affairs  which  merited
reprisals  from  the  natives  and  encouraged  hatred  of  the  intruders,  and  it  was
only  when  the  Canaanite  oppression  became  unendurable  that  those  Avho
suffered  most  from  it  united  themselves  to  make  a  common  effort,  and  rallied
for  a  moment  round  the  chief  who  was  ready  to  lead  them.  Many  of  these
liberators  must  have  acquired  an  ephemeral  popularity,  and  then  have  sunk
into  oblivion  together  with  the  two  or  three  generations  who  had  known  them ;
those  whose  memory  remained  green  among  their  kinsmen  were  known  by
posterity  as  the  judges  of  Israel.'-^  These  judges  were  not  magistrates  invested
with  official  powers  and  approved  by  the  whole  nation,  or  rulers  of  a  highly
organised  republic,  chosen  directly  by  Grod  or  by  those  inspired  by  Him.
They  were  merely  local  chiefs,  heroes  to  their  own  immediate  tribe,  well
known  in  their  particular  surroundings,  but  often  despised  by  those  only
at  a  short  distance  from  them.  Some  of  them  have  left  only  a  name  behind
them,  such  as  Shamgar,  Ibzan,  Tola,  Elou,  and  Abdon ;  indeed,  some  scholars
have  thrown  doubts  on  the  personality  of  a  few  of  them,  as,  for  instance,  Jair,
whom  they  afiirm  to  have  personified  a  Gileadite  clan,  and  Othniel,  who  is
said  to  represent  one  of  the  Kenite  families  associated  with  the  children  of
Israel.^  Others,  again,  have  come  down  to  us  through  an  atmosphere  of
popular  tradition,  the  elements  of  which  modern  criticism  has  tried  in  vain
to  analyse.     Of  such  unsettled   and  turbulent  times  we   cannot  expect   an

•  Judges  ii.  15-19.

-  The  word  ••  judges,"  whicli  has  beeu  adopted  to  designate  these  lulers,  is  somewhat  misleading,
as  it  suggests  the  idea  of  an  oigauized  civil  magistracy.  The  word  "shophet,"  the  same  that  we  meet
with  in  chissicul  times  under  the  form  svffttes,  hail  indeed  that  seuse,  but  its  primary  meaning
denotes  a  man  invested  witli  au  absolute  authority,  regular  or  otherwise ;  it  would  be  better  trans-
lated chief,  prince,  captain.

'  For  a  general  treatment  of  these  lesser  judges,  cf.  Noldeke,  Untenuchungen  zur  Kritik  des
Alien  Testameiilg,  p.  ISl,  et  seq.  The  name  Tola  occurs  as  that  of  one  of  the  clans  of  Issaohar
(Gen.  xlvi.  13 ;  Numb.  xxvi.  23) ;  Elon  was  one  of  the  clans  of  Zebulon  (Gen.  xlvi.  14 ;  Numh.
xxvi.  20).


THE  MOABITES  AND   BENJAMIN — EHUD.  685

uninterruptod  history :  ^  some  salient  episodes  alone  remain,  spread  over  a
period  of  nearly  two  centuries,  and  from  these  we  can  gather  some  idea  of  the
progress  made  by  the  Israelites,  and  observe  their  stages  of  transition  from
a  cluster  of  semi-barbarous  hordes  to  a
settled  nation  ripe  for  monarchy.

The  first  of  these  episodes  deals
merely  with  a  part,  and  that  the  least
important,  of  the  tribes  settled  in  Central
Canaan.^  The  destruction  of  the  Amorite
kingdoms  of  Heshbon  and  Bashan  had
been  as  profitable  to  tlie  kinsmen  of  the
Israelites,  Ammon  and  Moab,  as  it  had
been  to  the  Israelites  themselves.  The
Moabites  had  followed  in  the  wake  of
the  Hebrews  through  all  the  surround-
ing regions  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;  they  had
pushed  on  from  the  banks  of  the  Arnon
to  those  of  the  Jabbok,  and  at  the  time
of  the  Judges  were  no  longer  content
with  harassing  merely  Eeuben  and  Gad.
They  were  a  fine  race  of  warlike,  well-
armed  Bedawins.  Jericho  had  fallen
into  their  hands,  and  their  King  Eglou
had  successfully  scoured  the  entire  hill-
country  of  Ephraim,*  so  that  those  who
wished  to  escape  being  pillaged  had  to  safeguard  themselves  by  the  payment
of  an  annual  tribute.  Ehud  the  Left-handed  concealed  under  his  garments
a  keen  dagger,  and  joined  himself  to  the  Benjamite  deputies  who  were
to  carry  their  dues  to  the  Moabite  sovereign.  The  money  having  been  paid,
the   deputies   turned   homewards,  but   when   they  reached   the  cromlech   of

'  Rexan,  Hist,  du  jieuph:  d'Israel,  vol.  i.  \\  302,  liowever,  believes  that  the  judges  "  formed  an
almost  continuous  line,  and  that  there  merely  Ineks  a  descent  from  father  to  son  to  make  of  them  an
actual  dynasty."  The  chronolojjy  of  the  Bool:  of  Judges  appears  to  cover  more  than  four  centuries,
from  Othulel  to  Samson,  but  this  computation  cannot  bo  relied  on,  as  "forty  years"  represents  an
indefinite  space  of  time.  We  must  probably  limit  this  early  period  of  Hebrew  history  to  about  a
century  and  a  half,  from  cir.  1200  to  lOfjO  n.c,

-  The  episode  of  Othniel  and  Cushan-rishathaim,  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  history  of  this
period  (^Judges  iii.  8-11),  is  by  many  critics  rejected  as  spurious.

'  The  text  seems  to  infer  {Judgis  iii.  i:!-1.5)  that,  after  having  taken  the  Cily  of  I'ahn  Trees,  i.e.
Jericho  {Dc.ut.  xxxiv.  3 ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  15),  Eglon  had  made  it  his  residence,  which  makes  the  story
incomprehensible  from  a  geographical  point  of  view.  IJut  all  difliculties  would  disappear  if  wo  agreed
to  admit  that  in  ver.  15  the  name  of  the  capital  of  Eglou  has  dropjied  out  (Bi:i)i)i!,  Din  Blither  Itichter
tind  Samuelie,  p.  90).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  tlio  original  brought  back  by  F.  dc  Saulcy,  and  placed  in  the
Louvre ;  cf.  PERROT-CniPiBZ,  Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  VAnliqxdle,  vol.  iv.  p.  413.


MOABITE  WARRIOR*


C8G  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

Gilgal,'  and  were  safe  beyond  the  reach  of  the  enemy,  Ehud  retraced  his  steps,
and  presenting  himself  before  the  palace  of  EgloQ  in  the  attitude  of  a  prophet,
announced  that  he  had  a  secret  errand  to  the  king,  who  thereupon  commanded
silence,  and  ordered  his  servants  to  leave  him  with  the  divine  luessenger  in  his
summer  parlour.  "  And  Ehud  said,  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee.
And  he  arose  out  of  his  seat.  And  Ehud  put  forth  his  left  hand,  and  took  the
sword  from  his  right  thigh,  and  thrust  it  into  his  belly :  and  the  haft  also  went
in  after  the  blade ;  and  the  fat  closed  upon  the  blade,  for  he  drew  not  the  sword
out  of  his  belly  ;  and  it  came  out  behind."  Then  Ehud  locked  the  doors  and
escaped.  '"  Now  when  he  was  gone  out,  his  servants  came  ;  and  they  saw,  and,
behold,  the  doors  of  the  parlour  were  locked  ;  and  they  said,  Surely  he  covereth
his  feet  in  his  summer  chamber."  But  by  the  time  they  had  forced  an
entrance,  Ehud  had  reached  Gilgal  and  was  in  safety.  He  at  once  assembled
the  clans  of  Benjamin,  occupied  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  massacred  the  bands
of  Moabites  scattered  over  the  plain  of  Jericho,  and  blocked  the  routes  by
which  the  invaders  attempted  to  reach  the  hill-country  of  Epbraim.  Almost
at  the  same  time  the  tribes  in  Galilee  had  a  narrow  escape  from  a  still  more
formidable  enemy.''  They  had  for  some  time  been  under  the  Amorite  yoke,
and  the  sacred  writings  represent  them  at  this  junctui-e  as  oppressed  either  by
Sisera  of  Harosheth-ha-Goyim  or  by  a  second  Jabin,  who  was  able  to  bring  nine
hundred  chariots  of  iron  into  the  fieldJ^  At  length  the  prophetess  Deborah
of  Issachar  sent  to  Barak  of  Kadesh  a  command  to  assemble  his  people,
together  with  those  of  Zebulon,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  *  she  herself  led  the
contingents  of  Issachar,  Ephraira,  aud  Machir  to  meet  him  at  the  foot  of  Tabor,
where  the  united  host  is  stated  to  have  comprised  forty  thousand  men.    Sisera,^

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  103.  The  cromlech  at  Gilgal  was  composed  of  twelve  stones,  which,  we  are  told,
were  erected  by  Joshua  as  a  remembrauce  of  the  crossing  of  the  Jordan  (^Josh.  iv.  19-24).

'  The  text  tells  us  that,  after  the  time  of  Ehud,  the  land  had  rest  eighty  years  (Judges  iii.  30).
This,  again,  is  one  of  those  numbers  which  represent  an  indefinite  space  of  time.

^  It  has  been  maintained  that  two  versions  are  here  blended  together  in  the  text,  one  iu  which
the  principal  part  is  played  by  Sisera,  the  other  in  which  it  is  attributed  to  Jabin  (Coknill,  Einleitung
in  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  94,  et  seq.).  For  the  identity  of  Jabin  II.  with  the  Jabin  of
Joshua,  cf.  supra,  p.  6S0.  The  episode  of  Debora\i  and  Barak  (Judges  iv.,  v.)  comprises  a  narrative
in  prose  (chap,  iv.),  and  the  song  (chap,  v.)  attributed  to  Deborah  (Budde,  Die  Biicher  Eichter  und
Samuelis,  p.  101,  et  seq.).  Maurice  Vernes  is  the  only  writer  who  has  contested  the  authenticity  of
this  song  (Les  Dehuts  de  la  nation  juive,  in  the  Revue  de  VHist.  des  Religious,  vol.  vii.  pp.  332-
338);  the  prose  account  probably  is  derived  from  the  song.  According  to  WsLLHArsEX-BLEEK,
Einleitung  ins  Alte  Testament,  4th  edit.,  p.  487,  et  seq.,  the  differences  in  the  two  accounts  arise
partly  from  an  imperfect  understanding  of  the  poetic  text,  and  partly  from  one  having  come  down
from  some  other  source  (Budde,  Die  Biicher  Richter  und  tiamuelis,  pp.  GS-71,  105-107  :  cf.  Wildeboer-
RiscH,  Die  Litteratur  des  Alten  Testaments  nacli  der  Zeitfolge  Hirer  Entstehung,  pp.  30,  31).

*  Some  critics  suppose  that  the  prose  narrative  (Judges  iv.  5)  has  confounded  the  prophetess
Deborah,  wife  of  Lapidoth,  with  Deborah,  nurse  of  Kachel,  who  was  buried  near  Bethel,  under  the
'■Oak  of  Weeping"  (Gen.  xxxv.  8),  and  consequently  place  it  between  Rama  and  Bethel,  in  the
hill-countiy  of  Ephraim.

'  In  the  prose  narrative  (Judges  iv.  2-7)  Sisera  is  stated  to  have  been  the  general  of  Jabin :


THE  AMOBITES  AND    TIIK   TRIBES  IN   THE  NOJiTH—DEBORAH.       CS?


TELL-JILJIL,    THE    SITE    OF   THE    ANCIENT   GILGAL.'

who  commanded  the  Canaanite  force,  attacked  the  Israelite  army  between
Taanach  and  Megiddo  in  that  plain  of  Kishon  which  had  often  served  as  a
battle-field  during  the  Egyj^tiau  campaigns.'-'  It  would  appear  that  heavy
rains  had  swelled  the  streams,  and  thus  prevented  the  chariots  from  rendering
their  expected  service  in  the  engagement ;  at  all  events,  the  Amorites  were
routed,  and  Sisera  escaped  with  the  survivors  towards  Hazor.  The  people  of
Meroz  facilitated  his  retreat,  but  a  Kenite  named  Jael,  the  wife  of  Heber,
traitorously  killed  him  with  a  blow  from  a  hammer  while  he  was  in  the  act  of
drinking.^  This  exploit  was  commemorated  in  a  song,  the  composition  of  which
is  attributed  to  Deborah  and  Barak :  "  For  that  the  leaders  took  the  lead  in
Israel,  for  that  the  people  offered  themselves  willingly,  bless  ye  the  Lord.
Hear,  0  ye  kiugs,  give  ear,  0  ye  princes ;  I,  even  I,  will  sing  unto  the  Lord ;  I
will  sing  praise  to  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel."  *    The  poet  then  dwells  on  the

there  is  nothing  incompatible  in  tliis  statement  with  the  royal  dignity  elsewhere  attributed  to  Sisera.
Harosheth-ha-Goyim  has  been  identiiied  with  the  present  village  of  El-Haretlyeh,  on  the  right  bank
<'f  the  Kishon.

^  Drawn  by  Boudiur,  from  a  photograiili  in  Lortet's  La  Sijrie  d'avjourd'hui,  p.  ir)!).

'  Cf.,  for  the  site  of  Megiddo  and  the  victory  gained  there  by  Thutmosis  III.,  pp.  13-1-136,
•J5G-250  of  the  present  work.

'  Meroz  is  the  present  Marus,  between  the  Lake  of  Huleh  and  Safed.-  I  have  followed  the
account  given  in  the  song  (Judges  v.  2-1-27).  According  to  the  prose  version  (iv.  17-22),  Jael  slew
Sisera  while  he  was  a.sleep  with  a  tent-piu,  which  she  drove  into  his  temple.  [The  text  of  Judges  v.
24-27  docs  not  seem  to  warrant  the  view  that  he  was  slain  "  in  the  act  of  drinking,"  nor  does  it  seem
to  (■(inflict  with  Judges  iv.  11.— Tit.]

•  Judrjes  V.  2,  3  (K.V.).


688  THE   HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

suiferiugs  of  tbe  people,  but  tells  how  Deborah  and  Barak  were  raised  up,  and
enumerates  the  tribes  who  took  part  in  the  conflict  as  well  as  those  who
turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  appeal.  "Then  came  down  a  remnant  of  the  nobles
and  the  people.  .  .  .  Out  of  Ephraim  came  down  they  whose  root  is  in  Amalek  :
— out  of  Machir  came  down  governor;;, — and  out  of  Zebulon  they  that  handle
the  marshall's  staff. — And  the  princes  of  Issachar  were  with  Deborah — as  was
Issachar  so  was  Barak, — into  the  valley  they  rushed  forth  at  his  feet.' — By  the
watercourses  of  Reuben — there  were  great  resolves  of  heart. — Why  safest  thou
among  the  sheepfolds, — to  hear  the  pipings  for  the  flocks  ? — At  the  water-
courses of  Eeubeu  — there  were  great  searchings  of  heart. — Gilead  abode
beyond  Jordan  : — and  Dan,  why  did  he  remain  in  ships  ? — Asher  sat  still  at
the  haven  of  the  sea — and  abode  by  his  creeks, — Zebulon  was  a  people  tliat
jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death, — and  Naphtali  upon  the  high  places  of
the  field. — The  kings  came  and  fought ; — then  fought  the  kings  of  Canaan. —
In  Taanach  by  the  waters  of  Megiddo : — they  took  no  gain  of  money. — They
fought  from  heaven, — the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  Sisera. — The
river  of  Kishon  swept  them  away, — that  ancient  river,  the  river  Kishon. — 0  my
soul,  march  on  with  strength. — Then  did  the  horsehoofs  stamp — by  reason  of
the  pransings,  the  pransings  of  their  strong  ones."  Sisera  flies,  and  the  poet
follows  him  in  fancy,  as  if  he  feared  to  see  him  escape  from  vengeance.  He
curses  the  people  of  Meroz  in  passing  "  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of
the  Lord."  He  addresses  Jael  and  blesses  her,  describing  the  manner  in  which
the  chief  fell  at  her  feet,  and  then  proceeds  to  show  how,  at  the  very  time  of
Sisera's  death,  his  people  were  awaiting  the  messenger  who  should  bring  the
news  of  his  victory ;  "  through  the  window  she  looked  forth  and  cried— the
mother  of  Sisera  cried  through  the  lattice— '  Why  is  his  chariot  so  long  in
coming  ? — Why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  chariot  ? ' — Her  wise  ladies  answered
her,— yea,  she  returned  answer  to  herself,— '  Have  they  not  found,  have
they  not  divided  the  spoil  ?— A  damsel,  two  damsels  to  every  man ;— to
Sisera  a  spoil  of  divers  colours,— a  spoil  of  divers  colours  of  embroidery
on  both  sides,  on  the  necks  of  the  spoil?— So  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,
0  Lord :— but  let  them  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth
in  his  might'  "  -

It   was  the  first   time,  as  far   as  we  know,  that   several  of  the  Israelite

1  Tlie  te.xt  of  the  song  {Judges  v.  14)  cont.iius  an  allusion  to  Benjamin,  wliich  is  considered
by  many  critics  to  be  an  interpolation.  It  gives  a  mistaken  reading,  "Issachar  with  Barak;"
Issachar  having  been  already  mentioned  with  Deborah,  probably  Zehulon  should  be  inserted
in  the  te.^t.

»  Judges  v.  13-21,  28-31.


\


MIDIANITE   RAIDS    AOAIXST   THE    CENTRAL    TRIliES.


i^m


tribes  combined  tosjetlier  for  common  action  after  tlieir  sojourn  in  the  desert  of
Kadesh-barnea,  and  the  success  which  followed  from  their  united  efforts  ought,
one  would  think,  to  have  encouraged  them  to  maintain  such  a  union,  but  it
fell  out  otherwise ;  the  desire  for  freedom  of  action  and  independence  was  too
strong  among  them  to  permit  of  the  continuance  of  the  coalition.     Manasseh^


MOUNT    TABOl!.'


restricted  in  its  development  by  the  neighbouring  Canaanite  tribes,  was  forced
to  seek  a  more  congenial  neighbourhood  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan — not  close
to  Gad,  in  the  land  of  Gilead,  but  to  the  north  of  the  Yarmuk  and  its  northern
affluents  in  the  vast  region  extending  to  the  mountains  of  the  Hauran.  The
families  of  Machir  and  Jair  migrated  one  after  the  other  to  the  east  of  the
Lake  of  Gennesaret,  while  that  of  Nobah  proceeded  as  far  as  the  brook  of
Kanah,  and  thus  formed  in  this  direction  the  extreme  outpost  of  the  children
of  Israel :  these  families  did  not  form  themselves  into  new  tribes,  for  they
were  mindful  of  their  affiliation  to  Manasseh,  and  continued  beyond  the  river
to  regard  themselves  still  as  his  children.-     The  prosperity  of  Ephraim   and


'  Dnnvii  by  Fauclier-Oudin,  from  a  plioto^'rapli  l)y  JI.  C.  AUuaiiil  of  Liuiof,'e3.

^  Mnnasauh  was  Biiid  to  hiivo  been  (istalilisliod  l>eyond  tlio  Jordan  at  tbe  time  tliatGad  and  Keubeii
were  in  possesaion  of  the  land  of  Gilead  (iV»»i/j.  xxxii.  3;!,  .'i'J-42,  xxxiv.  11,15;  Dexit.  iii.  IS-lii;
•lunh.  xiii.  8,  2'J-32,  xxii.).     Earlier  traditions,  according  to  Budde,  Die  Biicher  Richlerwul  Sainuelis,

2    Y


<590  THE   HEBIiEWS    ANJ>    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

Manasseh,  and  the  daring  nature  of  their  exploits,  could  not  fail  to  draw
upon  them  the  antagonism  and  jealousy  of  the  people  on  their  borders.  The
^[idianites  were  accustomed  almost  every  year  to  pass  through  the  region  beyond
the  Jordan  which  the  house  of  Joseph  had  recently  colonised.  Assembling  in
the  springtime  at  the  junction  of  the  Yarmuk  with  the  Jordan,  they  crossed  the
latter  river,  and,  spreading  over  the  plains  of  Mount  Tabor,  destroyed  the  grow-
ing crops,  raided  the  villages,  and  pushed,  sometimes,  their  skirmishing  parties
over  hill  and  dale  as  far  as  Gaza.^  A  perpetual  terror  reigned  wherever  they
were  accustomed  to  pass :  no  one  dared  beat  out  wheat  or  barley  in  the  open
air,  or  lead  his  herds  to  pasture  far  from  his  home,  except  under  dire  necessity  ;
and  even  on  such  occasions  the  inhabitants  would,  on  the  slightest  alarm,
abandon  their  possessions  to  take  refuge  in  caves  or  in  strongholds  on  the
mountains.-  During  one  of  these  incursions  two  of  their  sheikhs  encountered
some  men  of  noble  mien  in  the  vicinity  of  Tabor,  and  massacred  them  without
compunction.''  The  latter  were  people  of  Opluah/  bretliren  of  a  certain  Jerubbaal
^Gideon)  who  was  head  of  the  powerful  family  of  Abiezer."  Assembling  all  his
people  at  the  call  of  the  trumpet,  Jerubbaal  chose  from  among  them  three
hundred  of  the  strongest,  with  whom  he  came  down  unexpectedly  upon  the
raiders,  put  them  to  flight  in  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  and  followed  them  beyond
the  Jordan.  Having  crossed  the  river,  "  faint  and  yet  pursuing,"  he  approached
the  men  of  Succoth,  and  asked  them  for  bread  for   himself  and  his  tliree


pp.  32-39,  87,  8S,  placed  this  event  in  the  period  which  followed  the  conquest  of  Canaan  by  Joshua.
It  is  not  certain  that  all  the  families  which  constituted  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  took  tlieir  origin
from  Manasseh:  one  of  them,  for  example,  that  of  Jair,  was  regarded  as  having  originated  partly
from  Juiiah  (1  Chron.  ii.  21-24).

'  Judges  vi.  2-6.  The  inference  that  they  dare  not  heat  wheat  in  the  open  follows  from  ver.  11,
■nliere  it  is  said  that  "Gideon  was  beating  out  wheat  in  his  winepress  to  hide  it  from  the
Midianites,"

'  The  history  of  the  Midianite  oppression  {.Tudijes  vi.-viii.)  seems  to  be  from  two  different
sources;  the  second  (^Judges  viii.  4-21)  is  considered  by  some  to  represent  the  more  ancient
tradition.  The  double  name  of  the  hero.  Gideon-Jerubbaal,  has  led  some  to  assign  its  elements
respectively  to  Gideon,  juilge  of  the  western  portion  of  Manasseh,  and  Jerubbaal,  .judge  of  the
eastern  Manasseh  (cf.  Niebdhr,  Studien  und  Bemeikungen  zur  Gescldchte  des  Alien  Orients,
pp.  1-29),  and  to  the  consequent  fusion  of  the  two  men  in  one.

'  This  is  an  assumption  which  follows  reasonably  from  Judges  viii.  IS,  19.

*  The  site  of  the  Ophrah  of  Abiezer  is  not  known  for  certain,  but  it  would  seem  from  the  narrative
that  it  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Shechem.

'  The  position  of  Gideon-Jerubbaal  as  head  of  the  house  of  Abiezer  follows  clearly  from  the
narrative  ;  if  he  is  represented  in  the  first  part  of  the  account  as  a  man  of  humble  origin  (^Jiidges  vi.
15,  10),  it  was  to  exalt  the  power  of  Jahveh,  who  was  accustomed  to  choose  His  instruments  from
amongst  the  lowly.  The  name  Jerubbaal  (1  Sam.  xii.  11;  2  !<am.  si.  21,  where  the  name  is  trans-
formed into  Jerubbeshoth,  as  Ishbaal  and  Meribbaal  are  into  Ishbosheth  and  Mephibosheth  respec-
tively), in  which  "  Baal  "  seems  to  some  not  to  represent  the  Canaanite  God,  but  the  title  Lord
as  applied  to  Jahveh,  was  supposed  to  mean  "Baal  figlits  against  him,"  and  was,  therefore,  offensive
to  the  orthodox.  Kuenen,  De  Godsdiensl  lan  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  108,  thought  it  meant  "  Lord,
fight  for  him ! "  Kenan  read  it  Yarebaal,  from  the  Vulgate  form  Jerobaal,  and  translated  "  He
who  fears  Baal "  (Hist,  du  peiiptc  d^Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  319).  (iideon  signifies  "He  who  overthrows"  in
the  battle.


JERUBBAAL    AND    THE   OFFER    OF   SOVEREIGNTY.  691

hundred  followers.  Their  fear  of  the  marauders,  however,  was  so  great  that  tlie
people  refused  to  give  him  auy  help,  aud  he  had  no  better  success  with  the
people  of  Penuel  whom  he  encountered  a  little  further  on.  He  did  not  stop
to  compel  them  to  accede  to  his  wishes,  but  swore  to  inflict  an  exemplary
punishment  upon  them  on  his  return.  The  Midianites  continued  their  retreat,
in  the  mean  time, "  by  the  way  of  them  that  dwelt  in  tents  on  the  east  of  Nobah
and  Jogbehali,"  but  .Terubbaal  came  up  with  them  near  Karkar,  aud  discomfited
the  host.  He  took  vengeance  upon  the  two  peoples  who  had  refused  to  give
liim  bread,  and  having  thus  fulfilled  his  vow,  lie  began  to  question  his  prisoners,
the  two  chiefs  :  "  What  manner  of  men  were  they  whom  ye  slew  at  Tabor  ?  "
"  As  thou  art,  so  were  they  ;  each  one  resembled  the  children  of  a  king."
"  And  he  said.  They  were  my  bretiiren,  the  sons  of  my  mother :  as  the  Lord
liveth,  if  ye  had  saved  them  alive,  I  would  not  slay  you.  And  he  said  unto
Jether  his  firstborn.  Up,  aud  slay  them.  But  the  youth  drew  not  his  sword :
for  he  feared,  because  he  was  yet  a  youth."  True  Bedawins  as  they  were,  the
chiefs'  pride  revolted  at  the  idea  of  their  being  handed  over  for  execution  to
a  child,  and  they  cried  to  Jerubbaal :  "  Rise  thou,  and  fall  upon  us :  for  as  tlie
man  is,  so  is  his  strength."  From  this  victory  rose  tlie  first  monarchy  among
the  Israelites.  The  Midianites,  owing  to  their  marauding  habits  and  the  amount
of  tribute  which  they  were  accustomed  to  secure  for  escorting  caravans,  were
possessed  of  a  considerable  quantity  of  gold,  wliicli  they  lavished  on  the  decora-
tion of  their  j)ersons :  their  chiefs  were  clad  in  purple  mantles,  their  warriors
were  loaded  with  necklaces,  bracelets,  rings,  and  ear-rings,  and  their  camels  also
were  not  beiiind  their  masters  in  the  brilliance  of  their  caparison.  The  booty
wliich  Gideon  si'cured  was,  therefore,  considerable,  and,  as  we  learn  from  the
narrative,  excited  the  envy  of  the  Ephraimites,  who  said  :  "  Why  hast  thou
served  us  thus,  that  thou  calledst  us  not,  when  thou  wentest  to  fight  with
Midian  ?  "  ^  The  spoil  from  the  golden  ear-rings  alone  amounted  to  one  thou-
sand seven  hundred  shekels,  as  we  learn  from  the  narrative,  and  this  treasure
in  the  hands  of  Jerubbaal  was  not  left  unemployed,  but  was  made,  doubtless,
to  contribute  something  to  the  prestige  he  had  already  acquired  :  the  men  of
Israel,  whom  he  had  just  saved  from  their  foes,  expressed  their  gratitude  by
offering  the  crown  to  him  and  his  successors.  The  mode  of  life  of  the  Hebrews
had  been  much  ciianged  after  they  had  taken  up  their  abode  in  the  mountains
of  Canaan.  Tiie  tent  liad  given  place  to  tiie  house,  and,  like  their  Canaanite
neighbours,  they  had  given  themselves  up  to  agricultural  pursuits.  This
change  of  habits,  in  bringing  about  a  greater  abundance  of  the  necessaries  of
life  than  they  had  been  accustomed  to,  had  begotten  aspirations  which  threw

'  Jifihi'H  viii.  l-M.


602  THE  HEBREW'S   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

into   relief  the  inadequacy  of  the   social   organisation,  and    of   the    form   of

government  with  \vhicli  they  had  previously  been  content.      In  the  case  of

a  horde  of  nomads,  defeat  or  exile  would  be  of  little  moment.     Should  they

be  obliged  by  a  turu  in  their  affairs  to  leave  their  usual  haunts,  a  few  days

or  often  a  few  hours  would  suffice  to  enable  them   to   collect  their   effects

together,  and  set  out  without  trouble,  and  almost  without  regret,  in  search

of  a  new  and  more  favoured  home.     But  with  a  cultivator  of  the  ground  the

case  would  be  different :  the  farm,  clearings,  and  homestead  upon  which  he

had  spent   such   arduous  and   continued   labour ;    the   olive    trees  and  vines

which  had  supplied  him  with  oil  and  wine — everything,  in  fact,  upon  whicli

he  depended  for  a  livelihood,  or  which  was  dependent  upon  him,  would  bind

him  to  the  soil,  and  expose  his  property  to  disasters  likely  to  be  as  keenly

felt  as  wounds  inflicted  on  his  person.     He  would  feel  the  need,  therefore,  of

laws  to  secure  to  him  in  time  of  peace  the  quiet  possession  of  his  wealth,

of  an  army  to  protect  it  in  time  of  war,  and  of  a  ruler  to  cause,  on  the  one  hand,

the  laws  to  be  respected,  and  to  become  the  leader,  on  the  other,  of  the  military

forces.     Jerubbaal  is  said  to  have,  in  the  first  instance,  refused  the  crown,

but  everything  goes  to  prove  that  lie  afterwards  virtually  accepted  it.     He

became,   it   is   true,  only   a   petty  king,  whose   sovereignty  was   limited   to

Manasseh,  a  part  of  Ephraim,  and  a  few  towns,  such  as  Succoth  and  Penuel,

beyond  the  Jordan.     Tlie  Canaanite  city  of  Shechem  also  paid  liim  homage.

Like  all  great  chiefs,  he  had  also  numerous  wives,  and  he  recognised  as  the

national  Deity  the  God  to  wliom  he  owed  his  victories.^      Out  of  the  spoil

taken  from  the  Midianites  he  formed  and  set  up  at  Oplirah  an  ephod,  which

became,  as  we  learn,  "a  snare  unto  him  and  unto  his   house,"  but  he  had

also  erected  under  a  terebinth  tree  a  stone  altar  to  Jahveh-Shalom  ("  Jehovah

is  peace  ").-     This  sanctuary,  with  its  altar  and  ephod,  soon  acquired  great

celebrity,   and   centuries   after   its   foundation    it    was   tlie   object   of    many

pilgrimages  from  a  distance.

Jerubbaal  was  the  father  by  his  Israelite  wives  of  seventy  children,  and,  by
a  Canaanite  woman  whom  he  had  taken  as  a  concubine  at  Shechem,  of  one  son,
called  Abimelech;'  The  succession  to  the  throne  would  naturally  have  falleu
to  one  of  the  seventy,  but  before  this  could  be  arranged,  Abimelech  "  went  to
Shechem  unto  his  mother's  brethren,  and  spake  with  them,  and  with  all  the

'  Judges  viii.  27,  31.

'  The  Booh  of  Judges  separates  the  altar  from  the  ephod,  placing  the  erection  of  the  former
at  the  time  of  the  vocation  of  Gideon  (vi.  11-31)  and  that  of  the  ephod  after  the  victory  (viii.
24-27).  The  sanctuary  of  Ophrah  was  possibly  in  existence  before  the  time  of  Jerubbaal,  and
the  sanctity  of  the  place  may  have  determined  his  selection  of  the-  spot  for  placing  the  altar  and
ephod  there.

=  Judges  viii.  30,  31.


ABIMELECH  AXD    Ills    TROUBLES    WITH   SHEGHEM.  G'j;i

family  of  the  house  of  his  mother's  father,  saying,  Speak,  I  pray  you,  iu  the
■ears  of  all  the  men  of  Shechem,  Whether  is  better  for  yon,  tiiat  all  the  sons
of  Jerubbaal,  wliieh  are  threescore  and  ten  persons,  rule  over  you,  or  tliat  one
i'ule  over  you  ?  remember  also  that  I  am  your  bone  and  your  flesh."  This
advice  was  well  received ;  it  flattered  the  vanity  of  the  people  to  think  that
the  new  king  was  to  be  one  of  themselves;  "  tlieir  hearts  inclined  to  follow
Abimelech ;  for  they  said,  He  is  our  brother.  And  they  gave  him  three-
score and  ten  pieces  of  silver  out  of  the  house  of  Baal-berith  (the  Lord  of  the
Covenant),'  wherewith  Abimelech  hired  vain  and  light  fellows,  which  followed
him.  ...  He  slew  his  brethren  the  .sons  of  Jerubbaal,  being  threescore  and
ten  persons,  upon  one  stone."  The  massacre  having  been  effected, "  all  the  men
of  Shechem  assembled  themselves  together,  and  all  the  house  of  Millo,-  and
made  Abimelech  king,  by  the  oak  of  the  pillar  which  was  in  Shechem."^  He
dwelt  at  Ophrab,  in  the  residence,  and  near  the  sanctuary,  of  his  father,  and
from  thence  governed  the  territories  constituting  the  little  kingdom  of
Manasseh,  levying  tribute  upon  the  vassal  villages,  and  exacting  probably
tolls  from  caravans  passing  through  his  domain.  This  condition  of  things
lasted  for  three  years,  and  then  the  Shechemites,  who  had  shown  themselves
so  pleased  at  the  idea  of  having  "  one  of  their  brethren  "  as  sovereign,  found  it
irksome  to  pay  the  taxes  levied  upon  them  by  him,  as  if  they  were  in  no  way
related  to  him.  The  presence  among  them  of  a  certain  Zebul,  the  oflicer  and
representative  of  Abimelech,  restrained  them  at  first  from  breaking  out  into
rebellion,  but  they  returned  soon  to  their  ancient  predatory  ways,  and  demanded
ransom  for  the  travellers  they  might  capture  even  when  the  latter  were  in
po.ssessiou  of  the  king's  safe  conduct.  This  was  not  only  an  insult  to  their  lord,
but  a  serious  blow  to  his  treasury :  the  merchants  who  found  themselves  no
longer  protected  by  his  guarantee  employed  elsewhere  the  sums  which  would
have  come  into  his  hands.  The  king  concealed  his  auger,  however;  he  was
nut  inclined  to  adopt  premature  measures,  for  the  place  was  a  strong  one,
and  defeat  would  seriously  weaken  his  prestige.  The  people  of  Shechem,
•on  tlieir    part,  did    not   ri.sk  an   open  rupture  for  fear    of   the   consequences.

'  See  11.  155,  eiiprit,  lor  what  i.s  there  said  ou  I3aal-lierilh.

■  The  word  '•  Millo  "  is  a  generic  term,  meaning  citadel  .jr  .stronghold  of  the  city :  there  was  a
Millo  in  every  important  town,  Jerusalem  included.

'  Tlie  '•  oak  of  the  pillar  "  was  a  sacred  tree  overshadowing  probably  a  cipjms  :  it  may  have  been
the  tree  mentioned  in  Gen.  x.KXv.  i,  under  which  Jacob  buried  the  strange  gods;  or  that  referred  to  iu
Jo8h.  xxiv.  20,  under  whicli  Joslma  set  up  a  stone  commemorative  of  the  establishment  of  the  law.
Jotham,  the  youngest  son  of  Gideon,  escaped  the  massacre.  As  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  election  of
Abimelech,  he  ascended  Mount  Gerizim,and  gave  out  from  there  the  fable  of  the  trees,  applying  it  to
the  circumstances  of  the  time,  and  then  lied.  Some  critics  think  that  this  fable— which  is  confessedly
old— was  inserted  in  the  text  at  a  time  when  prophetical  ideas  prevailed  and  monarchy  was  not  yet
accepted.


694  THE  HEBREWS   AKD    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

Gaal,  son  of  Ebed,'  a  soldier  of  fortune  and  of  Israelitisli  blood,  arrived
upon  the  scene,  attended  by  bis  followers :  he  managed  to  gain  the  confi-
dence of  the  people  of  Shechem,  who  celebrated  under  his  protection  the
feast  of  the  Vintage.^  On  this  occasion  their  merry-making  was  disturbed
by  the  presence  among  them  of  the  officer  charged  with  collecting  the
tithes,  and  Gaal  did  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  stimulating  their  ire  by
his  ironical  speeches :  "  Who  is  Abimelech,  and  who  is  Shechem,  that  we
should  serve  him  ?  is  not  he  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  ?  and  Zebul  his  officer  ?
serve  ye  the  men  of  Hamor  the  father  of  Shechem  :  but  why  should  we
serve  him  ?  And  would  to  God  this  people  were  iinder  my  hand  !  then
would  I  remove  Abimelech.  And  he  said  to  Abimelech,  Increase  thine
army,  and  come  out."  Zebul  promptly  gave  informatiou  of  this  to  his  master,
and  invited  him  to  come  by  night  and  lie  in  ambush  in  the  vicinity  of  the
town,  "  that  in  the  morning,  as  soon  as  the  sun  is  up,  thou  shalt  rise  early,
and  set  upon  the  city :  and,  behold,  when  he  and  the  people  that  is  with  hiiu
come  out  against  thee,  thou  mayest  do  to  them  as  thou  shalt  find  occasion."
It  turned  out  as  he  foresaw ;  the  inhabitants  of  Shechem  went  out  in  order  to
take  part  in  the  gathering  in  of  tlie  vintage,  while  Gaal  posted  his  men  at  the
entering  in  of  the  gate  of  the  city.  As  he  looked  towards  the  hills  he  thought
he  saw  an  unusual  movement  among  the  trees,  and,  turning  round,  said  to
Zebul  who  was  close  by,  "  Behold,  there  come  people  down  from  the  tops  of  the
mountains.  And  Zebul  said  unto  him.  Thou  seest  the  shadow  of  the  moun-
tains as  if  they  were  men."  A  moment  after  he  looked  in  another  direction,
"and  spake  again  and  said.  See,  there  come  people  down  by  the  middle  of  tlie
land,  and  one  company  cometh  by  the  way  of  the  terebinth  of  the  augurs."
Zebul,  seeing  the  affair  turn  out  so  well,  threw  off  the  mask,  and  replied  rail-
ingly,  "  Where  is  now  thy  mouth,  wherewith  thou  saidst.  Who  is  Abimelech,
that  we  should  serve  him  ?  is  not  this  the  people  that  thou  hast  desjused  ?
go  out,  I  pray,  now,  and  fight  with  him."  The  King  of  Manasseh  had  no
difficulty  in  defeating  his  adversary,  but  arresting  the  pursuit  at  the  gates  of
the  city,  he  withdrew  to  the  neighbouring  village  of  Arumah/'  He  trusted  that
the  inhabitants,  who  had  taken  no  part  in  tlie  affair,  would  believe  that  his
wrath  had  been  appeased  by  the  defeat  of  Gaal;  and  so,  in  fact,  it  turned  out :

'  The  name  Ebeil  ("slave."  "  servant ")  is  assumed  to  have  been  substituted  in  the  Mussoretic
text  for  the  original  name  Jobaal  (which  appears  in  the  LXX.  as  'lc;3?)A ),  because  of  the  element  Baal
in  the  latter  word,  which  was  regarded  as  that  of  the  strange  god,  and  would  thus  have  the  sacrilegious
meaning,  "  Jahveh  is  Baal."  The  term  of  contempt,  Ebed,  was,  according  to  this  view,  thus  used  to
replace  it.

'  See  on  the  subject  of  this  festival,  p.  162,  aupni.

=  This  is  now  El-Ormeh,  i.e.  Kharbet  el-Eurmab,  to  the  south-west  of  Xablus  (Guihux,  Samarie,
vol.  ii.  pp.  2,  3).


THE  FALL    OF   THE   KINGDOM    OF  MANASSEH.


01)5


i-i.-m^^v^'T^


z^^ikiit^''-


JIOUNT   GERIZIM,
WITH    A    VIEW    OF   NABLLS.'


they  dismissed  their  unfortunate  cham|iion,  and  on  the  morrow  returned  to
their  labours  as  it'notliing  had  occurred.  Abimelecli  had  arranged  his  Abiezer-
ites  in  three  divisions :  one  of  whicli  made  for  the  irates,  while  the  other  two
fell  upon  the  scattered  labourers  in  the  vineyards.  Abimelecli  then  fouglit
against  the  city  and  took  it,  but  the  cliief  citi/ens  had  taken  refuge  in  "  the
hold  of  the  house  of  El-berith."  "  Abimelech  gat  him  up  to  Mount  Zalmon,
he  and  all  the  people  that  were  with  him  ;  and  Abimelech  took  an  axe  in  his
hand,  and  cut  down  a  bough  from  the  trees,  and  took  it  up,  and  laid  it  on  his
shoulder :  and  he  said  unto  the  people  that  were  with  him,  What  ye  have
seen  me  do,  make  haste,  and  do  as  I  have  done.  And  all  the  people  likewise
cut  down  every  man  his  bough,  and  followed  Abimelech,  and  put  tliem  to  the
hold,  and  set  the  hold  on  tire  upon  them ;  so  that  all  the  men  of  tlie  tower  of
Shechem  died  also,  about  a  tliousand  men  and  women."  This  summary  ven-
geance did  not,  liowever,  prevent  other  rebellions.  Thebez  imitated  Shechem,
and  came  nigh  suffering  the  same  penalty.'-  Tlie  king  besieged  tlie  city  and
took  it,  and  was  about  to  burn  with  fire  the  tower  in  which  all  the  people  of


'   Drawn  by  Boudier,  fnuji  a  iiliotogriipli  leprn.luueil  in  the  Due  dk  LnYXES,  Voyage  d' Exploraliim
ii  tn  mer  Morle,  vol.  iii.  pi.  21.

-■  Thebez,  now  Tubas,  the  uorth-eaat  of  Nabliis  (<;rt:iuN,  Samurie,  vol.  i.  pp.  :!57-3.")il).


69  G


THE  EEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


the  city  had  taken  refuge,  when
a  woman  threw  a  millstone
down  upon  his  head  "  and  brake
liis  skull."  The  narrative  tells
us  that,  feeling  himself  mortally
wounded,  he  called  his  armour-
bearer  to  him  and  said,  "  Draw
thy  sword,  and  kill  me,  that  men
say  not  of  me,  A  woman  slew
liim."  His  monarchy  ceased
with  him,  and  the  ancient
chronicler  recognises  in  the
catastrophe  a  just  punishment
for  the  atrocious  crime  he  had
committed  in  slaying  his  half-
brothers,  the  seventy  children
of  Jerubbaal.'  His  fall  may  be
regarded  also  as  the  natural  issue
of  his  peculiar  position :  the
resources  upon  which  he  relied  were  inadequate  to  secure  to  him  a  supremacy
in  Israel.  Manasseh,  now  deprived  of  a  chief,  and  given  up  to  internal  dissen-
sions, became  still  further  enfeebled,  and  an  easy  prey  to  its  rivals.  The  divine
writings  record  in  several  places  tiie  success  attained  by  tiie  central  tribes
in  their  conflict  with  their  enemies.  They  describe  how  a  certain  Jephthah
distinguished  himself  in  freeing  Gilead  from  the  Ammonites ;  ^  but  his
triumph  led  to  the  loss  of  his  daugliter,  whom  he  sacrificed  in  order  to
fulfil  a  vow  he  had  made  to  Jahveh  before  the  battle.^  These  were,  however,
comparatively  unimportant  episodes   in    the  general  history  of  the  Hebrew


TIIIJ    TUWN    OF    ASlALON.-


'  Judges  is.  23,  24.  "  And  (iod  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem  ;
and  the  men  of  Shechem  dealt  treacherously  with  Abimelech  :  that  the  violence  done  to  the  three-
score and  ten  sons  of  .Jerubbaal  might  come,  and  that  their  blood  might  be  laid  upon  Abimelech
their  brother,  whicli  slew  them,  and  upon  the  men  of  Shechem,  which  strengthened  his  hands  to  slay
his  brethren."

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  in  the  Rameasenm  ;  cf.  Chasipolhon,  Monuments
<]e  VEgtjpte,  vol.  ii.  p.  149,  et  seq.;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  145  c.  This  is  a  portion  of  the  picture
representing  the  capture  of  Ascalon  by  Ramses  II.

'  The  story  of  Jephthah  is  contained  in  chaps,  xi.,  xii.  1-7,  of  the  Book  of  Judges.  The  passage
<xi.  12-29)  is  regarded  by  some,  owing  to  its  faint  echo  of  certain  portions  of  Numb,  xx.,  sxi.,  to  be
an  interpolation.  .Jeplithah  is  said  to  have  had  Gilead  for  his  father  and  a  harlot  for  his  mother.
Varions  views  have  been  put  forward  as  to  the  account  of  his  victories  over  the  Blidiauites,  some  seeing
ill  it,  as  well  as  in  the  origin  of  the  four  days'  feast  in  honour  of  Jephthah's  daughter,  insertions  of  a
later  date.

*  There  are  two  views  as  to  the  nature  of  the  sacrifice  of  Jephthah's  daughter.  Some  think  she  was
vowed  to  perpetual  virginity,  while  others  consider  that  slie  was  actually  sacrificed  (see  Eeuss,  Hist.
<les  Israelites,  pp.  199,  200).


J1-:PHTHAE — THE   PHILISTINES   IN   CANAAN.  G97


THE   SITE   OP  ASHDOD,   SEEN  FROM   THE  SOUTH.'


race.  Bedawins  from  tlie  East,  sheikhs  of  the  Midianites,  Moabites,  and
Ammonites — all  these  marauding  peoples  of  the  frontier  whose  incursions
are  put  on  record — gave  tliem  continual  trouble,  and  rendered  their  existence
so  miserable  that  they  were  unable  to  develop  their  institutions  and  attain
the  permanent  freedom  after  which  they  a;imed.  But  their  real  dangers —
the  risk  of  perishing  altogether,  or  of  falling  back  into  a  condition  of  servitude
— did  not  arise  from  any  of  tliese  quarters,  but  from  the  Pliilistines.

By  a  decree  of  Pharaoh,  a  new  country  had  been  assigned  to  tlie  remnants
of  each  of  the  maritime  peoples :  the  towns  nearest  to  Egypt,  lying  between
Raphia  and  Joppa,  were  given  over  to  tlie  Philistines,  and  the  forest  region  and
the  coast  to  the  north  of  the  Philistines,  as  far  as  the  Phcenician  stations  of  Dor
and  Carinel,'-^  were  apjjropriated  to  the  Zakkala.  The  latter  was  a  military
colony,  and  was  chiefly  distributed  among  the  five  fortresses  which  commanded
theSheplielah.^  Gaza  and  Ashdod  were  separated  from  the  Mediterranean  by  a
line  of  sand-dunes,  and  liad  nothing  in  the  nature  of  a  sheltered  port — nothing,
in  fact,  but  a  "  maiuma,"  or  open  roadstead,  with  a  few  dwelliugs  and  storehouses
arranged  along  the  beach  on  which  their  boats  were  drawn  up.  Ascalon  was
built  on  the  sea,  and  its  harbour,  although  well  enough  suited  for  the  small
craft  of  the  ancients,  could  not  have  been  entered  by  the  most  insignificant
of  our  moflern  ships.  The  Philistines  had  here  their  naval  arsenal,  where  their
fleets  were  fitted   out  for  scouring  the  Egyptian  waters   as  a  marine  police,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  p)iotograph  No.  437  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.

'  We  are  iudebted  to  tlie  Papyrus  Gohniselieff  for  the  mention  of  the  position  of  the  Zal<kalii  at
tlie  beyinnin-  of  tlie  XXT'  dynasty.

■■  The  history  of  the  Philistines  is  dealt  with  at  great  length  in  Hitzig's  Drgeschiclite  und  Mytho-
loijie  der  I'hilisttr,  1843,  and  in  Stauke,  Guza  and  die  Pkilistnische  Kiiste,  Jena,  1S52 ;  but  tiny  must
be  read  witli  caution,  especially  the  former  of  the  two.  They  cviutain.  moreover,  none  of  the  fresh
facts  which  have  been  revealed  in  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  inscriptions  as  to  the  origin  and  history  of
the  people.


(■>98


THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


A    ZAKKALA.'


or  lor  piratical  expeditious  ou  their  own  account,  wlieu  the  occasion  served,

along  the  coasts  of  Phoenicia.'  Ekron  and
Gatli  kept  watch  over  the  eastern  side  of
the  plain  at  the  points  where  it  was  most
exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  people  of
the  hills — the  Canaanites  in  the  first  in-
stance, and  afterwards  the  Hebrews.  These
foreign  warriors  soon  changed  their  mode
of  life  in  contact  with  the  indigenous  in-
habitants ;  daily  intercourse,  followed  up
by  marriages  with  the  daughters  of  the
land,  led  to  the  substitution  of  the  language,
manners,  and  religion  of  the  environing
race  for  those  of  their  mother  country.
The  Zakkala,  who  were  not  numerous,  it  is  true,  lost  everything,  even
to  their  name,  and  it  was  all  that  the  Philistines  could  do  to  preserve
their  own.  At  the  end  of  one  or  two  generations,  the  "  colts  "  of  Palestine
could  cmly  speak  the  Canaanite  tongue,  in  which  a  few  words  of  the  old
Hellenic  patois  still  continued  to  survive.-^  Their  gods  were  henceforward
those  of  the  towns  in  which  they  resided,  such  as  Marna  and  Dagon  and
Gaza,*  Dagon  at  Ashdod,-'"'  Baalzebub  at  Ekron,"  and  Derketo  in  Ascalon  ; ''
and  their  mode  of  worship,  with  its  mingled  bloody  and  obscene  rites,  followed

'  See  p.  700,  infra,  for  mention  of  a  Philistine  fleet  belonging  to  Ascalon.

=  Drawn  by  Fuucber-Gudin,  from  a  "  squeeze ;  "  see,  ou  p.  471,  supra,  tUe  bas-relief  from  Medinet-
llabu,  to  which  this  head  belongs.

'  Stade,  who  accepts  the  Cretan  origin  of  the  Philistines,  thinks  that  they  were  descended  from
Semitic  colonies  planted  in  Crete  in  pre-Hellenic  times,  and  gradually  driven  out  l>y  Aclijean  in-
vaders (Geschiehte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  142).  It  seems  more  jirobable  that  they  belonged  to  one
of  the  uou-Semitic  tribes  which  liad  settled  in  that  island,  and  that  they  were,  as  Hitzig  points  out
{Urgeschichte  der  PhUister,  p.  .S7,  et  seq.),  allied  to  the  insular  and  continental  Greeks.  Hitzig
attempted  to  identify  the  name  Anchises  with  that  of  Akish,  King  of  Gath,  and  Kenan  thought  there
still  survived  in  Hebrew  a  few  Greek  words  which  had  come  from  their  language,  e.g. -|3"13  P^;);-,
nepi$o\os,  n"l3D  mekera,  ^uetxa'P".  C'J^'S  peUex,  iraWa^  (Hist,  da  peupJed' Israel,  vol.  ii.  p.  33).  Akish
is  met  with  from  the  XIX""  dynasty  onwanls  (W.  Max:  Mulleu,  Die  Keflo-Namen.  iu  the  Zeitschri/t
filr  Assyrioloijie,  vol.  ix.  pp.  394,  395),  and  under  Sargon  of  Assyria  (W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  and
Europa,  p.  386,  note  1).

*  Marna,  "our  lord,"  is  mentioned  alongside  Baalzephon  in  a  list  of  strange  gods  worshipped  at
Jlemphis  in  the  SIX"'  dynasty  (Saltier  Papyrus,  iv.  versn.  pi.  iv.  1.  6;  cf.  p.  iSr<,  supra).  Stephen  of
Byzantium  gives  the  name  as  Zeus  KpriTay4viis,  s.v.  Tata.  The  worship  of  Dagon  at  Gaza  is  men-
tioned iu  the  story  of  Samson  (Judges  xvi.  21-30).

■  The  temple  and  statue  of  Dagon  are  mentioned  in  the  .account  of  the  events  following  the  taking
of  the  ark  in  1  Sam.  v.  1-7.  It  is,  perhaps,  to  him  that  1  Chron.  x.  10  refers,  in  relating  how  the
Philistines  hung  up  Saul's  arms  in  the  house  of  their  gods,  although  1  Sam.  xxxi.  10  calls  the  place
the  "  house  of  the  Ashtoreth."

"  Baalzebub  was  the  god  of  Ekron  (2  Kings  i.  '2-ti),  and  his  name  was  doubtfully  translated  ■'  Lord
of  Flies."  The  discovery  of  tlic  name  of  the  town  Zebub  on  the  Tell  el-Amarna  tablets  shows  that
it  means  the  "  Baal  of  Zebub"  (Halevv,  Recliercluis  Bibliqnes,  xxvii.,  in  the  Revue  Semitique,  vol.  i.  p.  23 ;
■\ViscKLER,  Geschiehte  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  223,  note  1 .  225).  Zebub  was  situated  in  the  Philistine  plains,
not  fur  from  Ekron.     Hale'vy  thinks  it  may  have  been  a  suburb  of  that  town.

■   The  worship  of  Derketo  or  Atergatis  at  Ascalon  is  witnessed  to  by  the  classical  writers.


THE   POLiriCAl.    ORGANISATION   OF   THE   PHILIHTINES.  GIJ'^

that  of  the  country.      Two  things  belonging  to  their  past  history  they  still
retained — a    clear    remembrance    of    their    far-off    origin,    and    that    warlike


A    riiOCESSIO.V    Ul'    rUILISTINE    CAVTIVi:S  AT    -MEDIXlOT-HAIir.'

temperament  which  had  enabled  them  to  fight  their  way  through  many
obstacles  from  the  sliores  of  the  ^Egean  to  the  frontiers  of  Egypt.  Tiiey
could  recall  their  island  of  Caphtor,-  and  their  neighbours  in  their  new  home
were  accustomed  to  bestow  upon  them  the  designation  of  Cretans,  of  which
tliey  themselves  were  not  a  little  proud.''  Gaza  enjoyed  among  them  a  kind
of  hegemony,  alike  ou  account  of  its  strategic  position  and  its  favourable
situation  for  commerce,  but  this  supremacy  was  of  very  precarious  character,,
and    brought  with    it    no    right   whatever  to   meddle  in  the    internal    affairs

'  Drawn  by  Fiiuclier-Gudiii,  from  a  photograpli  tiikeu  by  lusiu^er  in  ISSl.

^  Jer.  xlvii.  4  calls  tliem  "  Hie  remnant  of  the  isle  of  Caphtor  ; "  Amos  (ix.  7)  knew  tliat  the  I.onl'
had  brought  "  the  Philistines  from  Caphtor;  "  and  inDeut.  ii.  23  it  is  related  how  "  the  Caphtorim  which
i-ame  forth  out  of  Caphtor  destroyed  the  Avvim,  which  dwelt  in  villages  as  far  as  Gaza,  and  dwelt
in  their  stead."  Classical  tradition  falls  in  with  the  sacred  record,  and  ascribes  a  Cretan  origin  to
the  Philistines;  it  is  suggested,  therefore,  that  in  Gen.  x.  14  the  names  Casluhim  and  Caphtorim
should  be  tninapoaod,  to  bring  the  verse  into  harmony  with  history  and  other  parts  of  Scripture.

'  In  an  episode  in  the  life  of  David  (1  Sam.  xxx.  14),  there  is  mention  of  the  "  south  of  tlie
Cherethites,"  which  some  have  made  to  mean  Cretans — that  is  to  say,  the  region  to  the  south  of  the
Philistines,  alongside  the  territory  of  .ludah,  and  to  the  "south  of  Caleb."  Ezelc.  xxv.  IG  also
mentions  in  juxtaposition  with  the  Philistines  the  Cherethites,  and  "the  remnant  of  the  sea-coost,"
as  objects  of  God's  vengeance  for  tlie  many  evils  they  had  inflicted  on  Israel.  By  the  Cherethiin*
here,  and  the  Cherethites  in  Ze.ph.  ii.  .S,  the  Cretans  are  by  some  thought  to  be  meant,  which  wouliL
account  for  their  association  with  the  Philistines.


700  THE  HEBREWS    AN  I)    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

■of  other  members  of  the  confederacy.  Each  of  the  latter  had  a  chief  of
its  own,  a  Seren,*  and  tlie  office  of  this  chief  was  hereditary  in  one  case  at
least — Gath,  for  instance,  where  there  existed  a  hxrger  Canaanite  element
than  elsewliere,  and  was  there  identiiied  witii  that  of  "  melek/'  -  or  king.  The
live  Sarnim  assembled  in  council  to  deliberate  upon  common  interests,  and
to  offer  sacrifices  in  the  name  of  the  Pentapolis.  These  eliiefs  were
respectively  free  to  make  alliances,  or  to  take  tlie  field  on  their  own  account,
but  in  matters  of  common  importance  they  acted  together,  and  took  their
places  each  at  the  iiead  of  his  own  contingent.''  Their  armies  were  made  up  of
regiments  of  skilled  archers  and  of  pikemen,  to  whom  were  added  a  body  of
charioteers  made  up  of  the  princes  and  the  nobles  of  the  nation.  The  armour
for  all  alike  was  the  coat  of  scale  mail  and  the  iielmet  of  brass;  their
weapons  consisted  of  the  two-edged  battle-axe,  the  bow,  the  lance,  and  a  large
and  heavy  sword  of  bronze  or  iron.*  Their  war  tactics  were  probably  similar
to  those  of  the  Egyptians,  who  were  unrivalled  in  military  operations  at  this
period  throughout  the  whole  East.  Under  able  leadership,  and  in  positions
favourable  for  tiie  operations  of  their  chariots,  the  Philistines  had  nothing  to
fear  from  the  forces  which  any  of  their  foes  could  bring  up  against  them.  As  to
their  maritime  history,  it  is  certain  that  in  the  earliest  period,  at  least,  of  their
sojourn  in  Syria,  as  well  as  in  that  before  their  capture  by  Kamses  III.,  they
were  successful  in  sea-fights,  but  the  memory  of  only  one  of  their  expeditions
has  come  down  to  us  :  a  squadron  of  theirs  having  sailed  forth  from  Ascalou
somewhere  towards  the  end  of  the  XIP"  dynasty,^  succeeded  in  destroying
the  Sidonian  fleet,  and  pillaging  Sidon  itself.  But  however  vigorously  they
may  have  plied  the  occupation  of  Corsairs  at  the  outset  of  their  career,  there
was,  it  would  appear,  a  rapid  falling  off  in  their  maritime  prowess  :  it  was  on  land,
and  as  soldiers,  that  they  displayed  their  bravery  and  gained  their  iame.  Their
geographical  position,  indeed,  on  the  direct  and  almost  only  route  for  caravans
passing  between  Asia  and   Africa,  must   have  contributed  to  their  success.

'  The  same  plisJUim  figure  in  the  narrative  of  the  last  Philistine  campaign  against  Saul  (1  Sam.
xxix.  2-4,  7,  9>  Their  number,  five,  is  expressly  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  vi.  4,  16-18,  as  well  as  the
names  of  tlie  towns  over  which  they  ruled.

-  Achish  was  King  of  Gath  (1  Sam.  xxi.  10,  12,  xxvii.  2),  and  probably  Maoch  before  him.

'  Achish,  for  example.  King  of  Gath,  makes  war  alone  against  the  pillaging  tribes,  owing  to  the
intervention  of  David  and  his  men,  without  being  calleil  to  account  by  the  other  princes  (1  .Sam.  xxvii.
2-12,  xxviii.  1,  2),  but  as  soon  as  an  aft'air  of  moment  is  in  contemplation — such  as  the  war  against
i?aul — they  demand  the  dismissal  of  David,  and  Achish  is  obliged  to  submit  to  his  colleagues  acting
together  (1  Sam.  xxix.).

*  Philistine  arcliers  are  mentioned  in  the  battle  of  Gilboa  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  3)  as  well  as  chariots
(2  Sam.  i.  G).  The  horsemen  mentioned  in  the  same  connexion  are  regarded  by  some  critics  as  an
interpolation,  because  they  cannot  bring  themselves  to  think  that  the  Philistines  had  cavalry  corps
in  the  X"'  century  B.C.  The  Pliilistine  arms  are  described  at  length  in  the  duel  between  David  and
Goliath  (1  Sam.  xvii.  5-7,  38,  39).     They  are  in  some  respects  like  those  of  the  Homeric  heroes.

'  Justinus,  xviii.  3,  §  5.  The  memory  of  this  has  been  preserved,  owing  to  the  disputes  about
precedence  which  raged  in  the  Greek  period  between  tlie  Phcuuiciun  towns.  The  destruction  of
Sidon  must  have  allowed  Tyre  to  develop  and  take  the  first  place.


THE    POLITICAL    OliGAN/SATION   OF   THE   PIIILISTIXES.


70  t


The  number  of  such  caravans  was  considerable,  for  although  Egypt  had
ceased  to  be  a  conquering  nation  on  account  of  her  feebleness  at  home,  slie  was
still  one  of  the  great  centres  of  production,  and  the  most  important  market


^t^SaJinrfi^^e!!^


A    I'HILISTIXK   SHU'    MF   WAK.


of  the  East.  A  very  great  part  of  her  trade  with  foreign  countries  was  carried
on  through  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  and  of  this  commerce  the  Phoenicians  had
made  themselves  masters ;  the  remainder  followed  the  land-routes,  and  passed
continually  through  tlie  territory  of  the  Philistines.  These  people  were
in  possession  of  the  tract  of  land  which  lay  between  the  Mediterranean  and
the  beginning  of  the  southern  desert,  forming  as  it  were  a  narrow  passage,  into
which  all  the  roads  leading  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates  necessarily  converged.
The  chief  of  these  routes  was  that  which  crossed  Moiint  Carmel,  near  Meaiddo.
and  passed  up  the  valleys  of  the  Litciuy  and  the  Oroutes.  This  was  met
at  intervals  by  other  secondary  roads,  such  as  that  which  cauie  from
Damascus  by  way  of  Tabor  and  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  or  tliose  wliich,  starting
out  from  the  highland  of  Gilead,  led  through  the  fords  of  tlie  liower  Jordan
to  Ekrou  and  Gath  respectively.  The  Philistines  charged  tiiemselves,  after
the  example  and  at  the  instigation  of  the  Egyptians,  witli  the  maintenance  of
the  great  trunk  road  which  was  in  their  hands,  and  also  with  securing  safe
transit  along  it,  as  far  as  they  could  post  their  troops,  for  those  who  confided
tliemselvos  to  their  care.  In  exchange  for  these  good  offices  they  exacted  the
same  tolls  which  liad  been  levied  by  the  Canaanites  before  them.

'  Drawn  by  I'"aiiclier-titidiii,  from  ii  photoi,'rai)li   liy  Beatu ;  cf.  on  p.  4tJ9,  »upi«,  thu  bas-i'elief  of
Mediuet-Hubii,  from  which  tliia  cut  is  taken.


TO'J  'inE   llEBIiE]VS    ANJ>    THE   EIlIUSTlNEFi— DAMASCUS.

In  their  efforts  to  put  down  brigandage,  they  had  been  brought  into  contact
Avith  some  of  tlie  Hebrew  elans  after  the  hxtter  had  taken  possession  of  Canaan.
Judah,  in  its  home   among   the   mountains   of  the   Dead  Sea,  had  become
acquainted  with  the  diverse  races  which  were  found  there,  and  consequently
there   had    been   frequent   intermarriages   between   the    Hebrews    and   these
peoples.     Some  critics  have  argued  from  this  that  the  chronicler  had  this  fact
in  his  mind  wheu  he  assigned  a  Cauaanite  wife,  Shuah,  to  the  father  of  the
tribe  himself.^     He  relates  how  Judah,  having  separated  from  his  brethren,
"  turned  in  to  a  certain  Adullamite,  whose  name  was  Hirah,"  and  that  here  he
became  acquainted  with  Shuah,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons.     With  Tamar,
tlie  widow  of  the  eldest  of  the  latter,  he  had  accidental  intercourse,  and  two
children,  Perez  and  Zerah,  the  ancestors  of  numerous  families,  were  born  of
that  union.^     Edomites,  Arabs,  and  Midianites  were  associated  with  this  semi-
■Canaanite  stock — for  example,  Kain,  Caleb,  Othniel,  Kenaz,  Shobal,  Ephah,  and
Jerahmeel,  but  the  Xenites  took  the  first  place  among  them,  and  played  an
important  part  in  the  history  of  the  conquest  of  Canaan.-^     It  is  related  how
one  of  their  subdivisions,  of  which  Caleb  was  the  eponymous  hero,  had  driven
irom  Hebron  the  three  sons  of  Anak — Sheshai,  Ahimau,  and  Talmai — and  had
then  promised  his  daugiiter  Achsah  in  marriage  to  him  who  should  capture
Debir ;  this  turned  out  to  be  his  youngest  brother  Othniel,  who  captured  the
■city,  and  at  the  same  time  obtained  a  wife.*     Hobab,  another  Kenite,  who  is
represented  to  have  been  the  brother-in-law  of  Moses,  occupied  a  position  to
the  south  of  Arad,  in  Idumasan  territory.^     These  heterogeneous   elements
■existed  alongside  each  other  for  a  long  time  without  intermingling ;   they
combined,  however,  now  and  again  to  act  against  a  common  foe,  for  we  know
that  the  people  of  Judah  aided  the  tribe  of  Simeon  in  the  reduction  of  the
city  of  Zephath;  ^  but  they  followed  an  independent  course  for  the  most  part,
•and  their  isolation  prevented  their  obtaining,  for   a   lengthened  period,  any
extension  of  territory.     They  failed,  as  at  tirst,  in  their  attempts  to  subjugate
the  province  of  Arad,  and   in   their  efforts  to    capture  the  fortresses    which
guarded   the  caravan  routes  between  Ashdod  and  the  mouth   of  the  Jordan.
It  is  related,  however,  that  they  overthrew  Adoui-bezek,  Kiug  of  the  Jebusites,
and  that  they  had  dealt  with  him  as  he  was  accustomed  to  deal  with  his
prisoners.     "And  Adoni-bezek  said.  Threescore  and  ten  kings,  having  their
thumbs  and  tiieir  great  toes  cut  off,  gathered  their  meat  under  my  table :

'  For  Stade's  view  as  to  the  late  development  of  Judal),  sro  Gcg.  des  VoJlces  hr.,  vol.  i.  pp.  157-160.

-  Gen.  xxxviii.,  where  there  is  a  detiiiled  account  of  .Tiulah's  unions.

'  Stade,  op.  cil..  Vol.  i.  pp.  lai,  i;!2,  l."i'J.

'  BtJDDE,  Die  Backer  Richier  uitd  Samuelh,  p.  S.j,  w  litre  the  account  of  the  JudtEan  conquest  is
ingeniously  put  together,  and  tlie  first  chapter  of  Judges  is  used  for  the  purpose.

'  The  fatiier-iii-law  of  :\[oses  is  called  .lelhio  in  Exod.  in.  1,  iv.  19,  but  Eaguel  in  Exod.  ii.
18-22,     Hobab  is  the  son  of  Kaguel,  Xumh.  x.  29  :  f.,r  his  place  in  Judfjes,  see  BrDDE,  op.  cit.,  p.  S(i.

«  Judges  i.  17,  where  Zephath  is  tlie  better  reading,  and  not  Arad,  as  has  been  suggested.


JUDAH  A XI)   ITS    CVNSTirUENT  ELEMENTS.


703


TELL   ES-SAFIEH,   THE   GATH   OF   THE   PHILISTINES.'

as  I  have  done,  so  God  bath  requited  me."  ^  Although  Adoni-bezek  had
been  overthrown  Jerusalem  still  remained  independent,  as  did  also  Gibeon,
Beeroth,  Kirjath-Jearim,  Ajalon,  Gezer,  and  the  cities  of  the  plain,  for  the
Israelites  could  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley,  because  they  had
chariots  of  iron,  with  which  the  Hebrew  foot-soldiers  found  it  difficult  to  deal.^
This  independent  and  isolated  group  was  not  at  first,  however,  a  subject  of
anxiety  to  the  masters  of  the  coast,  and  tliere  is  but  a  bare  reference  to  the
exploits  of  a  certain  Shamgar,  son  of  Anath,  who  "  smote  of  the  Philistines
six  liundred  men  with  an  ox-goad."^  These  cities  had  also  to  reckon  «ith
Ephraim,  and  the  tribes  which  had  thrown  in  their  lot  with  her.  Dan
had  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  northern  districts  of  the  Shephelah — which  were
dependent  upon  Ekron  or  Gath — and  also  upon  the  semi-Phoeniciau  port  of
Joppa ;  but  these  tribes  did  not  succeed  in  taking  possession  ol'  those
•districts,  although  they  had  harassed  them  from  time  to  time  by  raids  in
which  the  children  of  Israel  did  not  always  come  off  victorious.  One  of
tlieir  chiefs — Samson — had  a  great  reputation  among  them  for  his  bravery
4ind  bodily  strength,  and  we  have  some  details  of  his  history.  The  episodes
which  have  been  preserved  deal  with  some  of  his  exploits  against  the  Philis-
tines, and  thi're  is  a  certain  liumour  in  the  chronicler's  account  of  the  weapons


'   Druwn  by  linuilier,  I'niiii  pluitograph  N(i.  'JCo  of  tliu  Palestine  Exploratum  Fund.

'  JJl'DDE,  Die  liiicher  Richter  und  Samuelif.  lip.  2-1,  02-06,  84,  S."),  endeavours  to  sliow  tlmt  these
•events  were  attriljuted  iit  a  later  date  to  .Joshua.

^  Sei'  .lush.  ix.  H-2i  lor  an  explanation  of  how  these  people  were  allowed  afterwards  to  remain  in  a
subordinate  capacity  anionf;  the  children  of  Israel.  For  the  stratijj^ical  and  commercial  importance  to
Judah  and  Israel  of  Giheon  and  the  neighbouring  places,  see  Stade,  Gi's.  den  ViiUics  Israelii, \it\.  ii.  p.  137.

'  Judges  iii.  'Jl  ;  cf.  also  Judges  v.  0,  in  which  Shamgar  is  mentioned  in  the  song  of  Deborah.


704  THE    IIEBBEWS    AND    THE   PBILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

which  he  employed  :  "  with  the  jawbone  of  au  ass  have  I  smitten  a  thousand
men ; "  he  burned  up  their  harvest  also  by  letting  go  three  hundred  foxes,
with  torches  attached  to  their  tails,  among  the  standing  corn  of  the  Philis-
tines. Various  events  in  his  career  are  subsequently  narrated;  such  as
his  adventure  in  the  house  of  the  harlot  at  Gaza,  when  he  carried  off  the
gate  of  the  city  and  the  gate-posts  "to  the  top  of  the  mountain  that  is
before  Hebron."  By  Delilah's  treachery  he  was  finally  delivered  over  to  his
enemies,  who,  having  put  out  his  eye.«,  condemned  him  to  grind  in  the  prison-
house.  On  the  occasion  of  a  great  festival  in  honour  of  Dagon  he  was  brought
into  the  temple  to  amuse  his  captors,  but  while  they  were  making  merry  at
his  expense,  he  took  hold  of  the  two  pillars  against  which  he  was  resting,  and
bowina:  "  himself  with  all  his  mitrht,"  overturned  them,  "  and  the  house  fell
upon  the  lords,  and  upon  all  the  people  that  were  therein."  ^  The  tribe  of  Dan
at  length  became  weary  of  these  unprofitable  struggles,  and  determined  to
seek  out  another  and  more  easily  defensible  settlement.  They  sent  out
five  emissaries,  therefore,  to  look  out  for  a  new  home.  While  these  were
passing  through  the  mountains  they  called  upon  a  certain  Jlichah  in  the  hill-
country  of  Ephraim  and  lodged  there.  Here  they  took  counsel  of  a  Levite
whom  Michah  had  made  his  priest,  and,  in  answer  to  the  question  whether
their  journey  would  be  prosperous,  he  told  them  to  "  Go  in  peace :  before  the
Lord  is  the  way  wherein  ye  go."  Their  search  turned  out  successful,  for  they
discovered  near  the  sources  of  tlie  Jordan  the  town  of  Laish,  whose  people,  like
the  Zidonions,  dwelt  in  security,  fearing  no  trouble.  On  the  report  of  the
emissaries,  Dan  decided  to  emigrate :  the  warriors  set  out  to  the  number
of  six  hundred,  carried,  off  with  them  the  priest  of  Michah  and  his  ephod,
teraphim,  and  graven  image,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  Laisli,  to  which  they
gave  the  name  of  their  tribe.  "  The  children  of  Dan  set  up  for  themselves  the
o-raven  image :  and  Jonathan,  the  son  of  Gershom,  the  son  of  Moses,  he  and
his  sons  were  priests  to  the  tribe  of  the  Dauites  until  the  day  of  the  captivity
of  the  land."  -^  The  tribe  of  Dan  displayed  in  this  advanced  post  of  peril  the
bravery  it  had  shown  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Shephelah,  and  showed  itself
the  most  bellicose  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  It  bore  out  well  its  character — "  Dan
is  a  lion's  whelp  that  leapeth  forth  from  Bashau  "  on  the  Hermon ;  ^  "  a  serpent

'  Some  learned  critics  considered  Samson  to  have  been  a  sort  of  solar  dei(y  (H.  Hlsson',  La
Leiiende  ile  Samson  et  les  Mtjlhes  solaires,  18(10;  Steinthal,  Zeitschrift  J'iir  Volherjy-^ychohgie.  vol.  ii.
pp.  llU-lliO,  l'21l-178  :  GoLDZiHER,  Der  Mythos  bei  der  Hehrseir,  p.  V2S).

-  Some  critics  see  in  the  history  of  this  niijjratioii,  whicli  is  given  summarily  in  Josh.  xi.\.  47,  a
iilendin"  of  two  accounts.  Bcdde,  Die  Biicher  Bidder,  etc.,  pp.  13S-14i;,  has  attempted  a  reionstruc-
tiou  of  the  narrative.  The  presence  of  a  descendant  of  Moses  as  a  priest  in  this  local  sanctuary  pro-
bablv  offended  the  religious  scruples  of  a  copyist,  who  snbstitnted  Jlauassch  for  Moses  {Judcies  xviii.
30),  but  the  correction  was  not  generally  accepted.  [Tlie  K.  V.  reads  "  Moses  "  where  the  authorised
text  (and  the  I. XX.  also)  has  "  Manasseh." — Tk.].

'  Sec  tlie  Blessing  of  Moaes  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2'1).


DAN  AND    THE  STORY   OF  SAMSON.


705


in  the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse's  heels,  so  that  Iiis  rider
falleth  backward."  '  The  new  position  they  had  taken  up  enabled  them  to
protect  Galilee  for  centuries  against  the  incursions  of  the  Aramaeans.

Their  departure,  however,  left  the  descendants  of  Joseph  unprotected,  with
Benjamin  as  their  only  bulwark.  Benjamin,  like  Dan,  was  one  of  the  tribes
which  contained  scarcely  more  than  two  or  three  clans,  but  compensated  for


illl;.    HILL    OF    SUILOH,    SLl-.N    blOjil    THE    MjlU  U-LA!5l  ."

the  smallness  of  their  numbers  by  their  energy  and  tenacity  of  character :
lying  to  the  south  of  Ephraim,  they  had  developed  into  a  breed  of  hardy
adventurers,  skilled  in  handling  the  bow  and  sling,  accustomed  from  child-
hood to  use  botii  hands  indifferently,  and  always  ready  to  set  out  on  any
•expedition,  not  only  against  the  Canaanites,  but,  if  need  be,  against  their  own
kinsfolk.^  They  had  consequently  aroused  the  hatred  of  both  friend  and  foe,
and  we  read  that  the  remaining  tribes  at  length  decreed  their  destruction ;
a,  massacre  ensued,  from  which  six  hundred  Benjamites  only  escajjed  to
continue  the  race.'  Their  territory  adjoined  on  the  south  that  of  Jerusalem,
the  fortress  of  the  Jebusites,  and  on  the  west  the  powerful  confederation  of
which  Gibeon  was  the  head.  It  comprised  some  half-dozen  towns — Kamah,
Anathoth,  Miclimash,  and  Nob,  and  thus  commanded  both  sides  of  the  passes
leading  from  the  Shephelah  into  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.     Tlie  Benjamites

'  These  are  the  words  used  iu  the  Blessing  of  Jacob  {Gen.  xlix.  17).

'  Drawn  by  Uoudier,  from  photograph  No.  100  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.

'  Benjamin  signifies,  properly  speaking,  "  the  Southern  :  "  for  the  history  of  the  territorial  growth
of  this  tribe,  cf.  Stade,  Geach.  det  Volkes  Israel,  Vol.  i.  ])p.  160,  161.

'  Story  of  tlie  Levite  of  Ephraim  {Judges  xix.-xxi.),  in  which  the  important  historical  event-  is
the  massacre  of  tlie  pillaging  clan  by  its  neighbours.  The  story  of  the  Levite  is  considered  by  some
critics  to  be  of  a  later  date  tlian  the  rest  of  the  text  (Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  71).

•1    V.


706  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

were  in  the  habit  of  descending  suddenly  upon  merchants  who  were  making
their  way  to  or  returning  from  Gilead,  and  of  robbing  them  of  their  wares  ;
sometimes  they  would  make  a  raid  upon  the  environs  of  Ekron  and  Gath,  "  like
a  wolf  that  ravineth :  "  realising  the  prediction  of  Jacob,  "  iu  the  morning  he
shall  devour  tlie  prey,  and  at  even  he  shall  divide  the  spoil." '     The  Philistines
never  failed  to  make  reprisals  after  each  raid,  and  tlie  Benjamites  were  no
match  for  their  heavily  armed  battalions ;  but  the  labyrinth  of  ravines  and
narrow  gorges  into  which  the  Philistines  had  to  penetrate  to  meet  their  enemy
was  a  favourable  region  for  guerilla  warfare,  in  which  they  were  no  match  for
their  opponents.     Peace  was  never  of  long  duration  on  this  ill-defined  border-
land, and  neitlier  intercourse  between  one  village  and  another,  alliances,  nor
intermarriage  between  the  two  peoples  had  the  effect  of  interrupting  hostili-
ties; even  when  a  truce  was  made  at  one  localitj',  the  feud  would  be  kept
up  at   other    points   of   contact.      All    details    of    this   conflict    have    been
lost    and   we   merely   know   that   it  terminated  in  the  defeat   of  the   house
of  Joseph,  a  number   of  whom  were   enslaved.     The   ancient   sanctuary   of
Shiloh  still  continued  to  be  the  sacred  town  of  the  Hebrews,  as  it  had  been
under   the  Canaanites,  and  the  people  of  Ephraim  kept  there  the   ark   of
Jahveh-Sabaoth,  "the  Lord  of  hosts."-     It  was  a  chest  of  wood,  similar  in
shape  to   the   shrine  which  surmounted   the  sacred  barks  of  the    Egyptian
divinities,  but  instead  of  a  prophesying  statue,  contained  the  two  tables  of
the  Mosaic  law.^     Yearly  festivals  were  celebrated  before  it,  and  it  was  con-
sulted as  an  oracle  by  all  the  Israelites.     Eli,  the  priest  to  whose   care  it
was   at  this  time  consigned,  had  earned   universal  respect  by  the  austerity
of  his  life  and  by  his  skill  in  interpreting  the  divine  oracles.*     His  two  sons,
on  the  contrary,  took  advantage  of  his  extreme  age  to  annoy  those  who  came
up  to  worship,  and  they  were  even  accused  of  improper    behaviour  towards
the  women  who  "  served  at  the  door  of"  the  tabernacle.     They  appropriated
to  themselves  a  larger  portion  of  the  victims  than  they  were  entitled  to,  ex-
tracting from  the  caldron  the  meat  offerings  of  the  faithful  after  the  sacrifice
was  over   by  means  of  flesh-hooks.     Their  misdeeds  were  such,  that  "men
abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord,"  and  yet  the  reverence  for  the  ark  was

'  He  is  thus  characterised  in  the  Blessing  of  Jacob  (Gch.  slix.  27).

^  At  the  very  opening  of  the  First  Bool:  of  Samuel  (i.  3),  Shiloh  is  mentioned  as  being  the  sanctuary
olJahvch-Sabaoth,  Jahveh  the  Lord  of  hosts.  The  facts  given  in  Jvsh.  xviii.  1  show  that  the  date  of
its  foundation  there  goes  back  to  the  earliest  times  of  the  Israelite  conquest ;  of.  supra,  p.  GS2.

•■  The  statement  that  the  tables  of  the  law  were  enclosed  within  the  ark  is  frequently  repeated
in  Exodus  and  in  subsequent  books  of  the  Hexateuch.

■"  The  history  of  Eli  extends  over  chaps,  i.-iv.  of  the  First  Book  of  Samuel ;  it  is  incorporated  with
that  of  Samuel,  and  treats  only  of  the  events  which  accompanied  the  destruction  of  the  sanctuary  of
Shiloh  by  the  Philistines.  For  the  views  of  certain  critics  as  to  the  sources  of  the  narrative,  cf.
Bleek-Wellhau-sen,  Einkitung  in  das  alte  Testament,  4th  edit.,  pp.  201-206  ;  and  lastly,  Bvdde,
Die  BUcher  Bichter  und  Samuelie,  p.  196,  et  seq.).


BENJAMIN  AND    BIS   POSITION    ON    THE   PHILISTINE   FRONTIEP.      707

SO  great  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  that  they  continued  to  have  recourse
to  it  on  every  occasion  of  national  danger.'  The  people  of  Ephraim  and
Benjamin  having  been  defeated  once  between  Eben-ezer  and  Aphek,  bore
the  ark  in  state  to  the  battle-field,  that  its  presence  miglit  inspire  them
with  confidence.  The  Philistines  were  alarmed  at  its  advent,  and  exclaimed,
"  God  is  come  into  the  camp.  Woe  unto  us !  Who  shall  deliver  us  out  of
the  hand  of  these  mighty  gods?  ...  Be  strong,  and  quit  yourselves  like
men,  0  ye  Philistines,  that  ye  be  not  servants  unto  the  Hebrews,  as  they
have  been  to  you."^  In  response  to  this  appeal,  their  troops  fought  so  boldly
that  they  once  more  gained  a  victory.  "  And  there  ran  a  man  of  Benjamin
out  of  the  army,  and  came  to  Shiloh  the  same  day  with  his  clothes  rent,  and
with  earth  upon  his  head.  And  when  he  came,  lo,  Eli  sat  upon  his  seat  by
the  wayside  watching :  for  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God.  And  when
the  man  came  into  the  city,  and  told  it,  all  the  city  cried  out.  And  when  Eli
heard  the  noise  of  the  crying,  he  said.  What  meaueth  the  noise  of  this
tumult?  And  the  man  hasted,  and  came  and  told  Eli.  Now  Eli  was  ninety
and  eight  years  old ;  and  his  eyes  were  set,  that  he  could  not  see.  And  the
man  said  unto  Eli,  I  am  he  that  came  out  of  the  army,  and  I  fled  to-day
out  of  the  army.  And  he  said.  How  went  the  matter,  my  son  ?  And  he
that  brought  the  tidings  answered  and  said,  Israel  is  fled  before  the  Philis-
tines, and  there  hath  been  also  a  great  slaughter  among  the  peojjle,  and  thy
two  sons  also,  Hophni  and  Phineas,  are  dead,  and  the  ark  of  God  is  taken.  And
it  came  to  pass,  when  he  made  mention  of  the  ark  of  God,  that  he  fell  from
off  his  seat  backward  by  the  side  of  the  gate,  and  his  neck  brake,  and  he  died :
for  he  was  an  old  man,  and  heavy."  ^

The  defeat  at  Eben-ezer  completed,  at  least  for  the  time,  the  overthrow
of  the  tribes  of  Central  Canaan.  The  Philistines  destroyed  the  sanctuary  of
Shiloh,*  and  placed  a  garrison  at  Gibeah  to  keep  the  Benjamites  in  subjection,
and  to  command  the  route  of  the  Jordan;''  it  would  even  appear  that  they
pushed  their  advance-posts  beyond  Carmel  in  order  to  keep  in  touch  with  the
independent  Canaanite  cities  such  as  Megiddo,  Taanach,  and  Bethshan,  and  to
ensure  a  free  use  of  the  various  routes  leading  in  the  direction  of  Damascus,
Tyre,  and  Ccele-Syria.*^  Tiie  Philistine  power  continued  dominant  for  at  least
half  a  century.  The  Hebrew  chroniclers,  grieved  at  the  successes  of  their
heathen  oppressors,  have  left  us  but  a  meagre  account  of  this  period,  and  have

'  1  Sam.  ii.  12-17.  '  l  Sum.  iv.  .'J-IO.  '  1  Sam.  iv.  12-lS

*  This  is  not  mentioned  in  the  aiiercd  books ;  but  certiiiu  reasons  for  believing  tliis  destruction
to  liave  taken  place  are  given  in  Staue,  Gesch.  den  Volhs  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  205.

=■  The  Philistine  garrison  at  Geba  (Gibeah)  is  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xili.  3,  1.

°  After  the  victory  at  Gilbou,  the  Pliili»tines  exposed  the  dead  Iwdies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  upon
the  walls  of  liethshan  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  10,  12),  which  they  wouhl  not  have  been  able  to  do  had  the
inhabitants  not  been  allies  or  vassals.  Friendly  relations  with  Bethshan  entailed  almost  as  a  matter
of  course  some  similar  understanding  with  the  cities  of  the  plain  of  Jezreel.


708  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

confined  themselves  to  a  record  of  the  few  Israelite  victories.   Just  at  this  time,
however,  there  lived  a  man  who  was  able  to  inspire  them  witli  fresh  hope.     He
was  a  priest  of  Ramah,  Samuel,  the  son  of  Elkanah,  who  had  acquired  the
reputation  of  being  a  just  and  wise  jud^e  in  the  towns  of  Bethel,  Gilgal,  and
IMizpah ;   "  and  he  judged  Israel  in  all  those  places,  and  his  return  was  to
Kamah,  for  there  was  his  house  ....  and  he  built  there  an  altar  unto  the
Lord."!      To  this  man  the  whole  Israelite  nation  attributed  with  pride  the
deliverance  of  their  race.    The  sacred  writings  relate  how  his  mother,  the  pious
Hannah,  had  obtained  his  birth  from  Jahveh  after  years  of  childlessness,  and
had  forthwith  devoted  him  to  the  service  of  G-od.     She  had  sent  him  to  Shiloh
at  the  age  of  three  years,  and  there,  clothed  in  a  linen  tunic  and  in  a  little
robe  which  his  mother  made  for  him  herself,  he  ministered  before  God  in  the
presence  of  Eli.     One  night  it  happened,  when  the  latter  was  asleep  in  his
place,  "  and  the  lamp  of  God  was  not  yet  gone  out,  and  Samuel  was  laid  down
to  sleep  in  the  temple  of  tlie  Lord,  where  the  ark  of  God  was,  that  the  Lord
called  Samuel:  and  he  said.  Here  am  I.     And  he  ran  unto  Eli,  and  said.  Here
am  I;  for  thou  calledst  me.     And  he  said,  I  called  thee  not;  lie  down  again."
Twice  again  the  voice  was  heard,  and  at  length  Eli  perceived  that  it  was  God
who  had  called  the  child,  and  he  bade  him  reply :  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  Thy
servant  heareth."     From  thenceforward  Jahveh  was  "  with  him,  and  did  let
none  of  his  words  fall  to  the  ground.     And  all  Israel  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-
sheba   knew  tliat  Samuel  was  established  to  be  a  prophet  of  the   Lord."  ^
Twenty  years  after  the  sad  death  of  his  master,  Samuel  felt  that  the  moment
had  come  to  throw  off  the  Philistine  yoke;  he  exhorted  the  people  to  put
away  their  false  gods,  and  he  assembled  them  at  Mizpah  to  absolve  them  from
their  sins.     The  Philistines,  suspicious  of  this  concourse,  which  boded  ill  for
the   maintenance  of  their   authority,  arose   against   him.      "  And  when   the
children  of  Israel  heard  it,  they  were  afraid  of  the  Philistines.     And  Samuel
took  a  sucking  lamb,  and  offered  it  for  a  whole  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord  :
and  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel,  and  the  Lord  answered  him."     The
Philistines,  demoralised   by  the   thunderstorm  which  ensued,  were  overcome
on  the  very  spot  where  they  had  triumphed  over  the  sons  of  Eli,  and  fled
in  disorder  to  their  own  country.     "  Then  Samuel  took  a  stone,  and  set  it
between  Mizpah  and  Shen,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Eben-ezer  (the  Stone
of  Help),  saying,  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord   lielped  us."      He  next  attacked
the  Tyrians   and   the   Amorites,  and  won   back  from   them   all  the   territory

'  1  Sam.  vii.  U!,  17.  These  verses  represeut,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  that  we  know  of  Samuel
anterior  to  liis  relations  witli  Saul.  This  account  seems  to  represent  him  as  exercising  merely  a
restricted  intluence  over  tlie  territory  of  Benjamin  and  the  south  of  Ephraim  ;  his  position  as  judge
of  all  Israel  seems  to  have  developed  at  a  later  period.

'  1  Sam.  i.-iii.


SAMUEL   AND    THE  PHILISTINE  RULE   IN    CANAAN.  709

tlipy  had  conquered.^  One  passage,  in  which  Samuel  is  not  mentioned,
tells  us  how  heavily  the  Philistine  yoke  had  weighed  upon  the  people,  and
explains  their  long  patience  by  the  fact  that  their  enemies  had  taken  away
all  their  weapons.  "Now  tliere  was  no  smith  found  throughout  all  the  land
of  Israel :  for  the  Philistines  said.  Lest  the  Hebrews  make  them  swords  or
spears  ;  "  and  whoever  needed  to  buy  or  repair  the  most  ordinary  agricultural
implements  was  forced  to  address  himself  to  the  Philistine  blacksmiths.^
The  very  extremity  of  the  evil  worked  its  own  cure.  The  fear  of  the  Midian-
ites  had  already  been  the  occasion  of  the  ephemeral  rule  of  Jernlibaal  and
Abimelech ;  the  Philistine  tyranny  forced  first  the  tribes  of  Central  and  then
tliose  of  Southern  Canaan  to  unite  under  the  leadersliip  of  one  man.  In  face
of  so  redoubtable  an  enemy  and  so  grave  a  peril  a  greater  effort  was  required,
and  the  result  was  proportionate  to  their  increased  activity.

The  Manassite  rule  extended  at  most  over  two  or  three  clans,  but  that
of  Saul  and  David  embraced  the  whole  Isi-aelite  nation.^  Benjamin  at
that  time  reckoned  among  its  most  powerful  chiefs  a  man  of  ancient  and
noble  family^ — Saul,  tlie  son  of  Kish — who  possessed  extensive  flocks  and
considerable  property,  and  was  noted  for  his  personal  beauty,  for  "there
was  not  among  the  children  of  Israel  a  goodlier  jjerson  than  he :  from
his  shoulders  and  upward  he  was  higher  than  any  of  the  people."  *  He  had
already  reached  mature  manhood,  and  had  several  children,  the  eldest  of
whom,  Jonathan,  was  well  known  as  a  skilful  and  brave  soldier,  while  Saul's
reputation  was  such  that  his  kinsmen  beyond  Jordan  had  recourse  to  his  aid
as  to  a  hero  whose  presence  would  secure  victory.  The  Ammonites  had  laid
siege  to  Jabesh-Gilead,  and  the  town  was  on  the  point  of  surrendering;  Saul
came  to  their  help,  forced  the  enemy  to  raise  the  siege,  and  inflicted  such  a
severe  lesson  upon  them,  that  during  the  whole  of  his  lifetime  they  did  not
again  attempt  hostilities.  He  was  soon  after  proclaimed  king  by  the  Ben-
jamites,  as  Jerubbaal  had  been  raised  to  authority  by  the  Manassites  on  the

'  This  manner  of  retaliating  against  the  Pliilistines  for  tlie  disaster  tliey  liad  formerly  inflicted  on
Israel,  is  supposed  by  some  critics  to  be  an  addition  of  a  later  date,  either  belonging  to  tlie  time  of
the  prophets,  or  to  the  period  when  the  Jews,  without  any  king  or  settled  government,  rallied  at
Mizpah.  According  to  these  scliolars,  1  Sam.  vii.  2-14  forms  part  of  a  biography,  written  at  a  time-
when  the  foundation  of  the  Benjamito  monarchy  had  not  as  yet  been  attributed  to  Saul  (Reuss,  Eitt.
de»  Israilitee,  p.  252) ;  a  resume' o(  some  of  these  theories  is  given  in  Stade,  Gesch.  des  VoUies  Jurael,
vol.  i.  pp.  197-200.

»  1  Sam.  xiii.  20,  21.

'  The  beginning  of  Saul's  reign,  up  to  his  meeting  with  David,  will  be  found  in  1  Sam.  viii.-xv.
We  can  distinguish  the  remains  of  at  least  two  ancient  narratives,  which  the  writer  of  the  Book  of
Samuel  has  put  together  in  order  to  form  a  complete  and  continuous  account.  As  elsewhere  in  this
work,  I  have  confined  myself  to  accepting  the  results  at  which  criticism  has  arrived,  without  entering
into  detailed  discussions  which  do  not  come  witliin  the  domain  of  history.

*  1  Sam.  ix.  2.  In  one  account  he  is  rejiresented  as  quite  a  young  man,  whose  father  is  still  in
the  prime  of  life  (1  Sam.  ix.),  but  tliis  cannot  n^t'er  to  the  time  of  the  Philistine  war,  where  wo  find  him
accompanied,  at  the  very  outset  of  his  reign,  by  his  son,  who  is  already  skilled  in  the  use  of  weapons.


710  THE  EEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

morrow  of  liis  victory.^  We  learn  from  the  sacred  writings  that  Samuel's
influence  had  heljjed  to  bring  about  these  events.  It  had  been  shown  him
by  the  divine  voice  that  Saul  was  to  be  the  chosen  ruler,  and  he  had  anointed
liim  and  set  him  before  the  people  as  their  appointed  lord ;  the  scene  of  this
must  have  been  either  Mizpah  or  Gilgal."  The  accession  of  a  sovereign  who
possessed  the  allegiance  of  all  Israel  could  not  fail  to  arouse  the  vigilance  of
their  Philistine  oppressors ;  Jonathan,  however,  anticipated  their  attack  and
captured  Gibeah.  The  five  kings  at  once  despatched  an  army  to  revenge  this
loss;  the  main  body  occupied  Michmash,  almost  opposite  to  the  stronghold
taken  from  tliem,  while  three  bands  of  soldiers  were  dispersed  over  the  country,
ravaging  as  they  went,  with  orders  to  attack  Saul  in  the  rear.  The  latter  had
only  six  hundred  men,  with  whom  he  scarcely  dared  to  face  so  large  a  force ;
besides  which,  he  was  separated  from  the  enemy  by  the  Wady  Suweinit,  here
narrowed  almost  into  a  gorge  between  two  precipitous  rocks,  and  through  which
no  body  of  troops  could  penetrate  without  running  the  risk  of  exposing  them-
selves in  single  file  to  the  enemy.  Jonathan,  however,  resolved  to  attempt  a
surprise  iu  broad  daylight,  accompanied  only  by  his  armour-bearer.  "  There
was  a  rocky  crag  on  the  one  side,  and  a  rocky  crag  on  the  other  side :  and  the
name  of  the  one  was  Bozez  (the  Shining),  and  the  name  of  the  other  Seneh
(the  Acacia).  The  one  crag  rose  up  on  the  north  in  front  of  Michmash,  and
the  other  on  the  south  iu  front  of  Geba  (Gibeah)."  ^  The  two  men  descended
the  side  of  the  gorge,  on  the  top  of  which  they  were  encamped,  and  prepared
openly  to  climb  the  opposite  sid^.  The  Philistine  sentries  imagined  they
were  deserters,  and  said  as  they  approached :  "  Behold,  the  Hebrews  come
forth  out  of  the  holes  where  they  had  hid  themselves.  And  the  men  of  the
garrison  answered  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer,  and  said.  Come  up  to  us,
and  we  will  show  you  a  thing.  And  Jonathan  said  unto  his  armour-bearer,
Come  up  after  me  :  for  the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Israel.
And  Jonathan  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and  upon  his  feet,  and  his  armour-
bearer  alter  him :  and  they  fell  before  Jonathan ;  and  his  armour-bearer  slew
them  after  him.  And  that  first  slaughter  that  Jonathan  and  his  armour-
bearer  made,  was  about  twenty  men,  within  as  it  were  half  a  furrow's  length  in
an  acre  of  land."  From  Gibeah,  where  Saul's  troops  were  in  ignorance  of  what
was  passing,  the  Benjamite  sentinels  could  distinguish  a  tumult.    Saul  guessed

'  1  Sam.  xi.  According  to  the  text  of  the  LXX.,  the  war  against  the  Ammonites  broke  out  a
month  after  Saul  had  been  secretly  anointed  by  Samuel ;  his  popular  proclamation  did  not  take  place
till  after  the  return  from  the  campaign.

-  One  narrative  appears  to  represent  him  as  being  only  the  priest  or  local  prophet  of  Ramah,  and
depicts  him  as  favourable  to  the  establishment  of  the  monarchy  (I  Sam.  ix.  1-27,  x.  1-16);  the  other,
however,  admits  that  he  was  "judge"  of  all  Israel,  and  implies  that  he  was  hostile  to  the  choice  of
a  king  (1  Sam.  viii.  1-22,  x.  17,  27,  xii.  1-25).

^  1  Sam.  xiv.  4,  5.


THE  WADY   SUWEIsiT.

Drawn  by  Itoudier,  from  pliotograpli  No.  402  of  the  Fahsline  Exploration  Fund.


712  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

that  a  surprise  had  taken  place,  and  marched  upon  the  enemy.  The  Philis-
tines were  ousted  from  their  position,  and  pursued  hotly  beyond  Bethel  as  far
as  Ajalon.^  This  constituted  the  actual  birthday  of  the  Israelite  monarchy.
Gilead,,  the  whole  house  of  Joseph— Ephraim  and  Manasseh — and  Benjamin
formed  its  nucleus,  and  were  Saul's  strongest  supporters.  We  do  not  know
how  far  his  influence  extended  northwards ;  it  probably  stopped  short  at  the
neighbourhood  of  Mount  Tabor,  and  the  Galilreans  either  refused  to  submit  to
bis  authority,  or  acknowledged  it  merely  in  theory.  In  the  south  the  clans  of
Judali  and  Simeon  were  not  long  in  rallying  round  him,  and  their  neighbours
the  Kenites,  with  Caleb  and  Jerahmeel,  soon  followed  their  example.  These
southerners,  however,  appear  to  have  been  somewhat  half-hearted  in  their
allegiance  to  the  Benjamite  king:  it  was  not  enough  to  have  gained  their
adhesion — a  stronger  tie  was  needed  to  attach  them  to  the  rest  of  the  nation.
Saul  endeavoured  to  get  rid  of  the  line  of  Canaanite  cities  which  isolated
them  from  Ephraim,  but  he  failed  in  the  effort,  we  know  not  from  what
cause,  and  his  attempt  produced  no  other  result  than  to  arouse  against
him  the  hatred  of  the  Gibeonite  inhabitants.^  He  did  bis  best  to  watch  over
the  security  of  his  new  subjects,  and  protected  them  against  the  Amalekites,.
who  were  constantly  harassing  them.  Their  king,  Agag,  happening  to  fall
into  his  hands,  he  killed  him,  and  destroyed  several  of  their  nomad  bands,
thus  inspiring  the  remainder  with  a  salutary  terror.^  Some  critics  think  that
all  the  victories  attributed  to  him — over  Moab,  Edom,  and  even  the  Aramseans
of  Zobah — were  not  won  by  his  own  sword,  and  that  some  of  the  projects  and
conquests  of  David  have  been  transferred  to  his  name.  At  any  rate,  th&
constant  incursions  of  the  Philistines  could  not  have  left  him  much  time  for
fighting  in  the  north  and  east  of  his  domains.  Their  defeat  at  Gibeah  was  by
no  means  a  decisive  one,  and  they  quickly  recovered  from  the  blow ;  the
conflict  with  them  lasted  to  the  end  of  Saul's  lifetime,  and  during  the  whole
of  this  period  he  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  increasing  his  army.*

'  The  account  of  these  events,  separated  by  the  parts  relating  to  the  biography  of  Samuel
(1  Sam.  xiii.  7(/-15a,  thought  by  some  to  be  of  a  later  date)  and  of  the  breakiug  by  Jonathan  of  the
fast  enjoined  by  Saul  (1  Sam.  siv.  23-45),  covers  1  Sam.  xiii.  3-7a,  156-23,  xiv.  1-22,  46.  The  details-
appear  to  be  strictly  historical ;  the  number  of  the  Philistines,  however,  seems  to  be  exaggerated :
"  30,000  chariots,  and  6000  horsemen,  and  people  as  the  sand  which  is  on  the  sea  shore  in  multitude  "
(1  Sam.  xiii.  5).

'  The  fact  is  made  known  to  us  by  an  accidental  mention  of  it  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  1-11.  The  motive
which  induced  Saul  to  take  arms  against  the  Gibeonites  is  immediately  apparent  when  we  realise
the  position  occupied  by  Gibeon  between  Judah  and  the  tribes  of  Central  Canaan.

'  The  part  taken  by  Samuel  in  the  narrative  of  Saul's  war  against  the  Amalekites  (1  Sam.  xv.)-
is  thought  by  some  critics  to  have  been  introduced  with  a  view  of  e.Nalting  the  propliet's  office  at  the
expense  of  the  king  and  the  monarcliy.  They  regard  1  Sam.  xiv.  48  as  being  the  sole  historic  ground
of  tlie  narrative.

'  1  Sam.  xi\'.  47.  We  may  admit  his  successful  skirmishes  with  Moab,  but  some  writers  maintain
that  the  defeat  of  the  Edomites  and  Aramseans  is  a  mere  anticipation,  and  consider  that  tlu'  passage
is  only  a  reflection  of  2  Sam.  viii.  8,  and  reproduces  the  list  of  the  wars  of  David,  with  the  exception
of  the  expedition  against  Damascus.


THE    GROWTn   OF    THE   UENJAMITK   MONARCHY.

The  monarchy  was  as  yet  in  a  very  rudimentary  state,
without  either  the  pomp  or  accessories  usually  associated
with  royalty  in  the  ancient  kingdoms  of  the  East.  Saul,  as
King  of  Israel,  led  much  the  same  sort  of  life  as  when  lie
was  merely  a  Benjamite  chief  He  preferred  to  reside  at
Gibeah,  in  the  house  of  his  forel'athers,  with  no  further  re-
sources than  those  yielded  by  the  domain  inherited  from  his
ancestors,  together  with  the  spoil  taken  in  battle.^  All  that
he  had,  in  i^ddition  to  his  former  surroundings,  were  a  priest-
hood attached  to  the  court,  and  a  small  army  entirely  at  his
own  disposal.  Ahijah,  a  descendant  of  Eli,  sacrificed  for  the
king  when  the  latter  did  not  himself  officiate;  he  fulfilled  the
office  of  chaplain  to  him  in  time  of  war,  and  was  the  mouth-
piece of  the  divine  oracles  when  these  were  consulted  as  to  the
propitious  moment  for  attacking  the  enemy.-  The  army  con-
sisted of  a  nucleus  of  Benjamites,  recruited  from  the  king's
clan,  with  the  addition  of  any  adventurers,  whether  Israelites  or  strangers,  who
were  attracted  to  enlist  under  a  popular  military  chief.  It  comprised  archers,
slingers,  and  bands  of  heavily  armed  infantry,  after  tlie  fashion  of  the  I'hosni-
cians,  bearing  pikes.  We  can  gain  some  idea  of  their  appeai-ance  and  equip-
ment from  the  bronze  statuettes  of  an  almost  contemporary  period,  which  show
us  the  Phoenician  foot-soldiers  or  the  barbarian  mercenaries  in  the  pay  of  the
Phoenician  cities  :  they  wear  the  horizontally  striped  loin-cloth  of  the  Syrians,
leaving  the  arms  and  legs  entirely  bare,  and  tlie  head  is  protected  by  a
pointed  or  conical  helmet.  Saul  possessed  none  of  the  iron-bound  chariots
which  always  accompanied  the  Canaanite  infantry  ;  these  heavy  vehicles  would
have  been  entirely  out  of  place  in  the  luountain  districts,  which  were  the  usual
field  of  operations  for  the  Israelite  force.*     We  are  unable  to  ascertain  whether


A   PUCENIUAN   SOLDIEB.*


'  Gibeah  is  nowhere  expressly  mentioned  as  being  the  capital  of  Saul,  but  the  name  Gibeah  of
Saul  which  it  bore  shows  that  it  must  have  been  the  royal  residence;  the  names  of  the  towns  men-
tioned in  the  account  of  Saul's  pursuit  of  David — Naioth,  Eamah,  and  Nob — are  all  near  to  Gibeah.
It  was  also  at  (jiibeah  that  the  Gibeonites  slew  seven  of  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  Saul  (2  Sam.  xxi.
0-9),  no  doubt  to  bring  ignominy  on  the  family  of  the  lirst  king  in  the  very  place  in  which  they  had
governed.

'  Ahijah  (1  Sam.  xiv.  3),  son  of  Ahitub,  great-grandson  of  Eli,  appears  to  be  the  same  as  Ahimelech,
son  of  Ahitub,  who  subsequently  helped  David  (1  Sam.  xxi.  1-10),  and  was  massacred  by  order  of
Saul  (1  Sam.  xxii.  9-19).  The  scribe  must  have  beou  shocked  by  the  name  Meleeh — that  of  the  god
Milik  [Moloch]— and  must  have  substituted  Jali  or  Jabveh.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-tJudin,  from  the  bronze  original  in  the  T.ouvre;  cf.  PEitROT-CniPiEZ,  Ilist.
de  VArt  dans  I' Antiquit^^  vol.  iii.  p.  405,

'  Willi  rigi.rd  to  the  use  of  Iho  bow  among  Saul's  soldiers,  ef.  1  Sam.  xx.  18-42,  where  we  find
the  curious  scene  of  the  meeting  of  David  ami  Jonathan  when  the  latler  came  out  of  Gibeah  on  the
pretext  of  practising  with  bow  and  arrows.  The  accoutrement  of  the  Hebrews  is  given  in  the  passage
where  Saul  lends  liis  armour  to  David  before  meeting  witli  (ioliath  (1  Sam.  xvii.  ys,  39);  it  is  the
same  as  that  of  the  rhilistiues  described  mpra,  p.  7U(l.


7  I  4  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

the  king's  soldiers  received  any  regular  pay,  but  we  know  that  the  spoil  was
divided  between  the  prince  and  his  men,  each  according  to  his  rank  and  in
proportion  to  the  valour  he  had  displayed.^  In  cases  of  necessity  the  whole
of  the  tribes  were  assembled,  and  a  selection  was  made  of  all  those  capable
of  bearing  arms.  This  militia,  composed  mainly  of  a  pastoral  peasantry  in
the  prime  of  life,  capable  of  heroic  efforts,  was  nevertheless  ill-disciplined,
liable  to  sudden  panics,  and  prone  to  become  disbanded  on  the  slightest
reverse.^  Saul  had  the  supreme  command  of  the  whole ;  the  members  of  his
own  family  served  as  lieutenants  under  him,  including  his  son  Jonathan,  to
whom  he  owed  some  of  his  most  brilliant  victories,  together  with  his  cousin
Abner,  the  sar-zaha,  who  led  the  royal  guard.^  Among  the  men  of  distinguished
valour  who  had  taken  service  under  Saul,  he  soon  singled  out  David,  son  of
Jesse,  a  native  of  Bethlehem  of  Judah.''  David  was  the  first  Judaean  hero,
the  typical  king  who  served  as  a  model  to  all  subsequent  monarchs.  His
elevation,  like  that  of  Saul,  is  traced  to  Samuel.  The  old  prophet  had
repaired  to  Bethlehem  ostensibly  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  and  after  examining
all  the  children  of  Jesse,  he  chose  the  youngest,  and  "  anointed  him  in
the  midst  of  his  brethren  :  and  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon
David."  ^  His  introduction  at  the  court  of  Saul  is  variously  accounted  for.
According  to  one  narrative,  Saul,  being  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  fell  at
times  into  a  profound  melancholy,  from  which  he  could  be  aroused  only
by  the  playing  of  a  harp.  On  learning  that  David  was  skilled  in  this
instrument,  he  begged  Jesse  to  send  him  his  son,  and  the  lad  soon  won  the
king's  affection.  As  often  as  the  illness  came  upon  him,  David  took  his
harp,  and  "  Saul  was  refreshed,  and  the  evil  spirit  departed  from  him." "
Another  account  relates  tliat  he  entered  on  his  soldierly  career  by  killing
•with  his  sling  Goliath  of  Gath,'  who  had  challenged  the  bravest   Israelites

'  Cf.  tlie  quarrel  which  took  place  between  the  soldiera  of  David  about  the  spoil  taken  from  the
Amalekites,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  strife  was  decided  by  David  (1  Sam.  xxx.  21-25).

-  Saul,  for  instance,  assembles  the  people  and  makes  a  selection  to  attack  the  Philistines
(1  Sam.  xiii.  2,4,7)  against  the  Ammonites  (1  Sam.  xi.7,  8)  and  against  the  Amalekites  (1  Samxv.i).

'  1  Sam.  xiv.  50,  51.  There  is  no  record  of  the  part  played  by  Abner  during  Saul's  lifetime:  he
begins  to  figure  in  the  narrative  after  the  battle  at  Gilboa  under  the  double  reign  of  Ish-bosheth  and
David  ;  cf.  supra,  p.  721.

*  The  name  of  David  is  a  shortened  form  of  Davdo,  Dodo,  "  the  favourite  of  Him,"  i.e.  God.

'  The  intervention  of  the  prophet  occupies  1  Sam.  xvi.  1-13.  Some  critics  have  imagined  that
this  passage  was  interpolated  at  a  later  date,  and  reflects  the  events  which  are  narrated  in  chap.  x.
They  say  it  was  to  show  that  Saul  was  not  alone  in  enjoying  consecration  by  the  prophet,  and  hence
«11  doubt  would  be  set  at  rest  as  to  whether  David  was  actually  that  "  neighbour  of  tliine.  that  is
better  than  thou,"  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xv.  28  (Budde,  Die  Biicher  Richier  and  Samuelis,  pp.  210, 217).

"  1  Sam.  xvi.  14-23.  This  narrative  is  dii-ectly  connected  with  1  Sam.  xiv.  52,  where  we  are  told
that  when  "Saul  saw  any  strong  man, or  any  valiant  man,  he  took  him  unto  him"  (Stadb,  Gesch.  des
Volhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  224,  225).

'  1  Sam.  xvii.,  xviii.  1-5.  According  to  some  writers,  this  second  version,  the  best  known  of  the
two,  is  a  development  at  a  later  period  of  the  tradition  preserved  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  19,  where  the  victory
of  Elhanan  over  Goliath  is  recorded  (Stade,  Gesch.  des  Vollies  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  225-229),


DAVID   AND   SAUL.  715

to  combat ;  though  elsewhere  the  death  of  Goliath  is  attributed  to  Elhanan
of  Bethlehem,^  one  of  the  "  mighty  men  of  valour,"  who  specially  distinguished
himself  in  the  wars  against  the  Philistines.  David  had,  however,  no  need
to  take  to  himself  the  brave  deeds  of  others ;  at  Ephes-dammim,  in  company
with  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Dodai,  and  Shammah,  the  son  of  Agu,  he  had  posted
himself  in  a  field  of  lentils,  and  the  three  warriors  had  kept  the  Philistines
at  bay  till  their  discomfited  Israelite  comrades  had  had  time  to  rally.^  Saul
entrusted  him  with  several  difficult  undertakings,  in  all  of  which  he  acquitted
himself  with  honour.  On  his  return  from  one  of  them,  the  women  of  the
villages  came  out  to  meet  him,  singing  and  dancing  to  the  sound  of  timbrels,
the  refrain  of  their  song  being :  "  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  David
his  ten  thousands."  The  king  concealed  the  jealousy  which  this  simple
expression  of  joy  excited  within  him,  but  it  found  vent  at  the  next  outbreak
of  his  illness,  and  he  attempted  to  kill  David  with  a  spear,  though  soon  after
he  endeavoured  to  make  amends  for  his  action  by  giving  him  his  second
daughter  Michal  in  marriage.^  This  did  not  prevent  the  kiug  from  again
attempting  David's  life,  either  in  a  real  or  simulated  fit  of  madness;  but
not  being  successful,  he  despatched  a  body  of  men  to  waylay  him.  According
to  one  account  it  was  Michal  who  helped  her  husband  to  escape,''  while  another
attributes  the  saving  of  bis  life  to  Jonathan.  This  prince  had  already  brought
about  one  reconciliation  between  his  father  and  David,  and  had  spared  no
pains  to  reinstall  him  in  the  royal  favour,  but  his  efforts  merely  aroused  the
king's  suspicion  against  himself.  Saul  imagined  that  a  conspiracy  existed
for  the  purpose  of  dethroning  him,  and  of  replacing  him  by  his  son  ;  Jonathan,
knowing  that  his  life  also  was  threatened,  at  length  renounced  the  attempt,
and  David  and  his  followers  withdrew  from  court.  He  was  hospitably  received
by  a  descendant  of  Eli,^  Ahimelech  the  priest,  at  Nob,  and  wandered  about
in  the  neighbourhood  of  AduUam,  hiding  himself  in  the  wooded  valleys  of
Khereth,  in  the  heart  of  Judah,     He  retained  the  sympathies  of  many  of  the

'  "2  Sam.  xxi.  19,  where  the  duel  of  Goliath  and  Elhanan  is  placed  in  the  reiga  of  David,  during
the  combat  at  Gob.  Some  critics  think  that  the  writer  of  Chronicles,  recognising  the  ililliculty  pre-
sented by  this  passage,  changed  the  epithet  Bethlehemite,  which  qualitied  the  name  of  Elhanan,  into
Lahmi,  the  name  of  Goliath's  brother  (1  Chron.  xx.  0).  Sayce  thouglit  to  get  over  the  dilhculty  by
supposing  that  Elhanan  was  D.ivid's  first  name ;  but  Elhanan  is  the  son  of  Jair,  and  not  the  son  of  Jesse.

"  The  combat  of  Paz-Dammim  or  Ephes-Dammitu  is  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  1 ;  the  exploit  of
David  and  his  two  comrades,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  'J-l'i  (cf.  1  Citron,  xi.  12-14,  which  slightly  varies  from
2  Sam.  xxiii.  9-12).

'  The  account  of  the  first  disagreement  between  Saul  and  David,  and  witli  regard  to  the  marriage
of  David  with  Michal,  is  given  in  1  Sam.  xviii.  (J-Ki,  20-29,  and  presents  every  appearance  of
autlienticity.  Verses  17-19,  mentiouing  a  project  of  union  between  David  and  Saul's  eldest  daugliter,
Merab,  has  at  some  timu  been  interpolated ;  it  is  not  given  in  the  LXX.,  either  because  it  was  not  in
the  Hebrew  version  they  had  before  them,  or  because  they  suppressed  it  owing  to  the  motive  ajipearing
to  them  insufficient.

•  1  Sam.  xix.  11-17.     Many  critics.regard  this  passage  as  an  interpolation.

'  1  Sam.  xxi.  8,  9  adds  that  he  took  as  a  weapon  the  sword  of  (ioliatli  which  was  laid  up  in  tlio
sanctuary  at  Nob.


716


THE   HEBREWS    AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


AID-EL-RA,    THE    SITE    OF   THE    ANCIENT   ADULLAM.'

Benjamites,  more  than  one  of  whom  doubted  whether  it  would  not  be  to  their
advantage  to  transfer  their  allegiance  from  their  aged  king  to  this  more
youthful  hero.  Saul  got  news  of  their  defection,  and  one  day  when  he  was
sitting,  spear  ia  hand,  under  the  tamarisk  at  Gibeah,  he  indignantly  upbraided
his  servants,  and  pointed  out  to  them  the  folly  of  their  plans.  "  Hear,  now,
ye  Benjamites ;  will  the  son  of  Jesse  give  every  one  of  you  iields  and  vine-
yards ?  will  he  make  you  all  captains  of  thousands  and  captains  of  hundreds  ?  "
Ahimelech  was  selected  as  the  victim  of  the  king's  anger :  denounced  by  Doeg,
Saul's  steward,  he  was  put  to  death,  and  all  liis  family,  with  the  exception  of
Abiathar,  one  of  his  sons,  perished  with  bim.^  As  soon  as  it  became  known
that  David  held  the  hill-country,  a  crowd  of  adventurous  spirits  flocked  to
place  themselves  under  his  leadership,  anticipating,  no  doubt,  that  spoil  would
not  be  lacking  with  so  brave  a  chief,  and  he  soon  found  himself  at  the  head
of  a  small  army,  with  Abiathar  as  priest,  and  the  ephod,  rescued  from  Nob,
in  his  possession.^  The  country  was  favourable  for  their  operations ;  it  was
a  perfect  labyrinth  of  deep  ravines,  communicating  with  each  other  by  narrow
passes  or  by  paths  winding  along  the  edges  of  precipices.    Isolated  rocks,  acces-

'  Drawn  by  Boutlier,  from  pliotograph  No.  430  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.

'  1  Sam.  sis.-xxii.,  where,  accordiug  to  some  critics,  two  contradictory  versions  have  been  blended
together  at  a  late  period.  The  most  probable  version  is  given  in  1  Sam.  xix.  8-10  [11-lS  a],  xsi.  1-7
[8-10],  sxii.,  and  is  that  which  I  have  followed  by  preference ;  the  other  version,  according  to  these
writers,  attributes  too  important  a  rule  to  Jonathan,  and  relates  at  length  the  efforts  he  made  to
reconcile  his  father  and  his  friend  (1  Sam.  sviii.  30,  xix.  1-7,  xx.).  It  is  thought,  from  the  coufusion
apparent  in  this  part  of  the  nan-ative,  that  a  record  of  the  real  motives  which  provoked  a  rupture
between  the  king  and  his  son-in-law  has  not  been  preserved  (Stade,  Geschichte,  vol.  i.  pp.  240,  241).

'  1  Sain.  xxii.  20-23,  xxiii.  6.  For  the  use  of  the  ephod  by  Abiathar  for  oracular  purposes,  cf.
1  Sam.  xxiiL  9-12,  xxx.  7,  S ;  the  inquiry  in  1  Sam.  xxiii.  2-4  probably  belongs  to  the  same  series,
although  neither  Abiathar  nor  the  ephod  is  mentioned.


DAVID   AND   EIS  FOLLOWERS   IN    THE  DESERT   OF  JUDAK      717


-Z*-^'^,       >'y^'


Till    Dl  aHif    OF    JLD\I1


sible  only  by  rugged  ascents,  defied  assault,
while  extensive  caves  offered  a  safe  hiding-
place  to  those  who  were  familiar  with  their

windings.  One  day  the  little  band  descended  to  the  rescue  of  Keilah,  which
they  succeeded  in  wresting  from  the  Philistines,  but  no  sooner  did  they  learn
that  Saul  was  on  his  way  to  meet  them  than  they  took  refuge  in  the  south
of  Judah,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ziph  and  Maon,  between  the  mountains
and  the  Dead  Sea.^  Saul,  already  irritated  by  his  rival's  successes,  was  still
more  galled  by  being  always  on  the  point  of  capturing  him,  and  yet  always
seeing  him  slip  from  his  grasp.  On  one  afternoon,  when  the  king  had  retired
into  a  cave  for  his  siesta,  he  found  himself  at  the  mercy  of  his  adversary  ;
the  latter,  however,  respected  the  sleep  of  his  royal  master,  and  contented
himself  with  cutting  a  piece  off  his  mantle.'*  On  another  occasion  David,  in
company  with  Abishai  and  Ahimelech  the  Hittite,  took  a  lance  and  a  pitcher
of  water  from  the  king's  bedside.^  The  inhabitants  of  the  country  were  not
all  equally  loyal  to  David's  cause;  those  of  Ziph,  whose  meagre  resources
were  taxed  to  support  his  followers,  plotted  to  deliver  him  up  to  the  king,°
while  Nabal  of  Maon  roughly  refused  him  food.  Abigail  atoned  for  her
husband's    churlishness    by  a  speedy  submission ;    she    collected  a  supply  of

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  jiliotograiih  No.  197  of  the  Pahsliiie  Exploration  Fund.  The  litiglita
visible  in  the  diBtiince  luo  the  mountains  of  Moab,  beyond  the  Dead  Sea.

'  1  Sam.  xxiii.  1-13  ;  an  episode  acknowledged  to  bo  historical  by  nearly  all  modern  critics.  The
scenes  of  David's  wanderings  have  been  sympatlietically  described  in  an  article  entitled  Survey  of
David's  Outlaw  Life,  in  Survey  of  Wnstern  Paleiline,  Special  Papers,  p.  208,  et  seq.

'  1  Sam.  xxiv.    Tljought  by  some  writers  to  be  of  much  later  date.

'  1  Sam.  xxvi.  4-25.  »  j  Sam.  xxiii.  14-2G,  xxvi.  1,  2.


718  TEE   HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

provisions,  and  brought  it  herself  to  the  wanderers.  David  was  as  much
disarmed  by  her  tact  as  by  her  beauty,  and  when  she  was  left  a  widow  he
married  her.  This  union  insured  the  support  of  the  Calebite  clan,  the  most
powerful  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  policy  as  well  as  gratitude  no  doubt
suggested  the  alliance.^

Skirmishes  were  not  as  frequent  between  the  king's  troops  and  the  outlaws
as  we  might  at  first  be  inclined  to  believe,  but  if  at  times  there  was  a  truce
to  hostilities,  they  never  actually  ceased,  and  the  position  became  intolerable.
Encamped  between  his  kinsman  and  the  Philistines,  David  found  himself
imable  to  resist  either  party  except  by  making  friends  with  the  other.  An
incursion  of  the  Philistines  near  Maon^  saved  David  from  the  king,  but  when
Saul  had  repulsed  it,  David  had  no  choice  but  to  throw  himself  into  the  arms
of  Achish,  King  of  Gath,  of  whom  he  craved  permission  to  settle  as  his  vassal
at  Ziklas:,  on  condition  of  David's  defending  the  frontier  against  the  Bedawin.s
Saul  did  not  deem  it  advisable  to  try  and  dislodge  him  from  this  retreat.  Peace
having  been  re-established  in  Judah,  the  king  turned  northward  and  occupied
the  heights  which  bound  the  plain  of  Jezreel  to  the  east ;  it  is  possible  that  he
contemplated  pushing  further  afield,  and  rallying  round  him  those  northern
tribes  who  had  hitherto  never  acknowledged  his  authority.  He  may,  on  the
other  hand,  have  desired  merely  to  lay  hands  on  the  Syrian  highways,  and
divert  to  his  own  profit  the  resources  brought  by  the  caravans  which  plied
along  them.''  The  Philistines,  who  had  been  nearly  ruined  by  the  loss  of  the
right  to  demand  toll  of  these  merchants,  assembled  the  contingents  of  their
five  principalities,  among  them  being  the  Hebrews  of  David,  who  formed  the
personal  guard  of  Achish.  The  four  other  princes  objected  to  the  presence
of  these  strangers  in  their  midst,  and  forced  Achish  to  dismiss  them.  David
returned  to  Ziklag,  to  find  ruin  and  desolation  everywhere.  The  Amalekites
had  taken  advantage  of  the  departure  of  the  Hebrews  to  revenge  themselves
once  for  all  for  David's  former  raids  on  them,  and  they  had  burnt  the  town,
carrying  off  the  women  and  flocks.  David  at  once  set  out  on  their  track,  over-
took them  just  beyond  the  torrent  of  Besor,  and  rescued  from  them,  not  only  his
own  belongings,  but  all  the  booty  they  had  collected  by  the  way  in  the  southern
provinces  of  Caleb,  in  Judah,  and  in  the  Cherethite  plain.  He  distributed  part
of  this  spoil  among  those  cities  of  Judah  which  had  shown  hospitality  to  himself

'  1  Sam.  ssv.  2-42.  2  1  g^m.  xxii!.  27,  28.

'  1  Sam.  xxvii.  The  earlier  part  of  this  chapter  (vers.  1-G)  ia  strictly  historical.  Some  critics  take
vers.  8-12  to  be  of  later  date,  and  pretend  that  they  were  inserted  to  show  the  cleverness  of  David,  and
to  deride  the  credulity  of  the  Kiug  of  Gath.

*  This  is  the  very  reasonable  hypothesis  put  forward  by  Reuss,  Eisl.  des  Israelites,  p.  320,  note  3,
and  worked  up  by  Maurice  Vernes,  Precis  d'Hist.  Juioe,  pp.  313-315.  Saul  must  have  taken  this
determination  almost  immediately  after  the  flight  of  David  to  the  Philistines;  indeed,  Achish  says
to  his  fellow-kings,  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  that  David  had  "been  with  me  .  .  .  these
years  "  (1  Sam.  xxix.  3).


THE  DEFEAT  AT  OILBOA    AND    THE   DEATH   OF  SAUL.


7V.>


THE    HILL    OF   EETHSUAN,    SEEN    FliOM   THE    EAST.'


and  his  men,  for  instance,  to  Jattir,  Aroer,  Eshtemoa,  Hormah,  and  Hebron.*
While  he  thus  kept  up  friendly  relations  with  those  who  might  otherwise  have
been  tempted  to  forget  him,  Saul  was  making  his  last  supreme  efibrt  against  the
Philistines,  but  only  to  meet  with  failure.  He  had  been  successful  in  repulsing
them  as  long  as  he  kept  to  the  mountain  districts,  where  the  courage  of  his  troops
made  up  for  their  lack  of  numbers  and  the  inferiority  of  their  arms;  but  he
was  imprudent  enough  to  take  up  a  position  on  the  hillsides  of  Gilboa,  whose
gentle  slopes  offered  no  hindrances  to  the  operations  of  the  heavy  Philistine
battalions.  They  attacked  the  Israelites  from  the  Shunem  side,  and  swept
all  before  them.  Jonathan  perished  in  the  conflict,  together  with  his  two
brothers,  Malchi-sluia  and  Abinadab ;  Saul,  who  was  wounded  by  an  arrow,
begged  his  armour-bearer  to  take  his  life,  but,  on  his  persistently  refusing,  the
king  killed  himself  with  his  own  sword.  The  victorious  Pliilistines  cut  off
his  head  and  tliose  of  his  sons,  and  placed  their  armour  in  the  temple  of
Ashtoreth,''  while  their  bodies,  thus  despoiled,  were  hung  up  outside  the  walls
of  Bethshan,  whose  Canaauite  inhabitants  had  made  common  cause  with  the
Philistines  against  Israel.  The  people  of  Jabesh-Gilead,  who  had  never
forgotten  how  Saul  had  saved  them  from  the  Ammonites,  hearing  the  news,
marched  all  night,  rescued  the  mutilated  remains,  and  brought  them  back

'   Druwn  by  Boudier,  from  pliotograph  No.  79  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.

'  1  Sam.  xxviii.  1,  2,  x.\ix.,  xxx.  Tliu  torrent  of  Besor  id  the  present  Wiuly  Eali-Sheriali,  wliicli
runs  to  tlie  south  of  Gaza.

'  The  text  of  1  Sam.  xxxi.  10  says,  iu  a  vague  manner,  "iu  the  house  of  the  Ashtaroth  "  (in  the
plural),  which  is  corrected,  somewhat  arbitrarily,  in  1  Chron.  x.  10  into  "  in  the  Louse  of  Dagou  "  (K.V.) ;
cf.  supra,  p.  G98,  note  4 :  it  ia  possible  that  it  was  the  temple  at  Gaza,  Gaza  being  the  chief  of  the
Philistine  towns.


720  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

to  their  own  town,  where  they  burned  them,  and  buried  the  charred  bones
under  a  tamarisk,  fasting  meanwhile  seven  days  as  a  sign  of  mourning.^
David  afterwards  disinterred  these  relics,  and  laid  them  in  the  burying-place
of  the  family  of  Kish  at  Zela,  in  Benjamin.^  The  tragic  end  of  their  king
made  a  profound  impression  on  the  people.  We  read  that,  before  entering  on
his  last  battle,  Saul  was  given  over  to  gloomy  forebodings :  he  had  sought
counsel  of  Jahveh,  but  God  "answered  him  not,  neither  by  dreams,  nor  by
Urim,  nor  by  prophets."  The  aged  Samuel  had  passed  away  at  Ramah,  and
had  apparently  never  seen  the  king  after  the  flight  of  David ;  ^  Saul  now
bethought  himself  of  the  prophet  in  his  despair,  and  sought  to  recall  him
from  the  tomb  to  obtain  his  counsel.  The  king  had  banished  from  the  land
all  wizards  and  fortune-tellers,  but  his  servants  brought  him  word  that  at
Endor  there  still  remained  a  woman  who  could  call  up  the  dead.  Saul  dis-
guised himself,  and,  accompanied  by  two  of  his  retainers,  went  to  find  her ;  he
succeeded  in  overcoming  her  fear  of  punisliment,  and  persuaded  her  to  make
the  evocation.  "  Whom  shall  I  bring  up  unto  thee  ?  " — "  Bring  up  Samuel." —
And  when  the  woman  saw  Samuel,  she  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  "  Why
hast  thou  deceived  me,  for  thou  art  Saul  ?  "  And  the  king  said  unto  her,  "  Be
not  afraid,  for  what  sawest  thou  ?  " — "  I  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth." —
"What  form  is  he  of?"— "An  old  man  cometh  up,  and  he  is  covered  with  a
mantle."  Saul  immediately  recognised  Samuel,  and  prostrated  himself  with  his
face  to  the  ground  before  him.  The  prophet,  as  inflexible  after  death  as  in
his  lifetime,  had  no  words  of  comfort  for  the  God-forsaken  man  who  had  troubled
his  repose.  "The  Lord  hath  rent  the  kingdom  out  of  thine  hand,  and  given
it  to  thy  neighbour,  even  to  David,  because  thou  obeyedst  not  the  voice  of  the
Lord,  .  .  .  and  to-morrow  shalt  thou  and  thy  sons  be  with  me.  The  Lord  also
shall  deliver  tiie  host  of  Israel  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines."  *  We  learn,
also,  how  David,  at  Ziklag,  on  hearing  the  news  of  the  disaster,  had  broken
into  weeping,  and  had  composed  a  lament,  full  of  beauty,  known  as  the  "  Song

'  1  Sam.  xxxi.  It  would  seem  that  there  were  two  narratives  describing  this  war :  in  one,  the
Philistines  encamped  at  Shuuem,  and  Saul  occupied  Mount  Gilboa  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  4) ;  in  the  other,  the
Philistines  encamped  at  Apliek,  and  tlie  Israelites  ''by  the  fountain  which  is  in  Jezreol"  (1  Sam.
xxix.  1).  The  first  of  these  accounts  is  connected  with  the  episode  of  the  witch  of  Endor,  the  second
with  the  sending  away  of  David  by  Acliish.  The  final  catastrophe  is  in  both  narratives  placed  on
Mount  Gilboa,  and  Stade,  Gesch.  dea  Volhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  255,  has  endeavoured  to  reconcile  the
two  accounts  by  admitting  that  the  battle  was  fought  between  Aphek  and  "  the  fountain,"  but  that
the  final  scene  took  place  on  the  slopes  of  Gilboa.  There  are  even  two  versions  of  the  battle,  one  in
1  Sam.  xxxi.  and  the  other  in  2  Sam.  i.  6-10,  where  Saul  does  not  kill  himself,  but  begs  an  Amalekite
to  slay  him  ;  many  critics  reject  the  second  version.

=  2  Sam.  xxi.  12-14:.

^  1  Sam.  XXV.  1,  repeated  1  Sam.  xxviii.  3,  with  a  mention  of  the  measures  taken  by  Saul  against
the  wizards  and  fortune-tellers.

■•  1  Sam.  xxviii.  5-25.  There  is  no  reason  why  this  scene  sliould  not  be  historical ;  it  was  natural
that  Saul,  like  many  an  ancient  general  in  similar  circumstances,  should  seek  to  know  the  future  by
means  of  the  occult  sciences  then  in  vogue.  Some  critics  think  that  certain  details  of  the  evocation —
as,  for  instance,  the  words  attributed  to  Samuel — are  of  a  later  date.


TEE  STBUGGLE  BETWEEN  JSEBAAL    AND    DAVID.  721

of  the  Bow,"  which  the  people  of  Judah  committed  to  memory  in  their  child-
liood.  "  Thy  gh:»ry,  0  Israel,  is  slain  upon  thy  high  places !  How  are  the
mighty  fallen !  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  Ash-
kelon ;  lest  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  rejoice,  lest  the  daughters  of  the
uncircumcised  triumph !  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let  there  be  no  dew  nor
rain  upon  you,  neither  fields  of  offerings :  for  there  the  shield  of  the  mighty
■was  vilely  cast  away,  the  shield  of  Saul,  not  anointed  witli  oil '  From  the
blood  of  the  slain,  from  the  fat  of  the  mighty,  the  bow  of  Jonathan  turned
not  back,  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  empty.  Saul  and  Jonathan  were
lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and  in  death  they  were  not  divided." '

The  Philistines  occupied  in  force  the  plain  of  Jezreel  and  the  pass  which
leads  from  it  into  the  lowlands  of  Bethshiin :  the  Israelites  abandoned  the
villages  which  they  had  occupied  in  these  districts,  and  the  gap  between
the  Hebrews  of  the  north  and  those  of  the  centre  grew  wider. '^  Tlie  remnants
of  Saul's  army  sought  shelter  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan,  but  found  no
leader  to  reorganise  them.  The  reverse  sustained  by  the  Israelitish  champion
seemed,  moreover,  to  prove  the  futility  of  trying  to  make  a  stand  against  the
invader,  and  even  the  uselessness  of  the  monarchy  itself:  why,  they  might
have  ashed,  burthen  ourselves  with  a  master,  and  patiently  bear  with  his
exactions,  if,  when  put  to  the  test,  he  fails  to  discharge  the  duties  for  the
performance  of  which  he  was  chosen  ?  And  yet  the  advantages  of  a  stable  form
of  government  had  been  so  manifest  during  the  reign  of  Saul,  that  it  never
for  a  moment  occurred  to  his  former  subjects  to  revert  to  patriarchal  institu-
tions :  the  question  which  troubled  tliem  was  not  whether  they  were  to  have
a  king,  but  rather  who  was  to  fill  the  post.  Saul  had  left  a  considerable
number  of  descendants  behind  him:^  from  these,  Abner,  the  ablest  of  his
captains,  chose  Ishbaal,  and  set  him  on  the  throne  to  reign  under  his  guidance.''
Gibeah  was  too  close  to  the  frontier  to  be  a  safe  residence  for  a  sovereign  whose

'  2  Sam.  i.  17-27  (ll.V.).  This  elegy  is  described  as  a  iiuotation  from  Jasher,  the  "Book  of  the
Upright."  Many  nicjdern  writers  attribute  its  authorship  to  David  himself  (Keuss,  Hist,  des  Israelites,
p.322;  Stade,  Gesclt.  des  Vullces  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  258  ;  Counill,  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Test.,  2nd  edit.,
p.  119);  others  reject  this  viewCDt-NCKEB,  Gesch.  des  J((e.,  ."jth  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  113;  Ed.  Meyeh,  Gesch.
des  Allerthums,  vol.  i.  p.  301 ;  Kenan,  Hist,  da  peuple  d'Israd,  vol.  i.  p.  43-1) ;  all  agree  in  regarding  it
as  extremely  ancient.     Tlie  title, "  Soug  of  the  Bow,"  is  based  on  the  possibly  corrupt  text  of  ver.  IS.

-  1  .S'ttm.  xxxi.  7.

"  We  know  tliat  he  had  tliree  sous  by  his  wife  Aliinoam — Jonathan,  Islibaal,  and  Malchi-shua;
and  two  daugliters,  Merab  and  Michal  (1  Sam.  xiv.  i'J,  .50,  where  "  I.shvi  "  should  be  read  "Ishbual  ").
Jonathan  left  at  least  one  sou,  Meribbaal  (1  Chron.  viii.  31,  ix.  40,  called  Mephibosheth  in  2  Sam.
xxi.  7),  and  Merab  had  live  eons  by  Adriul  (2  Sam.  xxi.  8).  One  of  Saul's  concubines,  Ivizpah.
daughter  of  Aiah,  had  borne  him  two  sons,  Armoni  and  Meribliaal  (2  Sam.  xxi.  S,  where  the  name
Meribbaal  is  changed  into  Mephibosheth) ;  Abiuadab,  who  fell  with  him  in  the  fight  at  Jlount
Gilboa  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  2),  whose  mother's  name  is  not  mentioned,  was  another  son.

*  Ishbaal  was  still  a  child  when  his  father  died  :  had  lie  been  old  enough  to  bear  arms,  he  would
have  taken  a  part  in  the  battle  of  (iilboa  with  liis  brothers.  The  expressions  used  in  the  account  of
his  elevation  to  the  throne  prove  that  he  was  a  minor  (2  Sam.  ii.  8,  9)  :  the  statement  tiiat  he  was
forty  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign  would  seem,  therefore,  to  be  an  error  (ii.  10).

3    A


722  TEE  EEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

position  was  still  insecure ;  Abner  therefore  installed  Ishbaal  at  Mahauaim,  in
the  heart  of  the  country  of  Gilead.     The  house  of  Jacob,  including  the  tribe
of  Benjamin,  acknowledged  him  as  king,  but  Judah  held  aloof.    It  had  adopted
the  same  policy  at  the  beginning  of  the  previous  reign,  yet  its  earlier  isola-
tion had  not  prevented  it  from  afterwards  throwing  in  its  lot  with  the  rest
of  the  nation.     But  at  that  time  no  leader  had  come  forward  from  its  own
ranks  who  was  worthy  to  be  reckoned  among  the  mighty  men  of  Israel ;  now,
on  the  contrary,  it  had  on  its  frontier  a  bold  and  resolute  leader  of  its  own
race.     David  lost  no  time  in  stepping  into  the  place  of  those  whose  loss  he
had  bewailed.     Their  sudden  removal,  while  it  left  him  without  a  peer  among
his  own  people,  exposed  him  to  the  suspicion  and  underground  machinations
of  his  foreign  protectors  ;  he  therefore  quitted  them  and  withdrew  to  Hebron,
where  his  fellow-countrymen  hastened  to  proclaim  him  king.^    From  that  time
onwards  the  tendency  of  the  Hebrew  race  was  to  drift  apart  into  two  distinct
bodies ;  one  of  them,  the  house  of  Joseph,  which  called  itself  by  the  name  of
Israel,  took  up  its  position  in  the  north,  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan ;  the
other,  which  is  described  as  the  house  of  Judah,  in  the  south,  between  the
Dead    Sea  and   the   Shephelah.     Abner   endeavoured   to   suppress  the  rival
kingdom  in  its  infancy :  he  brought  Ishbaal  to  Gibeah  and  proposed  to  Joab,
who  was  in  command  of  David's  army,  that  the  conflict  should  be  decided  by
the  somewhat  novel  expedient  of  pitting  twelve  of  the  house  of  Judah  against
an  equal  number  of  the  house  of  Benjamin.     The  champions  of  Judah  are  said
to  have  won  the  day,  but  the  opposing  forces  did  not  abide  by  the  result,  and
the  struggle  still  continued.'-^     An  intrigue  in  the  harem  furnished  a  solution
of  the  difficulty.     Saul  had  raised  one  of  his  wives  of  the  second  rank,  named
Eizpah,  to  the  post  of  favourite.     Abner  became  enamoured  of  her  and  took
her.     This  was  an  insult  to  tlie  royal  house,  and  amounted  to  an  act  of  open
usurpation :  the  wives  of  a  sovereign  could  not  legally  belong  to  any  but  his
successor,  and  for  any  one  to  treat  them  as  Abner  had  treated  Eizpah,  was
equivalent  to  his  declaring  himself  the  equal,  and  in  a  sense  the  rival,  of  his
master.     Ishbaal  keenly  resented  his  minister's  conduct,  and  openly  insulted
him.     Abner  made  terms  with  David,  won  the  northern  tribes,  including  that
of  Benjamin,  over  to  his  side,  and  when  what  seemed  a  propitious  moment
had  arrived  made  his  way  to  Hebron  with  an  escort  of  twenty  men.      He  was
favourably  received,  and  all  kinds  of  promises  were  made  him ;  but  when  he
was  about  to  depart  again  in  order  to  complete  the  negotiations  with  the
disaffected  elders,  Joab,  returning  from  an  expedition,  led  him  aside  into  a
gateway  and  slew  him.     David  gave  him  solemn  burial,  and  composed  a  lament

'  2  Sam.  ii.  1-11.  Very  probably  Abner  recognised  the  Philistine  suzerainty  as  David  had  done,
for  the  sake  of  peace;  at  any  rate,  we  find  no  mention  in  Holy  Writ  of  a  war  between  Ishbaal  and
the  Philistines.

"  2  Sam.  ii.  12-32,  iii.  1.


DAVID   DELIVERS  ISRAEL    FROM   THE  PHILISTINE  DOMINATION.      723

on  tlie  occasion,  of  which  four  verses  have  come  down  to  us :  havinp;  thus  paid
tribute  to  the  virtues  of  the  deceased  general,  he  lost  no  time  in  taking  further
precautions  to  secure  his  power.  The  unfortunate  king  Ishbaal,  deserted  by
every  one,  was  assassinated  by  two  of  his  officers  as  he  slept  in  the  heat  of  the
day,  and  his  head  was  carried  to  Hebron  :  David  again  poured  forth  lamenta-
tions, and  ordered  the  traitors  to  be  killed.^  There  was  now  no  obstacle  between
him  and  tbe  throne :  the  elders  of  the  people  met  him  at  Hebron,  poured  oil
upon  his  head,  and  anointed  him  king  over  all  the  provinces  which  had  obeyed
the  rule  of  Saul  in  Gilead — Ephraim  and  Benjamin  as  well  as  Judah.-^

As  long  as  Ishbaal  lived,  and  his  dissensions  with  Judah  assured  their  supre-
macy, the  Philistines  were  content  to  suspend  hostilities  :  the  news  of  his  death,
and  of  the  union  effected  between  Israel  and  Judah,  soon  roused  them  from
this  state  of  quiescence.  As  prince  of  the  house  of  Caleb  and  vassal  of  the  lord
of  Gath,  David  had  not  been  an  object  of  any  serious  apprehension  to  them  ;  but
in  his  new  character,  as  master  of  the  dominions  of  Saul,  David  became  at  once
a  dangerous  rival,  whom  they  must  overthrow  without  delay,  unless  they  were
willing  to  risk  being  ere  long  overthrown  by  him.  They  therefore  made  an  attack
on  Bethlehem  with  the  choicest  of  their  forces,  and  entrenched  themselves  there,
with  the  Canaanite  city  of  Jebus  as  their  base,  so  as  to  separate  Judah  entirely
from  Benjamin,  and  cut  off  the  little  army  quartered  round  Hebron  from  the
reinforcements  which  the  ceutral  tribes  would  otherwise  have  sent  to  its  aid.^
This  move  was  carried  out  so  quickly  that  David  found  himself  practically
isolated  from  the  rest  of  his  kingdom,  and  had  no  course  left  open  but  to  shut
himself  up  in  Aduilam,  with  his  ordinary  guard  and  the  Judsean  levies.^  The
whole  district  round  about  is  intersected  by  a  network  of  winding  streams,  and
abounds  in  rocky  gorges,  where  a  few  determined  men  could  successfully  hold
their  ground  against  the  onset  of  a  much  more  numerous  body  of  troops.  The
caves  afford,  as  we  know,  almost  impregnable  refuges :  David  liad  often  hidden

'  2  Sam.  iii.  1,  6-29,  iv.

'  2  Sam.  V.  1-3 ;  in  1  Cliron.  xi.  1-3,  xii.  23-40,  we  find  further  details  beyoud  those  given  in  the
Book  of  Samuel ;  it  seems  probable,  however,  that  the  uorthern  tribes  may  not  have  recognised
David's  sovereignty  at  this  time.

'  The  history  of  this  war  is  given  in  2  Sam.  v.  17-25,  where  tbe  text  shows  signs  of  having
been  much  condensed.  It  is  preceded  by  the  account  of  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  which  some
critics  wouhl  like  to  transfer  to  chap,  vi.,  following  ver.  1  which  leads  up  to  it.  Tlio  events
which  followed  are  eelf-expUmatory,  if  we  assume,  as  I  have  done  in  the  text,  that  the  Philistines
wished  to  detacli  Judali  from  Israel:  at  first  (2  iSi«»(.  v.  17-21^  David  endeavours  to  release  himself  and
effect  a  juncture  with  Israel,  as  is  proved  by  the  relative  positions  assigned  to  the  two  opposing  armies,
tlic  Phili.-tinesat  Betliloliem,  David  in  the  cave  of  AduUam  ;  afterwards  (2  Sam.  v.  22-25)  David  has
shaken  himself  free,  has  rejoined  Israel,  and  is  carrying  on  the  straggle  between  Gibeali  ami  (jezer.
The  incidents  recounted  in  2  Ham.  xxi.  15-22,  xxiii.  13-1'J,  seem  to  refer  almost  exclusively  to  the
earlier  part  of  the  war,  at  the  time  when  the  Hebrews  were  hemmed  in  in  tho  neighbourhood  of  Aduilam.

*  The  passage  in  2  Sam.  v.  17  simply  states  that  David  '*  went  down  to  the  hold,"  and  gives  no
further  details.  This  expression,  lollowing  as  it  does  the  account  of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  would
seem  to  refer  to  this  town  itself,  and  KiiNAN,  JIutoire  ilu  peuple  d' Israel,  vol.  ii.  pp.  17-23,  20-28,
has  thus  interpreted  it.  It  really  refers  to  Adnllam,  as  is  shown  by  the  passage  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13-17
(Stade,  Geacliichte  de»  Vollcet  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  20(1,  and  note).


724  rnE   HEBREWS  AND    THE   PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

himself  in  tliem  in  the  days  when  he  fled  before  Saul,  and  now  his  soldiers
profited   by  the  knowledge  he   possessed  of  them   to   elude   the   attacks  of
the  Philistines.      He  began   a  sort  of  guerilla    warfare,  in    the   conduct   of
which  he  seems  to  have  been  without  a  rival,  and  harassed  in  endless  skirmishes
his  more  heavily  equipped  adversaries.     He  did  not  spare  himself,  and  freely
risked  bis  own  life ;  but  he  was  of  small  stature  and  not  very  powerful,  so  that
his  spirit  often  outran  his  strength.     On  one  occasion,  when  he  had  advanced
too  far  into  the  fray  and  was  weary  witli  striking,  he  ran  great  peril  of  being
killed  by  a  gigantic  Philistine :  with  difficulty  Abishai  succeeded  in  rescuing
him  unharmed  from  the  dangerous  position  into  which  he  had  ventured,  and  for
the  future  he  was  not  allowed  to  run  such  risks  on  the  field  of  battle.^     On
another  occasion,  when  lying  in  the  cave  of  Adullam,  he  began  to  feel  a  longing
for  the  cool  waters  of  Bethlehem,  and  asked  who  would  go  down  and  fetch
him  a  draught  from  the  well  by  the  gates  of  the  town.     Three  of  his  mighty
men,  Joshebbasshebeth,  Eleazar,  and  Shammah,  broke  through  the  host  of  the
Philistines  and  succeeded  in  bringing  it ;  but  he  refused  to   drink  tlie  few
drops  they  had  brought,  and  poured  them  out  as  a  libation  to  Jehovah,  saying,
"  Shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  men  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  their  lives  ?  "  ^   Duels
between  the  bravest  and  stoutest  champions  of  the  two  hosts  were  of  frequent
occurrence.   It  was  in  an  encounter  of  this  kind  that  Elhanan  the  Bethlehemite
[or  David]  slew  the  giant  Goliath  at  Gob.^     At  length  David  succeeded  in
breaking  his  way  through  the  enemies'  lines  in  the  valley  of  Eephaim,  thus
forcing   open   the   road   to   the   north.      Here  he  probably  fell   in  with   the
Israelitish  contingent,  and,  thus  reinforced,  was  at  last  in  a  position  to  give
battle  in  the  open :  he  was  again  successful,  and  routing  his  foes  pursued  them
from  Gibeon  to  Gezer.*     None  of  his  victories,  however,  was  of  a  sufficiently
decisive  character  to  bring  the  struggle  to  an  end :  it  dragged  on  year  after  year,
and  when  at  last  it  did  terminate,  there  was  no  question  on  either  side  of  sub-
mission or  of  tribute :  ^  the  Hebrews  completely  regained  their  independence,
but  the  Philistines  do  not  seem  to  have  lost  any  portion  of  their  domain,  and
apj)arently  retained  possession  of  all  that  they  had  previously  held.    But  though
they  suffered  no  loss  of  territory,  their  position  was  in  reality  much  inferior  to

>  2  Sam.  sxi.  15-17.

-  2  Sam.  sxiii.  13-17;  of.  1  Chrou.  xi.  15-19.  Popular  tradition  furnishes  many  incidents  of  a
similar  type ;  of.  Alexander  in  the  desert  of  Gedrosia,  Godfrey  de  Bouillon  in  Asia  Minor,  etc.

['  For  the  conflicting  accounts  of  the  slaying  of  Goliath,  and  the  efforts  to  reconcile  them,  see
p.  715,  supra,  and  note  1. — Tr.]

■"  The  Hebrew  text  gives  "  from  Geba  [or  Gibeah]  to  Gezer  "  (2  Sam.  v.  25) ;  the  Septuagint,  "  from
Gibeon  to  Gezer."  This  latter  reading  [which  is  that  of  1  Chron.  xiv.  16.— Tk.]  is  more  in  accordance
with  the  geographical  facts,  and  I  have  therefore  adopted  it.  Jahveh  had  shown  by  a  continual  rustling
in  the  leaves  of  the  mulberry  trees  that  He  was  on  David's  side.     As  to  Elhanan,  see  p.  715,  supra.

■*  In  2  Sam.  viii.  1  we  are  told  that  David  humiliated  the  Philistines,  and  took  "  the  bridle  of  the
mother  city"  out  of  their  hands,  or,  in  other  words,  destroyed  the  supremacy  which  they  had  exercised
over  Israel ;  he  probably  did  no  more  than  this,  and  failed  to  secure  any  part  of  their  terjitory.  Tlie
passage  in  1  Chron.  xviii.  1,  which  attributes  to  him  the  conquest  of  Gath  and  its  dcpendoucies,  i3
probably  an  amplification  of  the  somewhat  obscure  wording  employed  in  2  Sam.  viii.  1.


CONSTITUTION   OF    THE  HEBREW  KINGDOM    UNDER   DAVID.      725

what  it  was  before.  Their  control  of  the  plain  of  Jezreel  was  lost  to  them  for
ever,  and  with  it  tlie  revenue  which  they  had  levied  from  passing  caravans :
tiie  Hebrews  transferred  to  themselves  this  right  of  their  former  masters,
and  were  so  much  the  richer  at  tlieir  expense.  To  the  five  cities  this  was  a
more  damaging  blow  than  twenty  reverses  would  have  been  to  Benjamin  or
.Tudah.  The  military  spirit  had  not  died  out  among  the  Philistines,  and  they
were  still  capable  of  any  action  which  did  not  require  sustained  effort ;  but  lack
of  resources  prevented  them  from  entering  on  a  campaign  of  any  length,  and
any  chance  they  may  at  one  time  have  had  of  exercising  a  dominant  influence
in  the  affairs  of  Southern  Syria  had  passed  away.  Under  the  restraining  hand
of  Egypt  they  returned  to  the  rank  of  a  second-rate  power,  just  strong  enough
to  inspire  its  neighbours  with  respect,  but  too  weak  to  extend  its  territory  by
annexing  that  of  others.  Though  they  might  still,  at  times,  give  David  trouble
by  contesting  at  intervals  the  possession  of  some  outlying  citadel,  or  by  making
an  occasional  raid  on  one  of  the  districts  which  lay  close  to  the  frontier,  they
were  no  longer  a  permanent  menace  to  the  continued  existence  of  his  kingdom.
But  was  Judah  strong  enough  to  take  their  place,  and  set  up  in  Southern
Syria  a  sovereign  state,  around  which  the  whole  fighting  material  of  the
country  might  range  itself  with  confidence?  The  incidents  of  the  last  war
had  clearly  shown  the  disadvantages  of  its  isolated  position  in  regard  to  the
bulk  of  the  nation.  The  gap  between  Ekron  and  the  Jordan,  which  separated
it  from  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  had,  at  all  costs,  to  be  filled  up,  if  a  repetition
of  the  manceuvre  which  so  nearly  cost  David  his  throne  at  Adullam  were  to
be  avoided.  It  is  true  that  the  Gibeonites  and  their  allies  acknowledged  the
sovereignty  of  Ephraim,  and  formed  a  sort  of  connecting  link  between  the
tribes,  but  it  was  impossible  to  rely  on  their  fidelity  so  long  as  they  were
exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  Jebusites  in  their  rear:  as  soon  therefore  as  David
found  he  had  nothing  more  to  fear  from  the  Philistines,  he  turned  his  attention
to  Jerusalem.^  This  city  stood  on  a  dry  and  sterile  limestone  spur,  separated  on
three  sides  from  the  surrounding  hills  by  two  valleys  of  unequal  lengtli.  That
of  the  Kedron,  on  the  east,  begins  as  a  simple  depression,  but  gradually
becomes  deeper  and  narrower  as  it  extends  towards  the  south.  About  a  mile
and  a  half  from  its  commencement  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  deep  gorge,  shut
in  by  precipitous  rocks,  which  for  some  days  after  the  winter  rains  is  turned
into  the  bed  of  a  torrent.'-'     During  the  remainder  of  tlie  year  a  number  of

'  Tlie  name  Jerusaloin  occurs  under  tlio  form  Uroalimmu,  or  UruHaliin,  in  the  Tel  lil-Amariia
tablets  (cf.  p.  131,  note  3,  nupra).  Sion  was  the  name  of  the  citadel  preserved  by  the  Israelites
after  the  capture  of  the  phice,  and  applied  by  them  to  tlie  part  of  the  city  which  contained  the  royal
palace,  and  subsequently  to  the  town  itself.

'  The  Kedron  is  called  a  nahul  (2  Sam,  xv.  23 ;  1  Kinijn  ii.  37 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  10),  i.e.  a  torrent  which
runs  dry  iluring  the  summer ;  in  winter  it  was  termed  a  brook,  x«'M«P/5<"'5>  during  the  Greek  epoch
(1  Mace.  xii.  37).  Excavations  show  that  the  fall  diminishes  at  the  foot  of  the  ancient  walls,  ami
that  the  bottom  of  the  valley  has  risen  nearly  twelve  yards.


72ii  THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

springs,  wLicli  well  up  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  furnish  an  unfailing  supply
of  water  to  the  inhabitants  of  Gihon,^  Siloam,^  and  Eogel.^  The  valley  widens
out  again  near  En-R6gel,  and  affords  a  channel  to  the  Wady  of  the  Children
of  Hinnom,  which  bounds  the  plateau  on  the  west.  The  intermediate  space
has  for  a  long  time  been  nothing  more  than  an  undulating  plain,  at  present
covered  by  the  houses  of  modern  Jerusalem.  In  ancient  times  it  was  traversed
by  a  depression  in  the  ground,  since  filled  up,  which  ran  almost  parallel  with
the  Kedron,  and  joined  it  near  the  Pool  of  Siloam.*  The  ancient  city  of  the
Jebusites  stood  on  the  summit  of  the  headland  which  rises  between  these  two
valleys,  the  town  of  Jebus  itself  being  at  the  extremity,  while  the  Millo  lay
farther  to  the  north  on  the  hill  of  Sion,  behind  a  ravine  which  ran  down  at
right  angles  into  the  valley  of  the  Kedron.^  An  unfortified  suburb  had
gradually  grown  up  on  the  lower  ground  to  the  west,  and  was  connected  by
a  stairway  cut  in  the  rock  ^  with  the  upper  city.  This  latter  was  surrounded
by  ramparts  with  turrets,  like  those  of  the  Canaanitish  citadels  which  we
constantly  find  depicted  on  the  Egyptian  monuments.  Its  natural  advantages
and  efiicient  garrison  had  so  far  enabled  it  to  repel  all  the  attacks  of  its
enemies.  When  David  appeared  with  his  troops,  the  inhabitants  ridiculed  his
presumption,  and  were  good  enough  to  warn  him  of  the  hopelessness  of  his
enterprise:  a  garrison  composed  of  the  halt  and  the  blind,  without  an  able-
bodied  man  amongst  them,  would,  they  declared,  be  able  successfully  to  resist
him.  The  king,  stung  by  their  mockery,  made  a  promise  to  his  "  mighty  men  "
that  the  first  of  them  to  scale  the  walls  should  be  made  chief  and  captain
of  his  host.  We  often  find  tliat  impregnable  cities  owe  their  downfall  to
negligence  on  the  part  of  their  defenders:  these  concentrate  their  whole
attention  on  the  few  vulnerable  points,  and  give  but  scanty  care  to  those
which  are  regarded  as  inaccessible.'  Jerusalem  proved  to  be  no  exception  to
this  rule ;  Joab  carried  it  by  a  sudden  assault,  and  received  as  his  reward  the
best  part  of  the  territory  which  he   had  won  by  his  valour.^     In  attacking

■  Now,  possibly,  the  "Fountain  of  the  Virgin,"  but  its  identity  is  not  certain.

^  These  are  the  springs  which  feed  the  group  of  reservoirs  now  known  as  the  Pool  of  Siloam.  The
name  "  Silnam  "  occurs  only  in  Neh.  iii.  1.5,  but  is  undoubtedly  more  ancient.

"  Eu-R6gel,  the  "Traveller's  Well,"  is  now  called  the  -'Well  of  Job."

'  This  valley,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  name  in  the  Old  Testament,  was  called,  in  the  time  o
Josephus,  the  Tyropseon,  or  Cheesemakers'  Quarter  (Bell.  Jud.,  V.  iv.  1).  Its  true  position,  which  had
been  only  suspected  up  to  the  middle  of  the  present  century,  was  determined  with  certainty  by  means
of  the  excavations  carried  out  by  the  English  and  Germans.  The  bottom  of  the  valley  was  found
at  a  depth  of  from  forty  to  sixty  feet  below  the  present  surface.

'  As  to  the  application  of  the  name  Millo  to  fortresses  in  general,  see  p.  093,  note  2,  supra.  The
name  Moriah,  borne  by  the  hill  on  which  the  temple  stands,  belongs  to  a  different  category;  it  is  a
symbolical  term  employed  in  Gen.  xsii.  2,  and  is  applied  by  the  writer  of  2  Chron.  iii.  1  to  tlie  site
of  Solomon's  temple.

"  This  is  the  Ophel  of  the  Hebrew  text.

'  Cf.  the  capture  of  Sardis  by  Cyrus  (Herodotus,  I.  Ixxxiv.)  and  by  Antiochus  HI.  (Polvbius,
vii.  47),  as  also  tlie  taking  of  the  Capitol  by  the  Gauls.

«  The  account  of  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  is  given  in  2  Sam.  v.  6-9,  where  the  text  is  possibly


JERUSALEM  BECOMES  TEE  CAPITAL  OF  THE  HEBREW  KINGDOM.      727

Jerusalem,  David's  first  idea  was  probably  to  rid  himself  of  oue  of  the  more
troublesome  obstacles  which  served  to  separate  oue-half  of  his  people  from  the
other ;  but  once  he  liad  set  foot  in  the  place,  he  was  not  slow  to  perceive  its
advantages,  and  determined  to  make  it  his  residence.  Hebron  had  suiBced  so
long  as  his  power  extended  over  Caleb  and  Judah  only.  Situated  as  it  was
in  the  heart  of  the  mountains,  and  in  the  wealthiest  part  of  the  j^rovince  in
which  it  stood,  it  seemed  the  natural  centre  to  which  the  Kenites  and  men  of
Judah  must  gravitate,  and  the  point  at  which  they  might  most  readily  be
moulded  into  a  nation;  it  was,  however,  too  far  to  the  south  to  offer  a
convenient  rallying-point  for  a  ruler  who  wished  to  bring  the  Hebrew  com-
munities scattered  about  on  both  banks  of  the  Jordan  under  the  sway  of
a  common  sceptre.  Jerusalem,  on  the  other  hand,  was  close  to  the  crossing
point  of  the  roads  which  lead  from  the  Sinaitic  desert  into  Syria,  and  from  the
Shephelah  to  the  laud  of  Gilead  ;  it  commanded  nearly  the  whole  domain  of
Israel  and  tlie  ring  of  hostile  races  by  which  it  was  encircled.  From  this  lofty
eyrie,  David,  with  Judah  behind  him,  could  either  swoop  down  upon  Moab,
whose  mountains  shut  him  out  from  a  view  of  the  Dead  Sea,  or  make  a  sudden
descent  on  the  seaboard,  by  way  of  Bethhoron,  at  the  least  sign  of  disturb-
ance among  the  Philistines,  or  could  push  straight  on  across  Mount  Ephraim
into  Galilee.  Issachar,  Naphtali,  Asher,  Dan,  and  Zebulun  were,  perhaps,
a  little  too  far  from  the  seat  of  government ;  but  they  were  secondary  tribes,
incapiible  of  any  independent  action,  who  obeyed  without  repugnance,  but  also
without  enthusiasm,  the  soldier-king  able  to  protect  them  from  external  foes.
The  future  master  of  Israel  would  be  he  who  maintained  his  hold  on  the
posterity  of  Judah  aud  of  Joseph,  and  David  could  not  hope  to  find  a  more
suitable  place  than  Jerusalem  from  which  to  watch  over  the  two  ruling  houses
at  one  and  the  same  time.

The  lower  part  of  the  town  he  gave  up  to  the  original  inhabitants,^  the
upper  he  filled  with  Benjamites  and  men  of  Judah;-  he  built  or  restored  a
royal  palace  on  Mount  Sion,  in  which  he  lived  surrounded  by  his  warriors  and
his  family.^  One  thing  only  was  lacking — a  temple  for  his  God.  Jerubbaal  had
had  a  sanctuary  at  Ophrah,  and  Saul  had  secured  the  services  of  Ahijah  the
prophet  of  Shiloh :  ^  David  was  no  longer  satisfied  with  the  ephod  which  had

corrupt,  with  iuterpolated  glosses,  especially  ia  ver.  8  ;  David's  reply  to  the  mockery  of  the  Jebusites
is  difficult  to  understand.  1  Chron.  xi.  4-8  gives  a  more  correct  text,  but  one  less  complete  in  so  far
as  the  portions  parallel  with  2  Sam.  v.  (i-9  are  concerned;  the  details  in  regard  to  Joab  are  un-
doubtedly historical,  but  we  do  not  find  them  in  the  Book  of  Samuel.

'  Judge.K  i.  21 ;  cf.  Zech.  xi.  7,  where  Ekroii  in  its  deciidence  is  likened  to  the  Jebusite  vassal  of  Judah.

'  Jerusalem  is  sometimes  assigned  to  Benjamin  {Judges  i.  21),  sometimes  to  Judah  {Joili.  xv.  63).
Judah  alone  is  right.

'  2  Sam.  V.  9,  and  the  piirallel  passage  iu  1  Citron,  xi.  7,  S.

*  VA.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  the  sanctuary  of  Jerubbaal  on  ]).  (;i)2,  supra,  and  in  regard  to  the
priesthood  attached  to  tlie  person  of  Sanl,  on  p.  71 H  of  the  present  work.


7-2i<  THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

bet'ii  the  channel  of  many  wise  counsels  during  his  years  of  adversity  and  his
struggles  against  the  Philistines.  He  longed  for  some  still  more  sacred  object
with  which  to  identify  the  fortunes  of  his  people,  and  by  which  he  might  raise
the  newly  gained  jarestige  of  his  capital.  It  so  happened  that  the  ark  of  the
Lord,  the  ancient  safeguard  of  Ephraim,  had  been  lying  since  the  battle  of
Eben-ezer  not  far  away,  without  a  fixed  abode  or  regular  worshippers.^  The
reason  why  it  had  not  brought  victory  on  that  occasion,  was  that  God's  anger
had  been  stirred  at  the  misdeeds  committed  in  His  name  by  the  sons  of  Eli,
and  desired  to  punish  His  people  ;  true,  it  had  been  preserved  from  profanation,
and  the  miracles  which  took  place  in  its  neighbourhood  proved  that  it  was  still
the  seat  of  a  supernatural  power.  At  first  the  Philistines  had,  according  ta
their  custom,  shut  it  up  in  the  temple  of  Dagon  at  Ashdocl.  On  the  morrow,
when  the  priests  entered  the  sanctuary,  they  found  the  statue  of  their  god
prostrate  in  front  of  it,  his  fish-like  body  overthrown,  and  his  head  and  hands
scattered  on  the  floor  ;^  at  the  same  time  a  plague  of  malignant  tumours  broke
out  among  the  people,  and  thousands  of  mice  overran  their  houses.  The
inhabitants  of  Ashdod  made  haste  to  transfer  the  ark  to  Gath ;  from  Gath  it
was  passed  on  to  Ekron :  it  thus  went  the  round  of  the  five  cities,  its  arrival
being  in  each  case  accompanied  by  the  same  disasters.  The  soothsayers,  being
consulted  at  the  end  of  seven  months,  ordered  that  solemn  sacrifices  should  be
offered  up,  and  the  ark  restored  to  its  rightful  worshippers,  accompanied  by
expiatory  ofterings  of  five  golden  mice  and  five  golden  tumours,  one  for  each  of
the  five  repentant  cities.*  The  ark  was  placed  on  a  new  cart,  and  two  milch
cows  with  their  calves  drew  it,  lowing  all  the  way,  without  guidance  from  any
man,  to  the  field  of  a  certain  Joshua  at  Bethshemesh.  The  inhabitants  welcomed
it  with  great  joy,  but  their  curiosity  overcame  their  reverence,  aud  tliey  looked'
within  the  shrine.  Jehovah,  being  angered  thereat,  smote  seventy  men  of
them,  and  the  warriors  made  haste  to  bring  the  ark  to  Kirjath-jearim,  where  it
remained  for  a  long  time,  in  the  house  of  Abinadab  on  the  hill,  under  charge
of  his  son  Eleazar.**     Kirjath-jearim  is  only  about  two  leagues  from  Jerusalem.

'  The  account  of  the  events  which  followed  the  battle  of  Eben-ezer  up  to  its  arrival  in  the  house
of  Abinadab,  is  taken  from  the  history  of  the  ark,  referred  to  on  pp.  700,  707,  supra.  It  is  given  in
1  Sam.  v.,  vi..  vii.  1,  where  it  forms  an  exceedingly  characteristic  whole,  composed,  it  may  be,  of  two
separate  versions  thrown  into  one;  the  passage  in  1  Sam.  vi.  IS,  where  the  Levites  receive  the  ark,
is  supposed  by  some  to  be  interpolated.

''  The  statue  here  referred  to  is  evidently  similar  to  those  of  the  Chakh-ean  gods  and  genii  (cf.
Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  537,  5-17),  in  which  Dagou  is  represented  as  a  man  with  his  back
and  head  envelox^ed  in  a  fish  as  in  a  cloak.

'  In  the  Oustinoft"  collection  at  Jaffa,  there  is  a  roughly  shaped  image  of  a  mouse,  cut  out  of  a
piece  of  white  metal,  and  perhaps  obtained  from  the  ruins  of  Gaza ;  it  would  seem  to  be  an  ex-voto-
of  the  same  kind  as  that  referred  to  in  the  Hebrew  text,  but  it  is  of  doubtful  authenticity.  See  the
reproduction  on  p.  729  of  the  present  work.

'  The  text  of  1  Sam.  vi.  21,  vii.  1,  gives  the  reading  Kirjath-jearim,  whereas  the  text  of  2  Sam.


THE   ARK    OF    GOD    AT  JERUSALEM.  729

David  himself  went  thither,  and  setting  "  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new  cart,"
brouglit  it  away.^  Two  attendants,  called  Uzzah  and  Ahio,  drove  the  new  cart,
"  and  David  and  all  Israel  played  before  God  with  all  their  might :  even  with
songs,  and  with  harps,  and  with  psalteries,  and  witli  timbrels,  and  with  cymbals,
and  with  trumpets."  An  accident  leading  to  serious  consequences  brought
the  procession  to  a  standstill ;  the  oxen  stumbled,  and  their  sacred  burden
threatened  to  fall :  Uzzah,  putting  forth  his  hand  to  hold
the  ark,  was  smitten  by  the  Lord,  "and  there  he  died  before
the  Lord."  David  wixs  disturbed  at  this,  feeling  some
insecurity  in  dealing  with  a  Deity  who  had  thus  seemed
to  punish  one  of  His  worshippers  for  a  well-meant  and
respectful  act.  He  "  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day,"
and  "would  not  remove  the  ark  "  to  Jerusalem,  but  left
it  for  three  months  in  the  house  of  a  Philistine,  Obed-
Edom  of  Gath  ;  but  finding  that  its  host,  instead  of  ex-
periencing any  evil,  was  blessed  by  the  Lord,  he  carried

....  .  ii'i  1  1  T  MOUSE    OK   METAL.=

out  his  original  intention,  and  brought  the  ark  to  Jeru-
salem. "  David,  girded  with  a  linen  ephod,  danced  with  all  his  might  before
the  Lord,"  and  "  all  the  house  of  Israel  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord  with
shouting,  and  with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet."  When  the  ark  had  been  placed
in  the  tent  that  David  had  prepared  for  it,  he  offered  up  burnt  offerings  and
peace  offerings,  and  at  the  end  of  the  festival  there  were  dealt  out  to  the  people
gifts  of  bread,  cakes,  and  wine  (or  flesh).  There  is  inserted  in  the  narrative^
an  account  of  the  conduct  of  Michal  his  wife,  who,  looking  out  of  the  window
and  seeing  the  king  dancing  and  playing,  despised  him  in  her  heart,  and  when
David  returned  to  liis  house  congratulated  him  ironically — "  How  glorious  was
the  King  of  Israel  to-day,  who  uncovered  himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  handmaids
of  his  servants ! "  David  said  in  reply  that  he  would  rather  be  held  in  honour
by  the  handmaids  of  whom  she  had  spoken  than  avoid  the  acts  which  covered
him  with  ridicule  in  her  eyes;  and  the  chronicler  adds  that  "Michal  the
daughter  of  Saul  had  no  child  unto  the  day  of  her  death."  ■*

vi.  2  has  Ba;ilu-Juclah,  wliioli  should  be  corrected  to  liaal-Judali.  Uaal-Jiidalj,  or,  in  its  abbreviated
lorm,  Baala,  is  anotber  name  for  Kirjath-jeurim  (Josh.  xv.  IJ-II  ;  of.  1  Chron.  xiii.  (i).  Simibirly,  wo
iiiid  tlie  name  Kirjatli-Baal  (Jueli.  xv.  00).     Kirjath-jearim  is  now  Kbarbet-el-Enab.

'  The  transport  of  the  ark  from  Kirjath-jearim  to  Jerusalem  is  reUited  in  "2  5am.  vi.  and  in
1  Chron,  xiii.,  xv.,  xvi.

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  published  by  Schick  and  Oldfield  Thomas,  in  tho
Palettinu  Kxii'oralion  Fund,  QuarUrhj  Statement,  1S9.3,  p.  2UG;   1891,  p.  189.

'  Kenan,  Uietoire  du  i)eui>le  d' Israel,  vol.  il.  pp.  57,  58,  would  consider  this  to  have  been  inserted
in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.  It  appeared  to  him  to  answer  "  to  the  antipathy  of  Hamutal  and  the  ladies
of  the  court  to  tlie  worship  of  Jahveh,  and  to  that  form  of  human  respect  which  restrained  tho  people
of  the  world  from  giving  themselves  up  to  it."

*  [David's  reply  slmws  (2  Sam.  vi.  21,22)  that  it  was  in  gratitude  to  .Iulio\ah  who  had  exalted  bim
that  he  tlius  humbled  himself. — Tu.]


730  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

The  tent  and  the  ark  were  assigned  at  this  time  to  the  care  of  two  priests —
Zadok,  son  of  Ahitub,  and  Abiathar,  son  of  Ahimelecli,  who  was  a  descendant
of  Eli,  and  had  never  quitted  David  throughout  his  adventurous  career.^     It  is
probable,  too,  that  the  ephod  had  not  disappeared,  and  that  it  had  its  place  in
the  sanctuary  ;  but  it  may  have  gradually  fallen  into  neglect,  and  may  have
ceased  to  be  the  vehicle  of  oracular  responses  as  in  earlier  years.     The  king
was  accustomed  on  important  occasions  to  take  part  in  the  sacred  ceremonies,
after  the  example  of  contemporary  monarchs,  and  he  had  beside  him  at  this
time  a  priest  of  standing  to  guide  him  in  the  religious  rites,  and  to  fulfil  for
him  duties  similar  to  those  which  the  chief  reader  rendered  to  Pharaoh.     The
only  one  of  these  priests  of  David  whose  name  has  come  down  to  us  was  Ira
the  Jethrite,  who  accompanied  his  master  in  his  campaigns,  and  would  seem  to
have  been  a  soldier  also,  and  one  of"  the  thirty."     These  priestly  officials  seem,
however,  to  have  played  but  a  subordinate  part,  as  history  is  almost  silent  about
their  acts.'-^     While  David  owed  everything  to  the  sword  and  trusted  in  it,  he
recognised  at  the  same  time  that  he  had  obtained  his  crown  from  Jahveh  ;
just  as  the  sovereigns  of  Thebes  and  Nineveh  saw  in  Amon  and  Assur  the
source  of  their  own  royal  authority.     He  consulted  the  Lord  directly  when  he
wished  for  counsel,  and  accepted  the  issue  as  a  test  whether  his  interpretation  of
the  Divine  will  was  correct  or  erroneous.     When  once  he  had  realised,  at  the
time  of  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  that  God  had  chosen  him  to  be  the  champion
of  Israel,  he  spared  no  labour  to  accomplish  the  task  which  the  Divine  favour
had  assigned  to  him.     He  attacked  one  after  the  other  the  peoples  who  had
encroached  upon  his  domain,  Moab  being  the  first  to  feel  the  force  of  his  arm.
He  extended  his  possessions  at  the  expense  of  Gilead,  and  the  fertile  provinces
opposite  Jericho  fell  to  his  sword.    These  territories  were  in  dangerous  proximity
to  Jerusalem,  and  David  doubtless  realised  the  peril  of  their  independence.
The  struggle  for  their  possession  must  have  continued  for  some  time,  but  the
details  are  not  given,  and  we  have  only  the  record  of  a  few  incidental  exploits  :
we  know,  for  instance,  that  the  captain  of  David's  guard,  Benaiab,  slew  two
Moabite  notables  in  a  battle.^    Moabite  captives  were  treated  with  all  the  severity
sanctioned  by  the  laws  of  war.      They  were  laid  on  the  ground  in  a  line,  and
two-thirds  of  the  length   of   the  row  being  measured  ofl",  all   within  it  were
pitilessly  massacred,  the  rest  having  their  lives  spared.     Moab  acknowledged

'  2  Sam.  viii.  17,  xx.  25;  cf.  1  Sam.  xxi.  1,  xxii.  '2U;  1  Citron,  xv.  U.

-  2  Sam.  XX.  26,  wbere  he  is  called  the  Jairite,  and  not  the  Ithrite,  owing  to  an  easily  under-
stood confusion  of  the  Hebrew  letters.  He  figures  in  the  list  of  the  Gibhorim,  "  mighty  men,"  2  Sam.
xxiii.  38.

'  2  Sam.  xxiii.  20-23 ;  cf.  1  Chron.  xi.  22-25.  "  Ariel,"  wl}0  is  made  the  father  of  the  two  slain
by  Benaiah,  may  possibly  be  the  term  in  11.  12,  17,  18  of  the  Inscription  of  Mesha  (Moabite  Stone)  ;
but  its  meaning  is  obscure,  and  has  hitherto  baffled  all  attempts  to  explain  it.


WAliS   AGAINST   THE   AMMONITES   AND    AEAM^ANS.  731

its  defeat,  and  agreed  to  pay  tribute  :  it  had  suffered  so  much  that  it  required
several  generations  to  recover.^  Gilead  had  become  detached  from  David's
domain  oq  the  south,  while  the  Ammonites  were  pressing  it  on  the  east,  and  the
Aramssans  making  encroachments  upon  its  pasture-lands  on  the  north.  Nahash,
King  of  the  Ammonites,  being  dead,  David,  who  had  received  help  from  him  in
his  struggle  with  Saul,  sent  messengers  to  offer  congratulations  to  his  son  Hanun
on  his  accession.  Hanun,  supposing  the  messengers  to  be  spies  sent  to  examine
the  defences  of  the  city,  "  shaved  off  one-half  of  their  beards,  and  cut  off  their
garments  in  the  middle,  even  to  their  buttocks,  and  sent  them  away."  This
was  the  signal  for  war.  The  Ammonites,  foreseeing  that  David  would
endeavour  to  take  a  terrible  vengeance  for  this  insult  to  his  people,  came  to
an  understanding  with  their  neighbours.  The  overthrow  of  the  Amorite  chiefs
had  favoured  the  expansion  of  the  Aramaeans  towards  the  south.  They  had
invaded  all  that  region  hitherto  unconquered  by  Israel  in  the  valley  of  the
Litany  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  and  some  half-dozen  of  their  petty  states  had
appropriated  among  them  the  greater  part  of  the  territories  which  were
described  in  the  sacred  record  as  having  belonged  previously  to  Jabin  of  Hazor
and  the  kings  of  Bashan.^  The  strongest  of  these  principalities — that  which
occupied  the  position  of  Qodshu  in  the  Bekaa,  and  had  Zoba  as  its  capital —
was  at  this  time  under  the  rule  of  Hadadezer,  son  of  Eehob.  This  warrior  had
conquered  Damascus,  Maacah,  and  Geshur,  was  threatening  the  Canaanite
town  of  Hamath,  and  was  preparing  to  set  out  to  the  Euphrates  when  the
Ammonites  sought  his  help  and  protection.  He  came  immediately  to  their
succour.  Joab,  who  was  in  command  of  David's  army,  left  a  portion  of  his
troops  at  Rabbath  under  his  brother  Abishai,  and  with  the  rest  set  out  against
the  Syrians.  He  overthrew  them,  and  returned  immediately  afterwards.  The
Ammonites,  hearing  of  his  victory,  disbanded  their  army;  but  Joab  had  suffered
such  serious  losses,  that  he  judged  it  wise  to  defer  his  attack  upon  them  until
Zoba  should  be  captured.  David  then  took  the  field  himself,  crossed  the  Jordan
with  all  liis  reserves,  attacked  the  Syrians  at  Helam,  put  them  to  fliglit,  killing
Shobach,  their  general,  and  captured  Damascus.  Hadadezer  [Hadarezer]  "  made
peace  with  Israel,"  and  Tou  or  'J'oi,  the  King  of  Hamath,  whom  this  victory  had
delivered,  sent  presents  to  David.  This  was  the  work  of  a  single  campaign.
The  next  year  Joab  invested  Rabbath,  and  when  it  was  about  to  surrender  he

'  2  Slim.  viii.  '1.

^  On  tlie  progrose  of  the  Aramieana  in  this  ru^'ion,  noe  Wincki.ek,  Gesdiichte  Isnii-b,  vol.  i.  pj].  i;37-
144,  where  the  .luthor  tries  to  show  t)iat  Zoba  and  Anuu-Zoba  were  not  iu  the  uortli  of  Israc;!  iiud  to  the
west  of  Dumaeeiis,  but  somewliore  in  the  Hauran,  near  the  Ammonites.  Tlie  kingdom  of  Zoba,  under
Hadadezer,  must,  in  fact,  have  extended  southward  to  tlie  frontiers  of  Amnion,  but  I  think  that  the
small  state  which  formed  its  nucleus  was  in  the  vulloy  of  the  Upper  Orontes  and  that  of  the  Litany.
Zoba  must  have  taken  the  place  of  Qodshfl.  whose  name  is  only  incidentally  mentioned  in  2  Sit7ii
xxiv.  C,  where  the  Hebrew  gives  Tahtem-h'odshi,  and  the  LXX.  (Lucian's  recension)  Kedesh.


732


THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


^  V  :


called  the  king  to  his  c^^mp,  and  conceded  to  him  the  honour  of  receiving  the

submission  of  the  city  in
person.  The  Ammonites
were  treated  with  as  much
severity  as  their  kinsmen
of  Moab.  David  "  put
them  under  saws  and  har-
rows of  iron,  and  under
axes  of  iron,  and  made
them  pass  through  the
brick-kiln."  1  This  suc-
cess brought  others  in  its
train.  The  Iduma3ans  had
taken  advantage  of  the  em-
ployment of  the  Israelite
army  against  the  Ara-
mjeans  to  make  raids  into
•Judah.  Joab  and  Abishai,
despatched  in  haste  to
check  them,  met  tliem  in
the  Valley  of  Salt  to  the
south  of  the  Dead  Sea,
and  gave  them  battle :
their  king  perished  in
the  fight,  and  his  sou
Hadad  with  some  of  his
followers  took  flight  into
Egypt.  Joab  put  to  the
sword  all  the  able-bodied
combatants,  and  estab-
lished garrisons  at  Petra,
Elath,  and  Eziongeber  ^
on  the  Eed  Sea.     David

dedicated  the  spoils  to  the  Lord,  "  who  gave  victory  to  David  wherever  he  went."
Southern  Syria  had  found  its  master :  were  the  Hebrews  going  to  pursue

their  success,  and  undertake  in  the  central  and  northern  regions  a  work  of

'  The  war  with  the  Araniieans,  described  iu  i  Sam.  viii.  3-12,  ie  similar  to  the  account  of  the
conflict  with  the  Ammonites  in  2  Sam.  x.-xii.,  but  with  more  details.  Both  documents  are  reproduced
in  1  Chron.  xviii.  3-11,  and  xix.,  xx.  1-3.

-  2  Sam.  viii.  13,  14 ;  of.  1  Chron.  xviii.  12, 13.  Neither  Elath  nor  Eziongeber  are  here  mentioned,
but  1  Kings  ix.  20-28  and  2  Chron.  viii.  17,  IS  prove  that  these  places  had  been  occupied  by  David.
For  all  that  concerns  Iladad,  see  1  Kings  xi.  15-20.


\^.^i^u7rgn  ^^  tbbaJtfv-Jmmoti

JL   hbon  p.,
rial  U  an     C

^  ihbon.


tiSaaesh  Bar  tt^i


^


Ji      ^    t       ii


<^'  THE

HEBREW   KINGDOM.

Scale,
o So 100 rSoi


THE  HEBREW  KINGDOM  IN  ITS    GREATEST  EXTENT.


73:3


conquest  which  had  baffled  the  efforts  of  all  their  predecessors — Canaauites,
Amorites,  and  Hittites?  Tiie  Assyrians,  thrown  back  on  the  Tigris,  were
at  this  time  leading  a  sort  of  vegetative  existence  in  obscurity  ;  and  as
for  Egypt,  it  would  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  it  ever  had  possessions  in
Asia.   There  was,  therefore,  nothing  to  be  feared  from  foreign  intervention  should


■~1


THE    SITE   OP

KABBA.TH-AMMON,

SEEN    FKOM  THE  WEST  '


the  Hebrews  be  inclined  to  weld
into  a  single  state  the  nations  lying  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Eed  Sea.
Unfortunately,  the  Israelites  had  not  the  necessary  characteristics  of  a  con-
quering people.  Their  history  from  the  time  of  their  entry  into  Canaan
showed,  it  is  true,  that  they  were  by  no  means  incapable  of  enthusiasm  and
solidarity :  a  leader  with  the  needful  energy  and  good  fortune  to  inspire
them  with  confidence  could  rouse  them  from  their  self-satisfied  indolence,  and
band  them  together  for  a  great  effort.  But  such  concentration  of  purpose  was
ephemeral  in  its  nature,  and  disappeared  with  the  chief  who  had  brought  it
about.  In  his  absence,  or  when  the  danger  he  had  pointed  out  was  no  longer
imminent,  they  fell  back  instinctively  into  their  usual  state  of  apathy  and
disorganisation.  Their  nomadic  temperament,  which  two  centuries  of  a
sedentary  existence  had  not  seriously  modified,  disposed  them  to  give  way  to
tribal  quarrels,  to  keep  up  hereditary  vendettas,  to  break  out  into  sudden
turault-s  or  to  make  pillaging  expeditions  into  their  neighbours'  territories.
Long  wars,  requiring  the  maintenance  of  a  permanent  army,  the  continual
levying  of  troops  and  taxes,  and  a  prolonged  effort  to  keep  what  tliey  had
'  Drawn  by  Buudier,  from  photograph  No.  377  of  tUo  Falestine  Exploration  Fund.


734  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

acquired,  were  repugnant  to  them.  The  kingdom  which  David  had  founded
owed  its  permanence  to  the  strong  will  of  its  originator,  and  its  increase  or
even  its  maintenance  depended  upon  the  absence  of  any  internal  disturbance
or  court  intrigue,  to  counteract  which  might  make  too  serious  a  drain  upon
his  energy.  David  had  survived  his  last  victory  sufficiently  long  to  witness
around  him  the  evolution  of  plots,  and  tlie  multiplication  of  the  usual  miseries
which  sadden,  in  the  East,  the  last  years  of  a  long  reign.  It  was  a  matter
of  custom  as  well  as  policy  that  an  exaltation  in  the  position  of  a  ruler
should  be  accompanied  by  a  proportional  increase  in  the  number  of  his  retinue
and  his  wives.  David  was  no  exception  to  this  custom  :  to  the  two  wives,
Abigail  and  Ahinoam,  whicli  he  had  while  he  was  in  exile  at  Ziklag,  he  now
added  Maacah  the  Aramsean,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Geshur,  Haggith,
Abital,  Eglah,  and  several  others.^  During  the  siege  of  Kabbath-Ammon
he  also  committed  adultery  with  Bathsheba,  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  Hittite,
and,  placing  her  husband  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle,  brought  about  his
death.  Eebuked  by  the  j)rophet  Nathan  for  this  crime,  he  expressed  his  peni-
tence, but  he  continued  at  the  same  time  to  keep  Bathsheba,  by  whom  he
had  several  children."  There  was  considerable  rivalry  among  the  progeny
of  these  different  unions,  as  the  right  of  succession  would  appear  not  to  have
been  definitely  settled.  Of  the  family  of  Saul,  moreover,  there  were  still  several
members  in  existence — the  son  which  he  had  by  Kizpah,  the  children  of  his
daughter  Merab,  Merib-baal,  the  lame  offspring  of  Jonathan,*  and  Shimei,''
— all  of  whom  had  partisans  among  tlie •bribes,  and  whose  pretensions  might
be  pressed  unexpectedly  at  a  critical  moment.  The  eldest  son  of  Ahinoam,
Amnon,  whose  priority  in  age  seemed  likely  to  secure  for  him  the  crown,
had  fallen  in  love  with  one  of  his  half-sisters  named  Tamar,  the  daugiiter  of
Maacah,  and,  instead  of  demanding  her  in  marriage,  procured  her  attendance
on  him  by  a  feigned  illness,  and  foict'd  her  to  accede  to  his  desires.  His
love  was  thereupon  converted  immediately  into  hate,  and,  instead  of  marrying
her,  he  had  her  expelled  from  his  house  by  his  servants.  With  rent  garments
and  ashes  on  her  head,  she  fled  to  her  full-brother  Absalom.  David  was  very
wroth,  but  he  loved  his  firstborn,  and  could  not  permit  himself  to  punish
him.     Absalom  kept  his  a;iger   to  himself,  but  when  two   years  had  elapsed

'  As  to  Abigail,  see  pp.  717,  718,  supra.  Ahinoam  is  meutioned  in  the  following  passages :  1  Sam.
XXV.  43,  xxvii.  3,  xxx.  5 ;  2  Sam.  ii.  2,  iii.  2 ;  of.  also  1  Chroti.  iii.  1 ;  Maacah  in  2  Sam.  iii.  3 ;  1  Chron.
iii.  2;  Haggith  in  2  6^am.  iii.  4 ;  I  Kings  i.  5,  11,  ii.  13;  1  Chron.  iii.  2;  Abital  in  2  Sam.  iii.  4;
1  Chron.  iii.  3 ;  Eglah  in  2  Sam.  iii.  5 ;  1  Chron.  iii.  3.  For  the  concubines,  see  2  .S'ujn.  v.  13,  xv.  16,
xvi.  21,  22;  1  Chron.  iii.  9,xiv.  3.

*  2  Sam.  xi.,  xii.  7-25.

'  2  Sam.  ix.,  xvi.  1-4,  xix.  24-30,  where  the  name  is  changed  into  MephiOosheth ;  the  original
name  is  given  in  1  Chron.  viii.  34.

*  2  Sain.  xvi.  5-14,  xix.  16-23;  1  Kings  ii.  8,  D,  36-46.


ABSALOM'S    REBELLION.  735

be  invited  Amuou  to  a  banquet,  killed  him,  and  fled  to  bis  grandfatber  Talmai,
King  of  Gesbur.^     His  anger  was  now  turned  against  tbe  king  for  not  having
taken  up  the  cause  of  bis  sister,  and  be  began  to  meditate  bis  dethronement.
Having  been  recalled  to  Jerusalem  at  the   instigation   of  Joab,  "Absalom
prepared  bim  chariots  and  horses,  and  fifty  men  to  run  before  him,"  thus
affecting  tbe   outward   forms   of  royalty.      Judah,  dissatisfied  at  the  favour
shown  by  David  to  the  other  tribes,  soon  came  to  recognise  Absalom  as  their
chief,  and  some  of  the  most  intimate  counsellors  of  the  aged  king  began
secretly  to  take  his  part.     When  Absalom  deemed  things  safe  for  action,  be
betook  himself  to  Hebron,  under  the  pretence  of  a  vow  which  he  bad  made
during  bis  sojourn  at  Geshur.     All  Judah  rallied  around  bim,  and  the  excite-
ment at  Jerusalem  was  so  great  that  David  judged  it  prudent  to  retire,  with
bis  Philistine  and  Cheretbite  guards,  to  tbe  other  side  of  tbe  Jordan.   Absalom,
in  the  mean  while,  took  up  bis  abode  in  Jerusalem,  where,  having  received  tbe
tacit  adherence  of  the  family  of  Saul  and  of  a  number  of  the   notables,  be
made  himself  king.     To  show  that  tbe  rupture  between  bim  and  David  was
complete,  be  bad  tents  erected  on  the  top  of  the  house,  and  there,  in  view
of  the  people,  took  possession  of  his  father's  harem.     Success  would   have
been  assured  to  bim  if  he  had  promptly  sent  troops  after  the  fugitives,  but
while  be  was  spending  his  time  in  inactivity  and  feasting,  David  collected
together  those  who  were  faithful  to  bim,  and  put  them  under  tbe  command
of  Joab  and  Abishai.     The  king's  veterans  were   more  than  a  match  for  tbe
undisciplined  rabble  which  opposed  them,  and  in  tbe  action  which  followed
at   Mahauaim  Absalom   was   defeated :    in   his   flight   through   the   forest  of
Ephraim  be  was  caught  in  a  tree,  and  before   be  could  disentangle   himself
was  pierced  through  the  heart  by  Joab.'^

David,  we  read,  wished  bis  people  to  have  mercy  on  his  sou,  aud  he  wept
bitterly.  He  spared  on  this  occasion  the  family  of  Saul,  pardoned  the  tribe  of
Judah,  and  went  back  triumpliantly  into  Jerusalem,  wliicb  a  few  days  before  bad
taken  part  in  his  humiliation.  Tbe  tribes  of  the  bouse  of  Josepli  had  taken  no
side  in  tbe  quarrel.  They  were  ignorant  alike  of  the  motives  which  set  tbe  tribe
of  Judah  against  their  own  hero,  and  of  their  reasons  for  the  zeal  with  which  they
again  established  bim  on  the  throne.  They  sent  delegates  to  inquire  about  this,
who  reproached  Judah  for  acting  without  their  cognisance  :  ''  We  have  ten
parts  in  tbe  king,  and  we  have  also  more  right  in  David  than  ye  :  why  then  did

•  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Tamar  asked  Amnoii  to  marry  her,  and  that  the  sole  reinoach  directed
against  the  king's  eldest  son  was  that,  after  forcing  her,  he  was  unwilling  to  make  her  his  wife.  Unions
of  brother  and  sister  were  probably  as  legitimate  among  the  Hebrews  at  this  time  as  among  the
Egyptians  (cf.  Vatcit  of  Cimlization,  pp.  50-02,  270,  and  mipra,  pp.  77,  78).

'  2  Ham.  xiii.-xviii.


736  THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

ye  despise  us,  that  our  advice  should  uot  be  first  had  in  bringing  back  our
king?"  Judah  answered  with  yet  fiercer  words;  then  Sheba,  a  chief  of  the
Benjamites,  losing  patience,  blew  a  trumpet,  and  went  off  crying  :  "  We  have
no  portion  in  David,  neither  have  we  inheritance  in  the  sou  of  Jesse  :  every
man  to  his  tents,  0  Israel."  If  these  words  had  produced  an  echo  among
the  central  and  northern  tribes,  a  schism  would  have  been  inevitable :  some
approved  of  them,  while  others  took  no  action,  and  since  Judah  showed  no
disposition  to  put  its  military  forces  into  movement,  the  king  had  once  again
to  trust  to  Joab  and  the  Philistine  guards  to  repress  the  sedition.  Their
appearance  on  the  scene  disconcerted  the  rebels,  and  Sheba  retreated  to  the
northern  frontier  without  offering  battle.  Perhaps  he  reckoned  on  the  support
of  the  Aramaeans.  He  took  shelter  in  the  small  stronghold  of  Abel  of  Beth-
maaeah,  where  he  defended  himself  for  some  time ;  but  just  when  the  place
was  on  the  point  of  yielding,  the  inhabitants  cut  off  Sheba's  head,  and  threw
it  to  Joab  from  the  wall.^  His  death  brought  the  crisis  to  an  end,  and  peace
reigned  in  Israel.  Intrigues,  however,  began  again  more  persistently  than
ever  over  the  inheritance  which  the  two  slain  princes  had  failed  to  obtain.
The  eldest  son  of  the  king  was  now  Adonijah,  son  of  Haggith,  but  Bathsheba
exercised  an  undisputed  sway  over  her  husband,  and  had  prepared  him  to
recognise  in  Solomon  her  sou  the  heir  to  the  throne.  She  had  secured,  too,
as  his  adherents  several  persons  of  influence,  including  Zadok,  the  prophet
Nathan,  and  Benaiah,  the  captain  of  the  foreign  guard.  Adonijah  had  on  his
side  Abiathar  the  priest,  Joab,  and  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  who  had  been
captivated  by  his  beauty  and  his  regal  display.  In  the  midst  of  these  rivalries
the  king  was  daily  becoming  weaker  :  he  was  now  very  old,  and  although
he  was  covered  with  wrappings  he  could  not  maintain  his  animal  heat.
A  young  girl  was  sought  out  for  him  to  give  him  the  needful  warmth.
Abishag,  a  Shunammite,  was  secured  for  the  purpose,  but  her  beauty  inspired
Adonijah  with  such  a  violent  passion  that  he  decided  to  bring  matters  to
a  crisis.  He  invited  his  brethren,  with  the  exception  of  Solomon,  to  a  banquet
in  the  gardens  which  belonged  to  him  in  the  south  of  Jerusalem,  near  the  well
of  Eogel.  All  his  partisans  were  present,  and,  inspired  by  the  good  cheer,  began
to  cry,  '•  God  save  King  Adonijah !  "  When  Nathan  informed  Bathsheba  of  what
was  going  on,  she  went  in  unto  the  king,  who  was  being  attended  on  by  Abishag,
comjilained  to  him  of  the  weakness  he  was  showing  in  regard  to  his  eldest
son,  and  besought  him  to  designate  his  heir  officially.  He  collected  together
tlie  soldiers,  and  charged  them  to  take  the  young  man  Solomon  -with  royal
pomp  from  the  hill  of  Sion  to  the  source  of  the  Gilion  :  Nathan  anointed  his

'  2  Sam.  XX.  1-22.


DEATH   OF  DAVID   AND   ACCESSION   OF  SOLOMON.  737

forehead  with  tiie  sacred  oil,  and  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people  brought  him
to  the  palace,  mounted  on  his  father's  mule.  The  blare  of  the  coronation
trumpets  resounded  in  the  ears  of  the  conspirators,  quickly  followed  by  the
tidings  that  Solomon  had  been  hailed  king  over  the  whole  of  Israel :  they  fled
on  all  sides,  Adonijah  taking  refuge  at  the  horns  of  the  altar.  David  did  not
long  survive  this  event :  shortly  before  his  death  he  advised  Solomon  to  rid
himself  of  all  those  who  had  opposed  his  accession  to  the  throne.  Solomon
did  not  hesitate  to  follow  this  counsel,  and  the  befrinnius;  of  his  reign  was

'  DO  O

marked  by  a  series  of  bloodthirsty  executions.  Adonijah  was  the  first  to
suffer.  He  had  been  unvrise  enough  to  ask  the  hand  of  Abishag  in  marriage  :
this  request  was  regarded  as  indicative  of  a  hidden  intention  to  rebel,  and
furnished  an  excuse  for  his  assassination.  Abiathar,  at  whose  instigation
Adonijah  had  acted,  owed  his  escape  from  a  similar  fate  to  his  priestly
character  and  past  services :  he  was  banished  to  his  estate  at  Anatlioth,  and
Zadok  became  high  priest  in  his  stead.  Joab,  on  learning  the  fate  of  his
accomplice,  felt  that  he  was  a  lost  man,  and  vainly  sought  sanctuary  near  the
ark  of  the  Lord  ;  but  Benaiah  slew  him  there,  and  soon  after,  Shimei,  the  last
survivor  of  the  race  of  Saul,  was  put  to  death  on  some  transparent  pretext.
This  was  the  last  act  of  the  tragedy :  henceforward  Solomon,  freed  from  all
'those  who  bore  him  malice,  was  able  to  devote  his  whole  attention  to  the  cares
of  government.^

The  change  of  rulers  had  led,  as  usual,  to  insurrections  among  the
•tributary  races :  Damascus  had  revolted  before  the  death  of  David,  and  had
-not  been  recovered.  Hadad  returned  from  Egypt,  and  having  gained  adherents
in  certain  parts  of  Edom,  resisted  all  attempts  made  to  dislodge  him.^
As  a  soldier,  Solomon  was  neither  skilful  nor  fortunate :  he  even  failed  to
retain  what  his  father  had  won  for  him.  Though  he  continued  to  increase
his  army,  it  was  more  with  a  view  to  consolidating  his  power  over  the
Bne-Israel  than  for  any  aggressive  action  outside  his  borders.  On  the  other
hand,  he  showed  himself  an  excellent  administrator,  and  did  his  best,  by
various  measures  of  general  utility,  to  draw  closer  the  ties  whieli  bound  the
tribes  to  him  and  to  each  otiier.  He  repaired  the  citadels  with  such
means  as  he  had  at  his  disposal.     He  rebuilt  the  fortifications  of  Megiddo,

'  1  Kings  i.,  ii.  This  is  the  close  of  the  liistory  of  David,  and  follows  on  from  2  Sam.  xxiv.  It
would  suoiii  that  Adonijah  was  heir-apparont  (1  Kinrja  i.  5,  (J),  and  that  Solomon's  accession  was
'broujjht  about  by  an  intrigue,  which  owed  its  success  to  the  old  king's  weakness  (1  Kings  i.  12,
Vi,  17,  18,  30,  31).

''  It  seems  clear  from  the  context  that  the  revolt  of  Damascus  took  place  during  David's  lifetime.
It  cannot,  in  any  case,  have  occurred  at  a  later  date  than  the  beginning  of  the  ri'ign  of  Solomon,  for
we  lare  told  that  Kezon,  after  capturing  the  town,  "  was  an  adversary  of  Israel  all  the  ilays  of
Solomon  "  (1  Kings  xi.  23-25).  Hadad  returned  from  ICgypt  when  "  he  lad  Inard  that  David  slept
with  his  fathers,  and  that  Joab  the  captain  of  the  liost  was  dead  "  (1  Kings  xi.  21,  22,  2.")).

3   B


738  THE  HEBREWS  AND    TEE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

thus  securing  the  control  of  the  network  of  roads  which  traversed  Southeru
Syria.      He   remodelled   the   fortifications   of    Tamar,   the   two    Bethhorons,
Baivlath,   Hazor,   and   of  many   other   towns   which   defended    his   frontiers.
Some   of  them   he   garrisoned  with  foot-soldiers,  others  with    horsemen  and
chariots.     By  thus  distributing  his  military  forces   over   the  whole  country,
he  achieved   a   twofold   object ;  ^   he   provided,  on  the   one   hand,  additional
security  from  foreign  invasion,  and  on  the  other  diminished  the  risk  of  internal
revolt.      The   remnants    of    the   old    aboriginal   clans,   which   had    hitherto
managed  to   preserve   their   independence,  mainly   owing  to  the  dissensions
among  the  Israelites,  were  at  last  absorbed  into  the  tribes  in  whose  territory
they  had  settled.     A  few  still  held  out,  and  only  gave  way  after  long  and
stubborn  resistance :  before  he  could  triumph  over  Gezer,  Solomon  was  forced
to  humble  himself  before  the  Egyptian  Pharaoh.     He  paid  homage  to  him,
asked  the  hand  of  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  having  obtained  it,  persuaded
him  to  come  to  his  assistance :  the  Egyptian  engineers  placed  their  skill  at
the  service  of  the  besiegers  and  soon  brought  the  recalcitrant  city  to  reason,
handing  it  over  to  Solomon  in  payment  for  his  submission.^     The  Canaanites-
were  obliged  to  submit  to  the  poll-tax  and  the  corvee :  the  men  of  the  league
of  Gibeon  were  made  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for  the  house  of
the  Lord.^     The  Hebrews  themselves  bore  their  share  in  the  expenses  of  the
State,  and  though  less  heavily  taxed  than  the  Canaanites,  were,  nevertheless,,
compelled  to  contribute  considerable  sums ;  Judah  alone  was  exempt,  probably
because,  being  the  private  domain  of  the  sovereign,  its  revenues  were  already
included  in  the  royal  exchequer.*     In  order  to  facilitate  the  collection  of  the
taxes,  Solomon  divided  the  kingdom  into  twelve  districts,  each  of  which  was
placed   in   charge  of  a  collector ;   these   regions  did  not  coincide  with   the
existing  tribal  boundaries,  but  the  extent  of  each  was  determined  by  the
wealth  of  the  lands  contained  within  it.    While  one  district  included  the  whole
of  Mount  Ephraim,  another  was  limited  to  the  stronghold  of  Mahanaim  andi
its  suburbs.     Mahanaim  was  at  one  time  the  capital  of  Israel,  and  had  played'
an  important  part  in  the  life  of  David :  ^   it  held  the   key  to   the   regions

'  1  Kings  ix.  15,  17-19  ;  cf.  2  Chron.  viii.  4-0.  Tlie  parallel  passage  in  2  Chron.  viii.  4,  aud  the
marginal  variant  in  the  Booli  of  Kings,  give  the  reading  Tadmor  Palmyra  for  Tamar,  thus  giving  rise
to  the  legends  which  state  that  Solomon's  frontier  extended  to  the  Euphrates.  Tlie  Tamar  liere
referred  to  is  that  mentioned  in  Ezeli.  xlvii.  10,  xlviii.  'IS,  as  the  southern  boundary  of  Judah  ;  it  is
perhaps  identical  with  the  modern  Kharbet-Kurnub.

-  1  Kings  ix.  10.  The  Pharaoh  in  question  was,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  probably  one  of  the
Psifikhannit,  the  Psusennes  II.  of  Manetho  ;  cf.  p.  772,  infra.

'  1  Kings  ix.  20,  21.  The  annexation  of  the  Gibeonites  aud  their  allies  is  placed  at  the  time  of
the  conquest  in  Josh.  ix.  3-27  ;  it  should  be  rather  fixed  at  the  date  of  the  loss  of  independence  of
the  league,  probably  in  the  time  of  Solomon.

*  Stade,  Gescliichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  305,  thinks  that  Judah  was  not  exempt,  and  that  the
original  document  must  have  given  thirteen  districts.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  the  part  played  by  Mahanaim  under  David  on  pp.  722-735,  supra.


THE   GOVERNMENT  OF  SOLOMON.  739

beyond  Jordan,  and  its  ruler  was  a  person  of  such  influence  that  it  was  not
considered  prudent  to  leave  him   too  well   provided  with  funds.      By  thus
obliterating  the  old  tribal  boundaries,  Solomon  doubtless  hoped  to  destroy,
or  at  any  rate  greatly  weaken,  that  clannish  spirit  which  showed  itself  with
such  alarming  violence  at  the  time  of  the  revolt  of  Sheba,  and  to  weld  into
a  single  homoseneous  mass  the  various  Hebrew  and  Canaanitish  elements
of  which  the  people  of  Israel  were  composed.^     Each  of  these  provinces  was
obliged,  during  one  month  in  each  year,  to  provide  for  the  wants  of  "  the  king
and  his  household,"  or,  in  other  words,  the  requirements  of  the  central  govern-
ment.    A  large  part  of  these  contributions  went  to  supply  the  king's  table  ;
the  daily  consumption  at  the  court  was— thirty  measures  of  fine  flour,  sixty
measures  of  meal,  ten  fat  oxen,  twenty  oxen  out  of  the  pastures,  a  hundred
sheep,  besides  all  kinds  of  game  and  fatted  fowl :  nor  need  we  be  surprised  at
these  figures,  for  in  a  country  where,  and  at  a  time  when  money  was  unknown,
the  king  was  obliged  to  supply  food  to  all  his  dependents,  the  greater  part
of  their  emoluments  consisting  of  these  payments  in  kind.'-     The  tax-collectors
had   also   to   provide  fodder  for  the  horses  reserved  for  military  purposes  :
there  were   forty    thousand   of  these,  and   twelve   thousand   charioteers,  and
barley  and  straw  had   to  be   forthcoming   either   in  Jerusalem  itself  or   in
one  or  other  of  the   garrison  towns  amongst  which  they  were  distributed.*
The  levying  of  tolls  on  caravans  passing  through  the  country  completed  the
king's  fiscal  operations  which  were  based  on  the  systems  prevailing  in  neighbour-
ing States,  especially  that  of  Egypt.^     Solomon,  like  other  Oriental  sovereigns,
reserved  to  himself  the  monopoly  of  certain  imported  articles,  such  as  yarn,
chariots,  and  horses.     Egyptian  yarn,  perhaps  the  finest  produced  in  ancient
times,   was   in   great   request   among    the  dyers   and   embroiderers   of  Asia.
Chariots,  at  once  strong  and  light,  were  important  articles  of  commerce  at  a  time
when  their  use  in  warfare  was  universal.     As  for  horses,  the  cities  of  the  Delta
and  Middle  Egypt  possessed  a  celebrated  strain  of  stallions,  from  whicli  the
Syrian  princes  were  accustomed  to  obtain  their  war-steeds.**     Solomon  decreed

'  1  Kings  iv.  7-19,  where  a  list  of  the  districts  is  given  ;  tlie  fact  that  two  of  Solomon's  sons-in-
law  appear  in  it,  show  that  the  document  from  which  it  is  taken  gave  the  stall'  of  coUeclors  in  office
at  the  close  of  his  reign.

^  1  Kings  iv.  22,  23,  27.

'  1  Kings  iv.  2G-28 ;  the  complementary  passages  in  1  Kings  x.  2lj  and  2  Chron.  i.  14  give  the
number  of  chariots  as  HOO  and  of  charioteers  at  12,000.  The  numbers  do  not  seem  excessive  for  a
kingdom  which  embraceil  the  whole  south  of  ralestiue,  when  we  reflect  that,  at  the  battle  of  Qodshti,
Northern  Syria  was  able  to  put  between  2500  and  .3000  chariots  into  the  field  against  Ramses  II.  (cf.
what  has  been  said  on  this  point  on  p.  392,  supra).  The  Hebrew  chiiriots  proljably  carried  at  least
three  men,  like  those  of  the  IJittitea  and  Assyrians  (cf.  pp.  217,  357,  supra).

*  1  Kings  x.  15,  where  mention  is  made  of  thi^  amount  which  the  chapmen  brought,  and  the  traffic
(if  the  merchants  contains  an  allusion  to  these  tolls  (Reuss,  Hisloire  dcs  Israelites,  p.  458,  n.  2).

=  As  to  the  chariots  and  stallions  from  Egypt,  cf.  what  is  said  on  p.  21G,  note  1,  supra.  The
terms  in  which  the  text,  1  Kings  x.  27-29  (cf.  2  Chron.  i.  IG,  17),  sjieaks  of  the  trade  in  horses,  show
that  the  traffic  was  already  in  existence  when  Solomon  decided  to  embark  in  it.


740  THE  EEBBEWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

that  for  the  future  he  was  to  be  tlie  sole  intermediary  between  the  Asiatics  and
the  foreign  countries  supplying  their  requirements.  His  agents  went  down  at
regular  intervals  to  the  banks  of  the  Nile  to  lay  in  stock  ;  tlie  horses  and
chariots,  by  the  time  they  reached  Jerusalem,  cost  him  at  the  rate  of  six  hundred
silver  shekels  for  each  chariot,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  shekels  for  each  horse,
but  he  sold  them  again  at  a  profit  to  the  Aramrean  and  Hittite  princes.  In  return
he  purchased  from  themCiliciau  stallions,  probably  to  sell  again  to  the  Egyptians,
whose  relaxing  climate  necessitated  a  frequent  introduction  of  new  blood
into  their  stables.'  By  these  and  other  methods  of  which  we  know  nothing
the  yearly  revenue  of  the  kingdom  was  largely  increased :  and  though  it  only
reached  a  total  which  may  seem  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  enormous
quantities  of  the  precious  metals  which  passed  through  the  hands  of  the
Pharaohs  of  that  time,  jet  it  must  have  seemed  boundless  wealth  in  the  eyes
of  the  shepherds  and  husbandmen  who  formed  the  bulk  of  the  Hebrew  nation.
In  thus  developing  his  resources  and  turning  them  to  good  account,
Solomon  derived  great  assistance  from  the  Phoenicians  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,
a  race  whose  services  were  always  at  the  disposal  of  tiie  masters  of  Southern
Syria.  The  continued  success  of  the  Hellenic  colonists  on  the  eastern  shores
of  the  Mediterranean  had  compelled  the  Phoenicians  to  seek  with  redoubled
boldness  and  activity  in  the  Western  Mediterranean  some  sort  of  compensation
for  the  injury  which  their  trade  had  thus  suffered.-  They  increased  and  con-
solidated their  dealings  with  Sicily,  Africa,  and  Spain,  and  established  them-
selves throughout  the  whole  of  that  misty  region  which  extended  beyond
the  straits  of  Gibraltar  on  the  European  side,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Guadalete
to  that  of  the  Guadiana.  This  was  the  famous  Tarshish — the  Oriental
El  Dorado.  Here  they  had  founded  a  number  of  new  towns,  the  most
flourishing  of  which,  Gadir,^  rose  not  far  from  the  mouths  of  the  Betis,  on  a
small  islet  separated  from  the  mainland  by  a  narrow  arm  of  the  sea.  In  this
city  they  constructed  a  temple  to  Melkarth,  arsenals,  warehouses,  and  ship-
building yards :  it  was  the  Tyre  of  the  west,  and  its  merchant-vessels  sailed
to  the  south  and  to  the  north  to  trade  with  the  savage  races  of  the  African

'  1  Kincis  X.  27-29  ;  2  Chron.  i.  Ifi,  17.  Kve,  the  uame  of  Lower  Cilicia,  wiis  discovered  in  the
Hebrew  text  by  Fr.  Lenormant,  Origines del' Histoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  9, note  2.  Winckler,  with  mistaken
reliance  on  the  authority  of  Ermau,  has  denied  that  Egypt  produced  stud-horses  at  this  time,  and
•wishes  to  identify  the  Mizraim  of  the  Hebiew  text  with  Musri,  a  pFace  near  Mount  Taurus,  mentioned
in  the  Assyrian  texts  {AlltedamenlUclie  Forschuncjtn,  pp.  173,174).

-  As  to  these  various  points,  cf.  pp.  586-588,  supra.

'  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  here  the  question  of  tlie  identity  of  the  country  of  Tartessos  with
the  Tarshish  or  Tarsis  mentioned  in  tlie  Bible  (1  Kings  x.  22) ;  in  regard  to  the  colonisation  of
Spain  by  the  Phoenicians,  cf.,  in  addition  to  the  brief  summaries  by  Gutschinid  (Jv/e(He  Werke,  vol.  ii.
pp.  54-57)  and  of  Rawlinson  (Histori/of  Phcenicia,  pp.  120-128),  the  works  of  Meltzer(6'(;'sc/iicA<e  der
Karthager,  vol.  i.  pp.  37-40)  and  of  I'ietschmann  (Geschichle  der  PliSnizier,  p.  28G,  et  seq.),  and,  with
necessary  caution,  Movers  (Das  I'honizische  AUerthum,  vol.  ii,  p.  588,  et  seq.).


THE   T  YE  IAN  KINGDOM — B  IRA  31   I.  741

and  European  seaboard.  On  the  coast  of  Morocco  they  built  Lixos,  a  town
almost  as  large  as  Gadir,  and  beyond  Lixos,  thirty  days'  sail  southwards,  a
whole  host  of  depots,  reckoned  later  on  at  three  hundred.  By  exploiting
the  materials  to  be  obtained  from  these  lands,  such  as  gold,  silver,  tin,  lead,
and  copper,  Tyre  and  Sidon  were  soon  able  to  make  good  the  losses  they  had
suffered  from  Greek  privateersmen  and  marauding  Philistines.  Towards  the
close  of  the  reign  of  Saul  over  Israel,  a  certain  king  Abibaal  had  arisen  in
Tyre,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Hiram,  at  the  very  moment  when  David  was
engaged  in  bringing  the  whole  of  Israel  into  subjection.  Hiram,  guided  by
instinct  or  by  tradition,  at  once  adopted  a  policy  towards  the  rising  dynasty
which  his  ancestors  had  always  found  successful  in  similar  cases.^  He  made
friendly  overtures  to  the  Hebrews,  and  constituted  himself  their  broker  and
general  provider :  when  David  was  in  want  of  wood  for  the  house  he  was
building  at  Jerusalem,  Hiram  let  him  have  the  necessary  quantity,  and  hired
out  to  liim  workmen  and  artists  at  a  reasonable  wage,  to  help  him  in  turning
his  materials  to  good  account.'^  The  accession  of  Solomon  was  a  piece  of
good  luck  for  him.  The  new  king,  born  in  the  purple,  did  not  share  the
simple  and  somewhat  rustic  tastes  of  his  father.  He  wanted  palaces  and
gardens  and  a  temple,  which  might  rival,  even  if  only  in  a  small  way,  the
palaces  and  temples  of  Egypt  and  Chaldasa,  of  which  he  had  heard  such
glowing  accounts:  Hiram  undertook  to  procure  these  things  for  him  at  a
moderate  cost,  and  it  was  doubtless  his  influence  which  led  to  those  voyages
to  the  countries  which  produced  precious  metals,  perfumes,  rare  animals,  costly
woods,  and  all  those  foreign  knicknacks  with  which  Eastern  monarchs  of
all  ages  loved  to  surround  themselves.''  The  Phojuician  sailors  were  well
acquainted  with  the  bearings  of  Puanit,  most  of  them  having  heard  of  this
country  when  in  Egypt,  a  few  perhaps  having  gone  thither  under  the  direc-
tion and  by  the  orders  of  Pharaoh :  and  Hiram  tgok  advantage  of  the  access
which  the  Hebrews  had  gained  to  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  annexa-
tion of  Edom,  to  establish  relations  with  these  outlying  districts  without
having  to  pass  the  Egyptian  customs.  He  lent  to  Solomon  shipwrights  and
sailors,  who  helped  him  to  fit  out  a  fleet  at  Ezion-geber,  and  undertook
a  voyage  of  discovery  in  company  with  a  number  of  Hebrews,  who  were
no  doubt  despatched  in  the  same  capacity  as  the  royal  messengers  sent  with
the  galleys  of  Hatshopsitu.  It  was  a  venture  similar  to  tliose  so  frequently
undertaken  by  the  Egyptian  admirals  in  the  palmy  days  of  the  Theban
navy,  and  of  which  we  find  so  many  curious  pictures  among  the  bas-reliefs

'  Cf.  what  is  said  concerning  tho  jiolicy  aJniited  by  tlio  Tlieban  cities  on  pp.  190,  191,  supra.

=  2  Sam.  V.  11 ;  cf.  tlie  reference  to  the  name  incident  in  1  Kings  v.  1-;!.

'  As  to  tliis  predilection  of  the  PharaohB  and  Assyrian  Idugs,  cf.  pp.  2ij0,  '201,  2Uo,  G60, 001,  lupra.


742


THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES^DAMASCUS.


at  Doir  el-Baliari.'  On  their  return,  after  a  three  years'  absence,  they  reported
that  they  had  sailed  to  a  country  named  Ophir,  and  produced  in  support  of
their  statement  a  freight  well  calculated  to  convince  the  most  sceptical,
consisting  as  it  did  of  four  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold.     The  success

of  this  first  venture  encouraged  Solomon  to
persevere  in  such  expeditions :  he  sent  his
fleet  on  several  voyages  to  Ophir,  and  pro-
cured from  thence  a  rich  harvest  of  gold
and  silver,  wood  and  ivory,  apes  and  pea-
cocks.'-* Was  the  profit  from  these  distant
cruises  so  very  considerable  after  all  ?  After
they  had  ceased,  memory  may  have  thrown
a  fanciful  glamour  over  them,  and  magnified
the  treasures  they  had  yielded  to  fabulous
proportions  :  we  are  told  that  Solomon  would
have  no  drinking  vessels  or  other  utensils
save  those  of  pure  gold,  and  that  in  his  days  "  silver  was  as  stone,"  so  common
had  it  become.^  Doubtless  Hiram  took  good  care  to  obtain  his  full  share  of  the
gains.  The  Phcenician  king  began  to  find  Tyre  too  restricted  for  him,  the
various  islets  over  which  it  was  scattered  affording  too  small  a  space  to  support
the  multitudes  which  flocked  thither.  He  therefore  filled  up  the  channels
which  sej)arated  them  ;  by  means  of  embankments  and  fortified  quays  he
managed  to  reclaim  from  the  sea  a  certain  amount  of  land  on  the  south  ;
after  which  he  constructed  two  harbours — one  on  the  north,  called  the  Sidonian;
the  other  on  the  south,  named  the  Egyptian.  He  was  perhaps  also  the
originator  of  the  long  causeway,  the  lower  courses  of  which  still  serve  as  a
breakwater,  by  which  he  transformed  the  projecting  headland  between  the
island  and  the  mainland  into  a  well-sheltered  harbour.  Finally,  he  set  to  work
on  a  task  like  that  which  he  had  already  helped  Solomon  to  accomplish  :  *  he

'  Cf.  the  account  of  the  voyage  undertaken  under  Hatshopsitu  on  pp.  245-252,  supra.

=  1  Kings  ix.  26-28,  x.  11,  12 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  viii.  17,  IS,  ix.  10,  11,  21.  A  whole  library  might  be
stocked  with  the  various  treatises  which  have  appeared  on  the  situation  of  the  country  of  Opliir  :  Arabia,
Persia,  India,  .Java,  and  America  have  all  been  suggested.  The  mention  of  almug  wood  and  of  pea-
cooks,  which  may  be  of  Indian  origin,  for  a  long  time  inclined  the  scale  in  favour  of  India,  but  the
discoveries  of  Mauch  and  Bent  on  the  Zimbabaye  have  drawn  attention  to  the  basin  of  the  Zambesi
and  the  ruins  found  there.  Dr.  Peters,  one  of  the  best-known  German  explorers,  is  inclined  to  agree
with  Mauch  and  Bent,  in  their  theory  as  to  the  position  of  the  Opliir  of  the  Bible  (Oer  Goldene  Ophir
Salomo's,  pp.  50-02).  I  am  rather  inclined  to  identify  it  with  the  Egyptian  Puanit,  on  the  Somali  or
Yemen  seaboard.

=  1  Ki7igs  X.  21,  27.  In  Chronicles  the  statement  in  the  Book  of  Kings  is  repeated  in  a  still  more
emphatic  manner,  since  it  is  there  stated  that  gold  itself  was  "  in  Jerusalem  as  stones  "  (2  Chron.  i.  15).

*  Dirs,  Fragm.  2,  and  Menandek,  Fragm.  2,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicorttm  Grsecorum.
vol.  iv.  pp.  398,  399,  445,  446.  In  so  far  as  the  interpretation  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  enlarge-
ment of  the  harbour  and  building  of  the  temples  is  concerned,  I  follow  Renwn,  Mission  de  Fkgnicie,
pp.  546-575.


SOLOJilON'S  BUILDING    OPERATIONS.


743


built  for  himself  a  palace  of  cedar-wooJ,  and  restored  aad  beautified  the  temples
of  the  gods,  including  the  ancient  sanctuary  of  Melkarth  and  that  of  Astarte.
In  his  reign  the  greatness  of  Phomicia  reached  its  zenith,  just  as  that  of  the
Hebrews  culminated  under  David.

The  most  celebrated  of  Solomon's  works  were  to  be  seen  at  Jerusalem.     As
David  left  it,  the  city  was  somewhat  insignificant.     The  water  from  its  fountains


THE    EKEAKWATElt    OF   THE    EGYPTIAN    HAIiBODK   AT    TYUE.'

had  been  amply  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  the  little  Jebusite  town  ;  it  was
wholly  inadequate  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  growing  population  of  the
capital  of  Judah.  Solomon  made  better  provision  for  its  distribution  than  there
had  been  in  the  past,  and  then  tapped  a  new  source  of  supply  some  distance  away,
in  the  direction  of  Bethlehem  ;  it  is  even  said  that  he  made  the  reservoirs  for  its
storage  which  still  bear  his  name.'-^  Meanwhile,  Hiram  had  drawn  up  for  him  plans
for  a  fortified  residence,  on  a  scale  commensurate  with  the  thriving  fortunes  of
his  dynasty.  The  main  body  was  constructed  of  stone  from  the  Judaean  quarries,
cut  by  masons  from  Byblos,  but  it  was  inlaid  with  cedar  to  such  an  extent  that
one  wing  was  called  "  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon."  It  contained  every-
thing that  was  required  for  the  comfort  of  an  Eastern  potentate — a  harem,  with
separate  apartments  for  the  favourites  (one  of  which  was  probably  decorated  in
the  Egyptian  manner  for  the  benefit  of  Pharaoh's  daughter) ;  ^  then  there  were

'  Drawn  by  Bondier,  from  a  photograph  published  by  the  Duo  de  Ldtnes,  Voyage  d' Exploration
a  la  nuir  Morle,  vol.  iii.  pi.  18.

'  A  somewhat  ancient  tradition  atfributes  thcuo  works  to  Solomon ;  no  single  fact  conlirms  it,  but
the  balance  of  probability  seems  to  indicate  tliat  he  must  have  taken  steps  to  provide  a  water-supply
for  the  new  city.  The  channels  and  reservoirs,  of  which  traces  are  found  at  the  i)re3ent  day,
probably  occupy  the  same  positions  as  those  which  preceded  them.

^  1  Kinjs  vii.  8,  ix.  24;  2  Chron.  viii.  11.


744


THE  EEBREW8  AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.


reception-halls,  to  wliicli  the  great  men  of  the  kingdom  were  admitted,  store-
houses, and  an  arsenal.  The  king's  body-guard  possessed  five  hundred  shields
"  of  beaten  gold,"  which  were  handed  over  by  each  detachment,  when  the  guard
was  relieved,  to  the  one  which  took  its  place. ^  But  this  gorgeous  edifice  would
not  have  been  complete  if  the  temple  of  Jahveh  had  not  arisen  side  by  side


ONE    OF    SOLOMON'S    RESERVOIRS   NEAR    JERUSALEM.'

with  the  abode  of  the  temporal  ruler  of  the  nation.  No  monarch  in  those
days  could  regard  his  position  as  unassailable  until  he  had  a  sanctuary  and  a
priesthood  attached  to  his  religion,  either  in  his  own  palace  or  not  far  away
from  it.^  David  had  scarcely  entered  Jerusalem  before  he  fixed  upon  the
threshing-floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite  as  a  site  for  the  temple,  and  built  an
altar  there  to  the  Lord  during  a  plague  which  threatened  to  decimate  his
people ;  but  as  he  did  not  carry  the  project  any  farther,*  Solomon  set  him-
self to  complete  the  task  which  his  father  had  merely  sketched  out.  The  site
was  irregular  in  shape,  and  the  surface  did  not  naturally  lend  itself  to  the
purpose  for  which  it  was  destined.  His  engineers,  however,  put  this  right  by
constructing  enormous  piers  for  the  foundations,  which  they  built  up  from  the
slopes  of  the  mountain  or  from  the  bottom  of  the  valley  as  circumstances
required :  the  space  between  this  artificial  casing  and  the  solid  rock  was  filled

'  1  Kings  vii.  1-12,  x.  IG.  Of  the  uumeious  attempis  which  have  been  made  to  rcconBtvuct
Solomon's  palace,  I  shall  content  myself  by  mentioning  tliose  of  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,
vol.  i.  pp.  311-325,  and  Perrot-Chipiez,  Sisloire  del' AH  dans  I'Aidiquite;  vol.  iv.  pp.  39S-410.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  C.  Alluaud  of  Limoges.

"  Cr.  pp.  713,  727,  supra.

*  2  Sa7n.  xxiv.  lS-25.  The  threshing-floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite  is  mentioned  elsewhere  as
the  site  on  which  Solomon  built  his  temple  (2  Chron.  iii.  1).


THE    TEMPLE    OF  SOLOMON.


74D'


up,  and  the  whole  mass  formed  a  nearly  square  platform,  from  which  the
temple  buildings  were  to  rise.^  Hiram  undertook  to  supply  materials  for  the
work.  Solomon  had  written  to
him  that  he  should  command
"that  they  hew  me  cedar  trees
out  of  Lebanon ;  and  my  servants
shall  be  witli  thy  servants  ;  and  I
will  give  thee  hire  for  thy  servants
according  to  all  that  thou  shalt
say:  for  thou  knowest  that  there
is  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill
to  hew  timber  like  unto  the  Zidu-
nians."  Hiram  was  delighted  to
carry  out  tlie  wishes  of  his  royal
friend  with  regard  to  the  cedar
and  cypress  woods.  "  My  servants,"
he  answered,  "  shall  bring  them
down  from  Lebanon  unto  the  sea :
and  I  will  make  them  into  rafts
to  go  by  sea  unto  the  place  that
thou  shalt  appoint  me,  and  will
cause  them  to  be  broken  up  there,
and  thou  shalt  receive  them ;  and
tliou  slialt  accomplish  my  desire,
in  giving  food  for  my  liousehold."  The  payment  agreed  on,  which  was  in
kind,  consisted  of  twenty  thousand  hor  of  wheat,  and  twenty  hur  of  purfr
oil  per  annum,  for  which  Hiram  was  to  send  to  Jerusalem  not  only  tlie
timber,  but  architects,  masons,  and  Gebalite  carpenters  {i.e.  from  Byblos),
smelters,  sculptors,  and  overseers.^  Solomon  undertook  to  supply  the  neces-
sary labour,  and  for  this  purpose  made  a  levy  of  men  from  all  the  tribes.
The  number  of  these  labourers  was  reckoned  at  thirty  thousand,  and  they
were  relieved  regularly  every  three  months ;  seventy  thousand  were  occu-
pied in  the  transport  of  the  materials,  while  eighty  thousand  cut  the  stones
from  the  quarry.'*     It  is  possible  that  the  numbers  may  have  been  somewhat

'  For  tbia  part  of  tho  subject  I  must  refer  tlie  reader  to  the  exliaustive  account  given  in  Pekrot-
CiiiriKZ.  Hist,  del' Alt  itannVAnliriuil)!,  vol.  iv.  pp.  171-218,  of  the  works  undertakeu  for  tho  I'alcttine
Exploration  Fund,  especially  by  Wilson  and  Warren.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.

'  1  Kiiiijt  V.  7-1 1 ;  cf.  2  Chroii.  ii.  3-1 C,  where  the  writer  adds  20,000 1:6r  of  barley,  20,000  "  baths  "
of  wine,  and  the  same  quantity  of  oil.  For  the  transport  of  wood,  cf.  a  similar  case  in  Egypt  under
Hrihor,  Kupra,  pp.  582,  583.

*  1  Kimja  Y.  13-18;  cf.  2  CUron.  ii.  1,  2,  17,  18.


SOME    OF   THE    STONE   COURSE   OF   SALOMON  S   TEMPLE
AT  JERUSALEM.'^


746  TEE   HEBREWS    AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

exaggerated  in  popular  estimation,  since  tbe  greatest  Egyptian  monuments
never  required  such  formidable  levies  of  workmen  for  their  construction  ;  we
must  remember,  however,  that  such  an  undertaking  demanded  a  considerable
•effort,  as  the  Hebrews  were  quite  unaccustomed  to  that  kind  of  labour.  Tiie
front  of  the  temple  faced  eastward  ;  it  was  twenty  cubits  wide,  sixty  long,  and
thirty  high.  The  walls  were  of  enormous  squared  stones,  and  the  ceilings  and
frames  of  the  doors  of  carved  cedar,  plated  with  gold ;  it  was  entered  by  a
porch,  between  two  columns  of  wrought  bronze,  which  were  called  Jachin  and
Boaz.^  The  interior  contained  only  two  chambers ;  the  liehal,  or  holy  place,
where  were  kept  the  altar  of  incense,  the  seven-branched  candlestick,  and  the
table  of  shewbread ;  and  the  Holy  of  Holies — debir — where  the  ark  of  God
rested  beneath  the  wings  of  two  cherubim  of  gilded  wood.  Against  the  outer
wall  of  the  temple,  and  rising  to  half  its  height,  were  rows  of  small  apartments,
three  stories  high,  in  which  were  kept  the  treasures  and  vessels  of  the  sanctuary.
While  the  high  priest  was  allowed  to  enter  the  Holy  of  Holies  only  once  a
year,  the  holy  place  was  accessible  at  all  times  to  the  priests  engaged  in  the
services,  and  it  was  there  that  the  daily  ceremonies  of  the  temple-worship  took
place ;  there  stood  also  the  altar  of  incense  and  the  table  of  shewbread.  The
altar  of  sacrifice  stood  on  the  platform  in  front  of  the  entrance  ;  it  was  a  cube
of  masonry  with  a  parapet,  and  was  approached  by  stone  steps  ;  it  resembled,
probably,  in  general  outline  the  monumental  altars  which  stood  in  the  forecourts
of  the  Egyptian  temples  and  jjalaces.  There  stood  by  it,  as  was  also  customary
in  Chaldsea,  a  "  molten  sea,"  and  some  ten  smaller  lavers,  in  which  the  Levites
washed  the  portions  of  the  victims  to  be  offered,  together  with  the  basins,
knives,  flesh-hooks,  spoons,  shovels,  and  other  utensils  required  for  the  bloody
sacrifice.  A  low  wall  surmounted  by  a  balustrade  of  cedar-wood  separated
this  sacred  enclosure  from  a  court  to  which  the  people  were  permitted  to  have
free  access.^  Both  palace  and  temple  were  probably  designed  in  that  pseudo-
Egyptian  style  which  the  Phoenicians  were  known  to  afi'ect.^  The  few
Hebrew  edifices  of  which  remains  have  come  down  to  us,  reveal  a  method  of
construction  and  decoration  common  in  Egypt ;  we  have  an  example  of  this  in

'  1  Kings  vii.  15-22;  cf.  2  Chron.  iv.  11-13.  The  names  were  probably  engraved  each  upou  its
respective  column,  and  taken  together  formed  an  inscription  which  could  be  interpreted  in  various
ways.  Tbe  most  simple  interpretation  is  to  recognise  in  them  a  kind  of  talismanic  formula  to  ensure
the  strength  of  the  building,  aflirmiug  "  that  it  exists  by  the  strength  "  of  God  (cf.  Eenan,  Hist,  du
■peuple  d'Israel,  vol.  ii.  pp.  143, 144).  For  a  tentative  restoration  of  these  columns,  of.  Pekkot-Chipiez,
Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquile,  vol.  iv.  pp.  314-327 ;  we  may,  on  the  other  hami,  see  in  them  merely  au
equivalent  of  tlie  Egyptian  Stele-Pillars — as,  for  instance,  those  of  the  temple  of  Karnak,  reproduced
supra,  p.  557.

'  1  Kings  vi.-vii. ;  cf.  2  Chrnn.  iii.,  iv.  Here,  again,  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  two  restorations
proposed  by  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  325,  342,  and  by  PiiKKOT-CuiriEZ,  Hist,  ds  VArt
dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  243-338.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  577.


THE   DEDICATION   OF  SOLOMON'S    TEMPLE.


747


AN    UPRIGHT   OF    A    DOOR   AT   LACHISH.


the  uprights  of  the  doors  at  Lachish,  which  terminate  in  an  Egyptian  gorge

like  that  employed  in  the  naos  of  the  Phcenician  temples.     The  completion  of

the  whole  plan  occupied  thirteen  years ;   at  length  both  palace  and  temple

were  finished  in  the  XVII'"  year  of  the  king's  reign.     Solomon,  however,  did

not  wait  for  the  completion  of  the  work  to  dedicate  tlie  sanctuary  to  God.     As

soon  as  the  inner  court  was

ready,    which    was    in    his

Xl""  year,  he  proceeded  to

transfer  the  ark  to  its  new

resting-place ;  it  was  raised

upon   a  cubical    base,   and

the   long  staves  by  which

it  had   been   carried    were

left   in  their  rings,  as  was

usual  in  the  case  of  the
sacred  barks  of  the  Egyptian
deities.^  The  God  of  Israel
thus  took  up  His  abode
in  the  place  in  which  He

was  henceforth  to  be  honoured.  The  sacrifices  on  the  occasion  of  the
dedication  were  innumerable,  and  continued  for  fourteen  days,  in  the  presence
of  the  representatives  of  all  Israel.  The  ornate  ceremonial  and  worship
which  had  long  been  lavished  on  the  deities  of  rival  nations  were  now,  for
the  first  time,  oifered  to  the  God  of  Israel.  The  devout  Hebrews  who  had
come  together  from  far  and  near  returned  to  their  respective  tribes  filled  with
admiration,^  and  their  limited  knowledge  of  art  doubtless  led  them  to  consider
their  temple  as  unique  in  the  world  ;  as  a  fact,  it  presented  nothing  remark-
able either  in  proportion,  arrangement,  or  in  the  variety  and  richness  of  its
ornamentation  and  furniture.  Compared  with  the  magnificent  monuments  of
Egypt  and  Chaldaca,  the  work  of  Solomon  was  what  the  Hebrew  kingdom
appears  to  us  among  the  empires  of  the  ancient  world — a  little  temple  suited
to  a  little  people.

'  1  Kinije  -siii.  fr-S,  and  2  Chron.  v.  7-9.  For  the  represoutation  of  tlie  baric  of  the  Egyptian  god
Amon,  with  its  staves,  placed  on  its  altar  pace,  cf.  Lepsius,  Denhm.,  iii.  235.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  drawing  by  Puticie,  Tell  el  Hesy,  j).  20.

'  1  Kings  vi.  37,  :i8  states  that  the  foundations  were  laid  in  the  IV"'  year  of  Solomon's  reign,  in
the  month  of  Ziv,  and  that  the  temple  was  completed  in  the  month  of  Bui  in  the  XI"'  year  ;  the  work
occupied  seven  years.  1  Kinga  vii.  1  adds  that  the  construction  of  the  palace  lasted  thirteen
years;  it  went  on  for  six  years  after  the  comjilctiou  of  the  temple.  The  account  of  the  dedication
(1  Kings  viii.)  contains  a  long  prayer  by  .Solomon,  part  of  which  (vers.  M-Ui;)  is  thought  by  certain
critics  to  be  of  later  date.  They  contend  that  the  original  words  of  Solomon  are  coniined  to
vers.  12  and  13.


748  THE   HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

The  priests  to  whose  care  it  was  entrusted  did  not  differ  much  from  those
whom  David  had  gathered  about  him  at  the  outset  of  the  monarchy.^  They
in  no  waj-  formed  an  hereditary  caste  confined  to  the  limits  of  a  rigid  hierarchy  ;
they  admitted  into  their  number — -at  least  up  to  a  certain  point — men  of  varied
extraction,  who  were  either  drawn  by  their  own  inclinations  to  the  service  of  the
altar,  or  liad  been  dedicated  to  it  by  their  parents  from  childhood.  He  indeed
was  truly  a  priest  "  who  said  of  his  father  and  mother,  'I  have  not  seen  him  ; '
neither  did  he  acknowledge  his  brethren,  nor  knew  he  his  own  cliildren."  He
was  content,  after  renouncing  these,  to  observe  the  law  of  God  and  keep  His
covenant,  and  to  teach  Jacob  His  judgments  and  Israel  His  law;  he  put
ineeuse  before  the  Lord,  and  whole  burnt  offerings  upon  His  altar.^  As  in
Egypt,  the  correct  offering  of  tlie  Jewish  sacrifices  was  beset  with  considerable
difficulties,  and  the  risk  of  marring  their  efficacy  by  the  slightest  inadvertence
necessitated  the  employment  of  men  who  were  thoroughly  instructed  in  the
divinely  appointed  practices  and  formula?.  The  victims  had  to  be  certified  as
perfect,  while  the  offerers  themselves  had  to  be  ceremonially  i^ure ;  and,  indeed,
those  only  who  had  been  specially  trained  were  able  to  master  the  difficulties
connected  with  the  minutiae  of  legal  purity.  The  means  by  which  the  future
was  made  known  necessitated  the  intervention  of  skilful  interpreters  of  the
Divine  will.  We  know  that  in  Egypt  the  statues  of  the  gods  were  supposed
to  answer  the  questions  put  to  them  by  movements  of  the  head  or  arms,
sometimes  even  by  the  living  voice;  but  the  Hebrews  do  not  appear  to  have
been  influenced  by  any  such  recollections  in  the  use  of  their  sacred  oracles.  We
are  ignorant,  however,  of  the  manner  in  which  the  ephod  was  consulted,  and  we
know  merely  that  the  art  of  interrogating  the  Divine  will  by  it  demanded  a
long  noviciate.^  The  benefits  derived  by  those  initiated  into  these  mysteries
were  such  as  to  cause  tliem  to  desire  the  privileges  to  be  perpetuated  to  their
children.  Gathered  round  the  ancient  sanctuaries  were  certain  families  who,
from  father  to  son,  were  devoted  to  the  performance  of  the  sacred  rites,  as,  for
instance,  that  of  Eli  at  Shiloh,  and  that  of  Jonathan-beu-Gershom  at  Dan,
near  the  sources  of  the  Jordan ;  *  but,  in  addition  to  these,  the  text  mentions
functionaries  analogous  to  those  found  among  the  Canaanites,  diviners,  seers —
rou — who  had  means  of  discovering  that  which  was  hidden  from  the  vulgar.


'  Cf.  fupra,  pp.  727,  730.

^  These  are  the  expressions  used  iu  the  Blessing  of  Moses  (T}eut.  xxxiii.  8-12);  though  this
text  is  by  some  writers  pUced  as  late  as  the  VIH"'  century  B.C.,  yet  the  state  of  things  there
represented  would  apply  also  to  an  earlier  date.  The  Hebrew  priest,  in  short,  had  the  same  duties
as  a  large  proportion  of  the  priesthood  in  Chaldasa  and  Egypt.

'  An  example  of  tbe  consulting  of  the  ephod  will  be  found  iu  1  Sam.  xxx.  7,  8,  where  David
desires  to  know  if  he  shall  pursue  the  Amalekites.

'  Cf.,  for  these  two  families,  supra,  704,  706,  707,713,  715,  730.


THE   PRIESTHOOD    OF   THE   TEMPLE  AT  JERUSALEM.  749

even  to  the  finding  of  lost  objects,  but  whose  powers  sometimes  rose  to  a  higher
level  when  they  were  suddenly  possessed  by  the  prophetic  spirit  and  enabled
to  reveal  coming  events.  Besides  these,  again,  were  the  prophets — nahi  ^ — •
who  lived  either  alone  or  in  communities,  and  attained,  by  means  of  a  strict
training,  to  a  vision  of  the  future.  Their  prophetic  utterances  were  accom-
panied by  music  and  singing,  and  the  exaltation  of  spirit  which  followed  their
exercises  would  at  times  spread  to  the  bystanders,  as  is  the  case  in  the  "  zikr  "
of  the  Mahomedans  of  to-day.^  The  early  kings,  Saul  and  David,  used  to  have
recourse  to  individuals  belonging  to  all  these  three  classes,  but  the  prophets,
owing  to  the  intermittent  character  of  tlieir  inspiration  and  their  ministry,
could  not  fill  a  regular  ofBce  attached  to  the  court.  One  of  this  class  was  raised
up  by  God  from  time  to  time  to  warn  or  guide  His  servants,  and  then  sank
again  into  obscurity ;  the  priests,  on  the  contrary,  were  always  at  hand,  and
their  duties  brouglit  them  into  contact  with  the  sovereign  all  the  year  round.
The  god  who  was  worshipped  in  the  capital  of  the  country  and  his  priesthood
promptly  acquired  a  predominant  position  in  all  Oriental  monarchies,  and  most
of  the  other  temples,  together  with  the  sacerdotal  bodies  attached  to  them,
usually  fell  into  disrepute,  leaving  them  supreme.  If  Amon  of  Thebes
became  almost  the  sole  god,  and  his  priests  the  possessors  of  all  Egypt,  it
was  because  the  accession  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty  had  made  his  pontiffs  the
almoners  of  the  Pharaoh.^  Something  of  the  same  sort  took  place  in  Israel ;
the  priesthood  at  Jerusalem  attached  to  the  temple  built  by  the  sovereign,
being  constantly  about  his  person,  soon  surpassed  their  brethren  in  other  parts
of  the  country  both  in  influence  and  possessions.  Under  David's  reign  tiieir
head  had  been  Abiathar,  son  of  Ahimelech,  a  descendant  of  Eli,^  but  on
Solomon's  accession  the  primacy  had  been  transferred  to  the  line  of  Zadok.
In  this  alliance  of  the  throne  and  the  altar,  it  was  natural  at  first  that  the
throne  should  reap  the  advantage.  The  king  appears  to  have  continued  to
be  a  sort  of  higli  priest,  and  to  have  officiated  at  certain  times  and  occasions.^
The  priests  kept  the  temple  in  order,  and  watched  over  the  cleanliness  of  its
chambers  and  its  vessels;  they  interrogated  the  Divine  will  for  the  king
according  to  the  prescribed  ceremonies,  and  offered  sacrifices  on  behalf  of

'  1  Sam.  i.\.9  is  a  gloss  which  identifies  the  xeer  of  former  times  with  the  prophet  of  the  times  of
Ihe  monarchy.

^  1  Sam.  X.  5-13,  where  we  see  Saul  seized  witli  tlie  prophetic  spirit  ou  iiieutiiij;  witli  a  band  of
prophets  dcscendin;;  from  the  high  place ;  cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  13-16,  20-'23,  and  aupra,  p.  721),  for  David
dancing  before  the  ark.

'  For  the  history  of  the  priest-i  of  Amon,  cf.  p.  S.'iy  of  tlie  present  v.'ork.

*  For  Aliijah  or  Aliimelech,  cf.  supra,  p.  713,  note  2.

*  Solomon  olTiciated  and  preached  at  the  consecration  of  tlie  temple  (1  Kings  viii.).  Tlio  actual
words  appear  to  be  of  a  later  date ;  but  even  if  tliat  be  the  case,  it  proves  that,  at  the  time  tliey  were
wiitten,  theking  still  possessed  lus  full  sacerdotal  powers.


750  TEE  HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

the  monarch  and  his  subjects  ;  in  short,  they  were  at  first  little  more  than
chaplains  to  the  king  and  his  family.

Solomon's  allegiance  to  the  God  of  Israel  did  not  lead  him  to  proscribe
the  worship  of  other  gods ;  he  allowed  his  foreign  wives  the  exercise  of  their
various  religions,  and  he  raised  an  altar  to  Chemosh  on  the  Mount  of  Olives
for  one  of  them  who  was  a  Moabite.^  The  political  supremacy  and  material
advantages  which  all  these  establishments  acquired  for  Judah  could  not  fail
to  rouse  the  jealousy  of  the  other  tribes.  Ephraim  particularly  looked  ou
with  ill-concealed  anger  at  the  prospect  of  the  hegemony  becoming  estab-
lished in  the  hands  of  a  tribe  which  could  be  barely  said  to  have  existed
before  the  time  of  David,  and  was  to  a  considerable  extent  of  barbarous
origin.  Taxes,  homage,  the  keeping  up  and  recruiting  of  garrisons,  were  all
equally  odious  to  this,  as  well  as  to  the  other  clans  descended  from  Joseph ;
meanwhile  their  burdens  did  not  decrease.  A  new  fortress  had  to  be  built  at
Jerusalem  by  order  of  the  aged  king.  One  of  the  overseers  appointed  for  this
work— Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat — appears  to  have  stirred  up  the  popular
discontent,  and  to  have  hatched  a  revolutionary  plot.  Solomon,  hearing  of
the  conspiracy,  attempted  to  suppress  it ;  Jeroboam  was  forewarned,  and  fled
to  Egypt,  where  Pharaoh  Sheshonq  received  him  with  honour,  and  gave  him
his  wife's  sister  in  marriage.'-^  The  peace  of  the  nation  had  not  been  ostensibly
troubled,  but  the  very  fact  that  a  pretender  should  have  risen  up  in  opposition
to  the  legitimate  king  augured  ill  for  the  future  of  the  dynasty.  In  reality,
the  edifice  which  David  had  raised  with  such  difficulty  tottered  on  its  founda-
tions before  the  death  of  his  successor ;  the  foreign  vassals  were  either  in  a
restless  state  or  ready  to  throw  off  their  allegiance ;  money  was  scarce,  and
twenty  Galilsean  towns  had  been  perforce  ceded  to  Hiram  to  pay  the  debts  due
to  him  for  the  building  of  the  temple ;  ^  murmurings  were  heard  among  the
people,  who  desired  an  easier  life.  In  a  future  age,  when  priestly  and  jjrophetic
influences  had  gained  the  ascendant,  amid  the  perils  which  assailed  Jerusalem,
and  the  miseries  of  the  exile,  the  Israelites,  contrasting  their  humiliation  with
the  glory  of  the  past,  forgot  the  reproaches  which  their  forefathers  had  addressed
to  the  house  of  David,  and  surrounded  its  memory  with  a  halo  of  romance.
David  again  became  the  hero,  and  Solomon  the  saint  and  sage  of  his  race  ;  the
latter  "  spake  three  thousand  proverbs ;  and  his  songs  were  a  thousand  and
five.  And  he  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar  that  is  in  Lebanon  even  unto  the
hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall :  he  spake  also  of  beasts,  and  of  fowl»

'  1  Kings  xi.  7  ;  cf.  2  Kings  xxiii.  13.

'  1  Kings  xi.  23-40,  where  the  LXX.  is  fuller  than  the  A.V.

'  1  Kings  ix.  10-13  ;  cf.  2  Chron.  viii.  1,  2,  where  the  fact  seems  to  have  been  reversed,  and  Hiram,
is  made  the  donor  of  the  twenty  towns.


THE   DEFECTION   OF   THE    TEN    TRIBES.  751

and  of  creeping  things,  and  of  fishes." '     We  are  told  that  God  favoured  him
with  a  special  predilection,  and  appeared  to  him  on  three  separate  occasions:
once  immediately  after  the  death  of  David,  to  encourage  him  by  the  promise
of  a  prosperous  reign,  and  the  gift  of  wisdom  in  governing ;  again  after  the
dedication  of  the  temple,  to  confirm  him  in  his  pious  intentions ;  and  lastly
to  upbraid  him  for  his  idolatry,  and  to  predict  the  downfall  of  his  house.""
Solomon  is  supposed  to  have  had  continuous  dealings  with  all  the  sovereigns  of
the  Oriental  world,^  and  a  Queen  of  Sheba  is  recorded  as  having  come  to  bring
him  gifts  from  the  furthest  corner  of  Arabia.*     His  contemporaries,  however,
seem  to  have  regarded  him  as  a  tyrant  who  oppressed  them  with  taxes,  and
whose  death  was  unregretted.^     His  son  Eehoboam  experienced  no  opposition
in  Jerusalem   and  Judah  on  succeeding  to  the  throne  of  his  father;   when,,
however,  lie  repaired  to  Shechem  to  receive  the  oath  of  allegiance  from  the
northern  and  central  tribes,  he  found  them  unwilling  to   tender  it   except
under  certain  conditions ;  they  would  consent  to  obey  him  only  on  the  promise
of  his  delivering  them  from  the  forced  labour  which  had  been  imposed  upon-
tliem  by  his  predecessors.     Jeroboam,  who  had  returned  from  his  Egyptian
exile  on  the  news  of  Solomon's  death,  undertook  to  represent  their  grievances
to  the  new  king.     "  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous :  now  therefore  make
thou  the  grievous  service  of  thy  father,  and  his  heavy  yoke  which  he  put
upon  us,  lighter,  and  we  will  serve  thee."     Eehoboam  demanded  three  days
for  the  consideration  of  his  reply ;  he  took  counsel  with  the  old  advisers  of  the
late  king,  who  exhorted  him  to  comply  with  the  petition,  but  the  young  men
who  were  his  habitual  companions  urged  him,  on  the  contrary,  to  meet  the
remonstrances  of  his  subjects  with  threats  of  still  harsher  exactions.     Their
advice  was  taken,  and  when  Jeroboam  again   presented   himself,  Kehoboam
greeted  him  with  raillery  and  threats.     "  My  little  finger  is  thicker  than  my
father's  loins.     And  now  whereas  my  father  did  lade  you  witii  a  heavy  yoke,  I
will  add  to  your  yoke :  my  iiither  chastised  you  with  whips,  but  I  will  chastise
you  with  scorpions."     This  xmwise  answer  did  not  produce  the  intimidating
effect  which  was  desired ;  the  cry  of  revolt,  which  had  already  been  raised  in
the  earlier  days  of  tlie  monarchy,  was  once  more  heard.     "  AVhat  portion  have
we  in  David?  neither  have  we  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse:  to  your  tents,
C)  Israel :  now  see  to  thine  own  house,  David."     Eeboboam  attempted  to  carry

'  1  Kings  iv.  29-33.

=  1  Klnijs  iii.  4-15,  ix.  1-9,  xi.  9-13;  cf.  2  Chron.  i.  7-12,  vii.  12-22.

'  1  Kingx  iv.  31 ;  on  this  passage  are  t'oiiiuled  all  tho  legends  deiUiug  with  the  contests  of  wit  and
wisdom  in  wliicli  Solomon  was  sujiposed  to  have  entered  with  the  kings  of  neigliljouring  countries;
traces  of  these  are  found  in  Dins  {Fragm.  1,  in  JIuller-Didot,  Fragmeitta  llut.  Grxc,  vol.  iv.  p.  398),.
in  Menauder  {Fragm.  2,  ihid.,  p.  IIU),  and  in  Eupolemus  (Id.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  225-228).

'   1  Kingg  X.  1-13;  cf.  2  Chron.  ix.  1-12.

=■   I  am  inclined  to  place  the  date  of  Solomon's  death  between  935  and  930  B.C.


752  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

his  threats  into  execution,  and  sent  the  collectors  of  taxes  among  the  rebels  to
■enforce  paj'ment ;  but  one  of  them  was  stoned  almost  before  his  eyes,  and  the
king  himself  had  barely  time  to  regain  his  chariot  and  flee  to  Jerusalem  to
escape  au  outburst  of  popular  fury.  The  northern  and  central  tribes  imme-
diately oftered  the  crown  to  Jeroboam,  and  the  partisans  of  the  son  of  Solomon
were  reduced  to  those  of  his  own  tribe ;  Judah,  Caleb,  the  few  remaining
Simeonites,  and  some  of  the  towns  of  Dan  and  Benjamin,  which  were  too  near
to  Jerusalem  to  escape  the  influence  of  a  great  city,  were  all  who  threw  in
their  lot  with  him.^

Thus  was  accomplished  the  downfall  of  the  House  of  David,  and  with  it  the
Hebrew  kingdom  which  it  had  been  at  such  pains  to  build  up.  When  we
consider  the  character  of  the  two  kings  who  formed  its  sole  dynasty,  we
■cannot  refrain  from  thinking  that  it  deserved  a  better  fate.  David  and
Solomon  exhibited  that  curious  mixture  of  virtues  and  vices  which  distinguished
most  of  the  great  Semite  princes.  The  former,  a  soldier  of  fortune  and
.an  adventurous  hero,  represents  the  regular  type  of  the  founder  of  a  dynasty ;
■crafty,  cruel,  ungrateful,  and  dissolute,  but  at  the  same  time  brave,  prudent,
cautious,  generous,  and  capable  of  enthusiasm,  clemency,  and  repentance ;
at  once  so  lovable  and  so  gentle  that  he  was  able  to  inspire  those  about
him  with  the  firmest  friendship  and  the  most  absolute  devotion.  The  latter
was  a  religious  though  sensual  monarch,  fond  of  display — the  type  of
sovereign  who  usually  succeeds  to  the  head  of  the  family  and  enjoys  the
wealth  which  his  predecessor  had  acquired,  displaying  before  all  men  the
results  of  au  accomplished  work,  and  often  thereby  endangering  its  stability.
The  real  reason  of  their  failure  to  establish  a  durable  monarchy  was  the  fact  that
neither  of  them  understood  the  temperament  of  the  people  they  were  called
upon  to  govern.  The  few  representations  we  possess  of  the  Hebrews  of  this
period  depict  them  as  closely  resembling  the  nations  which  inhabited  Southern
•Syria  at  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  occupation.  They  belong  to  the  type  with
which  the  monuments  have  made  tis  familiar ;  they  are  distinguished  by  an
.aquiline  nose,  projecting  cheek-bones,  and  curly  hair  and  beard.  They  were
vigorous,  hardy,  and  inured  to  fatigue,  but  though  they  lacked  those  qualities
of  discipline  and  obedience  which  are  the  characteristics  of  true  warrior  races,
David  had  not  hesitated  to  employ  them  in  war;  they  were  neither  sailors,
builders,  nor  given  to  commerce  and  industries,  and  yet  Solomon  built
fleets,  raised  palaces  and  a  temple,  and  undertook  maritime  expeditions,  and

'  1  Kings  xii.  l-2i ;  cf.  2  Chron.  x.,  xi.  1-4.  The  te.xt  of  1  Kings  xii.  20  expressly  says,  "there
was  none  that  followed  the  house  of  David  but  tlie  tribe  of  Judah  ouly ;  "  whereas  tlie  following
verse,  which  some  think  to  have  been  added  by  another  baud,  adds  that  Ruhoboam  assembled  180,000
men  "  which  were  warriors"  from  "  the  house  of  Judah  and  the  tribe  of  Benjamin."


THE  EEBEEW  KINGDOM   DIVIDED.  753

financial  circumstances  seemed  for  tlie  moment  to  be  favourable.  The  onward
progress  of  Assyria  towards  tlie  Mediterranean  bad  been  arrested  by  the
Hittites,  Egypt  was  in  a  condition  of  lethargy,  the  Aramsean  populations
were  fretting  away  tlieir  energies  in  internal  dissensions;  David,  having
encountered  no  serious  opposition  after  his
victory  over  the  Philistines,  had  extended
his  conquests  and  increased  the  area  of  his
kingdom,  and  the  interested  assistance  wliicii
Tyre  afterwards  gave  to  Solomon  enabled  the
latter  to  realise  his  dreams  of  luxury  and  royal
magnificence.  But  the  kingdom  w  hich  had  been
created  by  David  and  Solomon  rested  solely  on
their  individual  efforts,  and  its  continuance
could  be  ensured  only  by  bequeathing  it  to
descendants  who  had  sufficient  energy  and  pru-
dence  to  consolidate  its  weaker  elements,  and

build  up  the  tottering  materials  which  were  constantly  tlireatening  to  fall
asunder.  As  soon  as  the  government  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the
weakling  Kehoboam,  who  had  at  the  outset  departed  from  his  predecessors'
policy,  the  component  parts  of  the  kingdom,  which  had  for  a  few  years  been  held
together,  now  became  disintegrated  without  a  shock,  and  as  if  by  mutual
consent.  The  old  order  of  things  which  existed  in  tlie  time  of  the  Judges  had
passed  away  with  the  death  of  Saul.  The  advantages  which  ensued  from  a
monarchical  regime  were  too  apparent  to  permit  of  its  being  set  aside,  and  the
tribes  who  had  been  bound  together  by  nearly  half  a  century  of  obedience  to
a  common  master  now  resolved  themselves,  according  to  their  geographical
positions,  into  two  masses  of  unequal  numbers  and  extent- — Judah  in  the
south,  togetlier  with  the  few  clans  who  remained  loyal  to  the  kingly  house,
and  Israel  in  the  north  and  the  regions  beyond  Jordan,  occupying  tliree-
fonrths  of  the  territory  which  had  belonged  to  David  and  Solomon.

Israel,  in  spite  of  its  extent  and  population,  did  not  enjoy  the  predominant
position  which  we  might  have  expected  at  the  beginning  of  its  independent
existence.  It  had  no  political  unity,  no  capital  in  which  to  concentrate  its
resources,  no  temple,  and  no  army  ;  it  represented  the  material  out  of  which
a  state  could  be  formed  rather  than  one  already  constituted.  It  was  sub-
divided into  three  groups,  formerly  independent  of,  and  almost  strangers  to

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  pliotograpli  by  Petrie ;  it  is  the  captive  who  represents  the  town
of  Ganoti  in  the  lists  of  Sheshouq  at  Karuak.  Cf.  another  type  taken  from  the  same  list,  viz.  that
which  corresijouds  to  the  town  of  Jud-hammelok,  and  whieh  is  eonsidored  tu  be  the  portrait  nf  Kehoboam
(]).  77:i.  note  ;i,  of  the  present  work),  given  as  the  head-pieee  to  the  summary  of  this  chapter,  p.  671.


754  THE  HEBREWS  ASD    THE  PHILISTINES—  DAMASOOS.

each  other,  and  between  whom  neither  David  nor  Solomon  had  been  able
to  establish  any  bond  which  would  enable  them  to  forget  their  former  isolation.
The  centre  group  was  composed  of  the  House  of  Joseph — Ephraim,  Ben-
jamin, and  Manasseh — and  comprised  the  old  fortresses  of  Perea,  Mahauaim,
Penuel,  Succoth,  and  Kamoth,  ranged  in  a  line  running  parallel  with  the
Jordan.  In  the  eastern  group  were  the  semi-nomad  tribes  of  Eeuben  and
Gad,  who  still  persisted  in  the  pastoral  habits  of  their  ancestors,  and  remained
indifferent  to  the  various  revolutions  which  had  agitated  their  race  for  several
generations.  Finally,  in  the  northern  group  lay  the  smaller  tribes  of  Asher,
Naphtali,  Issachar,  Zebulon,  and  Dan,  hemmed  in  between  the  Phoenicians  and
the  Aramaeans  of  Zoba  and  Damascus.  Each  group  had  its  own  traditions,
its  own  interests  often  opposed  to  those  of  its  neighbours,  and  its  own  peculiar
mode  of  life,  which  it  had  no  intention  of  renouncing  for  any  one  else's  benefit.
The  difficulty  of  keeping  these  groups  together  became  at  once  apparent.
Shechem  had  been  the  first  to  revolt  against  Eehoboam ;  it  was  a  large  and
populous  town,  situated  almost  in  the  centre  of  the  newly  formed  state,  and
the  seat  of  an  ancient  oracle,  both  of  which  advantages  seemed  to  single  it  out
as  the  future  capital.  But  its  very  importance,  and  the  memories  of  its  former
greatness  under  Jerubbaal  and  Abimelech,  were  against  it.  Built  in  the  western
territory  belonging  to  Manasseh,  the  eastern  and  northern  clans  would  at  once
object  to  its  being  chosen,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  humiliate  them  before
the  House  of  Joseph,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  selection  of  Jerusalem  had
tended  to  make  them  subservient  to  Judah.  Jeroboam  would  have  endangered
his  cause  by  fixing  on  it  as  his  capital,  and  he  therefore  soon  quitted  it  to
establish  himself  at  Tirzah.  It  is  true  that  the  latter  town  was  also  situated
in  the  mountains  of  Ephraim,  but  it  was  so  obscure  and  insignificant  a  place  that
it  disarmed  all  jealousy;  the  new  king  therefore  took  up  his  residence  in
it,  since  be  was  forced  to  fix  on  some  royal  abode,  but  it  never  became
for  him  what  Jerusalem  was  to  his  rival,  a  capital  at  once  religious  and
military.  He  had  his  own  sanctuary  and  priests  at  Tirzah,  as  was  but
natural,  but  had  he  attempted  to  found  a  temple  which  would  have  attracted
the  whole  population  to  a  common  worship,  he  would  have  excited  jealousies
which  would  have  been  fatal  to  his  autliority.  On  the  other  hand,  Solomon's
temple  had  in  its  short  period  of  existence  not  yet  acquired  such  a  prestige  as
to  prevent  Jeroboam's  drawing  his  people  away  from  it :  which  he  determined
to  do  from  a  fear  that  contact  with  Jerusalem  would  endanger  the  allegiance  of
his  subjects  to  his  person  and  family.  Such  concourses  of  worshippers,  assem-
bling at  periodic  intervals  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  soon  degenerated  into
a  kind  of  foir,  in  whicli  commercial  as  well  as  religious  motives  had  their  part.
These  gatherings  formed  a  source  of  revenue  to  the  prince  in  whose  capital  they


OSGANISATWN   OF   THE  KINGDOM   OF  ISRAEL.


755


^^^Is^^^j^


THE   MOUND    AND    PLAIN    01'    BETHEL.'


were  held,  and  financial  as  well  as  political  considerations  required  that  periodical
assemblies  should  be  established  in  Israel  similar  to  those  which  attracted
Judali  to  Jerusalem.  Jeroboam  adopted  a  plan  which  while  safeguarding
the  interests  of  his  treasury,  prevented  his  becoming  unpopular  with  his
own  subjects ;  as  he  was  unable  to  have  a  temple  for  himself  alone,  he  chose
two  out  of  the  most  venerated  ancient  sanctuaries,  that  of  Dan  for  the  northern
tribes,  and  that  of  Bethel,  on  the  Judsean  frontier,  for  the  tribes  of  the  east
and  centre.  He  made  two  calves  of  gold,  one  for  each  place,  and  said  to  the
people,  "  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem ;  behold  thy  gods,  O
Israel,  wliicli  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  He  granted  the
sanctuaries  certain  appanages,  and  established  a  priesthood  answering  to  that
which  oificiated  in  the  rival  kingdom :  "  whosoever  would  he  consecrated  him,
that  there  might  be  priests  of  the  high  places."  '■*  While  Jeroboam  thus
endeavoured  to  strengthen  himself  on  the  throne  by  adapting  the  monarchy
to  the  temperament  of  the  tribes  over  which  he  ruled,  Rehoboam  took  measures
to  regain  his  lost  ground  and  restore  the  unity  which  he  himself  had  destroyed.
He  recruited  tlie  army  which  had  been  somewhat  neglected  in  the  latter  years
of  his  father,  restored  the  walls  of  the  cities  which  had  remained  Jaithful  to
him,  and  fortified  tlie  places  which  constituted  his  frontier  defences  against
tlie  Israelites.*     His  ambition  was  not  as  foolish  as  we  might  be  tempted  to

'  Drawn  by  Boiulior,  from  the  pliotograph  published  by  the  Due  de  Luynes,  Voyage  cC Exploration
a  la  mer  Morte,  vol.  iii.  pi.  23.

=  1  Kings  xii.  •I5-'A'^;  chaps,  xii.  33,  xiii.,  xiv.  1-lS  contain,  side  by  side  with  the  narrative  of
fuels,  biicli  as  the  death  of  Jeroboam's  son,  comments  on  the  religious  conduct  of  the  sovereign,  which
some  regard  as  being  of  later  date.

'  1  Kinijs  xii.  21-24  ;  cf.  2  Chruu.  xi.  1-17,  wliere  the  list  of  strongholds,  wanting  in  the  Book  of


756  THE  HEBHEWS   AND    THE  miLISTlNES — DAMASCUS.

imagine,  lie  liad  soldiers,  charioteers,  generals,  sliilled  in  the  art  of  war,
well-tilled  storehouses,  the  remnant  of  the  wealtli  of  Solomon,  and,  as  a  last
resource,  the  gold  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  He  ruled  over  the  same
extent  of  territory  as  that  possessed  by  David  after  the  death  of  Saul,  but
the  means  at  his  disposal  were  incontestably  greater  than  those  of  his  grand-
father, and  it  is  possible  that  he  might  in  the  end  iiave  overcome  Jeroboam,
as  David  overcame  Ishbosheth,  had  not  the  intervention  of  Egyjjt  discon-
certed his  plans,  and,  by  exhausting  his  material  forces,  struck  a  death-blow
to  all  his  hopes.

The  century  and  a  half  which  had  elapsed  since  the  death  of  the  last  of
the  Ramessides  had,  as  far  as  we  can  ascertain,  been  troubled  by  civil  wars  and
revolutions.'  The  imperious  Egypt  of  the  Theban  dynasties  had  passed  away,
but  a  new  Egypt  had  arisen,  not  without  storm  and  struggle,  in  its  place.  As
long  as  the  campaigns  of  the  Pharaohs  had  been  coniined  to  the  Nile  valley
and  the  Oases,  Thebes  had  been  the  natural  centre  of  the  kingdom  ;  placed
almost  exactly  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  southern  frontier,  it  had
been  both  the  national  arsenal  and  the  treasure-house  to  which  all  foreign
wealth  had  found  its  way  from  the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Sahara,  and  from  the
coasts  of  Asia  Minor  to  the  equatorial  swamps.  The  cities  of  the  Delta,  lying
on  the  frontier  of  those  peoples  with  whom  Egypt  now  held  but  little  inter-
course, possessed  neither  the  authority  nor  the  resources  of  Thebes ;  even
Memphis,  to  which  the  prestige  of  her  ancient  dynasties  still  clung,  occupied
but  a  secondary  place  beside  her  rival.  •  The  invasion  of  the  shepherds,  by

Kings,  is  given  from  an  ancient  source.  The  writer  affirms,  in  harmony  witli  the  ideas  of  his  time,
"that  the  Levites  left  their  suburbs  and  their  possessiun,  and  Cfliiie  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem;  for
.Teroboam  and  his  sons  cast  them  oil",  that  they  should  not  execute  the  Priest's  office  unto  the  Lord."
'  I  iiave  mentioned  above,  on  p.  482,  the  uncertainty  which  still  shrouds  the  XX"'  dynast}'.
Tlie  following  is  the  order  in  whicli  I  proposed,  eight  years  ago,  that  its  kings  should  be
placed  (ies  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  tlie  Me'molres  de  la  Mission  I'ranfaise,  vol.  i.
p.  062)  :—

I.    NAKHTrSlT-MiAMON,  UsiRMABI-MlAMON.  VII.    KaMSES      VIII.        SiTHIKHOPSHCF-MiAMON,

11.    KaMSES      hi.      HaQ-nCtIR-ONU,       UsIKMARI-  UslKMAKt-KHOSIAMON.

mSaMON.  I     VIII.    MARITpSIU-MiAMON

HI.  Kamses     IV.     MAiTi-MtAMON,      UsirmaeI  -  1      IX.  KamsesIX.  SiPHTAH,  SakhanirJ-miamon.

SOTPUNIRI.  I  X.    IIaJISES      X.    MiAMUN,     NOFIRKEURI-SOTPU-

IV.  Eamses  v.  Amonhikhopshijf-miamon,  Usir-  '  uiRi.

JIARi-SAKHPIR.NIRI.  XI.    EaJISES     XI.      ASIENHIKHOPSHUF,     KhOPIB-

V.  Kamses    IV.    Amonhikhopshuf-haq-nC'tir-

ONu,  NibmarI-miamon.
VI.  Eajises  VII.  Atamox-haq-nOtir-onv,  Usik-

MARI-MiAMON-SOTPCXIRt.


MABI-SOTPUNIRI.

XII.  Ramses   XII.    KHAMotslT-HAQ-NCTiR-ONU-

MiAMON,  MANMARt-SOTpC'NIPHTAU.


I''or  another  possible  classification  of  the  earlier  Pharaohs  of  this  dynasty,  see  the  observations  of
K.  Sethe,  Untersuchungen  zur  Gesch.  und  AlterthiimsJnoule  ^gyplens,  pp.  59-(5-t.  The  XX"'  dynasty
lasted  for  about  a  hundred  aud  forty  years,  from  1220  to  1080  bo.


THE  XXP''  DYNASTY  AND    THE   DECADENCE   OF   THEBES.         757

making  the  Thebaid  the  refuge  aud  last  bulwark  of  the  Egyptian  nation.increased
its  importance :  in  the  critical  times  of  the  struggle,  Thebes  was  not  merely
the  foremost  city  in  the  country,  it  represented  the  country  itself,  and  the
heart  of  Egypt  may  be  said  to  have  throbbed  within  its  walls.  The  victories
of  Ahmosis,  the  expeditions  of  Thiitmosis  I.  aud  Thutmosis  III.,  enlarged  her
horizon ;  her  Pharaohs  crossed  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  they  conquered  Syria,  sub-
dued the  valleys  of  the  Euplirates  and  the  Balikh,  aud  by  so  doing  increased
her  wealth  and  her  splendour.  Her  streets  witnessed  during  two  centuries
processions  of  barbarian  prisoners  ladeu  with  the  spoils  of  conquest.  But  with
the  advent  of  the  XIX'"  aud  XX"*  dynasties  came  anxious  times ;  the  peoples  of
Syria  and  Libya,  long  kept  in  servitude,  at  length  rebelled,  and  the  long  distance
between  Karnak  and  Gaza  soon  began  to  be  irksome  to  princes  who  had  to  be
constantly  on  the  alert  on  the  Canaauite  frontier,  and  who  found  it  impossible
to  have  their  head-quarters  six  hundred  miles  from  the  .scene  of  hostilities.
Hence  it  came  about  that  Ramses  XL,  Minephtah,  and  Eamses  III.  all  took
up  their  abode  in  the  Delta  during  the  greater  part  of  their  active  life ;  tliey
restored  its  ancient  towns  and  founded  new  ones,  which  soon  acquired  con-
siderable wealth  by  foreign  commerce.^  The  centre  of  government  of  the
empire,  which,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  old  Memphite  state,  had  been  re-
moved southwards  to  Thebes  on  account  of  the  conquest  of  Ethiopia  aud  the
encroachment  of  Theban  civilization  upon  Nubia  and  the  Sudan,  now  gradually
returned  northwards,  and  passing  over  Heliopolis,  which  had  exercised  a
transitory  supremacy,  at  length  established  itself  in  the  Delta.  Tanis,  Bubastis,
Sals,  Mendes,  and  Sebennytos  all  disputed  the  honour  of  forming  the  royal
residence,  and  all  in  turn  during  the  course  of  ages  enjoyed  the  privilege
without  ever  rising  to  the  rank  of  Thebes,  or  producing  any  sovereigns  to  be
compared  with  those  of  Iier  triumphant  dynasties.  Tanis  was,  as  we  have  seen,
the  first  of  these  to  rule  the  whole  of  the  Nile  valley.^  Its  prosperity  had
continued  to  increase  from  the  time  that  Ramses  II.  began  to  rebuild  it ;
the  remaining  inhabitants  of  Avaris,  mingled  with  the  natives  of  pure  race
and  the  prisoners  of  war  settled  tliere,  had  furnished  it  with  an  active  and
industrious  population,  which  had  considerably  increased  during  the  peaceful
reigns  of  the  XX'"  dynasty.  The  surrounding  country,  drained  and  cultivated
by  unremitting  efforts,  became  one  of  the  most  fruitful  parts  of  the  Delta ;
there  was  a  large  exportation  of  iish  and  corn,  to  which  were  soon  added  the
various   products   of    its   manufactories,   such   as   liueu   aud    woollen    stuffs,

'  For  the  impulse  given  to  the  towns  of  the  Delta  iiniler  the  XIX"'  anil  XX'"  ilyiiasties  see
mpra,  pp.  423,  424,  470,  476.

'  The  little  that  is  known  of  the  circumstances  coimected  with  tliu  rise  of  the  Tauite  dynasty
will  he  found  supra,  pp.  562-565.


7oS  THE  nSDREWS   AND    THE   PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

ornament?,  and  objects  in  glass  and  in  precious  metals.*  These  were  embarked
on  Egyptian  or  Phoenician  galleys,  and  were  exchanged  in  the  ports  of  the
IMediterranean  for  Syrian,  Asiatic,  or  ^Egean  commodities,  which  were  then
transmitted  by  the  Egyptian  merchants  to  the  countries  of  the  East  and  to
Northern  Africa.-  The  port  of  Tanis  was  one  of  the  most  secure  and  con-
venient which  existed  at  that  period.  It  was  at  sufficient  distance  from  the
coast  to  be  safe  from  the  sudden  attacks  of  pirates;'  and  yet  near  enou"-h  to
permit  of  its  being  reached  from  the  open  by  merchantmen  in  a  few  hours  of
easy  navigation ;  the  arms  of  the  Nile,  and  the  canals  which  here  flowed  into
the  sea,  were  broad  and  deep,  and,  so  long  as  they  were  kept  well  dredged,
would  allow  the  heaviest-laden  vessel  of  large  draught  to  make  its  way
up  them  with  ease.  The  site  of  the  town  was  not  less  advantageous  for
overland  traffic.  Tanis  was  the  first  important  station  encountered  by  caravans
after  crossing  the  frontier  at  Zalu,''  and  it  offered  them  a  safe  and  convenient
emporium  for  tlie  disposal  of  their  goods  in  exchange  for  the  riches  of  Egypt
and  the  Delta.  The  combination  of  so  many  advantageous  features  on  one
site  tended  to  the  rapid  development  of  both  civic  and  individual  wealth  ;
in  less  than  three  centuries  after  its  rebuilding  by  Ramses  II.,  Tanis  had
risen  to  a  position  which  enabled  its  sovereigns  to  claim  even  the  obedience  of
Thebes  itself.

\se  know  very  little  of  the  history  of  this  Tanite  dynasty;  the  monuments
have  not  revealed  the  names  of  all  its  kings,  and  much  difficulty  is  experienced
in  establishing  the  sequence  of  those  already  brought  to  light."  Their  actual
domain  barely  extended  as  far  as  Siut,  but  their  suzerainty  was  acknowledged

'  The  immense  number  of  designs  taken  from  aquatic  plants,  as,  for  instance,  the  papyrus  ami
the  lotus,  single  or  in  groups,  as  well  as  from  fish  and  aquatic  birds,  which  we  observe  on  objects  of
Phoenician  goldsmiths'  work,  leads  me  to  believe  that  the  Tyrian  and  Sidonian  artists  borrowed  most
of  their  models  from  the  Delta,  and  doubtless  from  Tanis,  the  most  flourishing  town  of  the  Delta
during  the  centuries  following  the  downfall  of  Thebes.

'  It  was  from  Tanis  that  the  Egyptian  vessel  set  out  carrying  the  messengers  of  Hrihor  to
Byblos  ;  cf.  supra,  pp.  5S2,  5S3.

^  AVe  may  judge  of  the  security  afforded  by  such  a  position  by  the  account  in  Homer  (_Odyssey,
xiv.  185-359)  which  Ulysses  gives  to  Eumaios  of  his  pretended  voyage  to  Egypt ;  the  Greeks  having
disembarked,  and  being  scattered  over  the  country,  were  attacked  by  the  Egyptians  before  they
could  capture  a  town  or  carry  their  booty  to  the  ships.  Cf.,  for  these  legends.  Mallet,  Les  Premiers
^taUifsemenis  dee  Grecs  en  Egypte,  p.  12,  et  seq.

*  For  the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Delta  and  the  station  at  Zalu,  cf.  supra,  pp.  122,  123.

'  The  classification  of  the  Tanite  line  has  beeu  complicated  in  the  minds  of  most  Egyptologists
by  the  tendency  to  ignore  the  existence  of  the  sacerdotal  dynasty  of  high  priests,  to  confuse  with  the
Tanite  Pharaohs  those  of  the  high  priests  who  bore  the  crown,  and  to  identify  in  the  lists  of  Manetho
(more  or  less  corrected)  the  names  they  are  in  search  of.  I  have  discussed  the  various  systems
proposed,  even  to  those  of  Lepsius  and  Wiedemann,  in  the  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari  {Memoims
de  la  Mhsion  Frani^aise,  vol.  i.  p.  ti-tO,  et  seq.),  and  I  have  also  endeavoured  to  show  the  contem-
poraneousness of  the  two  families  in  a  clearer  way  than  has  been  hitherto  done.  Daresay  has  added
new  facts  to  those  I  had  already  pointed  out,  but  he  has  made  the  mistake  of  supposing  raiuotmu  to
have  been  of  the  Tanite  line  (Contribution  u  V Etude  de  la  XXP  dynastie,  in  the  i?.;ri(e  Arclcolugi'iue,


THE   RELATIONS    OF    THE    TIIEBANS    WITH    THE   TANITES.         759

by  the  Said  as  well  as  by  all  or  part  of  Ethiopia,^  ami  tlie  Tanite  Pharaohs
maintained  their  authority  with  such  vigour,  that  they  had  it  in  their  power  on
several  occasions  to  expel  tlie  high  priests  of  Anion,  and  to  restore,  at  least  for
a  time,  the  unity  of  the  empire.  To  accomplish  this,  it  would  have  been
sufficient  for  them  to  have  assumed  the  priestly  dignity  at  Thebes,  and  this
was  what  no  doubt  took  place  at  times  when  a  vacancy  in  the  high  priesthood
occurred ;  but  it  was  merely  in  an  interim,  and  the  Tanite  sovereigns  always
relinquished  the  office,  after  a  brief  lapse  of  time,  in  favour  of  some  member  of
the  family  of  Hrihor  whose  right  of  primogeniture  entitled  him  to  succeed  to  it.^
It  indeed  seemed  as  if  custom  and  religious  etiquette  had  made  the  two  offices
of  the  pontificate  and  the  royal  dignity  incompatible  for  one  individual  to  hold
simultaneously.  The  priestly  duties  had  become  marvellously  complicated
during  the  Theban  hegemony,  and  the  minute  observances  which  they  entailed
absorbed  the  whole  life  of  those  who  dedicated  themselves  to  their  perform-
ance.^ They  had  daily  to  fulfil  a  multitude  of  rites,  distributed  over  the  various
iiours  in  such  a  manner  that  it  seemed  impossible  to  find  leisure  for  any  fresh
occupation  without  encroaching  on  the  time  allotted  to  absolute  bodily  needs.
The  high  priest  rose  each  morning  at  an  appointed  hour  ;  he  had  certain  times
for  taking  food,  for  recreation,  for  giving  audience,  for  dispensing  justice,  for
attending  to  worldly  affairs,  and  for  relaxation  with  his  wives  and  children ;

189G,  vol.  sxviii.  pp.  72-90).    A  fresh  exaininatiou  of  the  subject  has  led  me  to  adopt  provisionally
the  following  order  for  the  series  of  Tanite  kings  : —


From  the  Mondments.

1.  NsBINDIDI-JiTaMOK,  XjAZKHOPIRBt-SOTPUNlEi.

2.  PsiCkHANNIT  I.  MlAMON,  Akhopirbi-sotpuniamon.

3.  AMENEMOPIT-mJaMON,  UsiEMAEt-SOTPiJlJIAMON.

4.  Siamon-m!amon,  NCtirkhopirr!-sotpCniamon.

5.  Hor-PbiCkhannit  II.  Miamon,  Uazhiqr!.


From  Manetho.

1.  Smendes 20  years

2.  PsonsENNES  1 4G  „

3.  Nephelkueres  ....  4  „

4.  Amenophtuis   ....  9  1,

5.  OsOKUOR t!  „

6.  PSINAKHES 9  ,.

7.  PSOUSENNES  II.        ...  30      „


The  dynasty  must  have  reigned  about  a  hundred  and  forty  years,  from  cir.  1080  to  940  B.C. ;  but  these,
of  course,  are  merely  approximate  dates.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  5(;4.

=  This  is  only  true  if  the  personage  who  entitles  himself  once  within  a  cartouche,  "  the  Master  of
the  two  lands,  First  Prophet  of  Amon,  Psiiilshannit "  (Wiedemann,  Zur  XXL  Dynastie  Manetho  s,  in
ihe  Zeitschri/t,lSSS,\>.H8;  Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  tho  Mifmoires  de  la
MimUm  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.  pp.  679,  728),  is  really  the  Tanite  king,  and  not  the  high  priest  Paiiikhannit
(cf.  pp.  7C1,  7(!2  of  the  present  volume),  as  Daressy  is  inclined  to  tliink  {Contributions  a  I'hisloire
de  la  XXI'  dynastie,  p.  17).

'  The  first  book  of  Diodorus  contains  a  picture  of  the  life  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  (i.  70,  71),  which,
in  common  with  much  information  contained  in  the  work,  is  taken  from  a  lost  book  of  Hecataius.
The  historical  romance  written  by  the  latter  appears  to  have  been  composed  from  information  taken
from  Theban  sources.  The  comparison  of  it  with  the  inscribed  monuments  and  the  ritual  uf  the
oultus  of  Amon  proves  th.at  the  ideal  description  given  in  this  work  of  the  life  of  the  kings,  merely
reproduces  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  lives  of  the  Theban  and  Ethiopian  high  priests;  lieuce
the  greater  part  of  the  minute  observances  which  we  remark  therein  apply  to  the  latter  only,  and
nut  to  the  Pharaohs  properly  so  called.


760  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

at  uiglit  he  kept  watch,  ur  rose  at  intervals  to  prepare  for  tlie  various  cere-
monies which  could  only  be  celebrated  at  sunrise.  He  was  responsible  for  the
superintendence  of  the  priests  of  Amon  in  the  numberless  festivals  held  in  honour
of  the  gods,  from  which  he  could  not  absent  himself  except  for  some  legitimate
reason.  From  all  this  it  will  be  seen  how  impossible  it  was  for  a  lay  king,  like
the  sovereign  ruling  at  Tanis,  to  submit  to  such  restraints  beyond  a  certain
point ;  his  patience  would  soon  have  become  exhausted,  want  of  practice  would
have  led  him  to  make  slips  or  omissions,  rendering  the  rites  null  and  void ;  ^
and  the  temporal  affairs  of  his  kingdom — internal  administration,  justice,
finance,  commerce,  and  war — made  such  demands  upon  his  time,  that  he  was
obliged  as  soon  as  possible  to  find  a  substitute  to  fulfil  his  religious  duties.
The  force  of  circumstances  therefore  maintained  the  line  of  Theban  high
priests  side  by  side  with  their  sovereigns,  the  Tanite  kings.  They  were,  it  is
true,  dangerous  rivals,  both  on  account  of  the  wealth  of  their  fief  and  of  the
immense  prestige  which  they  enjoyed  in  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  in  all  the  nomes
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Amon.-  They  were  allied  to  the  elder  branch  of
the  Eamessides,  and  had  thus  inherited  such  near  rights  to  the  crown  that
Smendes  had  not  hesitated  to  concede  to  Hrihor  the  cartouches,  the  preamble,
and  insignia  of  the  Pharaoh,  including  the  psehent  and  the  iron  helmet  inlaid
with  gold.^  This  concession,  however,  had  been  made  as  a  personal  favour,  and
extended  only  to  the  lifetime  of  Hrihor,  without  holding  good,  as  a  matter
of  course,  for  his  successors;  his  son  Pionkhi  had  to  confine  himself  to i the
priestly  titles,^  and  liis  grandson  Painotmii  enjoyed  the  kingly  privileges  only
during  part  of  his  life,"  doubtless. in  consequence  of  his  marriage  with  a  certain
Makeri,  probably  daughter  of  Psiukhaniiit  I.,  the  Tanite  king.''  Makeri
apparently  died  soon  after,  and  the  discovery  of  her  coffin  in  the  hiding-place
at  Deir  el-Bahari  reveals  the  fact  of  her  death  in  giving  birth  to  a  little
daughter  wlio  did  not  survive  her,  and  who  rests  in  the  same  coffin  beside


'  Cr.  Maspero,  Daioii  of  Civilization,  pp.  1-J4-127.

-  The  limits  of  tlie  Theban  state  have  beeu  defined,  supra,  pp.  563,  564  ;  for  the  remarkable  exten-
sion of  the  eultus  of  Amon,  cf.  ibid.,  p.  300.

'  For  this  restricted  royalty  of  Hrihor,  cf.  supru,  pp.  503-565.
The  only  monument  of  this  prince  as  yet  known  (Maspeko,  Notes  sur  ciuelques  points  de  Gram-
maire  et  d'Histoire,  in  the  Zeiischri/t,  18S3,  p.  62)  gives  him  merely  the  usual  titles  of  the  high  priest,
and  the  inscriptions  of  his  sou  Painotmii  I.  style  him  "First  Prophet  of  Amon."  His  name  should
probably  be  read  Palonukhi  or  Piouukhi,  rather  than  Pioukhi  or  Piankhi.  It  is  not  unlikely  that
some  of  the  papyri  published  by  Spiegelberg  date  from  his  pontificate  (Spiegelberg,  Correspondances
dtt  temps  des  rois-pretres,  etc.,  pp.  10,  II).

'  Cf.  the  history  of  his  protocol  in  Maspkho,  Le$  Momies  roijales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  Mgnxoires
de  la  Mission  Frangaise,  vol.  i.  p.  079,  et  seq.

For  Makeri  and  the  monuments  remaining  of  her  reign,  see  Wiedemann,  ^(lyptische  Qesch..
\K  534,  and  Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  Mc'noires  de  la  Mission  Frangaise,
vol.  i.  pp.  577.  G92-69S.


THE  LINE   OF    TllEBAN  IU(JE   PRIESTS.


■61


the  miiinniy  of  her  mother.'  None  of  tlie  successors  of  Painotmu — 3Iasahirti,
Mauakhpirri,  Painotmu  II.,  Psiukhannit,  Nsbindidi — enjoyed  a  similar  dis-
tinction, and  if  one  of  tliem  happened  to  surround  his  name  with  a  cartouche,  it
was  done  surreptitiously,  without  the  authority  of  the  sovereign.^  Painotmu  II.
contented  himself  witli  drawing  attention  to  liis  connection  witli  the  reiKnine;


iHE    MLMLMIEs    OF    c.'rREN    MAKEIII    AND    HER    CHILD/

house,  and  styled  liimself  '■  Eoyal  Son  of  Psiukhannit-Miamon,"  on  account  of
his  ancestress  IVIakeri  having  been  tlie  daughter  of  the  Pharaoh  Psiukhannit.*
The  relationship  of  which  he  boasted  was  a  distant  one,  but  many  of  his
contemporaries  who  claimed  to  be  of  the  line  of  Sesostris,  and  called  them-
selves "  royal  sons  of  Eamses,"  traced  their  descent  from  a  far  more  remote
ancestor.  The  death  of  one  high  priest,  or  the  appointment  of  his  successor,
was  often  the  occasion  of  disturbances ;  the  jealousies  between  his  children  by
the  same  or.  by  different  wives  were  as  bitter  as  those  which  existed  in  the
palace  of  tlie  Pharaohs,  and  the  suzerain  liimself  was  obliged  at  times  to  inter-
fere in  order  to  restore  peace.    It  was  owing  to  an  intervention  of  tliis  kind  that

'  Maspero,  Xes  Momies  rnyuleg  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  M^moires  de  la  Mission  Fran^aise,  vol.  i.
p.  .')77.

•  Manakliijirri  often  places  his  name  in  a  square  cartouche  which  tends  at  times  to  become  an
oval  (Maspeko,  Lee  Momies  royales,  etc.,  pp.  70'2-70i),  but  this  is  the  case  only  on  some  pieces  of  stuff
rolled  round  a  mummy  and  on  some  bricks  concealed  in  tlie  walla  of  el-Hibeh,  Thelie.s,  and  (Jebelein.
If  the  "P.^iukhannit,  Ilish  Priest  of  Amon,"  who  once  (to  our  knowledge)  enclosed  his  name  in  a
cartouche,  is  really  a  high  priest,  and  not  a  king  (cf.  supra,  p.  759,  note  2),  his  case  would  be  analogous
to  that  of  Manakhpirri.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  by  ICinil  Brugsch-Bey ;  cf.  jr.\si>Ei;o,  Les  Momies
royales,  etc.,  pi.  xix.  u.

'  The  example  of  the  "royal  sons  of  Eamses"  (cf.  supra,  pp.  564,  565)  explains  the  variant  which
makes  "  Painotmu,  son  of  Manakhpirri,"  into  "  Paiuotmil,  royal  son  of  Psi&kliilnnit-Mianion "
(Maspero,  Les  Momies  royales,  etc.,  pp.  070,  708-710;  Uaressv,  Cunlribuliou  «  I'histoire  de  la  XXI'
Dyimslii>,  jip.  4  -6).


7G-_'  THE  EEDBEWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

]\[auaklipini  was  called  on  to  replace  his  brother  Masahirti.  A  section  of  the
Theban  population  had  revolted,  but  the  rising  had  been  put  down  by  the
Tanite  Siamon,  and  its  leaders  banished  to  the  Oasis  ;  Manakhpirri  had  there-
upon been  summoned  to  court  and  officially  invested  with  the  pontificate  in
the  XXV"'  year  of  the  king's  reign.  But  on  his  return  to  Karnak,  the  new
high  priest  desired  to  heal  old  feuds,  and  at  once  recalled  the  exiles. '^  Troubles
and  disorders  appeared  to  beset  the  Thebans,  and,  like  the  last  of  the  Ramessides,
they  were  engaged  in  a  perpetual  struggle  against  robbers.'^  The  town,  de-
prived of  its  former  influx  of  foreign  spoil,  became  more  and  more  impoverished,
and  its  population  gradually  dwindled.  The  necropolis  suffered  increasingly
from  pillagers,  and  the  burying-places  of  the  kings  were  felt  to  be  in  such
danger,  tliat  the  authorities,  despairing  of  being  able  to  protect  them,  with-
drew the  mummies  from  their  resting-places.  The  bodies  of  Seti  I.,  Ramses  II.,
and  Ramses  III.  were  once  more  carried  down  the  valley,  and,  after  various
removals,  were  at  length  huddled  together  for  safety  in  the  tomb  of  Amenothes
I.  at  Drah-abu'l-Neggah.''

The  Tanite  Pharaohs  seemed  to  have  lacked  neither  courage  nor  good  will.
The  few  monuments  which  they  have  left  show  that  to  some  extent  they  carried
on  the  works  begun  by  their  predecessors.  An  unusually  high  inundation  had
injured  the  temple  at  Karnak,  the  foundations  had  been  denuded  by  the  water,
and  serious  damage  would  have  been  done,  had  not  the  work  of  reparation
been  immediately  undertaken.  Nsbindidi  reopened  the  sandstone  quarries
between  Erment  and  Gebelein,  from  which  Seti  I.  had  obtained  the  building
materials  for  the  temple,  and  drew  from  thence  what  was  required  for  the  repair
of  the  edifice.*      Two  of  the  descendants  of  Xsbindidi,  Psiukhannit  I.  and

'  This  appears  iu  the  Maunier  Stele  preserved  for  some  time  in  the  "  Maison  Fran^aise  "  at
Luxor,  anil  now  removed  to  the  Louvre.  It  was  published  and  translated  by  Bkcgsch,  Hecueil  de
Monuments,  vol.  i.  pi.  xxii.  pp.  39.  40 ;  Iteise  nach  der  Grosseu  Oase  el  Khargeh,  pi.  xxii.  pp.  S6-8S ;  and
Gesch.  A<!gypteHS,  pp.  015-649.

'  The  series  of  high  priests  side  by  side  with  the  sovereigns  of  the  XXI~'  dynasty  may  ho
provisionally  arranged  as  follows: —

Thebans.  Tanites.

I.   HkiBOK  HONNDTIR-NI-AMOS,  SiAMOK-mIaMON SmENDES.

ir.    PloNKHI j

III.  Painotmu  I.  MiAMON,  Kbopibkheri-SotpCniamon    .    .     .     >    PsiukhJnnit  I.

IV.  Masahirti )

V.    MAXAKHPIRIU ,       AMENEMuriT.

VI.    PAiSOTJlC  II (       SlAMON.

\'II.    NsBINDlDI? )      PsiCKH.^NNiT  II.

VIII.  PsiOkh.^nnit

This  is  the  table  drawn  up  by  Maspero,  Les  Moynies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahart,  p.  729,  partly  corrected
by  fresh  information  given  by  Uaressy,  Contribution  a  I'histoire  de  la  XXI'  Dynasty,  p.  IS.

'  This  follows  from  the  legal  documents  found  on  several  royal  muramies  (Maspero,  Les  Momies
royales,  etc.,  in  the  Mgmolres  de  la  Mission  Frangaise,  vol.  i.  pp.  551,  559).

*  Dabesst,  Les  Carriires  de  Gebelein  et  le  roi  Smendvs,  in  tlie  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  X.  pp  133-
13S  ;  Maspero,  A  Sleh  of  King  Smendes,  in  the  Eecords  of  the  Past,  2nd  series,  vol.  v.  pp.  17-24.


THE   TANITE   FlIARAOIIS.  7(i:f

Amenemopit,  remodelled  the  little  temple  built  by  Kheops  in  honour  of  hi»
daughter  Honitsouu,  at  the  south-east  angle  of  his  pyramid.'  Both  Siamon-
miamon  and  Psiiikhannit  I.  have  left  traces  of  their  work  at  Memphis,  and
the  latter  inserted  his  cartouches  on  two  of  the  obelisks  raised  by  Eamses  at
Heliopolis.-  But  tliese  were  only  minor  undertakings,  and  it  is  at  Tanis  that
we  must  seek  the  most  characteristic  examples  of  their  activity.  Here  it
was  that  Psiukhannit  rebuilt  the  brick  ramparts  which  defended  the  city,
and  decorated  several  of  the  halls  of  the  great  temple.^  The  pylons  of  this
sanctuary  had  been  merely  begun  by  Sesostris :  Siamon  completed  them,  and
added  the  sphinxes ;  and  the  metal  plaques  and  small  objects  which  he  con-
cealed under  the  base  of  one  of  the  latter  have  been  brought  to  light  in  tlie
course  of  excavations.*  The  appropriation  of  the  monuments  of  other  kino-s
which  we  have  remarked  under  former  dynasties,  was  also  practised  by  the
Tanites.  Siamon  placed  his  inscriptions  over  those  of  the  Ramessides,'^  and
Psiukhannit  engraved  his  name  on  the  sphinxes  and  statues  of  Amenemhait  III.
as  unscrupulously  as  Apophis  and  the  Hyksos  had  done  before  him."  The
Tanite  sovereigns,  however,  were  not  at  a  loss  for  artists,  and  they  had  revived,
after  the  lapse  of  centuries,  the  traditions  of  the  local  school  which  had
flourished  during  the  XII"^  dynasty.  One  of  the  groups,  executed  by  order  of
Psiukhannit,  has  escaped  destruction,  and  is  now  in  the  Gizeh  Museum.  It
represents  two  figures  of  the  Nile,  marching  gravely  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and

'  From  this  temple  came  the  fragments  reproduced  by  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  102  h,  c  ;
cf.  Maspeeo,  Guide  du  Yhileur  au  Musee  de  Boulaq,  p.  423,  and  the  part  of  an  inscription  now  at
Berlin  (Lepsius,  Vber  die  XXI.  Manethonische  Kilnigsdynastie,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  18S2,  p.  106).
Manetho  transcribes  the  name  Amenemopit  as  Amenophtis,  which  supposes  a  variant  Amenupiti,  u,
form  actually  found  on  some  private  steK-e ;  the  usual  transcription  of  the  Egyptian  name  Amenem-
opit is  Ametwphis  (Wiedemann,  Zur  XXI.  Dijnastie  Manetho's,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1S82,  pp.  86-88),
but  this  form  is  most  often  erroneously  used  to  transcribe  Amenhotpu  instead  of  Amenothea  (cf.  supra,
p.  94,  note  2).

'  Block  from  Memphis  bearing  the  name  of  Siamon,  in  Brugsoh's  Recueil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.
pi.  Iv.,  No.  3;  obelisks  from  Alexandria  now  at  London  and  New  York,  sec  Lepsics,  op.  cit,  p.  104.
The  two  cartouches  of  Siamon  have  been  generally  assigned  to  Hrilior,  and  were  thought  to  represent
the  royal  protocol  of  this  king  used  outside  Thebes,  in  Lower  Egypt  (Naville,  Inscription  hislorique
de  Pinodjem  III,  p.  IC,  et  seq. ;  Wiedemann,  op.  cit.,  p.  87,  and  Aigyptische  Geschichfe,  p.  532;
Maspeeo,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bahtri,  in  the  Mc'moires  dc  la  Mission  Franfaise,  vol.  i.  p.  673).
Darcssy  has  shown  that  Siamon  must  certainly  be  distinguished  from  Hrihor,  and  has  given  him  his
proper  place  after  Amenemopit  in  the  Tanite  dynasty  {Contrihution  a  Velude  de  la  XXI  dynastie
€gyplienne,  pp.  8-10,  16).

»  Lepsiu.s,  Deiikm.,  in.  255  d;  Flinders  Petbie,  Tanis,  i.  p.  28,  and  ii.  p.  13.  Several  plaques  at
Gizeh  bear  his  cartouche  (Mariette,  Notice  des  principaux  monuments  du  Mme'e  de  Boulaq,  1876,
lip.  204,  2U5,  Nos.  545-550).

'  One  sphinx  of  Siamon  is  mentioned  by  Naville,  inser.  hist,  de  Pinodjem  III.,  p.  16;  cf.
Fl.  Petkie,  Tauis,  ii.  pp.  U,  12,  28,  and  pi.  viii.  These  plaques  are  preserved  at  the  Gizeh  Museum
(Mariette,  Notice  des  princ.  mon.,  1 876,  p.  205,  Nos.  551, 552  ;  BIaspeko,  Guide  du  Visitcur,  etc.,  p.  93,
No.  3778) ;  Vassalli  tells  me  several  more  have  been  discovered  at  tlie  angle  of  one  of  the  pylons.

'  Flinders  Petrie,  Tanis,  ii.  p.  28.

•  Sphinx  in  the  Gizeh  Museum,  in  Mariette,  Notice  des  princ.  mon.,  1876,  p.  264,  Noa.  11,  13;
Maspero,  Guide  du  Visiteur,  etc.,  pp.  64,  65 :  cf.  what  is  said  of  these  spliin.xes  in  the  Dawn  of
Ciriliznlion,  pp.  501,  .')02,  and  supra,  \i.  50.


"G4


THE  HEBREWS   AXD    THE   PTJJLISTINES — DAMASCnS.


carryiug  iu  front  of  tliem  tables  of  offerings,  ornamented  with  fish  and  garnished
witli  flowers.  The  stone  in  which  they  are  executed  is  of  an  extraordinary
hardness,  but  the  sculptor  has,  notwithstanding,  succeeded  in
carving  and  polishing  it  with  a  skill  which  does  credit
to  his  proficiency  iu  his  craft.  The  general  effect  of
the  figures  is  a  little  heavy,  but  the  detail  is  excel-
lent, and  the  correctness  of  pose,  precision  in  model-
ling, and  harmony  of  proportion  are  beyond  criticism.
Tlie  heads  present  a  certain  element  of  strangeness.
The  artist  evidently  took  as  his  model,  as
far  as  type  and  style  of  head-dress  are  con-
cerned, the  monuments  of  Amenemhait  III.
which  he  saw  around  him ;  indeed,  he  \ivo-
bably  copied  one  of  them  feature  for  feature.
He  has  reproduced  the  severity  of  expression,
the  firm  mouth,  the  projecting  cheek-bones,
the  long  hair  and  fan-shaped  beard  of  his
model,  but  he  has  not  been  able  to  imitate
the  broad  and  powerful  treatment  of  the  older
artists ;  his  method  of  execution  has  a
certain  hardness  and  conventionality  which
we  never  see  to  the  same  extent  in  the
statues  of  the  XII"'  dynasty.  The  work
is,  however,  an  extremely  interesting  one,
and  we  are  tempted  to  wish  that  many  more  such  monuments  had  been
saved  from  the  ruins  of  the  city.-  The  Pharaoh  who  dedicated  it  was  a
great  builder,  and,  like  most  of  his  predecessors  with  similar  tastes,  some-
what of  a  conqueror.  The  sovereigns  of  the  XXI~'  dynasty,  though  they
never  undertook  any  distant  campaigns,  did  not  neglect  to  keep  up  a  kind
of  suzerainty  over  the  Philistine  Shephelah  to  wliich  they  still  laid  claim.
The  expedition  which  one  of  them,  probably  Psiiikhauuit  II.,  led  against
Gezer,  the  alliance  with  the  Hebrews  and  the  marriage  of  a  royal  princess
with  Solomon,  must  all  have  been  regarded  at  the  court  of  Tanis  as  a  partial
revival  of  the  former  Egyptian  rule  in  Syria.-'     The  kings  were,  however,  obliged

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudiii,  horn  a  photograph  by  Emil  Brugsoh-Bey.

-  Mariette  attributes  this  group  to  the  Hyksos  (Deuxiiine  lettre  a  M.  h  cicomte  de. Rouge  sur  les
t'ouilles  de  Tanis,  pp.  5-7,  and  pi.  v.,  vi.,  a,ud  Notice  des  priiicipaux  monunieuls,  ISlil,  No.  14,  pp.  'I6i,
265);  I  liave  already  expressed  (Jre/i^oZoje'e  h'gtjptieime,i).  217)  the  opinion  that  it  dates  from  the
XXI*'  dynasty.     Cf.  supra,  p.  55,  note  8.

^  For  the  taking  of  Gozer,  the  marriage  of  a  daughter  of  Pharaoli  to  Solomon,  and  the  deductious
which  can  be  drawn  from  it  as  to  tlie  relative  positions  of  Egypt  and  the  Hebrew  kingdom  towards
the  end  of  the  XXI''  dynasty,  cf.  supra,  p.  738,  and  infra,  p.  772.


THE  TWij    XILES   OF   T.\NIS.'


THE  LIBYAN  MERCENARIES.  7iS^

to  rest  content  with  small  results,  for  though  their  battalions  were  sufficiently
numerous  and  well  disciplined  to  overcome  the  Canaanite  chiefs,  or  even
the  Israelite  kingdom,  it  is  to  be  doubted  whether  they  were  strong  enough  to
attack  the  troops  of  the  Aramaean  or  Hittite  princes,  who  had  a  highly  organised
military  system,  modelled  on  that  of  Assyria.  Egyptian  arms  and  tactics  had  not
made  much  progress  since  the  great  campaigns  of  the  Theban  conquerors  ;  the
military  authorities  still  complacently  trusted  to  their  cliariots  and  their  light
troops  of  archers  at  a  period  when  the  whole  success  of  a  campaign  was  decided
by  heavily  armed  infantry,  and  when  cavalry  had  already  begun  to  change
the  issue  of  battles.  The  decadence  of  the  military  spirit  in  Egypt  had  been
particularly  marked  in  all  classes  under  the  later  Kamessides,  and  the  native
militia,  without  exception,  were  reduced  to  a  mere  rabble — courageous,  it  is
true,  and  able  to  sell  their  lives  dearly  when  occasion  demanded,  rather  than
give  way  before  the  enemy,  but  entirely  lacking  that  enthusiasm  and  resolution
which  sweep  all  obstacles  before  them.  The  chariotry  had  not  degenerated  in
the  same  way,  thanks  to  the  care  with  which  the  Pharaoh  and  his  vassals  kept
up  the  breeding  of  suitable  horses  in  the  training  stables  of  the  principal
towns.  Egypt  provided  Solomon  with  draught-horses,  and  with  strong  yet
light  chariots,  which  he  sold  with  advantage  to  the  sovereigns  of  the  Orontes
and  the  Euphrates.^  But  it  was  the  mercenaries  who  constituted  the  most
active  and  effective  section  of  the  Pharaonic  armies.  These  troops  formed  the
backbone  on  which  all  the  other  elements — chariots,  spearmen,  and  native  archers
— were  dependent.  Their  spirited  attack  carried  the  other  troops  with  them,
and  by  a  tremendous  onslaught  on  the  enemy  at  a  decisive  moment  gave  the
commanding  general  some  chance  of  success  against  the  better-equipped  and
better-organised  battalions  that  he  would  be  sure  to  meet  with  on  the  plains
of  Asia.  The  Tanite  kings  enrolled  these  mercenaries  in  large  numbers ;  they
entrusted  them  with  the  garrisoning  of  the  principal  towns,  and  confirmed  the
privileges  which  their  chiefs  had  received  from  the  Eamessides,  but  the  results
of  such  a  policy  were  not  long  in  manifesting  themselves,  and  this  state  of
affairs  had  been  barely  a  century  in  existence  before  Egypt  became  a  prey
to  the  barbarians.

It  would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  say  that  it  had  fallen  a  prey  to  the
Libyans  only.  The  Asiatics  and  Europeans  whom  the  Theban  Pharaohs  had
called  in  to  fight  for  them  had  become  merged  in  the  bulk  of  the  nation,  or
had  died  out  for  lack  of  renewal.  Semites  abounded,  it  is  true,  in  the  eastern
iiomes  of  thfl  Delta,  but  their  presence  had  no  effect  on  the  military  strength
of  the  country.     Some  had  settled  in  the  towns  and  villages,  and  were  engaged

'  For  the  breeding  e(ablc3  of  the  Egyi)tians,  ami  the  ehiiriota  which  they  were  in  the  haliit  of
sii|i])lying  to  the  Ilebrews,  see  supra,  p.  '21U,  note  1,  nnd  pp.  739,  7t0.


7Gi;  THE  HEBBEWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

ill  commerce  or  industry ;  these  included  Phoenician,  Canaanite,  Edomite,  and
even  Hebrew  merchants  and  artisans,  who  had  been  forced  to  flee  from  their
own  countries  owing  to  political  disturbances.^  A  certain  proportion  were  descen-
dants of  the  Hyksos,  who  had  been  reinforced  from  time  to  time  by  settlements
of  prisoners  captured  in  battle ;  they  had  taken  refuge  in  the  marshes  as  in  the
times  of  Ahmosis,  and  there  lived  in  a  kind  of  semi-civilized  independence,
refusing  to  pay  taxes,  boasting  of  having  kept  themselves  from  any  alliances
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  valley,  while  their  kinsmen  of  the  older  stock
betrayed  the  knowledge  of  their  origin  by  such  disparaging  nicknames  as  Pa-
shmuri,  "  the  stranger,"  or  Pi-amu,  "  the  Asiatic."  -  The  Shardana,  who  had
constituted  the  body-guard  of  Kamses  II.,  and  whose  commanders  had,  under
Eamses  III.,  ranked  with  the  great  officers  of  the  crown,  had  all  but  disappeared.^
It  had  been  found  difficult  to  recruit  them  since  the  dislodgment  of  the  People
of  the  Sea  from  the  Delta  and  the  Syrian  littoral,  and  their  settlement  in  Italy
and  the  fabulous  islands  of  the  Mediterranean ;  ^  the  adventurers  from  Crete
and  the  JEgean  coasts  now  preferred  to  serve  under  the  Philistines,  where
they  found  those  who  were  akin  to  their  own  race,  and  from  thence  they  passed
on  to  the  Hebrews,  where,  under  David  and  Solomon,  they  were  gladly  hired
as  mercenaries.'  The  Libyans  had  replaced  the  Shardana  in  all  the  offices
they  had  filled  and  in  all  the  garrison  towns  they  had  occupied.  The  kingdom
of  Maraiii  and  Kapur  had  not  survived  the  defeats  which  it  had  suffered  from
Minephtah  and  Eamses  III.,''  but  the  Mashaiiasha  who  had  founded  it  still
kept  an  active  hegemony  over  their  former  subjects;  hence  it  was  that  the
Egyptians  became  accustomed  to  look  on  all  the  Libyan  tribes  as  branches  of
the  dominant  race,  and  confounded  all  the  immigrants  from  Libya  under  the
common  name  of  Mashauasha.''     Egypt  was  thus  slowly  flooded  by  Libyans ;

■  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  si.  40,  xii.  2,  3)  and  Hadad  (1  Kings  xi.  17-22)  took  refuge  in  this  way  at
the  court  of  Pharaoii ;  cf.  supra,  pp.  737,  750.

•  On  these  descendants  of  the  Hyksos,  cf.  supra,  pp.  88,  89,  441,  442.  On  the  names  Fi-slimuri
Aui  Fi-amu,  Biahmites  and  Bashmurites,  cf.  Makiette,  Melanges  d' Arch€ologie  Egyptienne  el
Assyrieiine,  vol.  i.  pp.  91-93.

»  Cf.  what  is  said  about  the  Sbardanian  auxiliaries  of  Egypt,  supra,  pp.  372,  373,  390,  391,  479,
480,  489 ;  they  are  not  mentioned  after  the  reign  of  Kamses  III.

*  For  their  migrations,  cf  supra,  p.  587.

>  Cariaus  or  Cretans  (Cherethites)  formed  part  of  David's  body-guard  (2  Sam.  viii.  18,  xv.  18,
xx.  23);  one  again  meets  witli  these  Carian  or  Cretan  troops  in  Jndah  in  the  reign  of  Athaliah
<2  Kings  xi.  4,  19).

«  Cf  supra,  pp.  4^0-436,  456-4C1,  470-474.

■  Ramses  III.  still  distinguished  between  the  Qahaka,  the  Tilionu,  and  the  Mashaftasha  (of.  supra,
p.  4oC) ;  the  monuments  of  the  XXII'"'  dynasty  only  recognise  the  Mashauasha,  whose  name  they
<.'urtail  to  aia.  The  meaning  of  this  abbreviation  had  been  discovered  by  E.  do  Kougc,  from  the
variants  on  the  steles  of  the  Serapeum  (^Etude  eur  gueJques  monuments  du  rigne  de  Taliraka,  in  the
Mitanges  d'Arch.  Egyp.  et  Assyr.,  vol.  i.  p.  87);  Lautli  {Die  Piancki  Stele,  1870,  pp.  G9,  70),  Brugsch
(Geschichte  JSgyptens,  p.  (344,  et  seq.),  and  Krall  {Die  Composition  und  Schiclcsale  des  Manethonischen
GescMchtswerke,  p.  76)  believe  them  to  be  Asiatics,  more  particularly  Assyrians.  One  section  of  the
■troops,  which  Herodotus  (II.  clxiv.,  et  seq.)  called  Ma'x'M"'.  consisted  of  Libyan  bands,  as  I  shall  have
•occasion  to  show  later  on.


THE   PRKDOMINANCK    OF  LIBYAN  MERCENARIES   IN  EGYPT.      7(i7

it  was  a  gradual  invasion,  which  succeeded  by  pacific  means  where  brute  force
had  failed.  A  Berber  population  gradually  took  possession  of  the  country,
occupying  the  eastern  provinces  of  the  Delta,  filling  its  towns— Sais,  Damanhur,
and  Marea— making  its  way  into  the  Fayum,  the  suburbs  of  Heracleopolis,  and
penetrating  as  far  south  as  Abydos ;  at  the  latter  place  they  were  not  found
in  such  great  numbers,  but  still  considerable  enough  to  leave  distinct  traces.^
The  high  priests  of  Amon  seem  to  have  been  the  only  personages  who  neglected
to  employ  this  ubiquitous  race ;  but  they  preferred  to  use  the  Xubian  tribe  of
the  iliizaiii,-  who  })robably  from  tlie  XIP'  dynasty  onwards  had  constituted


A   TliOOP  OF  LIBYANS   HUNTING.'


the  police  force  of  Thebes.  These  Libyan  immigrants  had  adopted  the
arts  of  Egypt  and  the  externals  of  her  civilization ;  they  sculptured  rude
figures  on  the  rocks  and  engraved  scenes  on  their  stone  vessels,  in  which  they
are  represented  fully  armed,^  and  taking  part  in  some  skirmish  or  attack,  or
even  a  chase  in  the  desert.  The  hunters  are  divided  into  two  groups,  each  of
which  is  preceded  by  a  different  ensign— that  of  the  West  for  the  right  wing
of  the  troop,  and  that  of  the  East  for  the  left  wing.     They  carry  the  spear,  the

'  The  settlement  of  Libyan  eolouista  by  Ramses  III.  at  Hormopolis  and  at  the  entrance  to  the
Fayum  has  been  indicateil,  supra,  p.  474  ;  the  presence  in  tliose  regions  of  persons  bearing  Asiatic
names  has  been  also  remarlced  (Petrik,  Kahun,  Gurob  and  Hawara,  p.  40),  without  drawing  thence
liny  proof  for  the  existence  of  Asiatic  colonies  in  those  regions.  The  presence  of  Libyans  at  Abydos
seems  to  be  proved  by  the  discovery  in  that  town  of  the  little  monument  here  reproduced,  and  of
many  objects  in  the  same  style,  many  of  whieli  are  in  the  Louvre  or  the  British  Museum.

'  For  the  part  played  by  the  Mazaid,  cf.  Dawn  of  Cioiiizatiou,  p.  30C,  note  3,  and  supra,  pp.  4G1,
.")38.  I  have  not  discovered  among  the  personal  attendants  ofjthe  descendants  of  Ilrihor  any  functionary
bearing  the  title  of  CViiV/o/ (Ae  il/n8/j«aa»7<a;  even  those  who  bore  it  later  on,  under  the  XXII'"'
dynasty,  were  always  officers  from  the  north  of  Egypt.  It  seems  almost  certain  that  Thebes  always
avoided  having  I>ibyau  troops,  and  never  receivcid  a  Mashailasha  settlement.

=  Drawn  by  l{(judicr,  from  the  original  in  tlie  Louvre  ;  cf.  IIeuzey,  Une  Tribu  aaiatique  I'.n  voyage,
in  tlie  Revue  Jrcliioloijique,  ISIIO,  vol.  i.  pis.  iv.,  v.

*  I  attribute  to  the  Libyans,  whether  mercenaries  or  tribes  hovering  on  the  Egyptian  frontier,  the
figures  cut  everywhere  on  the  rocks,  whicli  no  one  up  till  now  has  npniduced  or  studied.  To  them
I  attribute  also  tlie  tombs  which  Mr.  Petrie  has  so  suroessfully  explored,  and  in  wliich  ho  finds  the
remains  of  a  New  Race  which  seems  to  have  conquered  Egypt  after  the  VI"'  dynasty  :  they  appear
to  bo  of  different  periods,  but  all  belong  to  the  Berber  horsemen  of  the  desert  aud  the  outskirts  of
the  Nile  valby.


768  TEE  HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

boonieraug,  the  club,  the  double-curved  bow,  aud  tlie  dart ;  a  fox's  skin  depends
from  their  belts  over  their  thighs,  and  an  ostrich's  feather  waves  above  their
curly  hair.^  They  never  abandoned  this  special  head-dress  aud  manner  of
arming  themselves,  and  they  can  always  be  recognised  on  the  monuments  by
the  plumes  surmounting  their  forehead.^  Their  settlement  on  the  banks  of
the  Nile  and  intermarriage  with  the  Egyptians  had  no  deteriorating  effect  on
them,  as  had  been  the  case  with  the  Shardana,  and  they  preserved  nearly  all
their  national  characteristics.  If  here  and  there  some  of  them  became
assimilated  with  the  natives,  there  was  always  a  constant  influx  of  new  comers,
full  of  energy  and  vigour,  who  kept  the  race  from  becoming  enfeebled.  The
attractions  of  high  pay  aud  the  prospect  of  a  free-and-easy  life  drew  them  to
the  service  of  the  feudal  lords.  The  Pharaoh  entrusted  their  chiefs  with  con-
fidential offices  about  his  person,  and  placed  the  royal  princes  at  their  head.
The  position  at  length  attained  by  these  Mashauasha  was  analogous  to  that
of  the  CossEeans  at  Babylon,  and,  indeed,  was  merely  the  usual  sequel  of
permitting  a  foreign  militia  to  surround  an  Oriental  monarch ;  they  became
the  masters  of  their  sovereigns.'^  Some  of  their  generals  went  so  far  as  to
attempt  to  use  the  soldiery  to  overturn  the  native  dynasty,  and  place  them-
selves upon  the  throne ;  others  sought  to  make  and  unmake  kings  to  suit  their
own  taste.  The  earlier  Tanite  sovereigns  had  hoped  to  strengthen  their
authority  by  trusting  entirely  to  the  fidelity  and  gratitude  of  their  guard ;  the
later  kings  became  mere  puppets  in  the  hands  of  mercenaries.  At  length
a  Libyan  family  arose  who,  while  leaving  the  externals  of  power  in  the  hands
of  the  native  sovereigns,  reserved  to  themselves  the  actual  administration,
and  reduced  the  kings  to  the  condition  of  luxurious  dependence  enjoyed
by  the  elder  branch  of  the  Kamessides  under  the  rule  of  the  high  priests
of  Amon.

There  was  at  Bubastis,  towards  the  middle  or  end  of  the  XX"'  dynasty,
a  Tihonu  named  Buiuwa-buiuwa,  He  was  imdoubtedly  a  soldier  of  fortune,
without  either   office  or  rank,  but   his   descendants  prospered   and    rose   to

'  This  drawing  ia  reproduced  above,  p.  767.  M.  Heuzey  thought  it  represented  an  expedition
of  an  Asiatic  tribe,  but  the  arma  and  costumes  prove  that  the  tribe  in  question  was  Libyan,  as  I  have
brietJy  shown  (Trihu  asiatique  en  expedition,  p.  11).  Other  fragments  in  the  same  style  are  pre-
served in  the  Louvre  aud  the  British  Museum ;  they  all  came  from  Abydos,  according  to  the  verbal
information  given  me  in  1884  by  M.  Allemand,  the  iirst  owner  of  most  of  them.

-  This  design  is  generally  thought  to  represent  a  piece  of  cloth  folded  in  two,  and  laid  flat  on  the
head  (E.  de  Eocge,  Inscription  hidorique  du  roi  Pianclii-Meriamoun,  p.  21);  examination  of  the
monuments  proves  that  it  is  the  ostrich  plume  fixed  at  the  back  of  the  head,  and  laid  flat  on  the  hair
or  wig.

*  For  these  Cosssean  mercenaries  at  Babylon,  refer  to  what  I  have  said  above,  p.  117.  Without
speaking  of  the  Turks  who  surrounded  the  Calipbs  of  Bagdad,  I  shall  restrict  myself  to  citing,  in
Mussulman  Egypt,  the  negroes,  who  formed  an  important  part  of  the  Fatimite  Caliph's  body-guard,
and  whose  rebellions  filled  the  long  reign  of  Mostunsor-biUah  (E.  QfATREJiiaiE,  Mi'moires  historiques
et  g^ographiques  aur  I'Egypte,  vol.  ii.  p.  354,  et  seq.).


777^:   OniGIN  OF   THE  XXIP"   DYNASTY:    TEE  BUBASTITE.       769


NSITANIBASHIRIJ.''


important  positions  among  the  Ma-
shauasha  chiefs :  the  fourth  among
these,  Sheshonq  by  name,  married
Mihtiniioskhit,  a  princess  of  the  royal
line.  His  son,  Namaroti,  managed  to
combine  with  his  function  of  chief
of  tlie  Mashauasha  several  religious
offices,  and  his  grandson,  also  called
Sheshonq,  had  a  still  more  brilliant
career.-'  We  learn  from  the  monu-
ments of  the  latter  that,  even  before
he  had  ascended  the  throne,  he  was
recognised  as  king  and  prince  of
princes,   and   had    conferred   on   him  /-^

the  command  of  all  the  Libyan  troops.
Officially  he  was  tlie  chief  jierson  in  the  state  alter
the  sovereign,  and  had  the  privilege  of  holding
personal  intercourse  with  the  gods,  Amonra  included
— a  right  which  belonged  exclusively  to  the  Pharaoh  and  the  Theban  high
priest.  The  honours  which  he  bestowed  upon  his  dead  ancestors  were  of  a
remarkable  character,  and  included  the  institution  of  a  liturgical  office  in  con-
nection with  his  father  Namaroti,  a  work  which  resembles  in  its  sentiments  the
devotions  of  Ramses  II.  to  the  memory  of  Seti.''  He  succeeded  in  arranging  a
marriage  between  his  son  Osorkon  and  a  princess  of  the  royal  line,  the  daughter

'  The  genealogy  of  the  first  members  of  the  Bubastite  dynasty  is  inscribed  on  stele  1904  of
the  Serapeum,  published  by  Mariette  {Renseignemeids  sur  les  soixante-quatre  A2>is,  in  tlie  Bulletin  de
I'Aili^nssum  Frani;ais,  1S55,  pp.  94-07;  Le  Sirapgam  de  Memphis,  1st  edit.,  pi.  31),  of  which  the
subject-matter  was  thoroughly  examined  by  Lepsius,  tjber  die  XXII.  JEgyptische  Kuiiigsdynastie'
p.  2(1.5,  et  seq.  Birch  was  the  first  to  assign  a  Babylonian  origin  to  the  dynasty,  comparing  the  names
'■  Osorkhon  "  and  "Takeluti"  with  "Sargon"  and  "Tiglath"  (Observations  on  Two  Egyptian  Car-
touches found  at  Nimroud,  in  the  Transactions  Soe.  of  Literature,  2ud  series,  vol.  iii.  p.  IG."),  et  seq. ;  of.
Mariette,  Menseignements,  etc.,  in  the  Bulletin  de  VAth^nmum  Franfais,  1855,  p.  97  ;  Lepsius,  op.  cit.,
pp.  284-290;  Buugsch,  Eisloire  d'Egypte,  pp.  220,  221).  Oppert  recognises  Elamite  aflinitics  in  the
dynasty  (Les  inscriptions  en  langue  susienne,  in  the  3I^m.  du  Congr.  International  des  Orientalistes  u
Paris,  vol.  ii.  p.  183),  and  all  that  Brugsch  {Geschichte  JEgyptens,  pp.  G44,  G51-659)  says  about  Sheshonq
invading  the  country  from  Assyria  is  based  upon  a  too  free  handling  of  certain  texts  (Maspero,
in  the  Bevue  Critique,  ISSO,  vol.  ii.  pp.112-115);  Krall's  system  {Die  Composition  und  Schicksale  des
Maneihonitchen  Geschichticerkes,  pp.  71-7G)  has  not  been  confirmed  by  recent  investigation.  A
Libyan  origin,  hesitatingly  put  forward  by  Krall  (Die  Composition,  p.  73,  note  1),  was  confirmed  by
Stern  (Die  XXII.  Mamihonische  Kunigsdynantir,  in  tho  Zeitsdirift,  1S83,  pp.  15-2C);  it  is  now
generally  accepted  (Wiedemann,  JEgypl.  Gesch.,  pp.  544-548 ;  Eu.  Meter,  Gesch,  des  Alterthums,
vol.  i.  pp.  385,  3SG,  and  Geschichte  Aigyptens,  pp.  329,  3;!0  ;  Maspero,  llist.  Ancienne,  4th  edit.,  p.  359).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  E.  Brngsch-Bey ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Mamies  royales
de  Veir-el-Baliari,  in  the  Mgmaires  de  la  Mission  Frangaise,  vol.  i.  pi.  xx.  B.

'  The  Abydoa  inscriptions  published  in  Mariette,  Ahijdos,  yoi.  ii.  pis.  3G,  37;  translated  by
BniJGScu,  in  tho  Zeitschri/I,  1871,  p.  K5,  and  Geschichte  /Egijpteus,  pp.  (;51-G56 ;  also  by  biKCii,  in  the
Records  of  the  Fast,  2nd  series,  vol.  xii.  pji.  9G-99;  cf.  Navii.le,  Inscription  historique  de  Binodjem
III.,  pp.  13,  14.

3    I)


770  TEE  HEBREWS  AND    TUE  PlflLISTINES — DAMASCUS.

of  Psiukhannit  II.,,  by  which  alliance  he  secured  the  Tanite  succession  ; '  he
obtained  as  a  wife  for  bis  second  son  Auputi,  the  priestess  of  Amon,  and  thus
obtained  an  indirect  influence  over  the  Said  aud  Nubia.^  This  priestess  was
probably  a  daughter  or  niece  of  Painotmii  II.,  but  we  are  unacquainted
with  her  name.  Tlie  princesses  continued  to  play  a  preponderating  part  in
the  transmission  of  power,  and  we  may  assume  that  the  lady  in  question  was
one  of  those  whose  names  have  come  down  to  us — Nsikhonsii,  Nsitanibashiiii,
or  Isimkhobiu  II.,  who  brought  with  her  as  a  dowry  the  Bubastite  fief.
We  are  at  a  loss  whether  to  place  Auputi  immediately  after  Painotrau,
or  between  the  ejibemeral  pontificates  of  a  certain  Psiukhannit  and  a
certain  Nsbiudidi.  His  succession  imposed  a  very  onerous  duty  upon
liim.  Thebes  was  going  through  the  agonies  of  famine  aud  misery,  and
no  police  supervision  in  the  world  could  secure  the  treasures  stored  up
in  the  tombs  of  a  more  prosperous  age  from  the  attacks  of  a  famished
people.  Arrests,  trials,  and  punishments  were  ineffectual  against  the
violation  of  the  sepulchres,  and  even  the  royal  mummies — including
those  placed  in  the  chapel  of  Amenothes  I.  by  previous  high  priests — were
not  exemjrt  from  outrage.  The  remains  of  the  most  glorious  of  the  Pharaohs
were  reclining  in  this  chapel,  forming  a  sort  of  solemn  parliament :  here
was  Saqnunri  Tiuaqni,  the  last  member  of  the  XVII"'  dynasty ;  here  also
were  the  first  of  the  XYIII"' — Ahmosis,  Amenothes  I.,  and  the  three  of
the  name  Thiitmosis,  together  with  the  favourites  of  their  respective  harems
— Nofritari,  Ahhotpu  II.,  Anhapii,  Honittimihii,  aud  Sitkamosis ;  and,  in
addition,  Eamses  I.,  Seti  I.,  Ramses  II.  of  the  XIX'"  dynasty,  Ramses  III.
and  Eamses  X.  of  the  XX'"  dynasty.  The  "Servants  of  the  True  Place"'
were  accustomed  to  celebrate  at  the  appointed  periods  the  necessary  rites
established  in  their  honour.  Inspectors,  appointed  for  the  purpose  by
the  government,  determined  from  time,  to  time  the  identity  of  the  royal
mummies,  aud  examined  into  the  condition  of  their  wrappings  and  coffins  :
after  each  inspectiou  a  report,  giving  the  date  aud  the  name  of  the  functionary
responsible  for  the  examination,  was  inscribed  on  the  linen  or  the  lid
covering  the  bodies.  The  most  of  the  mummies  had  suifei-ed  considerably
before  they  reached  the   refuge   in    which   they   "ere   found.     The  bodies  of

'  Statue  of  the  Nile  iu  British  JIuseum,  reproduced  in  ARuyDALE-Boxojii-BmcH,  Egyptiun
AniiquHie»  in  the  BritUli  Museum,  pi.  13  (ef.  Dtiwn  of  Ch-ilizatioii,  p.  38).  See  the  inscription  in
Lepsius,  Ausicahl  der  icichtlgsttn  Urliunden,  pi.  xv.

-  The  date  of  the  death  of  Paiuotmii  II.  is  fixed  ut  the  XVI"'  year  of  his  reign,  according  to  the
inscriptions  in  the  pit  at  Deir  el-Bahaii  (Xotes  tur  qudques  points  de  Grammaire,  etc.,  in  the  Zeit-
schrijt,  1SS3;  cf.  Les  Momies  ruyales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  in  the  Me'moires  de  la  Mission  Fnuiptife^
vol.  i.  p.  52"2).  This  would  be  the  date  of  the  accession  of  Aiipiiti,  if  Ailpiiti  succeeded  him  diri'ctly,
as  I  am  inclined  to  believe  ;  but  if  Psiukhannit  was  his  immediate  successor,  as  Daressy  thinks  (Con-
tribution a  la  Etude  de  la  XX'  dtjnastie),  and  if  Xsbindidi  succeeded  Manakhpinl,  we  must  place
the  accession  of  Auputi  some  years  later.

'  As  to  the  "  Servants  of  the  True  Place  "  aud  their  functions  iu  the  necropolis,  see  supra,
pp.  526,  527.


THE  BIDISG-PLACE    OF  DEIR    EL-BAEARL  771

Sitamon  and  of  the  Princess  Honittimiliu   lui'l    been  completely  destroyed,
and    bundles    of    rags    bad    been    substituted     for    tliem,    so    arranged    witli
pieces  of  wood  as  to  resemble  human  figures.^     Ramses  I.,  Eamses  II.,  and
Thutmosis    had    been    deprived    of    their    original    shells,   and   were   found
in  extemporised  cases.-     Hrihor's   successors,  who  regarded   these  sovereigns
as   their   legitimate   ancestors,   had   guarded    them  with  watchful   care,  but
Auputi,    who    did    not    feel    himself  so    closely    related    to    these    old-world
Pharaohs,  considered,   doubtless,  this   vigilance    irksome,  and  determined  to
locate  the  mummies  in  a  spot  where  they  would  lieuceforward  be  secure  from
all  attack.     A  princess  of  the  family  of  Manakhpirri — Isimkhobiu,  it  would
appear — had  prepared  a  tomb   for  herself  in  the   rocky  cliff  which  bounds
the    amphitheatre  of  Deir  el-Bahari  on  the    south.     The  position  lent  itself
readily  to  concealment.     It  consisted  of  a  well  some    130  feet  deep,  with  a
passage  running  out  of  it   at  right  angles  for  a  distance  of  some   200  feet
and  ending  in  a  low,  oblong,  roughly  cut  chamber,    lacking  both  ornament
and   paintings.      Painotmu   II.  had  been  placed  within  this  chamber  in  the
XVI'"  year  of  the  reign  of  Psiidvhannit   II.,-'   and   several  members  of  his
family  had  been  placed  beside  him  not  long  afterwards.     Auputi  soon  trans-
ferred thither  the   batch  of  mummies  whicli,  in  the  chapel  of  Amenothes  I.,
iiad  been  awaiting  a  more  definite  sepulture  ;  the  coffins,  with  what  remained
of  their  funerary  furniture,  were  Imddled  together  in  disorder.     The  chamber
having   been    filled    up   to   the    roof,  the   remaining  materials,  consisting  of
coffers,  boxes  of  Uslialti,  Canopic  jars,  garlands,  together  with  the  belongings
•of  priestly  mummies,  were  arranged  along  the  passage :  when  the  place  was
full,  the  entrance  was  walled  up,  the  well  filled,  and  its  opening  so  dexterously
covered    that   it   remained   concealed  until  our   own   time.      The  accidental
''  sounding  "  of  some  pillaging  Arabs  revealed  the  place  as  Air  back  as  1872,
but  it  was  not  until  ten  years  later  (1881)  that  the  Pharaohs  once  more  saw
the  light.     They  are  now  enthroned — who  can  say  for  how  many  years  longer?
— in  the  chambers  of  the  Gizeh  Museum.     Egypt  is  truly  a  land  of  marvels  !
It  has  not  only,  like  Assyria  and  Chaldoea,  Greece  and  Italy,  preserved  for  us
monuments  by  which  its  historic  past  may  be  reconstructed,  but  it  has  handed
on  to  us  the  men  themselves  who  set  up  the  monuments  and  made  the  history.
Her  great  monarchs  are  not  any  longer  mere  names  deprived  of  appropriate
forms,  and  floating  colourless  and  shapeless  in  the  imagination  of  posterity  :
they  may  be  weighed,  touched,   and  measured ;  the  capacity  of  their  brains
may  be  gauged ;  the  curve  of  their  noses  and  the  cut  of  their  mouths  may
be  determined ;  we  know  if  they  were  bald,  or  if  they  suffered  Irom  some

'  SIaspkko,  //t'K  Moiniee  roi/ales  de  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  53S,  Oiil*,  OM.
'  See  mpru,  jip.  2-12,  note  2,  and  128.
'  JIaspeuo,  op.  i-il.,  lip.  .'j20-.')23.


772  THE  HEBREWS  AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

secret  iulirmity ;  and,  as  we  are  able  to  do  in  the  case  of  our  conteuiporaries,
we  may  publish  their  portraits  taken  first  hand  in  the  photographic  camera.^
Sheshonq,  by  assuming  the  control  of  the  Theban  priesthood,  did  not  on
this  account  extend  his  sovereignty  over  Egypt  beyond  its  southern  portion,,
and  that  part  of  Nubia  which  still  depended  on  it.  Ethiopia  remained
probably  outside  his  jurisdiction,  and  constituted  from  this  time  forward  an
independent  kingdom,  under  the  rule  of  dynasties  which  were,  or  claimed  ta
be,  descendants  of  Hrihor.  The  oasis,  on  the  other  hand,  and  the  Libyan
provinces  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Delta  and  the  sea,  rendei-ed  obedience
to  his  oiScers,  and  furnished  him  with  troops  which  were  recognised  as  among
his  best.  Sheshonq  found  himself  at  the  death  of  Psiukhannit  II.,  which
took  place  about  940  B.C.,  sole  master  of  Egypt,  with  an  effective  army  and
well-replenished  treasury  at  his  disposal.  What  better  use  could  he  make  of
his  resources  than  devote  them  to  reasserting  the  traditional  authority  of  his^
country  over  Syria  ?  The  intestine  quarrels  of  the  only  state  of  any  impor-
tance in  that  region  furnished  him  with  an  opportunity  of  which  he  found
it  easy  to  take  advantage.  Solomon  in  his  eyes  was  merely  a  crowned  vassal
of  Egypt,  and  his  appeal  for  aid  to  subdue  Gezer,  his  marriage  with  a  daughter
of  the  Egyptian  royal  house,  the  position  he  had  assigned  her  over  all  his
other  wives,  and  all  that  we  know  of  the  relations  between  Jerusalem  and
Tanis  at  the  time,  seem  to  indicate  that  the  Hebrews  themselves  acknow-
ledged some  sort  of  dependency  upon  Egypt.^  They  were  not,  however,,
on  this  account  free  from  suspicion  in  their  suzerain's  eyes,  who  seized
upon  every  pretext  that  offered  itself  to  cause  them  embarrassment.  Hadad,
and  .Teroboam  afterwards,  had  been  well  received  at  the  court  of  the  Pharaoh,
and  it  was  with  Egyptian  subsidies  that  these  two  rebels  returned  to  their
country,  the  former  in  the  lifetime  of  Solomon,  and  the  latter  after  his  death.^'
When  Jeroboam  saw  that  he  was  threatened  by  Eehoboam,  he  naturally
turned  to  his  old  protectors.  Sheshonq  had  two  problems  before  him.  Should
he  confirm  by  his  intervention  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  which  had  flourished
in  Kharu  for  now  half  a  century,  into  two  rival  states,  or  should  he  himself
give  way  to  the  vulgar  appetite  for  booty,  and  step  in  for  his  own  exclusive-
interest  ?  He  invaded  Judsea  four  years  after  the  schism,  and  Jerusalem
offered  no  resistance  to  him ;  Eehoboam  ransomed  his  capital  by  emptying
the  royal  treasuries  and  temple,  rendering  up  even  the  golden  shields  which
Solomon  was  accustomed  to  assign  to  his  guards  when  on  duty  about  his  person.''

'  The  history  of  the  discovery  and  the  details  are  given  in  Maspeko,  Les  Mamies  royales,  etc.,  in  ■
the  Mimoirei  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  p.  511,  et  seq.

-  See  what  is  said  about  these  events  on  pp.  73»,  743,  "tU,  705,  supra.     The  suzerainty  of  Egj  pt,
which  is  not  accepted  by  most  historians,  is  acknowledged  by  Winoklee,  Oesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  175.

'  See  on  this  subject  pp.  737,  750,  766,  supra.

*  1  Kings  xiv.  25-28  ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xii.  1-10,  where  an  episode,  not  in  the  Booh  of  Kings,  is  intro-  -
duced.     The  prophet  Shemaiah  played  an  important  part  in  the  transaction.


SBESHONQ'S    EXPEDITION  AGAINST  JERUSALEM.


73


This  expedition  of  tl\e  Pliaraoli  was  neither  dangerous  nor  protracted,  but  it
was  more  than  two  hundred  years  since  so  much  riches  from  countries  beyond
the  isthmus  had  been
brought  into  Egypt,  and
the  king  was  conse-
quently regarded  by  the
whole  people  of  the  Nile
valley  as  a  great  hero.
Aiiputi  took  upon  him-
self the  task  of  recording
the  exploit  on  the  south
wall  of  the  temple  of
Amon  at  Karnalc,  not
far  from  the  spot  where
Ramses  II.  had  had  en-
graved the  incidents  of
'bis  Syrian  campaigns.
His  architect  was  sent  to
Silsilis  to  procure  the
necessary  sandstone  to
repair  the  monument.^
He  depicted  upon  it  his
father  receiving  at  the
hands  of  Amon  proces-
sions of  Jewish  prisoners,
each  one  representing  a  captured  city.  The  list  makes  a  brave  show,
and  is  remarkable  for  the  number  of  the  names  composing  it  :  in  com-
.pari.son  with  those  of  Thutmosis  III.,  it  is  disappointing,  and  one  sees
4it  a  glance  how  inferior,  even  in  its  triumph,  the  Egypt  of  the  XXII'"'
dynasty  was  to  that  of  the  XVIII'".  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  Car-
chemish,  or  Qodshu,  or  Jlitanni,  or  Naharaim :  Megiddo  is  the  most
northern  point  mentioned,  and  the  localities  enumerated  bring  us  more
iind  more   to   the  south — Rabbat,  Taanach,  Hapharaim,  Mahanaim,^  Gibeon,

'  Seo  the  Silsilis  stele  piiblislieil  in  Champoli.iox,  MnnumenU  de  V Egtjiite,  etc.,  pi.  oxxii.  ?«'« ;
Lepsius,  Denlcm.,  iii.  2.51  c;  E.  and  .T.  de  Eovge,  ImscripHons  IMrogJi/phiques  recueiUie.s  en  ligypte,
j)l.  colxvii.;  translated  into  (Jerman  by  Bkl'gscii,  Geech.  JEiiypicm,  p.  CGi,  and  into  French  by
Maspkho,  Lei  Mamies  royulen,  in  the  M^moiree  de  la  Mienou  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  731-73'i.  It  is  dated
ia  the  XXI"  year  of  the  kins  (ChanipoUion  erroneously  f^ives  the  XXII'"'  year),  which  permits  our
aesigiiing  the  expedition  to  .ludsoa  two  or  tlireo  years  earlier  at  most.

'  Drawn  by  Bouili(.-r,  from  a  photograiih  by  lieato;  cf,  M.\iiiETTi!,  Voyarje  de  la  Uauie-Kgypte,
vol.  ii.  |d.  42.

"  Tlie  exi.^tence  of  the  namiis  of  certain  Israelite  towns  on  tho  list  of  Sheshonq  has  somewhat
astonislied  the  majority  of  the  hi.storians  of  Israel.  Renan  declared  that  the  list  must  "  put  aside  the
conjecture  that  .leroboam  had  been  the  instigator  of  the  expedition,  which  would  cerlaiuly  have  been


AMON    PRESENTING    TO    SHESHONQ    THE    LIST    OP    THE    CITIES
CAPTUBED   IN    ISItAEL    AND   JCDAH.^


774  THE  HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

Beth-boron,  Ajalon,  Jud-bammelek,  Migdol,  Jerza,  Shoko,  and  the  villages
of  the  Negeb.  Each  locality,  in  cousequeuce  of  the  cataloguing  of  obscure
towns,  furnished  enough  material  to  cover  two  or  even  three  of  the  crenellated
cartouches  in  which  the  names  of  the  conquered  peoples  are  enclosed,  and
Sheshonq  had  thus  the  puerile  satisfaction  of  parading  before  the  eyes  of
bis  subjects  a  longer  cortege  of  defeated  chiefs  than  that  of  his  predecessor.^
His  victorious  career  did  not  last  long :  be  died  shortly  after,  and  his  son
Osorkon  was  content  to  assume  at  a  distance  authority  over  the  Kbaru.'-  It
does  not  appear,  however,  that  either  the  Philistines,  or  Judah,  or  Israel,  or
any  of  the  petty  tribes  which  had  momentarily  gravitated  around  David  and
Solomon,  were  disposed  to  dispute  Osorkon's  claim,  theoretic  rather  than
real  as  it  was.  The  sword  of  the  stranger  had  finished  the  work  which  the
intestine  quarrel  of  the  tribes  had  begun.  If  Kehoboam  had  ever  formed  the
project  of  welding  together  the  disintegrated  elements  of  Israel,  the  taking
of  Jerusalem  must  have  been  a  death-blow  to  his  hopes.  His  arsenals  were
empty,  his  treasury  at  low  ebb,  and  the  prestige  purchased  by  David's  victories
was  effaced  by  tlie  humiliation  of  his  own  defeat.  The  ease  with  which  the
edifice  so  laboriously  constructed  by  the  heroes  of  Benjamin  and  Judah
had  been  overturned  at  the  first  shock,  was  a  proof  that  the  new  possessors

readily  admissible,  especially  if  any  forcu  were  attached  to  the  Greek  text  of  1  Einf/s  xii.  24,  whicli
makes  Jeroboam  to  have  been  a  sou-iu-law  of  the  King  of  Egypt "  (Hist,  du  peuple  d' Israel,  vol.  ii.  p.
200,  note  2);  the  same  view  had  been  already  expressed  by  Stade  {GeschicMe  des  Volkes  Israels,  vol.  i.
p.  351)  ;  others,  as,  for  instance,  Niebuhr  (Die  Chronologie  der  Gesch.  Israels,  pp.  viii.,  is.)  and  Winckler
(Geschichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  160),  have  thought  that  Sheshonq  had  conquered  the  country  for  his  ally
Jeroboam.  Sheshonq,  iu  fact,  was  following  the  Egyptian  custom  by  whicli  all  countries  and  towns
which  paid  tribute  to  the  Pharaoh,  or  who  recognised  Lis  suzerainty,  were  made  to,  or  miglit,  figure  on
his  triumphal  lists  whether  they  had  been  conquered  or  not :  the  preseueo  of  Megiddo  or  Mahauaim
on  the  lists  does  not  prove  that  they  were  conquered  by  Sheshonq,  but  that  the  prince  to  whcni  they
owned  allegiance  was  a  tributary  of  the  King  of  Egypt.  The  name  of  Jud-ham-melek,  which  occupies
the  twenty-ninth  place  on  the  list,  was  for  a  long  time  translated  as  Idiuj  or  kingdom  of  Judah,
and  passeil  for  being  a  portrait  of  Rchoboam  (Oh.vupollion,  Lettres  Sorites  d'Egypfe,  2ud  edit.,
pp.  9t),  100 ;  RosELLiNi,  Mvn.  Slorici,  vol.  ii.  pp.  70,  80,  vol.  iv.  pp.  l.'iS,  150;  E.  de  Rouge,  Mem.  tur
I'origine  ggyplienne  de  I'alphalet  phe'nicien,  p.  53),  which  is  impossible.  The  Hebrew  name  was
read  by  W.  Max  Muller  (The  supposed  Name  of  Judah  in  the  List  of  Sheshonq,  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  Bib.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  x.  pp.  81-83;  of.  Lepage-Renouf,  Pemarhs,  ibid.,  pp.  S3-StJ,  and  Asien  und
Europa  nach  altdgyptiscken  Denkmdlern,  p.  167)  Jad-ham-melek,  the  hand,  the  fort  of  the  king.  It
appears  to  me  to  be  more  easy  to  see  in  it  Jud-ham-melek  (Maspero,  La  Liste  de  Sheshonq  a  Karnak,
pp.  8,  9),  and  to  associate  it  with  Jehudah,  a  town  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  as  Brugsch  did  long  ago  (Geog.  ^
Inschr.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  02,  63).

'  The  text  of  the  list  was  published  by  Ciiampollion,  Monuments,  pis.  cclxxviii.',  cclxxxiv.,.
cclxxxv.,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  113,  et  seq. ;  by  Rosellini,  Mon.  Storici,  pi.  cxlviii. ;  by  Lei'sius,  Denkm.,  iii.
252,  253  a;  cf.  Maspeko,  Pevision  des  listes geugraphiques de  Thutmos III,  iu  the  Pecueilde  Travaux,.
vol.  vii.  pp.  100,  101.  It  has  been  studied  and  commented  upon  by  Blau,  Sisaq's  Zag  gegen  Juda  aus
dem  Denkmale  hei  Karnak  erlaiitert,  in  the  Zeitschrift  der  D.  Morg.  Gesellschafft,  vol.  xv.  pp.  233-250 ;
by  Bbugsch,  Geog.  Inschr.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56-71,  and  Gesch.  Mggptens,  pis.  660-663 ;  by  Maspeuo,  Notes
sur  diff€rents  points  de  Grammaire,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  ISSO,  pp.  41-10,  and  Etude  sur  la  liste  de  Sheshonq,
in  the  Victoria  Institute,  vol.  xxvii. ;  and  finally  by  W.  Max  Mvlleh,  Asien  und  Europa,  pp.  166-172.

-  ChampoUion  identified  Osorkon  I.  with    the  Zerah,  who,  according    to   2  Chron.  xiv.  0-15,
xvi.  8,  invaded  Judah  and  was  defeated  by  Asa  (Precis  du  Systeme  hierogbjphique,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  257
262  ;  of.  EwALD,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  170),  but  this  has  no  historic  value,  for
it  is  clear  that  Osorkon  uever  crossed  the  isthmus.


THE   RISE    OF    THE    TiVo    IIEDREW   KINGDOMS.  t  i '.1

of  Canaan  were  as  little  capable  of  barring  the  way  to  Egypt  iu  licr  old  age,
as  tlioir  predecessors  had  been  when  she  was  in  her  yonth  and  vigour.  The
Philistines  had  had  their  day ;  it  seemed  by  no  means  improbable  at  one  time
that  they  were  about  to  sweep  everything  before  them,  from  the  Negeb  to  the
Orontes,  but  their  peculiar  position  in  the  furthest  angle  of  the  country,  and
their  numerical  weakness,  prevented  them  from  continuing  their  efforts  for  a
prolonged  period,  and  they  were  at  length  obliged  to  renounce  in  favour  of
the  Hebrews  their  ambitious  pretensions.  The  latter,  who  had  been  making
steady  progress  for  some  half  a  century,  had  been  successful  where  the
Philistines  had  signally  failed,  and  Southern  Syria  recognised  their  supremacy
for  tlie  space  of  two  generations.  We  can  only  conjecture  what  they  might
have  done  if  a  second  David  had  led  them  into  the  valleys  of  the  Orontes
and  Euplirates.  They  were  stronger  in  numbers  than  their  possible  opponents,
and  their  troops,  strengthened  by  mercenary  guards,  would  have  perhaps
triumphed  over  the  more  skilled  but  fewer  warriors  which  the  Amorite  and
Aramsean  cities  could  throw  into  the  field  against  them.  The  pacific  reign  of
Solomon,  the  schism  among  the  tribes,  and  the  Egyptian  invasion  furnished
evidence  enough  that  they  also  were  not  destined  to  realise  that  solidarity
which  alone  could  secure  them  against  the  great  Oriental  empires  when
tiie  day  of  attack  came.

The  two  kingdoms  were  then  enjoying  an  independent  existence.  Judah,
in  spite  of  its  smaller  numbers  and  its  recent  disaster,  was  not  far  behind  the
more  extensive  Israel  iu  its  resources.  David,  and  afterwards  Solomon,  had  so
kneaded  together  the  various  elements  of  which  it  was  composed — -Caleb,
Cain,  Jerahmeel  and  the  Judeean  clans— that  they  had  become  a  homogeneous
mass,  grouped  around  the  capital  and  its  splendid  sanctuary,  and  actuated
with  feelings  of  profound  admiration  and  strong  fidelity  for  the  iamily  which
had  made  them  what  they  were.  Blisfortune  had  not  chilled  their  zeal  :
they  rallied  round  Eehoboam  and  his  race  with  such  a  persistency  that  they
were  enabled  to  maintain  their  ground  when  their  richer  rivals  had  squandered
their  energies  and  fallen  away  before  their  eyes.  Jeroboam,  indeed,  and  his
successors  had  never  obtained  from  their  people  more  than  a  precarious
support  and  a  lukewarm  devotion :  their  authority  was  continually  coming
into  conflict  with  a  tendency  to  disintegration  among  the  tribes,  and  they
could  only  maintain  their  rule  by  the  constant  employment  of  force.
Jeroboam  had  collected  together  from  the  garrisons  scattered  tlu'oughout
the  country  the  nucleus  of  an  army,  and  had  stationed  the  strongest  of  these
troops  in  his  residence  at  Tirzah  when  he  did  not  require  them  for  some
expedition  against  Judah  or  the  Philistines.  His  successors  followed  his
example  in  this  respect,  but  tiiis  military  resource  was   only  an   ineffectual


776  TEE  HEBREWS   AND    TEE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

protection  against  tlie  dangers  which  beset  them.  The  kings  were  literally
at  the  mercy  of  their  guard,  and  their  reign  was  entirely  dependent
on  its  loyalty  or  caprice :  any  unscrupulous  upstart  might  succeed  in  suborn-
ing his  comrades,  and  the  stroke  of  a  dagger  might  at  any  moment  send
the  sovereign  to  join  his  ancestors,  while  the  successful  rebel  reigned  in  bis
stead.'  The  Egyptian  troops  had  no  sooner  set  out  on  their  homeward  march,
than  the  two  kingdoms  began  to  display  their  respective  characteristics.
An  implacable  and  truceless  war  broke  out  between  them.  The  frontier
garrisons  of  the  two  nations  fought  with  each  other  from  one  year's  end  to
another — carrying  off  each  other's  cattle,  massacring  one  another,  burning
each  other's  villages  and  leading  their  inhabitants  into  slavery.^  From  time
to  time,  when  the  situation  became  intolerable,  one  of  the  kings  took  the  field
in  person,  and  began  operations  by  attacking  such  of  his  enemy's  strongholds
as  gave  him  the  most  trouble  at  the  time.  Kamah  acquired  an  unenviable
reputation  in  the  course  of  these  early  conflicts :  its  position  gave  it  command
of  the  roads  terminating  in  Jerusalem,  and  when  it  fell  into  the  bands  of
Israel,  the  Judasan  capital  was  blockaded  on  this  side.  The  strife  for  its
possession  was  always  of  a  terrible  character,  and  the  party  which  succeeded
in  establishing  itself  firmly  within  it  was  deemed  to  have  obtained  a  great
success.^  The  encounter  of  the  armies  did  not,  however,  seem  to  produce
much  more  serious  results  than  those  which  followed  the  continual  guerilla
warfare  along  the  frontier :  the  conqueror  had  no  sooner  defeated  his  enemy
than  he  set  to  work  to  pillage  the  country  in  the  vicinity,  and,  having  accom-
plished this,  returned  promptly  to  his  head-quarters  with  the  booty.  Eehoboam,
■who  had  seen  something  of  the  magnificence  of  Solomon,  tried  to  perpetuate
the  tradition  of  it  in  his  court,  as  far  as  his  slender  revenues  would  permit
him.  He  had  eighteen  women  in  his  harem,  among  whom  figured  some  of
his  aunts  and  cousins.  The  titular  queen  was  Maacah,  who  was  represented
as  a  daughter  of  Absalom.  She  was  devoted  to  the  asheras,  and  the  king
was  not  behind  his  father  in  his  tolerance  of  strange  gods ;  the  high  places
■continued  to  be  tolerated  by  him  as  sites  of  worship,  and  even  Jerusalem
was  not  free  from  manifestations  of  such  idolatry  as  was  associated  with  the
old  Canaanite  religion.     He  reigned  seventeen  years,  and  was  interred  in  the

'  Among  nineteen  kings  of  Israel,  eight  were  assassinated  and  were  replaced  by  the  captains  of
their  guards— Nadab,  Elah,  Zirari,  Joram,  Zachariah,  Shallum,  Pekahiah,  and  Pekah.

*  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  Hebrew  historians  when  they  say  •'there  was  war  between
Eehoboam  and  Jeroboam  all  the  days  of  liis  life  "  (1  Kings  xv.  6  ;  of.  2  Chron.  xii.  15),  and  "  between
Abijam  and  Jeroboam"  (1  Kings  xv.  7;  2  Chron.  xiii.  2),  and  "between  Asa  and  Baasha"  (1  Kinqi
XV.  16,  32)  "  all  their  days."

=  The  campaign  of  Abijah  at  Mount  Zemaraim  (2  Chron.  xiii.  3-19),  in  which  the  foundation
of  the  narrative  and  the  geographical  details  seem  fully  historical  (Clek3I0.nt-G  anneau.  La  Campagne
d'Ahyah  contre  Je'ruhoam  et  Vemplacement  tie  Yechdnah,  in  the  Journal  Asialique.  1877,  vol.  ix.  p.  -lOO,
■et  seq.).     See  also  the  campaign  of  Baasha  against  Kamah  (1  Kings  xv.  17-22;  cf.  2  Chron.  s.yi.  1-6).


THE  KINGDOM   OF  DAMASCUS   AND   ITS    ORIGIN.  ,  i  i

city  of  David  ;  ^  Abijam,  the  eldest  son  of  Maacah,  succeeded  liiiu,  and  followed
iu  liis  evil  ways.  Three  years  later  Asa  came  to  the  throne,^  no  opposition
being  raised  to  iiis  accession.  In  Israel  matters  did  not  go  so  smoothly.
\Mien  Jeroboam,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-two  years,  was  succeeded  by  his
son  Nadab,  about  the  year  905  B.C.,  it  was  soon  evident  tliat  the  instinct
of  loyalty  to  a  particular  dynasty  had  not  yet  laid  any  firm  hold  on  the  ten
tribes.  The  peace  between  the  Philistines  and  Israel  was  quite  as  unstable  as
that  between  Israel  and  Judah  :  an  endless  guerilla  warfare  was  waged  on  the
frontier,  Gibbethon  being  made  to  f>lay  much  the  same  part  in  this  region  as
Ramah  had  done  in  regard  to  Jerusalem.  For  the  moment  it  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Philistines,  and  in  the  second  year  of  his  reign  Nadab  had  gone
to  lay  siege  to  it  in  force,  \vhen  he  was  assassinated  in  his  tent  by  one  of  his
captains,  a  certain  Baasha,  son  of  Ahijah,  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar :  the  soldiers
proclaimed  the  assassin  king,  and  tlie  people  found  themselves  powerless  to
reject  the  nominee  of  the  army.^

Baasha  pressed  forward  resolutely  his  campaign  against  Judah.  He  seized
Eamah  and  fortified  it ;  ^  and  Asa,  feeling  his  incapacity  to  dislodge  him
unaided,  sought  to  secure  an  ally.  Egypt  was  too  much  occupied  with  its  own
internal  dissensions  to  be  able  to  render  any  effectual  help,  but  a  new  power
which  would  profit  quite  as  much  as  Judah  by  the  overthrow  of  Israel,  was
beginning  to  assert  itself  in  the  north.  Damascus  had,  so  far,  led  an  obscure
and  peaceful  existence  ;  it  had  given  way  before  Egypt  and  Chaldtea  whenever
the  Egyptians  or  Chaldajans  had  appeared  within  striking  distance,  but  had
refrained  from  taking  any  part  in  the  disturbances  by  whicli  Syria  was  torn
asunder.  Having  been  occupied  by  the  Amorites,  it  threw  its  lot  in  with  tlieirs
keeping,  however,  sedulously  in  the  backgroimd :  while  the  princes  of  Qodshu
waged  war  against  the  Pharaohs,  undismayed  by  frequent  reverses,  Damascus
did  not  scruple  to  pay  tribute  to  Thiitmosis  III.  and  his  descendants,  or  to
enter  into  friendly  relations  with  them.'  Meanwhile  the  Amorites  had  been
overthrown,  and  Qodshu,  ruined  by  the  Asiatic  invasion,  soon  became  little
more  than  an  obscure  third-rate  town ;  '^  the  Aramaeans  made  themselves  masters

'  1  Kings  xiv.  22-24;  cf.  2  Clirou.  xi.  18-28,  where  tlie  details  given  iu  additiuu  to  those  iu  the
Book  of  Kings  seem  to  be  of  uudoubted  authenticity.

'  1  Kings  xv.  1-8  ;  el'.  2  Chron.  xiii.  Tlie  Book  of  Kings  describes  his  mothtr  as  Maaoah,  the
daugliter  of  Absalom  (xv.  10),  wliicli  would  seem  to  indicates  tljat  lie  was  the  brotlier  aud  not  the  sou
of  Abijam.  The  uncertainty  on  tliis  puint  is  of  long  standing,  for  the  author  of  Chronidus  makes
Abijam's  mother  out  in  one  placo  to  bo  Micaiah,  daughter  of  Uriel  of  Gibeali  (.xiii.  2),  and  iu  another
(xi.  20)  Maaoah,  daughter  of  Absalom.

'   I  Kings  xv.  27-31.

*  1  Kings  XV.  17;  cf.  2  Chron.  xvi.  1.

*  As  to  the  early  history  of  Damascus,  cf.  \\  MO,  note  :J,  supra.

'  Cf.  pp.  -100,  -108-470,  47."),  .588-500,  sujnci,  for  information  iu  regard  to  the  ellects  of  the  Asiatic
invasion  on  Syria.  Qodshii  is  only  once  mentioned  iu  the  Bible  (2  .Sum.  xxiv.  G),  iu  which  passa"o
its  name,  misunderstood  by  the  Massoretic  scribe,  has  been  restored  from  the  Keptuagint  te.\t.  [Prof.
Swate's  recension  of  the  LX.\.  (published  in  1805)  gives  the  reading  as  "NaSaoa/:"  tlie  \'iilgate
gives  '•  Hodsi."— Tr]


778  TlIK   HEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINE^: — DAMASCUS.

of  Damascus  about  the  XII"'  century,  aud  in  tlieir  hands  it  continued  to  be,
just  as  in  the  jDi-eceding  epochs,  a  town  without  ambitions  and  of  no  great
renown.     We  have  seen  how  tlie  Aramaeans,  alarmed  at  the  sudden  rise  of  the
Hebrew  dynasty,  entered  into  a  coalition  against  David  with  the  Ammonite
leaders :  Zoba  aspired  to  the  chief  place  among  the  nations  of  Central  Syria,
but  met  with  reverses,  and  its  defeat  delivered  over  to  the  Israelites  its  revolted
dependencies  in  tlie  Hauran  and  its  vicinity,  such  as  Maacah,  Geshur,  and  even
Damascus  itself.^     Their  supremacy  was,  however,  short-lived  ;  immediatelj-
after  the  death  of  David,  a  chief  named  Eezou  undertook  to  free  them  from
the  yoke  of  the  stranger.     He  had  begun  his  military  career  under  Hadadezer,
King  of  Zoba:  when  disaster  overtook  this  leader  and  released  him  from  his
allegiance,  he  collected  an  armed  force  aud  fought  for  his  own  hand.     A  lucky
stroke  made  him  master  of  Damascus :   he  proclaimed   himself  king   there,
harassed  the  Israelites  with  impunity  during  the  reign  of  Solomon,  and  took
over  the  possessions  of  the  kings  of  Zoba  in  the  valleys  of  the  Litany  and  the
Orontes.^     The  rupture  between  the  houses  of  Israel  and  Judah  removed  the
only  dangerous  rival  from   his  path,  aud  Damascus  became  the  paramount
power  in  Southern  and  Central  Palestine.     While  Judah  and  Israel  wasted
their  strength  in  fratricidal  struggles,  Tabrimmon,  and  after  him  Benhadad
I,  gradually  extended  their  territory  in  Ccele-Syria ;  ^  they  conquered  Hamath,
and  the  desert  valleys  which  extend  north-eastward  in  the  direction  of  the
Euphrates,  and  forced  a  number  of  the  Hittite  kings  to  render  them  homage.
They  had  concluded  an  alliance  with  Jeroboam  as  soon  as  he  established  his
separate  kingdom,  and  maintained  the  treaty  with  his  successors,  Nadab  and
Baasha.     Asa  collected  all  the  gold  and  silver  which  was  left  in  the  temple  of
Jerusalem  and  in  his  own  palace,  and  sent  it  to  Benhadad,  saying,  "  There  is
a  league  between  me  and  thee,  between  thy  father  and  my  father  :  behold,  I
have  sent  unto  thee  a  present  of  silver  and  gold ;  go,  break  thy  league  with
Baasha,  King  of  Israel,  that  he  may  depart  from  me."     It  would  seem  that
Baasha,  in  his  eagerness  to  complete  the  fortifications  of  Kamah,  had  left  his
northern  frontier  undefended.     Benhadad  accepted  the  proposal  and  presents
of  the  King  of  Judah,  invaded  Galilee,  seized  the  cities  of  Ijon,  Dan,  and  Abel-
be  th-Maacah,  which  defended  the  upper  reaches  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Litany,

'  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  these  events  on  pp.  731,  732,  supra.

'  1  Kings  xi.  23-25;  for  the  early  history  of  Damascus,  cf.  Winckleu,  Altlestamenlliche  Unter-
suchungen,  p.  fiO,  et  seq.,  and  Geschichte  (Us  Volhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  148,  14-t.  The  reading  "Esron"
in  the  Septuiigiut  (1  Kings  .\i.  23)  indicates  a  form  "Kliezrou,"  by  wliich  it  was  sought  to  rcplacr
the  traditional  reading  "  Rezon."

'  Heziou,  wliom  the  Jewish  writer  intercalates  before  Tabriiumou  (1  Kings  xv.  IS),  is  probably
a  corruption  of  Kezun  ;  Winckler,  relying  on  the  Septuagint  variants  Azin  or  Azael  (1  Kings  xv.  18),
proposes  to  alter  Hezion  into  Hazael,  aud  inserts  a  certain  Hazael  I.  in  tliis  place.  Tabrimmou  is
only  mentioned  in  1  Kingss.\.  18,  where  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  father  of  Benhadad.  As  to  these
per.sonages,  cf.  Winckler,  AUtestamenfh'che  Vntersuchungen.  pp.  OO-l!,").  who.  to  uiy  mind,  pushes  his
iuirenious  criticism  a  little  too  far.


JSA    JSP    EAASHA — BENEADAh   I.  771>

the  lowlands  of  Genesareth.  and  all  the  land  of  Naphtali.  Baasha  hastily
withdrew  from  Judah,  made  terms  with  Benhadad,  and  settled  down  in
Tirzah  for  the  remainder  of  his  reign  ;  ^  Asa  demolished  Eamah,  and  built
the  strongholds  of  C4ebah  and  Mizpali  from  its  ruins.^  Benhadad  retained
the  territory  he  had  acquired,  and  exercised  a  nominal  sovereignty  over  the
two  Hebrew  kingdoms.  Baasha,  like  Jeroboam,  failed  to  found  a  lasting
dynasty;  his  son  Elali  met  witli  the  same  fate  at  the  hands  of  Zimri
which  he  himself  had  meted  out  to  Nadab.  As  on  the  former  occasion,  the
army  was  encamped  before  Gibbetbon,  in  the  country  of  tlie  Philistines,
when  the  tragedy  took  place.  Elah  was  at  Tirzah,  "  drinking  himself
drunk  in  the  house  of  Arza,  wJiieli  was  over  the  household ;  "  Zimri,  wha
was  "  captain  of  half  bis  chariots,"  left  bis  post  at  the  front,  and  assassinated
him  as  lie  lay  intoxicated.  The  wdiole  family  of  Baasha  perished  in  the  sub-
sequent confusion,  but  the  assassin  only  survived  by  seven  days  the  date  of
his  crime.  When  the  troops  whom  he  had  left  behind  him  in  camp  heard  of
what  had  occurred,  they  refused  to  accept  him  as  king,  and,  choosing  Orari  in
his  place,  marched  against  Tirzah.  Zimri,  finding  it  was  impcssible  either  to
win  them  over  to  his  side  or  defeat  tliem,  set  fire  to  the  palace,  and  perished
in  the  flames.  His  death  did  not,  however,  restore  peace  to  Israel ;  while  one-
half  of  the  tribes  approved  the  choice  of  the  army,  the  other  flocked  to  the
standard  of  Tihni,  son  of  Ginath.  War  raged  between  the  two  factions  for  four
years,  and  was  only  ended  by  the  death — whether  natural  or  violent  we  do  not
know — of  Tibni  and  his  brother  .Joram.''  Two  dynasties  had  thus  arisen  in
Israel,  and  had  been  swept  away  by  revolutionary  outbursts,  while  at  Jerusalem
the  descendants  of  David  followed  one  another  in  unbroken  succession.  Asa
outlived  Nadab  by  eleven  years,  and  we  hear  nothing  of  bis  relations  with  the
neighbouring  states  during  the  latter  part  of  bis  reign.  We  are  merely  told
that  his  zeal  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  was  greater  than  had  been  shown  by
any  of  his  predecessors.  He  threw  down  the  idols,  expelled  their  priests,  and
persecuted  all  those  who  practised  the  ancient  religions.  His  grandmother
Maacah  "  had  made  an  abominable  image  for  an  asherah ;  "  he  cut  it  down,
and  burnt  it  in  the  valley  of  the  Kedron,  and  deposed  her  from  the  supremacy
in  the  royal  household  which  she  had  held  for  three  generations.  He  is,  there-
fore, the  first  of  the  kings  to  receive  favourable  mention  from  the  orthodox
chroniclers  of  later  times,  and  it  is  stated  that  he  "did  that  which  was  right  in
the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as  did  David  his  father."  '

'   1  King*  XV.  21,  xvi.  U.

-   1  Kinijt  XV.  lS-22;  cf.  2  Chron.  xvi.  2-(J.

'  1  Kings  xvi.  S-22  ;  Joram  is  not  mi-iilioncd  in  the  Massoretic  text,  but  his  uiiiue  appears  in  the
Septuagiiit.

*  1  Kings  XV.  11 ;  cf.  2  CUion.  xiv.  2.  It  is  admitted,  however,  tliougli  without  any  Uamo  being
attached  to  him,  that  "tlie  higli  plaoe.'j  were  not  tnkeu  away  "  (I   Kiikjh  xv.  11 ;  cl'.  2  Chron.  xv.  17).


780  THE   HEBREWS    AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

Omri  proved  a  warlike  monarch,  and  his  reign,  though  not  a  long  one,  was
signalised  by  a  decisive  crisis  in  the  fortunes  of  Israel.^  The  northern  tribes
had,  so  far,  possessed  no  settled  capital,  Shechem,  Penuel,  and  Tirzah  having
served  in  turn  as  residences  for  the  successors  of  Jeroboam  and  Baasha,
Latterly  Tirzah  had  been  accorded  a  preference  over  its  rivals ;  but  Zimri  had
burnt  the  castle  there,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  had  been  taken  and  retaken
was  not  calculated  to  reassure  the  head  of  the  new  dynasty.  Omri  turned  his
attention  to  a  site  lying  a  little  to  the  north-west  of  Shechem  and  Moilnt  Ebal,
and  at  that  time  partly  covered  by  the  hamlet  of  Shomeron  or  Shimron — our
modern  Samaria.'-  His  choice  was  a  wise  and  judicious  one,  as  the  rapid
development  of  the  city  soon  proved.  It  lay  on  the  brow  of  a  rounded  hill,
which  rose  in  the  centre  of  a  wide  and  deep  depression,  and  was  connected  by
a  narrow  rido-e  with  the  surrounding  mountains.  The  valley  round  it  is  fertile
and  well  watered,  and  the  mountains  are  cultivated  up  to  their  summits;
throu<^hout  the  whole  of  Ephraim  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  find  a  site
which  could  compare  with  it  in  strength  or  attractiveness.^  Omri  surrounded
his  citv  with  substantial  ramparts  ;  he  built  a  palace  for  himself,  and  a  temple
in  which  was  enthroned  a  golden  calf  similar  to  those  at  Dan  and  Bethel.^  A
population  drawn  from  other  nations  besides  the  Israelites  flocked  into  this
well-defended  stronghold,  and  Samaria  soon  came  to  be  for  Israel  what  Jeru-
salem already  was  for  Judah,  an  almost  impregnable  fortress,  in  which  the
sovereign  entrenched  himself,  and  round  which  the  nation  could  rally  in  times
of  danger.  His  contemporaries  fully  realised  the  importance  of  this  move  on
Omri's  part ;  his  name  became  inseparably  connected  in  their  minds  with  tliat
of  Israel.  Samaria  and  the  house  of  Joseph  were  for  them,  henceforth,  the
house  of  Omri,  Bit-Omri,  and  the  name  still  clung  to  them  long  after  Omri
had  died  and  his  family  had  become  extinct.^  He  gained  the  supremacy  over
Judah,  and  forced  several  of  the  south-western  provinces,  which  had  been  in  a

'  The  Hebrew  writer  gives  the  length  of  his  reign  as  twelve  years  (1  Kings  xvi.  23).  Several
historians  consider  this  period  too  brief,  and  wish  to  extend  it  to  twenty-four  years  (Max  Duxcker,
Geschichte  dee  Alterthums,  5th  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  1S2,  et  seq. ;  Kenan,  Ristoire  du  peuple  d' Israel,  vol.  ii.
p.  252) ;  I  cannot,  however,  see  that  there  is,  so  far,  any  good  reason  for  doubting  the  approximate
accuracy  of  the  Bible  figures.

'  According  to  the  tradition  preserved  in  1  Kings  xvi.  24,  the  name  of  the  city  comes  from  Shomer,
the  man  from  wham  Ahab  bought  the  site.  One  method  of  explaining  this  tradition  will  be  found
in  Stade,  Der  Name  der  Sindt  Samarien  und  seine  Serlun/t,  in  the  Zeiischrift  fur  die  Aliteslamentliche
Wissenschaft,  1SS5,  pp.  165-175.

^  KOBIJJSON,  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine,  IS-ll,  vol.  iii.  pp.  138, 139, 146.

*  Amos  viii.  14,  where  the  sin  nf  Samaria,  coupled  as  it  is  with  the  life  of  the  god  of  Dan  and  the
tcay  of  Beersheha,  can,  as  Wellhausen  points  out,  only  refer  to  the  image  of  the  calf  worshipped  at
Samaria.

'  Oi'PERT,  Histoire  del  Empires  d'Assyrie  et  de  Chaldde,  pp.  105, 106 ;  Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften
und  dai  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  190, 191.  Shalmaneser  II.  evea  goes  so  far  as  to  describs  Jehu,
who  exterminated  the  family  of  Omri,  as  Jaiia  uhal  Kliumri,  "Jehu,  son  of  Omri."


THE   SUCCESSORS    OF   HIRAM  I.    AT    TYRE—ETHBAAL    I.         781

state  of  independence  since  the  days  of  Solomon,  to  acknowledge  his  rule  ;  he
conquered  the  country  of  Medeba,  vanquished  Kamoshgad,  King  of  Bloab,  and
imposed  on  him  a  heavy  tribute  in  sheep  and  wool.^  Against  Benhadad  in  the
north-west  he  was  less  fortunate.  He  was  forced  to  surrender  to  him  several
of  the  cities  of  Gilead — among  others  Ramoth-gilead,  which  commanded  the
fords  over  the  Jabbok  and  Jordan.-  He  even  set  apart  a  special  quarter  in
Samaria  for  the  natives  of  Damascus,  where  they  could  ply  their  trades  and
worship  their  gods  without  interference.     It  was  a  kind  of  semi-vassalage,  from


tfif^-^*-


1.     _>  ^_«s,  •—"•'*'    A^?«S^«


.--•^■."^    - i-.^


THE    HILL    OF    SAMAKIA,'


which  he  was  powerless  to  free  himself  unaided :  he  realised  this,  and  looked
for  help  from  without ;  he  asked  and  obtained  the  hand  of  Jezebel,  daughter
of  Ethbaal,  King  of  tlie  Sidonians,  for  Ahab,  his  heir.  Hiram  I.,  the  friend  of
David,  had  carried  the  greatness  of  Tyre  to  its  higiiest  point  ;^  after  his
death,  the  same  spirit  of  discord  which  divided  the  Hebrews  made  its  appear-
ance in  Phoenicia.  The  royal  power  was  not  easily  maintained  over  this  race
of  artisans  and  sailors  :  Baalbazer,  son  of  Hiram,  reigned  for  six  years,  and  his
successor,  Abdastart,  was  killed  in  a  riot  after  a  still  briefer  enjoyment  of  power.
We  know  how  strong  was  the  inHuence  exercised  by  foster-mothers  in  the  great
families  of  the  East ;  the  four  sons  of  Abdastart's  nurse  assassinated  their  foster-
brother,  and  the  eldest  of  Ihem  usurped  his  crown.  Supported  by  the  motley
crowd  of  slaves  and  adventurers  which  filled  the  harbours  of  Phcxinicia,  tliey
managed  to  cling  to  power  for  twelve  years.  Their  stupid  and  brutal  methods
of  government  produced  most  disastrous  results.  A  section  of  the  aristocracy
emigrated  to  the  colonies  across  the  sea  and  incited  them  to  rebellion ;  had  this

'  Inscription  of  Meeha,  11.  5-7;  cf.  2  Kings  iii.  4.

^  1  Kings  .\x.  34.     No  names  are  given  in  tlie  text,  but  external  evidence  proves  that  tliey  were
cities  of  Peraiu,  and  that  Kamotli-gilead  was  one  of  thorn.

'  Drawn  liy  liondier,  from  photograpli  No.  26  of  tho  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.
*  Cf.  wluit  is  said  about  Hiram  I.  and  his  career  on  pp.  741-745,  7M,  s«;)ra.


782  THE  IIKDREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

state  of  things  lasted  for  auy  time,  the  Tyiian  empire  would  have  been  doomed.
A  revolution  led  to  the  removal  of  the  usurper  and  the  restoration  of  the
former  dynasty,  but  did  not  bring  back  to  the  unfortunate  city  the  tranquillity
which  it  sorely  needed.  The  three  surviving  sous  of  Baalbezer,  Methuastart,
Astarym,  and  Phelles  followed  one  another  on  the  tlirone  in  rapid  succession,
■tlie  last-named  perishing  by  the  hand  of  his  cou?in  Ethhaal,  after  a  reign  of
eight  months.'  So  far,  the  Israelites  had  not  attempted  to  take  advantage  of
these  dissensions,  but  there  was  always  the  danger  lest  one  of  their  kings,  less
absorbed  than  his  predecessors  in  the  struggle  with  .Judah,  might  be  tempted
by  the  wealth  of  Phcenicia  to  lay  hands  on  it.  Ethbaal,  therefore,  eagerly
accepted  t  he  means  of  averting  this  danger  by  an  alliance  with  the  new  dynasty
offered  to  him  by  Omri.'^  The  presence  of  a  Phoenician  princess  at  Samaria
seems  to  have  had  a  favourable  effect  on  the  city  and  its  inhabitants.  The
tribes  of  Northern  and  Central  Palestine  had,  so  far,  resisted  the  march  of
material  civilization  which,  since  the  days  of  Solomon,  had  carried  Judah
-along  with  it ;  they  adhered,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  to  the  rude  and  simple
customs  of  their  ancestors.  Jezebel,  who  from  her  cradle  had  been  accustomed
to  all  the  luxuries  and  refinements  of  the  Piicenician  court,  was  by  no  means
prepared  to  dispense  with  them  in  her  adopted  country.  By  their  contact  with
her,  the  Israelites — at  any  rate,  the  upper  and  middle  classes  of  them — acquired
a  certain  degree  of  polish  ;  the  royal  office  assumed  a  more  dignified  exterior,
and  approached  more  nearly  the  splendours  of  the  other  Syrian  monarchies,
such  as  those  of  Damascus,  Hamath,  Sidon,  Tyre,  and  even  Judah.

Unfortunately,  the  effect  of  this  material  progress  was  marred  by  a  religious
difficulty.  Jezebel  had  been  brought  up  by  her  father,  the  high  priest  of  the
Sidonian  Astarte,  as  a  rigid  believer  in  his  faith,^  and  she  begged  Ahab  to
permit  her  to  celebrate  openly  the  worship  of  her  national  deities.  Ere  long
the  Tyrian  Baal  was  installed  at  Samaria  with  his  asherah,  and  his  votaries  had
their  temples  and  sacred  groves  to  worship  in :  their  priests  and  prophets  sat
at  the  king's  table.     Aliab  did  not  reject  the  God  of  liis  ancestors  in  order  to

'  Menander,  Fragm.  1,  in  MI'ller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grmcorum,  vol.  iv.  p.  44G  ;
•cf.  Movers,  Das  FhOnizhcJie  Alterthum,  vol.  i.  pp.  340-346  ;  G.  Eawlixson,  History  of  Fhanicia,
pp.  433-435 ;  Pietschaiaxn,  Geschichte  Phonizkm,  pp.  297,  29S.  As  to  the  spoiling  of  the  royal
names,  cf.  Gdtsohmid,  Kleine  Werle,  vol.  iv.  pp.  4S0-483,  and  Niese's  edition  of  Contra  Apionem,  i.
121-125;  as  to  the  authority  of  the  list,  cf.  Fraxz  Ruhl,  Die  Tyrische  Kiinigiliste  des  Meiianders  ran
Fphesos,  in  the  Rheiiiiiches  Museum,  18U3,  vol.  slviii.  p.  5G5,  et  seq.

'  1  Kings  svi.  31,  where  the  historian  has  HebraieiseJ  the  Phoauiciau  name  Ittobaal  into  "  Eth-
baal," "  Baal  is  with  him."  Izebel  or  Jezebel  seems  to  be  an  abbreviated  form  of  some  name  like
Baalezbel  {Corpus  InscTtptionum  Semiticarum,  vol.  i..  No.  loS,  p.  209).

'  Mesasder,  Fragm.  I,  in  311'ller-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grxcorum,  vol.  iv.  p.  446 ;  and,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  title  "  prie»t  of  Astarte  "  is  found  at  a  still  later  date  joined  to  that  of  the
King  of  Sidon  in  the  inscription  on  the  sarcophagus  at  Tabnith.  Gutschmid  is  inclined  to  base  an
■emendation  on  the  variant  "son  of  King  Astaitos"  (Kleine  Schrifttii,  vol.  iv.  pp.  483);  cf.,  however,
what  is  said  in  vol.  ii.  on  p.  64  of  the  same  work.


AJJAB    AND    THE   PROPHETS.  783

embrace  tlie  religion  of  his  wife — a  reproach  which  was  afterwards  laid  to  his
door  ;  he  remained  faithful  to  Him,  and  gave  the  cliildren  wliom  he  had  by
Jezebel  names  compounded  with  tliat  of  Jahveh,  such  as  Ahaziah,  Joram,  and
Athaliah.^  Tliis  was  not  the  first  instance  of  such  tolerance  in  the  history  of
the  Israelites  :  Solomon  had  granted  a  similar  liberty  of  conscience  to  all  his
foreign  wives,  and  neither  Eehoboam  nor  Abijam  had  opposed  Maacah  in  her
devotion  to  the  Canaauitish  idols.'-  But  the  times  were  changing,  and  the  altar
of  Eaal  could  no  longer  be  placed  side  by  side  with  that  of  Jahveh  without
arousing  fierce  anger  and  inexorable  hatred.  Scarce  a  hundred  years  had
elapsed  since  the  rupture  between  the  tribes,  and  already  one-half  of  the
people  were  unable  to  understand  how  place  could  be  found  in  the  breast  of  a
true  Israelite  for  any  other  god  but  Jahveh  :  Jahveh  alone  was  Lord,  for  none
of  the  deities  worshipped  by  foreign  races  under  human  or  animal  shapes
could  compare  with  Him  in  might  and  holiness.  From  this  to  the  repudiation
of  all  those  practices  associated  with  exotic  deities,  such  as  the  use  of  idols
of  wood  or  metal,  the  anointing  of  isolated  boulders  or  circles  of  rocks,
the  ofl'ering  up  of  prisoners  or  of  the  firstborn,  was  but  a  step  :  Asa  had
already  furnished  an  example  of  rigid  devotion  in  Judah,  and  there  were  many
in  Israel  who  shared  his  views  and  desired  to  imitate  him.  The  opposition  to
what  was  regarded  as  apostasy  on  tlic  part  of  the  king  did  not  come  from  the
official  priesthood ;  the  sanctuaries  at  Dan,  at  Bethel,  at  Shiloh,  and  at  Gilgal
were  prosperous  in  spite  of  Jezebel,  and  this  was  enough  for  them.  But  the
influence  of  the  prophets  had  increased  marvellously  since  the  rupture  between
the  kingdoms,  and  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  reign  Ahab  was  unwise  enough
to  outrage  their  sense  of  justice  by  one  of  his  violent  acts  :  in  a  transport  of
rage  he  had  slain  a  certain  Naboth,  who  had  refused  to  let  him  have  his  vine-
yard in  order  that  he  might  enlarge  the  grounds  of  the  palace  he  was  building
Ibr  himself  at  Jezreel.^  The  prophets,  as  in  former  times,^  were  divided  into
schools,  the  head  of  each  being  called  its  father,  the  members  bearing  the  title
uf  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets  ;  "  they  dwelt  in  a  sort  of  monastery,  each  having
his  own  cell,  where  they  ate  together,  performed  their  devotional  exercises  or
assembled  to  listen  to  the  exhortations  of  their  chief  prophets  r^  nor  did  their

'  1  Kinrjs  x\i.  M-'M.  Aliaziah  and  Joram  mcau  respectivuly  "  wliom  Jaliveli  sustaiiiotli,"  ami
'•  Jahveli  is  exalted."  Atlialiah  luay  possibly  be  derived  from  a  Plioeiiician  form,  Alhalith  or  Athlith,
into  which  the  name  of  Jahveh  does  not  enter  (Ren  an,  y/i'stoVciZu  peuple  d' Israel,  vol.  ii.  p.  2(51,  note:!;.

^  Of.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  the  Canaanitibli  en.stoins  of  Maacah  on  pp.  748,  749,  siijmi.

'  1  Kings  x.\i.,  wliere  the  later  tradition  tiirows  nearly  all  the  blame  on  Jezebel;  whereas  in
the  shorter  account,  in  2  Kings  ix.  '2,'),  2(J,  it  is  laid  entirely  ou  Ahah.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  in  regard  to  the  prophets  on  pp.  748,  749,  supra.

'  lu  1  Sam.  xix.  'JO,  a  passage  whicli  seems  to  some  to  bo  a  later  interjiolation  mentions  a  '■  company
of  the  prophets,  pro|ihe8ying,  and  Samuel  standing  as  head  over  them."  Cf.  2  Kings  vi.  1-7,  wiiero
thclnarrative  iulroduces  a  congregation  of  prophets  grouped  round  Klisha.


784  TEE  HEBREWS   AND    TEE  PHILISTINES— DAMASCUS.

sacred  ofEce  prevent  them  from  marrying.^  As  a  rule,  they  settled  near  one
of  the  temples,  and  lived  there  on  excellent  terms  with  the  members  of  the
regular  priesthood.  Accompanied  by  musical  instruments,  they  chanted  the
songs  in  which  the  poets  of  other  days  extolled  the  mighty  deeds  of  Jahveh,
and  obtained  from  this  source  the  incidents  of  the  semi-religious  accounts  which
they  narrated  concerning  the  early  history  of  the  people;  or,  when  the  spirit
moyed  them,  they  went  about  through  the  land  i^rophesying,  either  singly,  or
accompanied  by  a  disciple,  or  in  bauds.^  The  people  thronged  round  them  to
listen  to  their  hymns  or  their  stories  of  the  heroic  age :  the  great  ones  of  the
land,  even  kings  themselves,  received  visits  from  them,  and  endured  their
reproaches  or  exhortations  with  mingled  feelings  of  awe  and  terroi-.  A  few  of
the  prophets  took  the  part  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,^  but  the  majority  declared
against  them,  and  of  these,  the  most  conspicuous,  by  his  forcibleuess  of  speech
and  action,  was  Elijah.  We  do  not  know  of  what  race  or  family  he  came,  nor
even  what  he  was  :  *  the  incidents  of  his  life  which  have  come  down  to  us  seem
to  be  wrapped  in  a  vague  legendary  grandeur.  He  appears  before  Ahab,  and
tells  him  that  for  years  to  come  no  rain  or  dew  sliall  fall  on  the  earth  save  by
his  command,  and  then  takes  flight  into  the  desert  in  order  to  escape  the
king's  anger.  He  is  there  ministered  uuto  by  ravens,  which  bring  him  bread  and
meat  every  night  and  morning.  When  the  spring  from  which  he  drinks  dries
up,  he  goes  to  the  house  of  a  widow  at  Zarephath  in  the  country  of  Sidon,  and
there  he  lives  with  his  hostess  for  twelve  months  on  a  barrel  of  meal  and  a
cruse  of  oil  which  never  fail.  The  widow's  son  dies  suddenly :  he  prays  to
Jahveh  and  restores  him  to  life ;  then,  still  guided  by  an  inspiration  from  above,
he  again  presents  himself  before  the  king.  Ahab  receives  him  without  resent-
ment, assembles  the  prophets  of  Baal,  brings  them  face  to  face  with  Elijah  on
the  top  of  Mount  Carmel,  and  orders  them  to  put  an  end  to  the  drought  by
which  his  kingdom  is  wasted.  The  Phcenicians  erect  an  altar  nnd  call  upon
their  Baalim  with  loud  cries,  and  gash  their  arms  and  bodies  with  knives,  yet
cannot  bring  about  the  miracle  expected  of  them.  Elijah,  after  mocking  at
their  cries  and  contortions,  at  last  addresses  a  prayer  to  Jahveh,  and  fire  comes

'  2Kingtiv.  1-7,  where  an  account  is  given  of  the  miracle  worked  by  Elisha  on  behalf  of  "a
woman  of  the  wives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets."

'  1  Sam.  X.  5,  where  a  band  of  prophels  is  mentioned  "  coming  down  from  the  high  place  with  a
psaltery,  and  a  timbrel,  and  a  pipe,  and  a  harp,  before  them,  prophesying ;  "  cf  ver.  10.  In  '2  Kings  ii.
3-5,  bands  of  the  "  cliildren  of  the  prophets  "  come  out  from  Bethel  and  Jericho  to  ask  Elisha  if  he
knows  the  fate  which  awaits  Elijah  on  that  very  day.

'  Cf.  the  anonymous  prophet  who  encourages  Ahab,  in  the  name  of  Jahveh,  to  surprise  the  camp
of  Benhadad  before  Samaria  (1  Ki)igs  xs.  13-15,  22-25,  2S)  ;  and  the  prophet  Zedekiah,  who  gives
advice  contrary  to  that  of  his  fellow-prophet  Jlicaiah  in  the  council  of  war  held  by  Ahab  with
Jelioshaphat,  King  of  Judah,  before  the  attack  on  Eamoth-gilead  (1  Kings  xxii.  11,  12,  2t).

*  The  ethnical  inscription,  "  Tishbite,"  which  we  iind  after  his  name  (1  Kings  xvii.  1,  xxi.  17),
is  due  to  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  copyist.


TEE   CONFLICT  BETWEEN  ISRAEL  AND   DAMASCUS.  785

down  from  Leaven  and  consumes  the  sacrifice  iu  a  moment ;  the  people,
convinced  by  the  miracle,  fall  upon  the  idolaters  and  massacre  them,  and  the
rain  shortly  afterwards  falls  in  torrents.  After  this  triumph  he  is  said  to  have
fled  once  more  for  safety  to  the  desert,  and  there  on  Horeb  to  have  had  a
divine  vision.  "  And,  behold,  the  Lord  passed  by,  and  a  great  and  strong  wind
rent  the  mountains,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  rocks  before  the  Lord ;  but  the
Lord  was  not  in  the  wind :  and  after  the  wind  an  earthquake ;  but  the  Lord
was  not  in  the  earthquake  :  and  after  the  earthquake  a  fire  ;  but  the  Lord  was
not  in  the  fire  :  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  voice.  And  it  was  so,  when
Elijah  heard  it,  that  he  wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle,  and  went  out,  and  stood
in  the  entering  in  of  the  cave.  And,  behold,  there  came  a  voice  unto  him,
and  said,  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ? "  God  then  commanded  him  to
anoint  Hazael  as  King  of  Syria,  and  Jehu,  sou  of  Nimshi,  as  King  over  Israel,
and  Elisha,  son  of  Shaphat,  as  prophet  iu  his  stead,  "and  him  that  escapeth
from  the  sword  of  Hazael  shall  Jehu  slay  :  and  him  that  escapeth  from  the
sword  of  Jehu  shall  Elisha  slay."  The  sacred  writings  go  on  to  tell  us  that
the  prophet  who  had  held  such  close  converse  with  the  Deity  was  exempt
from  the  ordinary  laws  of  humanity,  and  was  carried  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of
fire.  Tlie  account  that  has  come  down  to  us  shows  the  impression  of  awe  left
by  Elijah  on  the  spirit  of  his  age.^

Ahab  was  one  of  the  most  warlike  among  the  warrior-kings  of  Israel.  He
ruled  Moab  with  a  strong  hand,^  kept  Judah  in  subjection,^  and  in  his  conflict
with  Damascus  experienced  alternately  victory  and  honourable  defeat.  Ha-
dadidri  [Hadadezer],  of  whom  the  Hebrew  historians  make  a  second  Benhadad,*
had  succeeded  the  conqueror  of  Baasha."'  The  account  of  his  campaigns  in  the
Hebrew  records  has  only  reached  us  in  a  seemingly  condensed  and  distorted
condition.  Israel,  strengthened  by  the  exploits  of  Omri,  must  have  offered  him
a  strenuous  resistance,  but  we  know  nothing  of  the  causes,  nor  of  the  opening
scenes  of  the  drama.     When  the  curtain  is  lifted,  the  preliminary  conflict  is

'  The  story  of  Klijah  is  found  in  1  Kinijx  xvii.-xi.'C.,  xxi.  17-29,  and  2  Khuji  i.,  ii.  1-14.

'  Inscription  of  Mcsha,  11.  7,  !S.

^  Tlie  suburdimiUou  of  JudfiMs  nowhere  explicitly  mentioned:  it  is  inferreil  from  the  attitude
adopted  by  Jelioshiiphat  in  presence  of  Ahab  (1  Kimjs  xxii.  l,et  seq.).

*  The  Assyrian  texts  call  this  Dadidri,  Adadidri,  whicli  exactly  corresponds  to  the  Hebrew  form
Hadadezer  ;  cf.  on  this  subject  the  contradielory  articles  by  Sciihadeh,  Keilimchriflen  und  Geschichts-
fortchuny,  p.  53S,  et  seq.,  KeHimchriJlen  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2na  edit.,  p.  200,  et  seq..  Die  Namen
Jladad,  Hadadezer,  Btnhadud  und  ihre  KeiUnschnflliche  Etiuioalente,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Keilfor-
echung,  vol.  ii.  pp.  30ti-384,  and  by  Fit.  Delitzscii,  Assyrioloijischeii  Notizen  zum  Alten  Testament,  II.,
der  Name  Benkadad,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  filr  Keiiforschumj,  vol  ii.  pp.  101-178,  the  former  upholding
the  reading  Adarezer,  Adadidri,  the  latter  that  of  Bouridri,  lliridri.

'  The  information  in  the  Book  of  Kings  docs  not  tell  us  at  what  time  during  the  reign  of  Ahab
liis  first  wars  with  Hadadezer  (Benhadad  II.)  and  the  siege  of  Samaria  occurred.  The  rapid  success
of  Shalmaneser's  campaigns  against  Damascus,  between  8o-t  and  839  B.C.,  does  not  allow  us  to  place
these  events  after  the  invasion  of  Assyria.  Ahab  appears,  in  851,  at  the  battle  of  Karkar,  as  the  ally
of  Benhadad,  as  I  shall  show  later.

3    E


786  TEE  EEBBEWS  AND    TEE  PEILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

over,  and  the  Israelites,  closely  besieged  in  Samaria,  have  no  alternative  before
them  but  unconditional  surrender.  This  was  the  first  serious  attack  the  city
had  sustained,  and  its  resistance  spoke  well  for  the  military  foresight  of  its
founder.  In  Benhadad's  train  were  thirty-two  kings,  and  horses  and  chariots
innumerable,  while  his  adversary  could  only  oppose  to  them  seven  thousand
men.  Ahab  was  willing  to  treat,  but  the  conditions  proposed  were  so  outrao^eous
that  he  broke  off  the  negotiations.  We  do  not  know  how  long  the  blockade
had  lasted,  when  one  day  the  garrison  made  a  sortie  in  full  daylight,  and  fell
upon  the  Syrian  camp ;  the  enemy  were  panic-stricken,  and  Benhadad  with
difficulty  escaped  on  horseback  with  a  handful  of  men.  He  resumed  hostilities
in  the  following  year,  but  instead  of  engaging  the  enemy  in  the  hill-country  of
Ephraim,  where  his  superior  numbers  brought  him  no  advantage,  he  deployed
his  lines  on  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  near  the  town  of  Aphek.  His  servants  had
counselled  him  to  change  his  tactics :  "  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  is  a  God  of
the  hills,  therefore  they  were  stronger  than  we ;  but  let  us  fight  against  them
in  the  plain,  and  surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  they."  The  advice,  however,
proved  futile,  for  he  sustained  on  the  open  plain  a  still  more  severe  defeat
than  he  had  met  with  in  the  mountains,  and  the  Hebrew  historians  affirm  that
he  was  taken  prisoner  during  the  pursuit.  The  power  of  Damascus  was  still
formidable,  and  the  captivity  of  its  king  had  done  little  to  bring  the  war  to  an
end;  Ahab,  therefore,  did  not  press  his  advantage,  but  received  the  Syrian
monarch  "  as  a  brother,"  and  set  him  at  liberty  after  concluding  with  him  an
offensive  and  defensive  alliance.  Israel  at  this  time  recovered  possession  of  some
of  the  cities  which  had  been  lost  under  Baasha  and  Omri,  and  the  Israelites  once
more  enjoyed  the  right  to  occupy  a  particular  quarter  of  Damascus.  Accord-
ing to  the  Hebrew  account,  this  was  the  retaliation  they  took  for  their  previous
humiliations.!  It  is  further  stated,  in  relation  to  this  event,  that  a  certain  man
of  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  speaking  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  bade  one  of  his
companions  smite  ,him.  Having  received  a  wound,  he  disguised  himself  with
a  bandage  over  his  eyes,  and  placed  himself  in  the  king's  path,  "and  as  the
king  passed  by,  he  cried  unto  the  king :  and  he  said,  Thy  servant  went  out
into  the  midst  of  the  battle  ;  and,  behold,  a  man  turned  aside,  and  brought
a  man  unto  me,  and  said.  Keep  this  mau :  if  by  any  meaus  he  be  missing,
then  shall  thy  life  be  for  his  life,  or  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  talent  of  silver.
And  as  thy  servant  was  busy  here  and  there,  he  was  gone.  And  the  King  of
Israel  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  judgment  be ;  thyself  hast  decided"  it.
Then  he  hasted,  and  took  the  headband  away  from  his  eyes,  and  the  King  of
Israel  discerned  him  that  he  was  one  of  the  prophets.      And  he  said  uuto

'  1  Kingt  xx.  1-31,


DAMASCUS  BEFORE   THE  ASSYRIAN  INVASION.  787

bim,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Because  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  thy  hand  the
man  whom  I  had  devoted  to  destruction,  therefore  thy  life  shall  go  for  his  life,
and  thy  people  for  his  people.  And  the  King  of  Israel  went  to  his  house  heavy
and  displeased,  and  came  to  Samaria."  ^  This  story  was  in  accordance  with  the
popular  feeling,  and  Ahab  certainly  ought  not  to  have  paused  till  he  had
exterminated  his  enemy,  could  he  have  done  so ;  but  was  this  actually  in  his
power  ?

We  have  no  reason  to  contest  the  leading  facts  in  this  account,  or  to  doubt
that  Benhadad  suffered  some  reverses  before  Samaria ;  but  we  may  perhaps
ask  whether  the  check  was  as  serious  as  we  are  led  to  believe,  and  whether
imagination  and  national  vanity  did  not  exaggerate  its  extent  and  results.
The  fortresses  of  Persea  which,  according  to  the  treaty,  ought  to  have  been
restored  to  Israel  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Damascus,  and
the  loss  of  Eamoth-gilead  continued  to  be  a  source  of  vexation  to  such  of  the
tribes  of  Gad  and  Reuben  as  followed  the  fortunes  of  the  house  of  Omri :  '■*
yet  these  places  formed  the  most  important  part  of  Benhadad's  ransom.  The
sole  effect  of  Ahab's  success  was  to  procure  for  him  more  lenient  treatment ;
he  lost  no  territory,  and  perhaps  regained  a  few  towns,  but  he  had  to  sign
conditions  of  peace  which  made  him  an  acknowledged  vassal  to  the  King  of
Syria.^  Damascus  still  remained  the  foremost  state  of  Syria,  and,  if  we  rightly
interpret  the  scanty  information  we  possesss,  seemed  in  a  fair  way  to  bring
about  that  unification  of  the  country  which  neither  Hittites,  Philistines,  nor
Hebrews  had  been  able  to  effect.  Situated  nearly  equidistant  from  Kaphia
and  Carcheraish,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  cultivated  region,  the  city  was  protected
in  the  rear  by  the  desert,  which  secured  it  from  invasion  on  the  ea.st  and  north-
east ;  the  dusty  plains  of  the  Haurau  protected  it  on  the  south,  and  the  wooded
cliffs  of  Anti-Lebanon  on  the  west  and  north-west.  It  was  entrenched  within
these  natural  barriers  as  in  a  fortress,  whence  the  garrison  was  able  to  sally
forth  at  will  to  attack  in  force  one  or  other  of  the  surrounding  nations :  if  the
city  were  victorious,  its  central  position  made  it  easy  for  its  rulers  to  keep  watch
over  and  preserve  what  they  had  won  ;  if  it  suffered  defeat,  the  surrounding
mountains  and  deserts  formed  natural  lines  of  fortification  easy  to  defend
against  the  pursuing  foe,  but  very  difficult  for  the  latter  to  force,  and  the

'  1  Kinge  XX.  o5-'13.

^  1  Kings  xxii.  3 :  "  And  the  King  of  Israel  said  unto  his  servants.  Know  yo  that  Ramoth-gilead
JB  ours,  and  wo  be  still,  and  take  it  not  out  of  tlio  liand  of  the  King  of  Syria  ?  "

'  No  document  as  yet  jirovcs  directly  that  Aliab  was  vassal  to  liuuliadad  II.  The  fact  seems  to
follow  clearly  enough  Irom  the  account  of  the  battle  of  Karkar,  against  Slialmaneser  11.,  where  the
contingent  of  Ahab  of  Israel  figures  among  those  of  the  kings  who  fought  for  Benhadad  II.  against
the  Assyrians  (Inscription  on  iht  Monolilh  of  Kurl-hi,  col.  ii.  11.  ill,  ^2).  I  shall  have  occasion  later
on  to  refer  to  this  subject.


788  THE  EEBREWS   AND    THE  PHILISTINES — DAMASCUS.

delay  presented  by  this  obstacle  gave  the  inhabitants  time  to  organise  their
reserves  and  bring  fresh  troops  into  the  field.  The  kings  of  Damascus  at  the
outset  brought  under  their  suzerainty  the  Aramaean  principalities — Argob,
Maacah,  and  Geshur,  by  which  they  controlled  the  Hauran,  and  Zobah,  which
secured  to  them  Coele-Syria  from  Lake  Huleh  to  the  Bahr  el-Kades.  They  had
taken  Upper  Galilee  from  the  Hebrews,  and  subsequently  Peraea,  as  far  as  the
Jabbok,  and  held  in  check  Israel  and  the  smaller  states,  Ammon  and  Bloab,
which  followed  in  its  wake.  They  exacted  tribute  from  Hamath,  the  Phoenician
Arvad,  the  lower  valley  of  the  Oroutes,  and  from  a  portion  of  the  Hittites,  and
demanded  contingents  from  their  princes  in  time  of  war.  Their  power  was
still  in  its  infancy,  and  its  elements  were  not  firmly  welded  together,  but  the
surrounding  peoples  were  in  such  a  state  of  weakness  and  disunion  that  they
might  be  left  out  of  account  as  formidable  enemies.  The  only  danger  that
menaced  the  rising  kingdom  was  the  possibility  that  the  two  ancient  warlike
nations,  Egypt  and  Assyria,  might  shake  off  their  torpor,  and  reappearing  on
the  scene  of  their  former  prowess  might  attack  her  before  she  had  consolidated
her  power  by  tlie  annexation  of  Xabaraim.


INDEX


Aahmes.    iiee  Alimosi
Abana  or  Amana.     See  Barada
Alxl-el-Guniali,  cemetery  of,  309
Abeshukh  (King  of  Babjlon),  27,

45
Abilain  (King  of  Babylon),  27.  28,

29,  4G
Abimelech  (of  Gerar),  Glj,  GS

(son  of  Jernbbaal),  G92

Abisha,  15

Abraham,  49,  65,  67,  68

Abu  Simbel  (Ipsambul),  387, 41 1  -

416
Abydos,  382

,  temple  at,  380,  381

Accad.  38,  40,  43,  44,  62

,  people  of,  117

Acre  (Aku),  13G,  259,  280
Adamah,  48
Adarakalama,  1 13
Adda  Martu,  37.  47
Adonis  (river),  9,  175,  17G

(god),  175,  178,  179

,  death  of.  179

Adora,  131

Adumitaeh,  119

Afrin,  the,  G

.AgumkakrinK-,  119,  120

Agumrabi,  J 19

[A]guya»hi,  119

Aliab,  781,  784

Ahhotpii  (Aahotep)I.,  Queen,  78,

80,  97,  99,  491

, ,  necklace  of,  3

, ,  mask  of,  3

Ahhotpu  II.,  Queen.  99,  104
Ahmasi(princeas-queen),  104,235,

236
Ahmaei-Nofritari,  Queen,  78,  79,

94-102
Ahmosi-PannekhaUt,  88, 101,210


Ahmosi-si-Abiaa,  82,  85,  SO,  87,

88,  90,  100,  210
Ahmosis  I.  (Aahmes),  76,  78,  80,

81,  86,  88,  91,  92,  93.  94,  96,  98
Ahmosii,  78
At,  335
Ajalon,  131
Akharru,  IS
Akkad.     See  Accad
Aksapu  (Ecdippa),  138,  258
Alasia,  kingdom  of,  142,  279,  284,

285,  286,  29G,  350,  358
Araalekites,  48
Amanos,  8,  18

Amenhotep.     See  Amenothes
Amenhotpii  (Amenophis),  94,  95,

98,  100,  101,  102,  104
Amenmesis,  439,  441,  454
Amenophis.     Sec  Amenhotpii
Amenothes  I.     See  Amenhotpii

,  the  cultus  of,  103

.\meniithe3  II.,  211,  289,  290,  291

,  statue  of,  209

Amenothes   III.,   280,   29G,   298,

301,  315,  448,  527

,  tomb  of,  309

Amenoflies   IV.  (Khuuiatouii   or

Ameuhotep),281, 316,321,  325-

330,  334, 347,  352
Ammianalii,  15
Ammisiitana  (King  of  Babylon),

27,  45,  49,  111
Ammizadugga(King  of  Babylon),

27,45
Ammou,  148

Ammonites,  the,  12G,  709,  731
Amon  (god  of    Thebes)  and  his

piiests,  312,  324,  543-552,  559,

561
Amorite8(Amurrii).  the,  vi.,lS,  19,

49,  140,  147,  MS,  150,  255,  279,

285,  329,  358,  371,  471,  677
Amraphel.     See  Khammurabi


Amu,  the,  16

Amurru.     See  Amorites

Amuii.     See  Hyksos

Anaklm  {or  Emim),  48

Annian  (Ilumailu),  112,  113

Anshan,  30,  33

Antarados  (Tortosa),  171

Apachnas,  53

Aphaka,  175,  176,  177

Aphobis  (Apopbis),  71

Aphukin,  131

Apopi,  romance  of,  75

Apophis  Aqnimri,59,  73

Apophis  I.,  53

Apophis  II.,  58

Aprie.     See  Afrin

Aramaeans  aud  their  settlement,
12G,  147,  6G9,  731

Arapkha,  601

Arbailu  (Arbela),  600

Arbeles  (see  Arbailu),  GOl,  GOG

Arioch  of  Ellasar  (Eri-.\ku,
Rimaku),  vi.,  48

Arisfl  (the  Syrian),  440,  453,  560

Ark  of  the  Lord,  the,  706,  707,
728-730

Arnon,  13

Arpliaxad  (Arpachshad),  ix.,  G4

Arvad  (Arados),  63, 169,  170,  171,
ISO,  188,  190,  192,  197,  264,
266,  273,  350,  389,  470

,  tombs  at,  579

Ascalon,  130,  131,  135

Ashcr,  tribe  of,  69

Ashnunak,  41,  119

Ashtaroth,  259

Ashtaroth-Karnaini,  4S

Asiatic,  an.  111

,  lion  overcoming  an  (amu-
let), 208

Asses,  53

Assur  (god),  603

,  winged  disk  of,  ."ii;7

3  r.  1


790


INDEX.


Asaur  (town),  112,  119,  146,  609

,  vicegerents  of,  118

Assurballit,  595
Assurnazirpal  I.,  610
Assyria,  146,  597,  599
- — -.  decadence  of,  667

,  hunting  in,  G23,  661

,  map  of,  31,  599

,  rise  of,  592

Assyrian  bird  of  prey,  568

Infantry,  tlie,  569,  627,  631

race,  the,  619

war-chariot,  626,  629,  632

war-tactics,  635-642

weight,  670

Astarte  or  Aghtoreth  (Ishtar),  157,

159, 161. 167, 170, 174, 181, 182,

184,  187,  203,  603
Aten.     See  Atonii
Atonii   (solar  disk),  worship  of,

314,  318,  320,  322
Autu,  183,  186
Avaris   (Hawilrit)  (Tanis?),   52,

62,  72,  74,  80,  86,  87,  88
Aztru,  329

B

Baal  (Hyksos  god)  Siitkhii,  the
Great  Sit,  vii.,  58,  59

(the  Syrian),  154,  155,  169,

170,  184

,  priests  of,  161,  162,  784

Baalim,  see  alio  Baal  (Syrian),
lo4,  159,  160,  161,  167,  784

Babylon,  19,  592

,  lords  of,  23,  24

,  plan  of,  21

■ ,  rise  of,  46

Babylonian  dynasties,  table  of,  27,
113,612

Balirein  Islands,  the,  62

Bahrel-Kades,  140,  141,  142

Barada  (Abana),  8

Beersheba,  163

Beit-Wally,  387

BeU,  48

Beni'Israel.     See  Israelites

Benhadad  I.,  778

Benbadad  II.,  785,  786

Benjamin,  tribe  of,  69

Iferytus  (Birutu,  Beirutu)  (Bey-
rout),  179,  180,  181,  191,  192,
197

Beth-Anoth,  131

Bethel,  66,  69,  163,  164,  680,  755

Bethels,  the  (Betyli),  160

Bethshan  (see  Bitshailu),  133, 138

Berber  tribes,  the,  430,  767

Bitshailu  (Bethshan),  133,  138

Bnon,  53


Borsippa  (Birs-Nimrud),  23
Bubastite  dynasty,  the,  769
Bttrnabiiriash  (King  of  Babylon),

272,281,  286,  329,  .'594
Byblos  (Gublu),   172,    173,    178,

191,  197,  266,  572


C


Cana,  258

Canaanites,   the,    126,    127,    150,

676,  680
,   agriculture  of  the,  131,  el

seq.
Carchemish  (Jerabis?),  144,  145,

265,  389,  401,  470
Carmel,  Mount,  134,  135
Casios,  Mount,  123
ChaldiBa,  map  of,  31
Chaldasans,  the,  62,  116

,  wars  against,  605

Chariot,  the  Asiatic,  225

• ,  the  Assyrian,  626

,  the  Egyptian,  216,  217,  218,

225,  285,  494,  739

,  the  Hebrew,  739

Chedorlaomer.     See  Kudur-laga-

mar
Coele-Syria,  7,  137,  140,  262,  263

,  place-names  in,  15

Cosssean  kings,  the.  591
Cossseans,   the  (Kashshu),    113,

591,  611

,  gods  of,  115

Cretans  (Cherethites),  766
Cyclades,  the,  205
Cyprus,  199,  268
• ,  map  of,  201

D

Dagon,  156

Damanhur,  Hyksos  remains  at,  55

Damascus,   140,    259,    279,    731,

737, 777

,  kingdom  of,  777

Damdamua  (Damdamusa),  608
Damkilishu,  113
Dan,  tribe  of,  69,  704

,  worship  at,  755

Dapiir  (Tabor),  128,  220,  399,  400

David,  714,  721,  775

David's  wars    with    Philistines,

724,  725
Deir-el-Bahari,  289,  508,  771
,   temple  of,   213,   240,   241,

289,  508,  771
Dilmun,  62
Drah-abu'1-Noggah,  cemetery  of,

94
Duiilu,  47
Dur-Undash,  34


Dushratta  (King  of  Mit.anni),280
281,282,284,  298,  328,356,  358

Dynasty  XVIII.  (table  of  kings).
337

XIX,,  341

XX.  (table  of  kings),  756

XXII..  769

E

Eagamil(Eaga),  112,  113

Ebarra,  42

Ecdippa.     See  Aksapu

Edomites,  the,  68,  126

Egyptian  art,  529-536

■ chariot,  the,  216,  217,  218,

225,  285,  494,  739

• costume,  493

education,  493

enamel  disli,  206

fables,  499

fairy  stories,  497

furniture,  493

goldsmiths'  work,  491

infantry,  223

love-song.s,  503-505

ships,  the,  458,  758

Ekurulanna,  113

El,  164,  172,  173,  179,  180,  192

Elam   (Ilamma),  vi.,  30,  33,  34,

46, 119,  592,  612

,  map  of,  31

Elamite  armies,  36,  66

princes,  title  of,  37

religion,  the,  35

Elephantine,  S3,  303,  305

Eli,  706,  et  seq.

Elijah,  784

Elisha,  783,  785

El-Kab  (principality  of),  83,  85

EUasar.     See  Larsa

El-Paran,  48

Emim,  the  (Anakim),  48

E-sagilla,  21,  41

Esau,  66,  68,  69

Etbai,  gold-mines  of,  374,  376

Ethbaal  I.  (Ittobaal),  781,  782

Ethiopia,  328,  351,  566

,  reorganisation  of,  by  Thut-

mosis  I.,  229

,  tributes  of,  267

Ethiopian  auxiliaries,  220

Euphrates,  the,  24

Exodus,  the,  443,  447

,  Egyptian  romance  of  tlie,

449


"Fankhiii"  (or  Asiatic  prisoners),

93
Funerals  and  mummies,  509-526


INDEX.


791


G

Gad  (goddess  of  Fortimii),  138

Gad,  tribe  of,  69

Gal-Ed  (Galeed).     See  Gilead

Gallas,  the,  232

Gandish,  115,  119

Gaza,  124,  135,  22S,  255

Gebel-Barkal,  302,  303

Genesareth.     See  Kinuereth

Gerf-hossein,  temple  at,  409,  410

Gezer,  131

Gibeah,  131

Gideou.     See  Jerubbaal

Gilead  (Galeed),  69,  163

Gilukhipa,  297,  298

Gizeh   museum,  head   of  a  gold

lion  from,  108
Goim,  the,  or  Goyyim  (Guti),  vi.,

48
Gomorrah,  48,  49,  63
Goshen,  land  of,  70,  71,  72
Gubin,  19

Gublu.     See  Bj'blos
Gulkishar,  113
Gurneh,  temple  of.     See  Qumeh

H

Habardip,  the,  35
Hadad.  772

(Semite  deity),  16,  156

Hadadezer  {or  Iladarezor)  [King

of  Zoba],  731,  771,785
Hadadidri   (Adadidri,    Dadidri).

See  Benluidad  II.
Uamath  (Hamatu),  140, 142,  259,

279
Hanaweh,  rocks  of,  187
Hariin  (brother  of  Abraham),  65
Harmhabi  (Horemheb),  341,  342,

348,  307,  368,  384

,  statue  of,  311

•  (wars  in  Ethiopia  of),  349,

351
Harran.     Bee  Kharan
Hatshopsltft  (Hatasu),  Queen,  72,

236,  237,  238,  241,243,247,308

II.,  243,  247,  252,  254,  290

Hadi-nibfl,  359

Haur^ii  (province  of  Auranitis  of

the  LXX.),  138,  787

,  cities  of,  259

Hazazon-Tamar,  49

Httzor,  258

Hebrew  kingdom,  map  of  the,  732

Hebrews,  the  (Ibriin),  6."),  70, 442,

674,  675
Hebron   {see  also  Kirjatli-.Vrba),

69,  70,  148
Hieraconpolis.    Ste  Nekuit


Hieromax.    See  Yarmnk
Hiram  I.,  781

and  Solomon.  74 1

Hira-Shfiitil.  72
Hittite  religion,  355

seal,  672

type  and  costume,  353

Hittites,  the.     See  Kliati

,   art    and  writing    of,   649,

et  leq.
,  campaign    of    Ramses    II.

against,  391
Hontttoui,  mummified   head    of

Queen,  506
Horim,  the,  48
Horse  in  Egypt,  the,  51, 215, 210,

218
Hotpliri,  76,  77
Hrihor  (Her-Hor),  562,  563,  582,

760
Huleh,  Lake  of,  10,  12,  259
Hyksos,  the  (Amuu  or  Monatiil),

50,  54,  55,  57,  72,  81

invasion,  the,  51,  et  seq.

,  probable  identification  with

the  Khati,  57


I


lannas,  53,  59

lanzi  (lanzu),  114

Ibleam,  1.35

Ibrim.    See  Hebrews

Ididi,  the,  31

Igurkapkapu, 112

Ilumallu  (Anman),  112,  113

Immeru  (King  of  Babylon),  27,

28,  29,  46
lobacchos.     See  .Jabbok
Irishum,  112
Isaac,  68
Ishin,  40
Ishkibal,  113
Ishmael,  66

,  children  of,  126

Ishtar.     See  Astarte
Ismidagan,  112
Israel,  kingdom  of,  753,  775
Israelites,  the,  or  Beni-Israel,  64,

72,  88,  443,  444,  447  (and  see

Hebrews)
Issachar,  tribe  of,  69
Itti-ilu-nibi.    See  Kiannibi
lurza,  131


Jabbok,  13,  69
.facob,  08,  69
.Jacob-el,  vii.
.lehoiakim.  King,  178
Jehu,  780


.Terabie.     See  Carchemisli
Jeroboam,  750,  772
Jerubbaal  (Gideon),  090
Jerusalem  (Ursalimmu    or  Uru-

salim),  131,  680,  703,  725,  720,

727,  772,  773
,       Sheshonq's      expedition

against,  773

,  priesthood  at,  749

Jezebel,  781,  782,  784

Job,  stone  of,  403

Joppa,  130

Jordan,  the,  9,  et  seq.

Joseph,  tribe  of,  69

Judah,  kingdom  of,  7.53,  775

,  tribe  of,  69

Judges,  the  Israelite,  683,  et  seq.
Jud-ham-melek,  774
,  head  of,  671

K

Kadashmankharbe,  117

Kadesh.     See  Qodshu

Kafiti,  268

Kalakh  (Calah),  000,  601

Kallimasin  (King  of  Babylon),

280,  282,  297,  594
Kamosa,  77,  78,  79,  98
Karasu,  the,  7
Karduiiiasli,  116,  117
Karnak,  341, 379,  et  seq  ,  419, 550,

557

,  temple  of  Amon  at,  307

Kashdim  (Chaldaians),  62,  116
Kashshu,  the.     See  Cossa;ans

(lord  of  heaven),  114

Kefatiu,  120, 121,  et  seq.,  192,  266
Keilah,  131
Khabur  (river),  25
Khabzilukha  (Khalzihikha),  608
Kliaidalu,  34
Khalabu  (.\leppo),  142
Khallu,  112
Khammurabi  (Amraphel)  (King

of  Babylon),  vii.,  27,  29,  39,  40,

41,43,  44,  48.49,  111

,  title  of,  49

Khamotsit,  424,  425,  448

Khani,  tlio,  120

Kharan,  Kharranu  (llarrau),  26,

05,  00,  140
Khara.  120,  121,  et  seq.,  255,  200,

262,  278,  279,  28.5,  371, 372,  475

,  map  of,  125

Khati  or  Khiti  (Hittites),  IS,  19,

57,  120,  148,  272,  284,  285,  292,

296, 350, 351, 362, 364,  300, 371,

389,  392,  468, 470,471, 474,  588,

589,  009
Khatusaru  (Khatusharu),  Hittito

prince,  389,  394,  398,  401,  455


792


INDEX.


Kbiani  (Sasiniiri),  53.  5S,  61

identified  with  luniias,  59

,  scarab  of,  2

Khonsfl  and  his  teiuple,  553-555
Kliiiitatonii.  See  Tel  el-Amarna
Khilniaton  or  Khflniatonii(Kliue-

naten).     See  Amenothes  IV.
Khushshi,  the,  35
Kiannibi  (Itti-ilu-nibi),  113
Kings,  tombs  of,  383,  et  ieq.^  483
Kinnereth,  258

,  Lake  of,  12

Kirjath-Arba  (Hebron),  66

Ivisii,  42

Kishon,  134,  CSS

Kishu,  2S

Kom-el-Ahmar.     See  Netenit

Kontbanunofir,  land  of,  90

Kudur-lagamar    (Chedorlaomer),

vi.,  39,  47,  4S.  49,  63
Kudnr-mabug,  38,  47
Kudur-uakhunta  (King  of  Elam),

37,  3S
Kurgalalamnia,  113
Kurigalzu  I.,  272,  594,  595,  596
Kurigalzu  II.,  596,  597
Kiisb.  princes  of,  231,  232,  269
Kuta,  28


Laban,  68

Laohish  (Tell  el-Hesy),  129,  131
Laish  (ur  Dan),  10,  193,  259
Lamnana  (Libanites),  189
Laisa  (EUasar)  38,  42,  46,  48
Lebanon,  etymology  of,  4

,  physical  features  of,  4, 6

Leon,  9

Levi,  tribe  of,  69

Libya,  100,  431,  456

Libyan  auxiliaries,  220,  765

defeat  at  Piriu,  435

invasioD,  the  first,  434,  435

second,  461

— last,  471

sailors,  458

Libyans  or  Labii  (Timibu),  126,

220, 430, 431,  432, 458, 473,  765,

767
Litany,  6,  7
Lot,  65,  66,  67
LotanuorRotanu,120, 121,  e<  seq.,

155,  256,  264,  266,  268,  283

,  head  of  a,  207

Luxor,  temple  at,  379,  417,  419
Lykos.     See  Nahr  el-Kelb

M

Madaktu  (Badaca),  34
Magadil,  467,  469,  470


:Magan,  62

Magato  (Maged),  140

Jlahanaim,  69

Mamre,  66

Manhntpdri.  76.  77

Maraiii  (Libyan  prince),  431,432,

434,  456
JIartu,  IS,  49
Mashauasha  (Maxyes),  430,  432,

456,  471,  489,  766,  768
Maurusaru  (Hittite  King),  372,

389
Maxyes.     See  Mashauasha
Mazaiu,  461,  767
Medinet-Habu,     130,    471,    476,

477,  47S,  483
Megiddo,  135,  136,  256,  257
Jlegiddo,  battle  of,  257.  et  seq.
Melamkurkurra    (Melammatati),

112,  113
Melammatati.      See    Melamkur-
kurra
Melchizedek,  66
Melkarth,    184,    185.    186,    187,

191,  192
Blemnon,  Colossi  of,  311
Memuouium  (at  Abydos),  422
Memnonium    at   Medinet-Habu,

478
Merodach,  42

,  temple  of,  22,  24,  41

Merodaeh-nadin-akhi,  663

Merom.     See  Huleh

Mesha  (King  of  Moab)  orKamosh-

gad),  160,  781
Messengers,  the  royal,  277
Migdol.  a,  127,  13o'
Migdol  (town),  131.  256
Blilukhkha,  62
Minephtali,  72,  425.  434,  436
Mitauui,  146,  210.  265,  268,  279,

292,  296,  401,  470
Moab,  148
Moabites,  the.  126
Moloch,  155
Mouatiii  ("  tlie  Shepherds  ").  See

Hyksos
Moses,  442,  et  seq.
Mummies  £uid  funerals,  509-526
Blutemuail,  295
Mutnofrit,  Queen,  237
Miitnozmit,  338,  341,  342

,  head  of,  338

JlyciBne,  205

,  dagger  from,  205


X

Naditu,  34

Naharaim,  14,  142,  143,  145,  210,
211,  262,  263,  265, 266,278,  279,


285,  291, 351,  358, 3C6, 389, 400,

593,  788
Nahr-Daraur.     See  Tamyras.
Nahr  el-Hasbany,  10
Nahr  el-Kebir,  9
Nahr  el-Kolb,  9,  657
Nairi.  653,  659
Nakhor,  64,  65
Nakhtusit,  453,  455,  456
Nakhta-ramses,  560
Nana  (goddess),  a  form  of  Ishtar,

37,41
Naphtali,  tribe  of,  69
Naramsiu,  iv.  17
Nar-Khammurabi,  43,  44
Nazana,  182
Nazibugash,  117
Nebuchadrezzar.  613,  615
Nekhabit.  lords  of,  S2,  83,  87

,  map  of,  82

(Vulture  Goddess),  84

Nekhnit  or  Kom-el-Ahmar(Hiera-

eonpolis),  83
New  race,  the,  767
Nipur,  iv.,  29,  38,  46
Nil,  142,  2S4

Nina,  the  goddess,  603,  604
Nineveh  (Nina,   603),  592,   601-

604,  617,  634
Nisibis  (Nazibiua),  193,  601,  605
Nofritari.    See  Ahmasi-Nofritari.
Niibhotpflri,  77
Nubia,  299,  376
Nubia,  temples  and  religions  of,

299
Numma  (or  Ilamma).     See  Elam

O

Omri.  780

Ono,  131

Ono-Repha  (Raphon,   Rapbana),

140,  259
Opbir,  742
Orontcs,  the  (Arantu)  (Nahr  el-

Asi),  6
Osorkon,  769,  774


Padan-Aiam.  64,  68

Painotmu,  760

Palestine  in  time  of  the  Judges,

map  of,  683
Pashe,  dynasty  of,  612,  665
Pectoral  in  the  Louvre,  452
Peleg,  64
Peniel,  69
Pentaur  (Pentaiiirit),  396

• ,  poem  of,  397,  421

Pentaatrit,  conspiracy  of,  479


INDEX.


793


"  People  of  the  Sea,"  205, 218, 431,

4G5,  409,  586
PcriBa,  403,  781,  787,  788
Philistine  oppression  of  Hebrews,

708,  709  '

Philistines.    See  Pulasati

in  Canaan,  the,  087

Phcenicia,  137,  169,  278,  279,  571
Phoenician  alphabet,  the,  575

architecture,  577

colonies,  202

.         commerce,  193,  195,  583

cosmogony,  the,  167

■ god,  figure  of,  073

navigation,  191

purple,  the,  203

roads,  189

soldiers,  713

tombs,  165

vessels,  the,  197,  407,  758

Pho3nicians,  the,  192

Piankh.     See  Pionkhi

Pihiri  or  Paheri  (Prince  of  Xe-

khabit),  S3
Pionkhi  {or  Piankh),  760
Pithom  {nr  Succoth),  442
"Plagues"     or     "Pests."       See

Hyksos
Potiphar,  70
"  Predestined    Prince,    Story   of

the,"  144
Psiiikhannit  I.,  760
Psiukhannit    II.    and    Solomon,

738,  764,  772
Pflanit,  213,  245,  247,  260,  267,

408,  475,  741
,  Hatshopsitft's  expedition  to,

247,  et  seq.

,  Prince  and  Princess  of,  250

Pulasati  (Philistines),  402,  463,

470,  475,  584,  587,  697,   698.

699,  760

a

Qodi  (Galilee  ?),  364,  365
Qodsliu  or  Kadcsh  on  the  Orontes,

140,  141,  148,  158,  255,  250,  204,

279,371,390,391,395

,  battle  of,  212,  220,  207,  393

,  Biblical  mention  of,  777

,  Prince  of,255,e<sc5.,  259, 266

Qulah,  pyramid  of,  84,  85
Qurneh  (or  fiurneh),  temple  of,

383,  384

K

Ra-Ap6pi,  74,  75
Eadesieh,  374,  375
R&hotpfl,  77


Ramesseum,  the,  420,  421
Ramman-niriiri  I.,  595, 607
Ramoth-Gilead,  781
Ramses  I..  368,  309,  384
Ramses  II.  (Miamiin,  Sesostris),

369,  385,  386,  387,  389, 401, 426,

427.  442

,  head  of,  340

in  the  Delta,  389

,    marriage      with      Hittite

princess,  405

,  mummy  of,  429

,  ring  of,  450

Ramses  III.,  130,  454,  407,  478,

558

,  mummy  of,  480,  481

Ramses  IV.  and  his  successors,

483,  et  seq.,  562

,  ,  tombs  of,  483

Ramses  (town),  72,  388,  403

Raphia,  124

Rashuf,  155,  156,  157,  158,  159

Rayan  or  Yanra.     See  Khiani

Rehoboam,  751,  772

Rephaim,  48

Reuben,  tribe  of,  09

RezOn  (Hezion  ?),  778

Rhodes,  203

Rimmon,  156

Rimsin  (Eri-aku),  29,  38,  89,  41,

43,  48
Rosh-Qodshu,  130,  138
Rotam'i  (or  Lotanii).     See  Lot,  66
Ruri  (Subri),  008


S


Saakeri,  333

Sagnrra.     See  Sajur

Sajur,  the,  7

Sakhoutinibri,  76

Salatis,  52,  53

Salsallat  (Zalzallat),  597

Samaria,  780,  781,  782

Samsiramman  I.,  112

Samsirammau  II.,  112

Samson,  703,  cl  seq.

Sarasuiluna  (King  of  Babylon),
27,  44
,  Samsusatana  (King  of  Babylon),
27,  45

Samuel,  708,  et  seq.
I  Sanakhta-niri,  76
I  Sangar,  296

Sanmtit  (Senmttt),  243,  245

Sapalalu  (Ilittite  king),  358,  359,
307,  308

Saqnfinri,  romance  of,  75

Saqnflnri  Tiiiaa  I.,  7.3,  75

Satjiu'iurl  Tidaa  II.,  76

Saqnflnri  III.  (Tiflaqni),  77,  78


432,


See


391,


Sargon  of  Agade  (tliu  Elder),  iv..

vi.,  17,  24,  30
Sargon  II.,  117
Saul,  709,  et  seq.,  719
Sekenen-Ea,  74

Semitic  influence  in  Egypt,  495
Semneh,  temple  at,  89
Serug,  64

Seti  I.,  270,  369,  370,  371,  373,
382,  385

,  head  of,  339

Seti  II.,  439

,  statue  of,  438

Shagalnsha  or  Shakalasha,

465
Shalmaneser  I.,  607,  609
Shalmaneser  II.,  785,  787
Sbamash,  155

Shardana     or     Shardani.
Shardanes

Shardanes,   the,    214,    372,
471,  489,  587,  766

Sharuhana  (Sharuhen),  88,  100,
255

Sharuhen.     See  Sharuhana

Shaiisfl,  54, 120, 134,  266,  286,  .370

Shaveli-Kiriathaim,  48

Sheba,  Queen  of,  751

Shechem  (Nablus),  66,  69,    133,
162,  163,  673,  680.  693

"Shephelah,"  13,  124

Shepherd  Kings,  the.    See  Hyksos

,  table  of,  107

Sbeshonq    (Shishak),    750,    769,
772,  773,  774

Shiloh,  162,  705,  706,  707

Shocho,  131

Shunem, 258

Shushshi,  113

Siddim,  vale  of,  49,  50,  03,  67

Sidon   (Ziduua),    180,    181,    191.
192,  197,  272,  740

,  coin  of,  110

Silsileh,  quarries  of,  102

Simeon,  tribe  of,  09

Simtishilkhak,  38,  39

Simyra,  172,  190,264

Sin  (the  god),  26

Sinai,  mines  of,  253

Siugar,  146,  284,  401,  600

Siniddiuam,  vii.,  38,  43

Sinmuballit  (King  of  Babylon),
27,  29,  39,  44

Sinflhit,  15

Siphtah-Minephtah,  439,  4.54

Sippara,'iv.,  28,  42,  44

Sirbonis,  Lake  of,  123

Smendes,  565,  700

Sodom,  48,  49,  63

Solomon,  737,  et  teq.
— ,  temple  of,  745


794


INDEX.


SovkhotpCl      III.      (Sakhemflaz-

tafliri),  83
Sovkflmsaaf  I.,  84
Stabl-Antar,  72
Stele  of  tlie  Sphiux,  295
Succotli,  69
Sumer,  38,  40,  43,  44,  62

,  people  of,  117

Sumuabim   (King   of    Babylon),

27,  29
Sumulailu   (King   of   Babylon),

27,  28,  29
Susa,  36,  37

Susian  Inscriptions,  the,  35
Susiana,  peoples  of,  35
Sflsirniri.     See  Khiani
Sutarna  (King  of  Mitanni),  297
"  Sutekli "  Apepi  1.,  Tii.,  59
Siitkhft  (the  god),  74,  75
Syene,  83
Syria,  5,  17, 18
,  Egyptian  commerce  with,

407
,  four  Egyptian  divisions  of,

120

,  high-roads  of,  136-140

,  map  of,  5

,  physical  features  of,  7

• ,  religion  of,  154

Syrian  costumes,  151,  et  seq.
customs,    Chaldsean     in-
fluence on,  153
Syrians,  racial  characteristics  of,

149


Taanach,  135

Tabor.     See  Dapur

"Tale  of  Two  Brothers,"  70

Tamyras,  9

Tauis,  424,  758

Timite  dynasty,  the,  758

,  table  of,  759

Tarshish  (Tarsis),  740
Tarsis.     See  Tarshish
Tassigurumash,  119
Tel-el-Amarna  (Khfiitatoufl),  318,
319,  331

tablets,  275,  284,  326

Tel-el- Yahiidiyeh,  476
Tell  el-Qadi,  10
Terakh,  65


Thapsacus,  193
Theban  high  priests,  761,  762
Theban  scribe,  451
Thebes,  decadence  of,  757

and  its  people,  485,  757

and  its  temples,  305,  et  eeq.,

308

,  necropolis  of,  507,  537-541

necropolis,  officer  of,  453

Thothmes.     See  Thfltmosis
Thatmosis  I.,  Thothmes  or  Ta-

hutmes,  105,  120,209,  228,236,

238,  240

,  campaign  in  Syria  of,  211

,  coffin  of,  242,  244

.  mummy  of,  242

Thfltmosis  II.,  289,  242

,  mummy  of,  243

Thatmosis  III.,    190,    238,    253,

254,   263,  265,  270,  271,  273,

299

,  mummy  of,  289,  290

,  triumphal  lists  of,  261

Thatmosis  IV.,  293

Tida'lo,   the    Guti  (Tidcal),   vi.

48,49
Tidcal.     See  Tida'lo
Tiglath-pileser  I.,  664

,  campaigns  of,  643-660

Tigris  ("  river  of  the  gods"),  43

source  of,  569

Tihonft,  372,  387

Tii,  Queen,  315

Til-Khumba,  34

TimaioB,  51

Timihu.     See  Libyans

Tiiiaqni,     77.      See     also     Saq-

nflnri  III.
Tombos,  229
Tribes  of  Israel,  the,  674,  675

,  defection  of  the,  751

Troy,  205

Tnkulti-ninip  I.,  609

Tunipa,  142, 263, 271, 279, 400, 470

Turah,  quarries  at,   92,  93,  95,

102,  449
Turnat  (Tornadotus),  592,  653
Tatankhamon,  334,  335
Tyre,  63,  183, 184,  lg5,  186,   188,

190,  192,  197,  740

,  coin  of,  109

,  map  of,  185,  742


Tyre,  Old  (Paljetyrns),  186
Tyrian  Ladder,  the,  138
Tyrseni,  the,  463,  464,  587

U

Uknh,  the,  31,  34

Ulai,  the,  31

Umliyash,    the    (the    people   of

Yamutbal  and  Tatbur),  35,  48,

47
Ur-Kashdim  (Ur  or   Uru  of  the

Chaldseans),  ix.,  64,  65
Uru,  v.,  38,  42,  46,  64
Uruk,  38,  42,  46

,  Ziggurat  of  Nana  at,  38

Uehabti    ("Respondents"),   310,

332,  771
Ushshi,  119

W

Wady-Halfah,  temple  at,  89
War-chariots  in  Ohaldsea,  51


Xoites,  the,  50,  52


Yanra  nr  Rayan.     See  Khiau!
Yarmuk,  13


Zab,  Great,  592,  604,  605,  606

,  Less,  596,  605

Zabulon,  tribe  of,  69

Zabum  or  Zabu  (King  of  Baby-
lon), 27,  28,  29,  46

Zagros,  mountains  of,  113,  116

Zahi,  88,  120,  121,  et  seq.,  169,
172,  264,  268,  273,  279,  358

Zakkala(Siculo-Pelasgi),  463,464,
470,  471,  584,  587,  698

ZalCl.     See  Zara

Zamzummim,  48

Zarpanit  (wife  of  Merodach),  42

Zara  (Zalfl),  122,  123,  253,  315,
347,  370,  371,  388,  390,  466

Zeboim,  48

Zuztm,  48


PRINTED  BV  WILLIAM  CLOWES  AND  SONS,    LIMITED,  LONDON  AND  EECCLBS.


X^


( Gizeh  Museum  ;


Plate!


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Librarj'  Card  Pocket

Vci'ier  Pat.  "Rcf.  Index  File"

\tade  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU


■iS«:---»«^:


arrtfer^.;.,.;..


