The Passing of the Empires (Maspero, 1900)
==========================================
Gaston Maspero — The Passing of the Empires, 850 B.C. to 330 B.C., translated by M. L. McClure (London, 1900), public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (passingofempires00maspuoft). Raw OCR, not proofread.

(i>-


^r^:^A^


HISTORY

OF  THE

ANCIENT  PEOPLES  OF  THE  CLASSIC  EAST


])5


j^m^


rwi^y^iir'.


x^^i^^'^  *>;


\N


THE


PASSING  OF  THE  EMPIRES


850  B.C.  TO  330  B.C.


1!Y


G.  MASPERO


HON.   U.e.L.   AKD  FELLOW  OF  QUEEN  S  COLLEGE,   OXFOKli
MEMBKB   OF   THE   IXSTITn'E.    AND   PROFESSOR    AT   THE    COLLEOE   OF    FRANCE


EDITED   BY
A.     H.    SAYCE

PROFESSOR    OF   ASSTRIOLOGY.    (iXFUIUi

TRANSLATED   BY   ]\I.   L.    McCLURE

MESIBER    OF   THE    COMMITTEE    OF   THE    EGYPT    EXPLORATION    FIXI'

WITH  MAVS.  TffSEE  COLOUUED  PLATES.  AND  NUMEROl'S  ILLVSTHATIONti


lai  »ci


LOXDOX

SOCIETY   FOR   PROMOTING   CHRISTIAN    KNOWLEDGE

X()l!THr:\rBEltLAX])    AYEXUE,   W.C.

11)11(1


S"***^


i  I

I9bl


[I'OUIJSlIKh    UNli|';i;     TIIK    HIUiaTlUX    ok    TllK    UKNK1;AI,    I.lTEllATUKK    COM  Mil  TICK.]


THU    UniNS    OF    THU    ArAUANA    OF   XCliXES    AT    I'EKSEPOLIS.


EDITOE'S    PREFACE


With  this  third  volume  Professor  Maspero  concludes  his  monumental  work  on
the  history  of  the  ancient  East.  The  overthrow  of  the  Persian  empire  by  the
Greek  soldiers  of  Alexander  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  era.  Europe  at
last  enters  upon  the  stage  of  history,  and  becomes  the  heir  of  the  culture  and
civilisation  of  the  Orient.  The  culture  which  had  grown  up  and  developed  on
the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  Nile  passes  to  the  West,  and  there  assumes
new  features  and  is  inspired  with  a  new  spirit.  The  East  perishes  of  age  and
decrepitude;  its  strength  is  outworn,  its  power  to  initiate  is  past.  The  long
ages  through  which  it  had  toiled  to  build  up  the  fabric  of  civilisation  are  at
an  end ;  fresh  races  are  needed  to  carry  on  the  work  which  it  had  achieved.
Greece  appears  upon  the  scene,  and  behind  Greece  looms  the  colossal  figure
of  the  Roman  empire.

Since  the  first  volume  of  Professor  Maspero's  work  was  published,  excava-
tion has  gone  on  apace  in  Egypt  and  Babylonia,  and  discoveries  of  a  startling
and  unexpected  nature  haje  followed  in  the  wake  of  excavation.  Many  pages
of  the  vulume  will  have  to  be  rewritten  in  the  light  of  them  ;  such  is  always
the  fate  of  the  historian  of  the  jmst  in  this  age  of  rapid  and  persistent  research.
Ages  that  seemed  prehistoric  step  suddenly  forth  into  the  day-dawn  of  history  ;
personages  whom  a  sceptical  criticism  had  consigned  to  the  land  of  myth  or
fable  are  clothed  once  more  with  flesh  and  blood,  and  events  which  had  been
long  forgotten  demand  to  be  recorded  and  described.  In  Babylonia,  for
example,  the  excavations  at  Niffer  and  Tello  have  shown  that  Sargou  of  Akkad,
so  far  from  being  a  creature  of  romance,  was  as  much  an  historical  monarch  as
Nebuchadrezzar  himself ;  monuments  of  his  reign  liave  been  discovered,  and


vi  EDITOR'S  PREFACE.

we  learn  from  them  tbat  the  empire  he  is  said  to  have  founded  had  a  very  real
existence.  Contracts  have  been  found  dated  in  the  years  when  he  was  occupied
in  conquering  Syria  and  Palestine,  and  a  cadastral  survey  that  was  made  for
the  purposes  of  taxation  mentions  a  Cauaanite  who  had  been  appointed
"  governor  of  the  land  of  the  Amorites."  Even  a  postal  service  had  already
been  established  along  the  high-roads  which  knit  the  several  parts  of  the
empire  together,  and  some  of  the  clay  seals  which  franked  the  letters  are
now  in  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre.

At  Susa,  M.  de  Morgan,  the  late  director  of  the  Service  of  Antiquities  in
Egypt,  has  been  excavating  below  the  remains  of  the  Achaimenian  period,
among  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Elamite  capital.  Here  he  has  found  number-
less historical  inscriptions,  besides  a  text  in  hieroglyphics  whicli  may  cast
light  on  the  origin  of  the  cuneiform  characters.  But  the  most  interesting
of  his  discoveries  are  two  Babylonian  monuments  that  were  carried  off  by
Elamite  conquerors  from  the  cities  of  Babylonia.  One  of  them  is  a  long
inscription  of  about  1200  lines  belonging  to  Manistusu,  one  of  the  early
Babylonian  kings,  whose  name  has  been  met  with  at  Niffer;  the  other  is  a
monument  of  Naram-Siu,  the  son  of  Sargon  of  Akkad,  which  it  seems  was
brought  as  booty  to  Susa  by  Simti-siikhak,  the  grandfather,  perhaps,  of  Eriaku
or  Arioch.

In  Armenia  also  equally  important  inscriptions  have  been  found  by  Belck
and  Lehmann.  More  than  two  hundred  new  ones  have  been  added  to  the  list
of  Vannic  texts.  It  has  been  discovered  from  them  that  the  kingdom  of
Biaiuas  or  Van  was  founded  by  Ispuinis  and  Menuas,  who  rebuilt  Van  itself  and
the  other  cities  which  they  had  previously  sacked  and  destroyed.  The  older
name  of  the  country  was  Kumussii,  and  it  may  be  that  the  language  spoken
in  it  was  allied  to  that  of  the  Hittites,  since  a  tablet  in  hieroglypliics  of  the
Hittite  type  has  been  unearthed  at  Toprak  Kaleh.  One  of  the  newly-found
inscriptions  of  Sarduris  III.  shows  that  the  name  of  the  Assyrian  god,  hitherto
read  Eamman  or  Eimmon,  was  really  pronounced  Hadad.  It  describes  a  war
of  the  Vannic  king  against  Assur-nirari,  son  of  Hadad-nirari  (A-da-di-ni-ra-ri)
of  Assyria,  thus  revealing  not  only  the  true  form  of  the  Assyrian  name,  but
also  the  parentage  of  the  last  king  of  the  older  Assyrian  dynasty.  From
another  inscription,  belonging  to  Kusas  II.,  the  son  of  Argistis,  we  learn  that
campaigns  were  carried  on  against  the  Hittites  and  the  Moscbi  in  the  latter
years  of  Sennacherib's  reign,  and  therefore  only  just  before  the  irruption  of
the  Kimmerians  into  the  northern  regions  of  Western  Asia.

The  two  German  explorers  have  also  discovered  the  site  and  even  the
ruins  of  Muzazir,  called  Ardinis  by  the  people  of  Van.  They  lie  on  the  hill
of  Shkenna,  near  Topsana,  on  the  road  between  Kelishin  and  Sidek.  In  the
immediate  neighbourhood  the  travellers  succeeded  in  deciphering  a  monu-
ment of  Kusas  I.,  partly  in  Vannic,  partly  in  Assyrian,  from  which  it  appears
that  the  Vannic  king  did  not,  after  all,  commit  suicide  when  the  news  of  the
fall  of  Muzazir  was  brought  to  him,  as  is  stated  by  Sargon,  but  that,  on
the  contrary,  he  "  marched  against  the  mountains  of  Assyria  "  and  restored  the


EDITOR'S   PREFACE.  VII

fallen  city  itself.  Uizana,  the  King  of  Muzazir,  had  iled  to  him  for  shelter,
and  after  the  departure  of  the  Assyrian  army  he  was  sent  back  by  Eusas  to
his  ancestral  domains.  The  whole  of  the  district  in  which  Muzazir  was  situated
was  termed  Lulu,  and  was  regarded  as  the  southern  province  of  Ararat.  In
it  was  Mount  Nizir,  on  whose  summit  the  ark  of  the  Chaldtean  Noah  rested,
and  which  is  therefore  rightly  described  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  as  one  of
"  the  mountains  of  Ararat."     It  was  probably  the  Kowandiz  of  to-day.

The  discoveries  made  by  Drs.  Belck  and  Lehmann,  however,  have  not
been  confined  to  Vannic  texts.  At  the  sources  of  the  Tigris  Dr.  Lehmann
has  found  two  Assyrian  inscriptions  of  the  Assyrian  king,  Shalmaneser  II.,
one  dated  in  his  fifteenth  and  the  other  in  his  thirty-first  year,  and  relating  to
his  campaigns  against  Aram  of  Ararat.  He  has  further  found  that  the  two
inscriptions  previously  known  to  exist  at  the  same  spot,  and  believed  to  belong
to  Tiglath-Ninip  and  Assur-nazir-pal,  are  really  those  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  and
refer  to  the  war  of  his  seventh  year.

But  it  is  from  Egypt  that  the  most  revolutionary  revelations  have  come.
At  Abydos  and  Kom  el-Ahmar,  opposite  El-Kab,  monuments  have  been
disinterred  of  the  kings  of  the  first  and  second  dynasties,  if  not  of  even
earlier  princes ;  while  at  Negada,  north  of  Thebes,  M.  de  Morgan  has  found
a  tomb  which  seems  to  have  been  that  of  Meues  himself.  A  new  world  of  art
has  been  opened  out  before  us;  even  the  hieroglyjshic  system  of  writing  is
as  yet  immature  and  strange.  But  the  art  is  already  advanced  in  many
respects ;  hard  stone  was  cut  into  vases  and  bowls,  and  even  into  statuary  of
considerable  artistic  excellence ;  glazed  porcelain  was  already  made,  and
bronze,  or  rather  copper,  was  fashioned  into  weapons  and  tools.  Tlie  writing
materia],  as  in  Babylonia,  was  often  clay,  over  which  seal-cylinders  of  a
Babylonian  pattern  were  rolled.  Equally  Babylonian  are  tlie  strange  and
composite  animals  engraved  on  some  of  the  objects  of  this  early  age,  as  well
as  the  structure  of  the  tombs,  which  were  built,  not  of  stone,  but  of  crude  brick,
with  their  external  walls  panelled  and  pilastered.  Professor  Hommel's  theory,
which  brings  Egyptian  civilisation  from  Babylonia  along  with  the  ancestors
of  the  historical  Egyptians,  has  thus  been  largely  verified.

But  the  historical  Egyptians  were  not  the  first  inhabitants  of  the  valley
of  the  Nile.  Not  only  have  palffiolithic  implements  been  found  on  the  plateau
of  the  desert ;  the  relics  of  neolithic  man  have  turned  up  in  extraordinary
abundance.  When  the  historical  Egyptians  arrived  with  their  copper  weapons
and  their  system  of  writing,  the  land  was  already  occupied  by  a  pastoral
people,  who  had  attained  a  liigh  level  of  neolithic  culture.  Their  implements
of  flint  are  the  most  beautiful  and  delicately  finished  that  have  ever  been
discovered ;  they  were  able  to  carve  vases  of  great  artistic  excellence  out  of
the  hardest  of  stone,  and  their  pottery  was  of  no  mean  quality.  Long  after
the  country  had  come  into  the  possession  of  the  historical  dynasties,  and  had
even  been  united  into  a  single  monarchy,  their  settlements  continued  to  exist
on  the  outskirts  of  the  desert,  and  the  neolithic  culture  that  distinguished  them
passed  only  gradually  away.     By  degrees,  however,  they  intermingled  with


i


viii  EDITOR'S  PREFACE.

their  conquerors  from  Asia,  and  thus  formed  the  Egyptian  race  of  a  later
day.  But  they  had  already  made  Egypt  what  it  has  been  throiighout  the
historical  period.  Under  the  direction  of  the  Asiatic  immigrants  and  of
the  eno-ineeriug  science  whose  first  home  had  been  in  the  alluvial  plain  of
Babylonia,  they  accomplished  those  great  works  of  irrigation  which  confined
the  Nile  to  its  present  channel,  which  cleared  away  the  jungle  and  the  swamp
that  had  formerly  bordered  the  desert,  and  turned  them  into  fertile  fields.
Theirs  were  the  hands  which  carried  out  the  plans  of  their  more  intelligent
masters,  and  cultivated  the  valley  when  once  it  had  been  reclaimed.  The
Egypt  of  history  was  the  creation  of  a  twofold  race:  the  Egyptians  of  the
monuments  supplied  the  controlling  and  directing  power;  the  Egyptians
of  the  neolithic  graves  bestowed  upon  it  their  labour  and  their  skill.

The  period  treated  of  by  Professor  Maspero  in  his  present  volume  is  one  for
which  there  is  an  abundance  of  materials  such  as  do  not  exist  for  the  earlier
portions  of  his  history.  The  evidence  of  the  monuments  is  supplemented  by  that
of  the  Hebrew  and  classical  writers.  But  on  this  very  account  it  is  in  some
respects  more  difficult  to  deal  with,  and  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the
historian  are  more  open  to  question  and  dispute.  In  some  cases  conflicting
accounts  are  given  of  an  event  which  seem  to  rest  on  equally  good  authority ;
in  other  cases,  there  is  a  sudden  failure  of  materials  just  where  the  thread  of  the
story  becomes  most  com]jlicated.  Of  this  tlie  decline  and  fall  of  the  Assyrian
empire  is  a  prominent  example ;  for  our  knowledge  of  it,  we  have  still  to
depend  chiefiy  on  the  untrustworthy  legends  of  the  Greeks.  Our  views  must
be  coloured  more  or  less  by  our  estimate  of  Herodotos  ;  those  who,  like  myself,
place  little  or  no  confidence  in  what  he  tells  us  about  Oriental  affairs  will
naturally  form  a  very  different  idea  of  the  death-struggle  of  Assyria  from  that
formed  by  writers  who  still  see  in  him  the  Father  of  Oriental  History.

Even  where  the  native  monuments  have  come  to  our  aid,  they  have  not
unfrequeutly  introduced  difficulties  and  doubts  where  none  seemed  to  exist
before,  and  have  made  the  task  of  the  critical  historian  harder  than  ever.
Cyrus  and  his  forefathers,  for  instance,  turn  out  to  have  been  kings  of  Anzan,
and  not  of  Persia,  thus  explaining  why  it  is  that  the  Neo-Susian  language
appears  by  the  side  of  the  Persian  and  the  Babylonian  as  one  of  the  three
official  languages  of  the  Persian  empire  ;  but  we  still  have  to  learn  what  was
the  relation  of  Anzan  to  Persia  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  Susa  on  the  other,
and  when  it  was  that  Cyrus  of  Anzan  became  also  King  of  Persia.  In  the
Annalistic  Tablet,  he  is  called  "  King  of  Persia  "  for  the  first  time  in  the  ninth
year  of  Nabonidos.

Similar  questions  arise  as  to  the  position  and  nationality  of  Astyages.  He
is  called  in  the  inscriptions,  not  a  Mede,  but  a  Manda — a  name  which,  as  I
showed  many  years  ago,  meant  for  tlie  Babylonian  a  "  barbarian  "  of  Kurdistan.
I  have  myself  little  doubt  that  the  Manda  over  whom  Astyages  ruled  were
the  Scythians  of  classical  tradition,  who,  as  may  be  gathered  from  a  text
published  by  Mr.  Strong,  bad  occupied  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Ellipi.  It  is
even  possible  that  in  the  Madyes  of  Herodotos,  we  have  a  reminiscence  of  the


THAN  SLA  ran' s  pbeface.  ix

Manda  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions.  That  the  Greek  writers  shoukl  have
confounded  the  Mada  or  Medes  with  the  Manda  or  Barbarians  is  not  sur-
prising ;  we  find  even  Berossos  describing  one  of  the  early  dynasties  of  Babylonia
as  "Median  "  where  ]\Ianda,  and  not  Mada,  must  plainly  be  meant.

These  and  similar  problems,  however,  will  doubtless  be  cleared  up  by  the
progress  of  excavation  and  research.  Perhaps  M,  de  Morgan's  excavations  at
Susa  may  throw  some  light  on  them,  but  it  is  to  the  work  of  the  German
expedition,  which  has  just  begun  the  systematic  exploration  of  the  site  of
Babylon,  that  we  must  chiefly  look  for  help.  The  Babylon  of  Nabopolassar  and
Nebuchadrezzar  rose  on  the  ruins  of  Nineveh,  and  the  story  of  the  downfall  of
tlie  Assyrian  empire  must  still  be  lying  buried  under  its  mounds.

A.  H.  SAYCE.


TEANSLATOirS    PBEFACE.


In  giving  to  the  public  the  translation  of  the  third  and  last  volume  of  Pro-
fessor Maspero's  work,  it  is  necessary  to  say  a  word  on  the  want  of  uniformity,
which  will  doubtless  be  remarked  by  the  reader,  in  the  orthography  of  the
geographical  and  personal  names  which  occur  iu  these  pages.  Professor
Maspero,  to  whom  I  have  referred  more  than  once  on  the  subject,  is  apparently
at  greater  pains  to  give  to  the  student  the  various  forms  under  which  a  town
or  province  was  known  at  different  periods,  than  to  preserve  a  uniform  ortho-
gi'aphy  of  the  name  throughout  his  present  work.  He  himself  writes :
"  Souvent  apres  avoir  donne  au  debut  la  forme  authentique,  j'ai  employe
dans  la  suite  la  forme  usuelle."  This  lack  of  uniformity  will  be  evident
chiefly  in  the  place-names  in  Palestine  and  Asia  Minor,  which  of  necessity
varied,  in  the  case  of  the  former  with  the  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  and  Persian
occupation,  in  that  of  the  latter  under  its  Assyrian,  Lydian,  Cimmerian,
Phrygian,  and  Greek  rulers.  One  of  these  many  variants,  and  that  often  with
an  incorrect  orthography,  may  be  familiar  to  the  English  reader,  and  therefore
must  be  mentioned  in  the  translation,  though  the  forms  used  in  the  French
may. be  subsequently  employed  throughout  the  book  without  again  identifying
them  with  the  popular  one.  I  have,  however,  endeavoured  to  collect  the
various  readings  and  place  them  in  the  index  under  one  heading.

In  rendering  the  passages  from  Holy  Scripture  cited  by  Professor  Maspero
in  the  course  of  his  work,  I  have  followed  the  Revised  Version,  but  in  the  two
or  three  instances  where  Professor  Maspero's  reading  of  the  Hebrew  original
do  not  agree  with  that  of  the  Revised  Version,  I  have  given  a  literal  trans-
lation of  his  French,  and  have  placed  the  Revised  Version  of  the  passage  in


X  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

a  Translator's  footuote.  The  forms  of  proper  names  occurring  in  Professor
Maspero's  quotations  from  the  Bible,  it  may  be  well  to  note,  are  not  m  many
cases  those  adopted  by  the  Editors  of  ouv  revised  Text.  No  change,  however
slic^ht  has  been  made  without  the  Author's  written  permission,  and  sucli
alterations  as  have  been  introduced  are  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  cor-
rection of  the  errors  of  the  French  printers,  and  not  one  of  them  has  any
bearing  on  Biblical  criticism.  .,    ^    ,

The  English  title  chosen  by  the  Editor  has  met  with  Professor  Maspero.

entire  approbation.


M.  L.  McCluee,


November  20, 1899.


NOTE  OF  THE  GENERAL  LITERATURE
COMMITTEE  OF  THE  S.P.C.K.


In  bringing  to  a  completion  their  undertaking  to  produce  in  English
Professor  Maspero's  "History  of  the  Ancient  Peoples  of  the  Classic  East,
the  Committee  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  they  do  not  take  upon
themselves  to  pronounce  on  conclusions  in  the  field  of  Biblical  criticism
deduced  by  the  author  from  the  events  and  documents  discussed.  \\  hiie
the  great  value  of  the  materials  embodied  and  their  vivid  presentment  m
Professor  Maspero's  books  have  seemed  to  the  Committee  to  justify  the
publication  of  these  volumes  by  the  S.P.C.K.,  the  author  must  be  held
responsible  for  the  opinions  which  his  study  of  these  materials  has  led  him
to  form.


*=


:i:^>^s>4.


i^v-SS-!


^s*^?^     #■


StJ^ift-


ONE    uF    THE     GATES    l 'F    THE    TEMl'LE    ■  ■!'    ZEES    IN    THE    I.'ASIS    HE    AJEMON.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTEK   I.

THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SYRIA.

VAGI-

AssDE-NAziR-PAL  (885-860)   AND   Shalmaneser   III.  (860-825) — The   Kingdom

OF  Uraetu  and  its  Conquering  Princes:  Menuas  and  Argistis  ...         o


CHAPTER   II.

TIGLATH-PILESER     III.     AND     THE     ORGANISATION     OF    THE
ASSYRIAN      EMPIRE     FROM     745    TO     722     B.C.

Failttre  of  Urartu  and  Ee-conqcest  of  Syria — Egypt  again  united
UNDER  Ethiopian  Auspices— Pionkhi — The  Downfall  of  Damascus,  of
Babylon,  and  of  Israel  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     1]'


CHAPTER   III.

SARGON     OF     ASSYRIA     AND     SENNACHERIB     (722-681     B.C.).

Sargon  as  a  "Warrior  and  as  a  Builder^The  Struggle  of  Sennacherib


with  Jdd.ea  and  Egypt — Destruction  of  Babylon


221


I


Xii  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER   IV.

THE  POWER  OF  ASSYRIA  AT  ITS  ZENITH.
ESARHADDON  AND  ASS  U  R  -  B  A  N  I  -  P  A  L.

I'AGE

The  Medes  and   Cimmerians:    Lyma — Tui:   Conquest   of  Egypt,  of   Arabia,

AND  OF  Elam     ...  ■•■  ■•■  •••  ■••  ■••  ■••     323


CHAPTEE   V.

THE      MEDES     AND     THE    SECOND      CHALD/EAN      EMPIRE.

The  Fall  of  Nineveh  and  the  Kise  of  the  CnALDiEAN  and  Median
Empires — The  XXVI"'  Egyptian  Dynasty:  Cyaxares,  Alyattes,  and
Xebuchadeezzae  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     445


CHAPTER   VI.

THE      IRANIAN      CONQUEST.

The  Iranian  Eeligions — Cyrus  in   Lydia  and   at   Babylon;    Cambyses  in

Egypt — Dakius  and  the  Organisation'  of  the  Empire  ...  ...     671


CHAPTER   VII.

THE     LAST     DAYS     OF     THE     OLD      EASTERN      WORLD.

The  Median  Wars — The   Last   Native  Dynasties  of   Egypt — The   Ea.steen

Wop.LD  ON  the  Eve  of  the  Macedonian  Conquest     ...  ...  ...     099

Index  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     815


THE    ASSYEIAN    EEVIVAL


AND


THE    STEUGGLE    FOE    SYEIA.


ASSUR-XAZIR-PAL    (885-860   B.C.)   AND   SHALilAXESEU    III.    (860-825    B.C.) THE    KIXCDOJI    OF

UBAKTn   AND    ITS   CONQUERIXG   PRINCES  :    MENUAS   AND   ABGISTIS.


Tlie  line  of  Assyrian  kings  after  Assurirba,  and  the  Babylonian  dynasties  :  the  war  between
Bamman-nirari  III.  and  Shamash-mttdammiq;  his  victories  over  Babylon;  Tukulti-ninip  II.
(890-885  B.C.) — Tlie  empire  at  tJie  accession  of  Assur-nazir-pal :  the  Assyrian  army  and  the
progress  of  military  tactics;  cavalry,  military  engines:  the  condition  of  Assyria's  neighbours,
methods  of  Assyrian  conquest.

Tlie  firat  campaigns  of  Assur-nazir-pal  in  Nairi  and  on  the  Khabur  (885-882  B.C.)  :  Zamua
reduced  to  an  Assyrian  province  (881  B.C.) — The  fourth  campaign  in  Nairi  and  the  war  on
the  Evphrates  (880  B.C.);  the  first  conquest  of  Bit-Adini — Northern  Syria  at  the  opening
of  the  IX'"  century:  its  civilisation,  arts,  army,  and  religion — The  submission  of  the  Hittite
states  and  of  the  Patina  :  the  Assyrians  reach  the  Mediterranean.

The  empire  after  the  n-ars  of  Assur-nazir-pal — Building  of  the  palace  at  Calah :  Assyrian
architecture  and  sculpture  in  the  IX"'  century — The  tunnel  of  Negub  and  the  palace  of  Balaudt
— The  last  years  of  Assur-nazir-pal:  his  campaign  of  the  year  867  in  Nairi — The  death  of
Assur-nazir-pal  (860  B.C.)  :  his  character.

B


(


)


Shalmaneser  III.  (^60-825  B.C.):  the  state  of  the  empire  at  his  accession — Uiartu:  its
physical  features,  races,  towns,  temples,  its  deities — Shalmaneser'' s  first  campaign  in  Urartu  :  lie
penetrates  as  far  as  Lake  Van  (860  B.C.) — The  conquest  of  Bit-Adini  and  of  Nairi  (859-855  B.C.).

The  attack  on  Damascus:  the  battle  of  Qanjar  (854  B.C.)  and  the  tour  against  Babyloii
(852-851  B.C.) — Tlie  alliance  between  Judah  and  Israel,  the  death  of  Ahab  (853  B.C.) ;  Damascus
successfully  resists  the  attacks  of  Assyria  (8i9~8iCj  b.c.) — Moab  delivered  from  Israel,  Mesha  :  the
death  of  Ben-hadad  (Adadidri)  and  the  accession  of  Hazael ;  the  fall  of  the  house  of  Omri-Jehn
(843  B.C.) — The  defeat  of  Bazael  and  the  homage  of  Jehu  (842-839  b.c).

Wars  in  Cilicia  and  in  Namri  (838-835  B.C.):  the  last  battles  of  Shalmaneser  III;  his
building  works,  the  revolt  of  Assur-dain-pal — Samsi-raminan  IV.  (825-812  b.c),  his  first
three  expeditions,  his  campaigns  against  Babylon — Rammiin-nirari  7^.(812-783  b.c) — Jchit,
Athaliah,  Joash  ;  the  siipremacy  of  Hazael  over  Israel  and  Judah — Victory  of  Rammdn-nirdri
over  Mari,  and  the  submission  of  all  Syria  to  the  Assyrians  (803  B.C.).

T/ie  growth  of  Urartu  :  the  conquests  of  Menuas  and  Argistis  I.,  their  victories  over
Assyria — Shalmaneser  IV.  (783-772  B.C.) — Assurddn  III.  (772-754  B.C.) — Assur-nirdri  III.
(754-745  B.C.) — The  downfall  of  Assyria  and  the  triumph  of  Urartu.


A    MOrNTAIX    BAID    OP   ASSYEIAX   CAVALRY.'


CHAPTEE   I.

THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  SYRIA.


Assur-nazii-pal  (885-860)  and  Shalmaneser  III.  (86(1-825)— Tlii;  kingdom  of  Urartu
and  its  conquering  princes  :  Slenuas  and  Argistis.

f  A  SSYEIA  was  the  first  to  i-eappear  on  the  scene  of  action.

-^        Less    hampered    by    an    ancient    past   than    Egypt    and

'  Chaldaea,  she  was  the  sooner  able  to  recover  her  strength  after

any  disastrous  crisis,  and  to  assume  again  the  offensive  along

7,  the   whole   of    her   frontier    line.      During    the   years   imme-

K  diately    following    the    ephemeral    victories    and    reverses    of

J  Assurirba,^  both  the  country  and  its  rulers  are  plunged  in  the

ff'''  I  l-;     obscurity  of  oblivion.     Two  figures  at  length,  though  at  what

date  is  uncertain,  emerge  from  the  darkness — a  certain  Irba-

ramman   and  an  Assur-nadinakhe   II.,  whom   we   fiud   engaged   in  buildino'

palaces   and   making  a  necropolis.^     They  were   followed   towards  950   by  a

Tiglath-pileser  II.,  of  whom  nothing  is  known  but  his  uame.^     He  in  his  turn

was  succeeded  about  the  year  935  by  one  Assurdan  II.,  who  appears  to  have

concentrated  his  energies  upon  public  works,  for  we  hear  of  him  digging  a

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  at  Koyunjik  of  the  time  of  Sennacherib ;  cf.  Layaed,
Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  38.  The  initial  cut,  which  is  also  by  Faucher-Gudin,  represents
the  broken  obelisk  of  Assiir-nazir-pal.  the  bas-reliefs  of  which  are  as  yet  unpublished ;  cf.  Hokmi  zd
Rassaji.  Asshur  and  the  Land  of  Ximrod,  pp.  S,  9,  and  pi.  iii.

-  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject  in  Maspero,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  664.  665.

'  Inscription  on  the  Brol:en  Obelisk,  col.  ii.  11.  4-6 ;  cf.  Peiser,  Insckriften  Aschur-ndsir'ahaVs.  in
ScHBADER.  Keilinschriftliche  BiUiotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  12G,  127.

*  Our  only  knowledge  of  Tiglath-pileser  IL  is  from  a  brick,  on  which  he  is  mentioned  as  being
the  grandfather  of  Eamman-nirari  II.  (Pdjches,  A  Guide  to  the  Nimrod  Central  Saloon,  p.  9,  No.  72 ;
cf.  Wlsckler.  Studien  und  Beitrage  z>i  der  Bahijlonisch-Assyrischen  Geschichte,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir
Assyriologie,  vol.  iL  pp.  311.  312).


4  THE  ASSYBIAN  REVIVAL    AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOB.    SYRIA.

canal  to  supply  his  capital^  with  water,  restoring  the  temples  and  fortifying
towns.^  Ramman-nirari  III.,  who  followed  him  in  912,  stands  out  more
distinctly  from  the  mists  which  envelop  the  history  of  this  period ;  he
repaired  the  gate  of  the  Tigris  and  the  adjoining  wall  at  Assur,^  he  enlarged
its  principal  sanctuary,'*  reduced  several  rebellious  provinces  to  obedience,^
and  waged  a  successful  warfare  against  the  neighbouring  inhabitants  of
Karduniash.  Since  the  extinction  of  the  race  of  Nebuchadrezzar  I.,  Babylon
had  been  a  prey  to  civil  discord  and  foreign  invasion.*^  The  Aramrean  tribes
mino-led  with,  or  contiguous  to  the  remnants  of  the  Cossseans  bordering  on
the  Persian  gulf,  constituted  possibly,  even  at  this  period,  the  powerful  nation
of  the  Kalda.'  It  has  been  supposed,  not  without  probability,  that  a
certain  Simashshikhu,  Prince  of  the  Country  of  the  Sea,  who  immediately
followed  the  last  scion  of  the  line  of  Pashe,^  was  one  of  their  chiefs.  He
endeavoured  to  establish  order  in  the  city,  and  rebuilt  the  temple  of  the
Sun  destroyed  by  the  nomads  at  Sippar,^  but  at  the  end  of  eighteen  years
he  was  assassinated.  His  son  Eamukinshumu  remained  at  the  head  of
affairs  some  three  to  six  months  ;  Kashshu-nadinakhe  ruled  three  or  six  years,
at  the  expiration  of  which  a  man  of  the  house  of  Bazi,  Eulbar-shakinshumi
by  name,  seized  upon  the  crown.'"  His  dynasty  consisted  of  three  members,
himself  included,  and  it  was  overthrown  after  a  duration  of  twenty  years  by
an  Elamite,  who  held  authority  for  another  seven.''    It  was  a  period  of  calamity

'  Inscription  on  the  Broken  Obelisk,  col.  ii.  1.  20;  cf.  Peiser,  Inschriflen  Aseliur-ndsir-dbal's,  in
SoHBADER,  Keilinschri/tliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  128,  129.

-   Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  30,  31  ;  cf.  KeiUnschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56, .")?.

^  Inscription  on  the  Broken  Obelisk,  col.  ii.  11.  24-26.

'  WiNCKLEB,  Studien  und  Beitrage,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologic,  vol.  ii.  pp.  311,  312.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  29,  30;  cf.  Keilinechriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56,  57.

"  For  this  subject,  cf  MAsrERO,  Struggle  of  tlie  Nations,  p.  665.

'  The  names  CbiildsBa  and  Chaldfeane  being  onlinarily  used  to  designate  the  territory  and  people
of  Babylon,  I  shall  employ  the  term  Kaldu  ur  Kakla  in  treating  of  the  Aramaean  tribes  who
couatituted  the  actual  Chaldean  nation.

'  Cf.  on  this  subject  Maspeko,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  669.  The  name  of  this  prince  has
been  read  Simbarshiku  by  Peiser,  a  reading  adopted  by  Eost,  Ihitersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen
Geschichte,  p.  26 ;  Simbarshiku  would  have  been  shortened  into  Sibir,  and  we  should  have  to  identify
it  with  that  of  the  Sibir  mentioned  by  Assur-nazir-pal  in  his  Annals,  col.  ii.  1.  84,  as  a  king  of
Karduniash  who  lived  before  his  (Assur-nazir-pal's)  time  (see  p.  20  of  the  present  volume).

"  Inscription  of  Nahuhaliddin,  col.  i.  11.  1-23,  in  Kawlinson,  Cun.  his.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  60 ;  cf.
Pinches,  Bemarks  upon  the  recent  Discoveries  of  Mr.  Bassam.  at  Aboo-Habha,  in  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.
of  Biblical  Arch.,  1880-1881,  vol.  iii.  pp.  110,  111,  and  the  Antiquities  found  by  Mr.  H.  Bassam  at  Abu-
Hahhah  (Sippara),  in  Transactions,\o\.  viii.  pp.  165-169;  Scheil,  Inscrip.  de  Nabu-abil-iddin,  in  the
Zeit.fur  Assyr.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  325,  326 ;  Jerejiias,  Die  Cultustafel  von  Sijipar,  in  the  Beit,  zur  Assyr.,  vol,  i.
pp.  269,  270 ;  and  Peiser,  Insch.  des  Nabu-abal-iddin,  in  Sohrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  1,  pp.  174-183.
The  name  of  this  king  may  be  read  Edubarshakin-shumi  (RosT,  Untersuchungen  zur
Altorientalischen  Gescli.,  p.  27 ;  cf  p.  10,  note  3).  The  house  of  Bazi  takes  its  name  from  an  ancestor
who  must  have  founded  it  at  some  unknown  date,  but  who  never  reigned  in  Chaldajj.  Winckler  has
with  reason  conjectured  that  the  name  subsequently  lost  its  meaning  to  the  Babylonians,  and  that
they  confused  the  Chaldaian  house  of  Bazi  with  the  Arab  country  of  Bazu  :  this  may  explain  why  in
his  dynastiis  Berosos  attributes  an  Arab  origin  to  that  one  which  comprises  the  short-lived  line  of
Bit-B:izi (Winckler,  Vntersuch. zur  Alt.  Gesch.,  pp.  5, 6;  of.  RosT,  XJntersuch.  zur  Alt.  Gesch..  pp.  19,  20).
"  Our  knowledge  of  these  events  is  derived  solely  from  the  texts  of  the  Babylonian  Canon


THE    VICTORIES    OF  RAMMAN-NIRARI  III.    OVER   BABYLON.  5

and  distress,  during  wliich  the  Arabs  or  the  Aramaeans  ravaged  tlie  country,
and  pillaged  without  compunction  not  only  the  property  of  the  inhabitants,
but  also  that  of  the  gods.  The  Elamite  usurper  having  died  about  the  year
1030,  a  Babylonian  of  noble  extraction  expelled  the  intruders,  and  succeeded
in  bringing  the  larger  part  of  the  kingdom  under  his  rule.^  Five  or  six  of
his  descendants  had  passed  away,  and  a  certain  Shamash-mudammiq  was
feebly  holding  the  reins  of  government,  when  the  expeditions  of  Kamman-
nirari  III.  provoked  war  afresh  between  Assyria  and  Babylon.  The  two
armies  encountered  each  other  once  again  on  their  former  battle-field  between
the  Lower  Zab  and  the  Turnat.  Shamash-mudammiq,  after  being  totally
routed  near  the  Yalman  mountains,^  did  not  long  survive,  and  Naboshumishkun,
who  succeeded  him,  showed  neither  more  ability  nor  energy  than  his  predecessor.
The  Assyrians  wrested  from  him  the  fortresses  of  Bambala  and  Bagdad,  dis-
lodged him  from  the  positions  where  he  had  entrenched  himself,  and  at  length
took  him  prisoner  while  in  flight,  and  condemned  him  to  perpetual  captivity.^

published  and  translated  by  G.  Smith  {On  Fragments  of  Inscriptions,  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  374-376),  by  Pinches  {The  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in
the  Proceedings,  1883-1884,  vol.  vi.  pp.  19ii,  197),  by  Sayce  (The  Dynastic  Tablets,  in  the  Records  of
the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  i.  pp.  17,  21).  The  inscription  of  Nabubaliddin  (col.  i.  11.  24-30,  col.  ii.
U.  1-17)  informs  us  that  Kashu-nadinakhe  and  Eulbar-shakinshumu  continued  the  works  begun
by  Simashshiku  in  the  temple  of  the  Sun  at  Sippar.

'  The  names  of  the  iirat  kings  uf  this  dynasty  are  destroyed  in  the  copies  of  the  Boyal  Canon
wliich  have  come  down  to  us.     Tlie  three  preceding  dynasties  are  restored  as  follows : —

SiMASH-sHiKU IS  years  5  months  lor  accordingj  17  years  3  months.

EAMUKix-sHUJiD .")  mouths  \   to  another  >  3  months.

Kashu-x ADiS-VKHE 3  years  '  computation )    6  years.

Total  for  the  dynasty  of  the  Sea  Country   21  years  5  months  „  23  years  6  months.     .

EuLBAK-sHAKiN-sHCMc 17  years  „  15  years.

NiNiP-KUDUKUsCK 3  yeavs  „  2  years.

Shilanimshukamuna 3  months  ,.  3  months.

Total  for  the  dynasty  of  Bazi  ....  20  years  3  months.
For  the  differences  in  the  lengths  of  these  reigns,  cf  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  592-594  ;  and  further,
Fe.  Delitzsch,  Assyriologische  Miscellen,  in  the  Berichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Saxony,  II.,
1894,  p.  189;  and  Eost,  Vntersuchungen  ziir  Altorientalischen  Gesch.,  p.  26,  uote  2.  A  boundary
stone,  published  by  Belsee,  Bab.  Kitdurru  Insehriften,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Ass.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  171-185,
and  translated  by  Peiser,  Texte  juristischen  und  geschdftlichen  Inhalts,  in  the  Eeilinschrift.  Bibl.
vol.  iv.  pp.  82-93,  bears  the  name  of  Ninip-kuduriisur,  dated  in  his  third  year,  and  also  mentions
a  king  Nabu-kinabal  who  appears  to  have  reigned  24  years.  According  to  Rest  {Untersiichungeu
zur  Alt.  Oesch.,  pp.  67,  68),  this  i.s  the  first  king  of  the  Babylonian  dynasty  wliich  followed  the
dynasty  of  Bazi;  a  certain  Irba-marduk,  mentioned  in  an  inscription  of  Jlerodacb-baladan  II.
(Peiser  and  Wiucklek,  Insehriften  Merodach-Baladan's  II.,  in  Soueadek,  ^e;7.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  186,
187,  col.  ii.  11.  43,  44),  ought  to  be  placed  among  the  live  or  six  unknown  princes  who  must  have
succeeded  this  Nabu-klnabal.

^  For  the  variants  of  this  name  which  occur  iu  the  inscriptions,  cf.  Fn.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das
Paradies  I  pp.  204,  205.  As  I  have  remarked  elsewhere  (Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  119,  note  3),
Winckler  identifies  the  position  of  the  countries  around  Yalman  with  the  present  province  of  Holwan
(Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  81,  82).

'  Shamash-mudammiq  appe.us  to  have  died  about  900.  Naboshumishkun  probably  reigned  only
one  or  two  years,  from  900  to  899  or  to  898.  The  name  of  his  successor  is  destroyed  iu  the
Sijnchronons  History ;  it  might  be  Nabubaliddin,  who  seems  to  have  had  a  long  life,  but  it  is  wiser,
until  fresh  light  is  thrown  on  the  subject,  to  admit  tliat  it  is  some  prince  other  than  Nabubaliddin,
whose  name  is  as  yet  unknown  to  us  (RosT,  Untersachungen  zur  Alt.  Gesch.,  p.  69).


6  THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL    AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

His  successor  abandoned  to  the  Assyrians  most  of  the  districts  situated  on  the
left  bank  of  the  Lower  Zab  between  the  Zagros  mountains  and  the  Tigris,^  and
peace,  which  was  speedily  secured  by  a  double  marriage,  remained  unbroken  for
nearly  half  a  century.  Tukulti-ninip  II.  was  fond  of  fighting;  "he  overthrew
his  adversaries  and  exposed  their  heads  upon  stakes,"  ^  but,  unlike  liis  prede-
cessor, he  directed  his  elTorts  against  Nairi  and  the  northern  and  western
tribes.  We  possess  no  details  of  his  campaigns ;  we  can  only  surmise  that
in  six  years,  from  890  to  885,^  he  brought  into  subjection  the  valley  of
the  Upper  Tigris  and  the  mountain  provinces  which  separate  it  from  the
Assyrian  plain.  Having  reached  the  source  of  the  river,  he  carved,  beside  the
image  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  the  following  inscription,  which  may  still  be  read
upon  the  rock.'  "  With  the  help  of  Assur,  Shamash,  and  Eamman,  the  gods
of  his  religion,  he  reached  this  spot.  The  lofty  mountains  he  subjugated  from
the  sun-rising  to  its  down-setting  ;  victorious,  irresistible,  he  came  hither,  and
like  unto  the  lightning  he  crossed  the  raging  rivers."  ^

He  did  not  live  long  to  enjoy  his  triumplis,  but  his  death  made  no  impression
on  the  impulse  given  to  the  fortunes  of  his  country.  Tlie  kingdom  which  he
left  to  Assur-nazir-pal,  the  eldest  of  his  sons,  embraced  scarcely  any  of  the
countries  which  had  paid  tribute  to  former  sovereigns.®  Besides  Assyria  proi^er,
it  comprised  merely  those  districts  of  Nairi  which  had  been  annexed  within  his
own  generation;  the  remainder  had  gradually  regained  their  liberty  :  first  the
outlying  dependencies — •CiIicia,Melitene,  Nortliern  Syria,  and  then  the  provinces
nearer  the  capital,  the  valleys  of  the  Masios  and  the  Zagros,  the  steppes  of
the  Khabur,  and  even  some  districts  such  as  Lubdi  and  Shupria,  which  had
been  allotted  to  Assyrian  colonists  at  various  times  after  successful  campaigns.'
Nearly  the   whole   empire   liad  to  be   reconquered  under    much   the    same

'  Synchronous  Hist,  col.  iii.  11.1-21;  cf.  Sayce,  The  Synchronous  Hist,  of  Ass.  and  Bahyloitia,  in  the
Records  of  the  Past,2ud  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  32,  aud  Peiser  and  Wincklkr,  Die  sogenannte  Stjuchron.  Gesch.,
in  ScHKADER,  KeilinschriftUche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  200,  201.  For  a  restoration  of  this  passage,  see
the  Synchronous  History  in  Wincki.er,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  246.

-  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  28,  29.

'  The  parts  preserved  of  the  Eponym  canon  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  620-621)  begin
their  record  in  893,  about  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Eamman-nirari  II.  The  line  wMch  distinguishes
the  two  reigns  from  one  another  is  drawn  between  the  name  of  the  persouage  who  corresponds  to
the  year  S9U,  and  that  of  Tukulti-ninip  who  corresponds  to  the  year  889  :  Tukulti-ninip  II.,  there-
fore, begins  his  reign  in  890,  and  his  death  is  six  years  later,  in  885.  Cf.  the  list  in  Schrader,
KeilinschriftUche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  p.  204.

'  For  the  inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  658, 659.

'  Schrader,  Die  Eeilinschriften  am  Eingange  der  Quellgrotten  des  Seheneh-Su,  pp.  14-19, 28.  This
inscription  and  its  accompanying  bas-relief  are  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.
11.  104,  105;  cf.  p.  19  of  the  present  volume.

«  For  the  details  and  extent  of  these  first  Assyrian  conquests,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  604,
et  seq.

'  An  account  of  some  of  the  secolonies  is  given  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  60S,  609, 640,  657,
665,  067,  668.     For  Lubdi  and  Shupria,  cf.  Wisckler,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  46-48.


THE  EMPIRE  AT   TEE  ACCESSION   OF  ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL  (885).  7

conditions  as  in  the  first  instance.  Assyria  itself,  it  is  true,  had  recovered  the
vitality  and  elasticity  of  its  earlier  days.  The  people  were  a  robust  and
energetic  race,  devoted  to  their  rulers,  and  ready  to  follow  them  blindly  and
trustingly  wherever  they  might  lead.  The  army,  while  composed  chiefly  of  the
same  classes  of  troops  as  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  I., — spearmen,  archers,
sappers,  and  slingers, — now  possessed  a  new  element,  whose  appearance  on  the
field  of  battle  was  to  revolutionize  the  whole  method  of  warfare ;  this  was  the


KS    ASSYRIAN    H0ESE5IAN    AI!ME1>    WITH    THE  SWORD.'

cavalry, properly  so  called,  introduced  as  an  adjunct  to  the  chariotry.  The  number
of  horsemen  forming  this  contingent  was  as  yet  small ;  like  the  infantry,  they
wore  casques  and  cuirasses,  but  were  clothed  with  a  tight-fitting  loin-cloth  in
place  of  the  long  kilt,  the  folds  of  which  would  have  embarrassed  their
movements.  One-half  of  the  men  carried  sword  and  lance,  the  other  half
sword  and  bow,  the  latter  of  a  smaller  kind  than  that  used  by  the  infantry.
Their  horses  were  bridlecF,  and  bore  trappings  on  the  forehead,  but  had  no
saddles ;  their  riders  rode  bareback  without  stirrups ;  they  sat  far  back  with
the  chest  thrown  forward,  their  knees  drawn  up  to  grip  the  shoulder  of  the
animal.  Each  horseman  was  attended  by  a  groom,  who  rode  abreast  of  him,
and  held  his  reins  during  an  action,  so  that  he  might  be  free  to  make  use  of
his  weapons.     This  body  of  cavalry,  having  little  confidence  in  its  own  powers,

'  Drawn  by  Fancher-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  in  bronze  on  the  gate  of  Balanat.  The  Assyrian
artist  has  shown  the  head  and  legs  of  the  second  horse  in  profile  behind  the  first,  but  he  has  forgotten
to  represent  the  rest  of  its  body,  and  also  the  man  riding  it.


8  TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE   STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

kept  in  close  contact  with  the  main  body  of  the  army,  and  was  not  used
in  independent  manoeuvres ;  it  was  associated  with  and  formed  an  escort
to  the  chariotiy  in  expeditions  where  speed  was  essential,  and  where  the
ordinary  foot  soldier  would  have  hampered  the  movements  of  the  charioteers.'


A   MOUNTED    ASSTMAX    ABCHEK    WITH    HIS    ATTENDANT,    CHARGING.'

The  army  thus  reinforced  was  at  all  events  more  efficient,  if  not  actually  more
powerful,  than  formerly ;  the  discipline  maintained  was  as  severe,  the  military
spirit  as  keen,  the  equipment  as  perfect,  and  the  tactics  as  skilful  as  in  former
times.^  A  knowledge  of  engineering  had  improved  upon  the  former  methods
of  taking  towns  by  sapping  and  scaling,  and  though  the  number  of  military
engines  was  as  yet  limited,  the  besiegers  were  well  able,  when  occasion  de-
manded, to  improvise  and  make  use  of  machines  capable  of  demolishing  even
the  strongest  walls.*     The  Assyrians  were  familiar  with  all  the  different  kinds

'  The  history  of  the  Assyrian  cavalry  has  been  briefly  sketched  by  G.  Rawlinson,  The  Five  Great
Monarchies^  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  422,  ot  seq.  Isolated  horsemen  must  no  doubt  have  existed  in  the
Assyrian  just  as  in  the  Egyptian  army  (cf.  on  this  point  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  218),  but  we
never  iiud  any  mention  of  a  hndy  of  cavalry  in  inscriptions  prior  to  the  time  of  Assur-nazir-pal ;  the
introduction  of  this  new  corps  must  consequently  have  taken  place  between  the  reigns  of  Tiglath-
pileeer  and  Assur-nazir-pal,  probably  nearer  the  time  of  tlie  latter.  Assur-nazir-pal  himself  seldom
speaks  of  his  cavalry  (^Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  70-73,  103),  but  he  constantly  makes
mention  of  the  horsemen  of  the  Aramsean  and  Syrian  principalities,  whom  he  incorporated  into  his
own  army  (^Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col,  iii.  11.  58,  60,  63,  69,  77).

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  oue  of  the  bronze  bas-reliefs  of  the  gate  of  Balawat.

'  For  the  organisation  of  the  Assyrian  armies  and  their  military  tactics  previous  to  the  use  of
cavalry,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  626-642.

'  For  the  Assyrian  engines  of  war,  sec  M.  Dieulafoy,  VAcropole  de  Suse,  pp.  148-158.  and  Jere-
miah and  Billekbeck,  Der  Untergang  A'ineveh's,  in  the  BeitrSge  zur  Assijriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  178-184  .


PROGRESS  OF  MILITARY  TACTICS;  CAVALRY  AND  BESIEOING  ENGINES.  9

of  battering-ram  ;  the  hand  variety,  which  was  merely  a  beam  tipped  with  iron,
worked  by  some  score  of  men  ;  the  fixed  ram,  in  which  the  beam  was  suspended
from  a  scaffold  and  moved  by  means  of  ropes;  and  lastly,  the  movable  ram,
running  on  four  or  six  wheels,  which  enabled  it  to  be  advanced  or  withdrawn  at
will.     The  military  engineers  of  the  day  allowed  full  rein  to  their  fancy  in  the


THE    MOVABLE    SOW    MAKING    A    r.HEACH    IS    THE    -WALI;    OP    A    FOETIiESS.'

many  curious  shapes  they  gave  to  this  latter  engine ;   for  example,  they  gave

to  the  mass  of  bronze  at  its  point  the  form  of  the  head  of  an  animal,  and  the

whole  engine  took  at  times  the  form  of  a  sow  ready  to  root  up  with  its  snout

the  foundations  of  the  enemy's  defences.     The  scaffolding  of  the  machine  was

usually  protected  by  a   carapace  of  green    leather   or   some   coarse  woollen

material   stretched  over  it,  which  broke  the  force  of  blows  from  projectiles ;

at  times  it  had  an  additional  arrangement  in  the  shape  of  a  cupola  or  turret  in

which  archers  were  stationed  to  sweep  tlie  face  of  the  wall  opposite  to  the

point  of  attack.     The  battering-rams  were  set  up  and  placed  in  line  at  a  short

distance  from  the  ramparts  of  the  besieged  town  ;  the  ground  in  front  of  them

was  then  levelled  and  a  regular  causeway  constrncted,  which  was  paved  with

The  batteriDg-ram  had  already  reached  such  a  degree  of  perfection  under  Assur-nazir-pal,  that  it
must  have  been  invented  some  time  before  the  execution  of  the  first  bas-reliefs  on  which  we  see  it
portrayed.  Its  points  of  resemblance  to  the  Greek  battering-ram  furnished  Hoefer  with  one  of  his
main  arguments  for  placing  the  monuments  of  Khorsabad  and  Koyuujik  as  late  as  the  Persian  or
Parthian  period  {Chaldgif,  Assyrie,  pp.  318,  319).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bronze  bas-reliefs  of  the  gate  at  Balawat.


10


TEE  ASSYBIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.


bricks  wherever  the  soil  appeared  to  be  lacking  in  firmness.  These  pre-
liminaries accomplished,  the  engines  were  pushed  forward  by  relays  of
troops  till  they  reached  the  required  range.  The  effort  needed  to  set  the
ram  in  motion  severely  taxed  the  strength  of  those  engaged  in  the  work  ;
for  the  size  of  the  beam  was   enormous,   and  its  iron   point,  or  the  square


IHh,     ILJititTl-]!    UAlll.iaM.-l^A.M    AllALklNt.     lUL     WALi.o    OF    A    TOWN.'

mass  of  metal  at  the  end,  was  of  no  light  weight.  The  besieged  did  their
best  to  cripple  or,  if  possible,  destroy  the  engine  as  it  approached  them.
Torches,  lighted  tow,  burning  pitch,  and  stink-pots  were  hurled  down  upon  its
roofing ;  attempts  were  made  to  seize  the  head  of  the  ram  by  means  of  chains  or
hooks,  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  moving,  or  in  order  to  drag  it  on  to  the  battle-
ments ;  in  some  cases  the  garrison  succeeded  in  crushing  the  machinery  with  a
mass  of  rock.  The  Assyrians,  however,  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  dis-
couraged by  such  trifling  accidents ;  they  would  at  once  extinguish  the  fire,
release,  by  sheer  force  of  muscle,  the  beams  which  the  enemy  had  secured,  and
if,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts,  one  of  the  machines  became  injured,  they
had  others  ready  to  take  its  place,  and  the  ram  would  be  again  at  work  after
only  a  few  minutes'  delay.  Walls,  even  when  of  burnt  brick  or  faced  with
small  stones,  stood  no  chance  against  such  an  attack.  The  first  blow  of  the  ram
sufficed  to  shake  them,  and  an  opening  was  rapidly  made,  so  that  in  a  few  days,
often  in  a  few  hours,  they  became  a  heap  of  ruins  ;  the  foot  soldiers  could  then
enter  by  the  breach  which  the  pioneers  had  effected.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  biis-relief  brought  from  Nlmroud,  now  in  the  British  Museum  ;
c£  Lavard,  ilonuiuenls  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  ]7.


THE   CONDITION   OF  ASSYRIA'S  NEIGHBOURS.


11


It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  strength  and  discipline  which
.the  Assyrian  troops  possessed  in  such  a  high  degree,  were  common  to  the
military  forces  of  all  the  great  states — Elam,  Damascus,  Nairi,  the  Hittites,  and
Chaldffia.  It  was  owing  to  this,  and  also  to  the  fact  that  the  armies  of  all  these
Powers  were,  as  a  rule,  both  in  strength  and  numbers,  much  on  a  par,  that  no
single  state  was  able  to  inflict  on  any  of  the  rest  such  a  defeat  as  would  end


THE   BESIEGED    ENDEAVOUIUMt    TU    Llill'l'LE    ijK    DtsTKUV    THE    BATTEia.NL,-UAM.'

ill  its  destruction.  What  decisive  results  had  the  terrible  struggles  produced,
which  stained  almost  periodically  the  valleys  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Zab  with
blood?  After  endless  loss  of  life  and  property,  they  had  nearly  always
issued  in  the  establishment  of  the  belligerents  in  their  respective  possessions,
with  possibly  the  cession  of  some  few  small  towns  or  fortresses  to  the  stronger
party,  most  of  which,  however,  were  destined  to  come  back  to  its  former
possessor  in  the  very  next  campaign.^  The  fall  of  the  capital  itself  was  not
decisive,  for  it  left  the  vanquished  foe  chafing  under  his  losses,  while  the
victory  cost  his  rival  so  dear  that  he  was  unable  to  maintain  the  ascendency
for  more  than  a  few  years.  Twice  at  least  in  three  centuries  a  king  of
Assyria  had  entered  Babylon,  and  twice  the  Babylonians  had  expelled  the
intruder  of  the  hour,  and  had  forced  him  back  with  a  blare  of  trumpets  to  the
frontier.    Although  the  Ninevite  dynasties  had  persisted  in  their  pretensions  to

"  Drawn  by  FaucUer-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  from  Nimroud,  now  in  the  British  Museum;  of.
Lavard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  19.

■  For  the  little  at  present  known  of  these  wars  between  Assyria  and  Chaldsea,  cf.  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  pp.  592,  593,  595-597,  604-012,  662-064.


12  TEE  ASSYIlIAy   BEVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGOLE  FOR    SYRIA

a  suzerainty  which  they  had  generally  been  unable  to  enforce,  the  tradition  of
which,  unsupported  by  any  definite  decree,  had  been  handed  on  from  one  genera-
tion to  another ;  yet  in  practice  their  kings  had  not  succeeded  in  "  taking  the
hands  of  Bel,"  *  and  in  reigning  personally  in  Babylon,  nor  in  extorting  from
the  native  sovereign  an  official  acknowledgment  of  his  vassalage.  Profiting
doubtless  by  past  experience,  Assur-nazir-pal  resolutely  avoided  those  direct
conflicts  in  which  so  many  of  his  predecessors  had  wasted  their  lives.  If  he  did
not  actually  renounce  his  hereditary  pretensions,  he  was  content  to  let  them  lie
dormant.  He  preferred  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty
signed  a  few  years  previously  by  Ramraan-nirari,  even  when  Babylon  neglected
to  observe  them  ;  he  closed  his  eyes  to  the  many  ill-disguised  acts  of  hostility
to  which  he  was  exposed,^  and  devoted  all  his  energies  to  dealing  with  less
dangerous  enemies.  Even  if  his  frontier  touched  Karduniash  to  the  south,
elsewhere  he  was  separated  from  the  few  states  strong  enough  to  menace  his
kingdom  by  a  strip  of  varying  width,  comprising  several  less  important  tribes
and  cities ; — to  the  east  and  north-east  by  the  barbarians  of  obscure  race
whose  villages  and  strongholds  were  scattered  along  the  upper  affluents  of  the
Tigris  or  on  the  lower  terraces  of  the  Iranian  plateau ;  to  the  west  and  north-
west by  the  principalities  and  nomad  tribes,  mostly  of  Aramiean  extraction,  who
now  for  a  century  had  peopled  the  mountains  of  the  Tigris  and  the  steppes
of  Mesopotamia.  They  were  high-spirited,  warlike,  hardy  populations,
proud  of  their  independence  and  quick  to  take  up  arras  in  its  defence  or
for  its  recovery,  but  none  of  them  possessed  more  than  a  restricted  domain,  or
had  more  than  a  handful  of  soldiers  at  its  disposal.  At  times,  it  is  true,  the
nature  of  their  locality  befriended  them,  and  the  advantages  of  position
helped  to  comjiensate  for  their  paucity  of  numbers.  Sometimes  they  were
entrenched  behind  one  of  those  rapid  watercourses  like  the  Radanu,  the  Zab,
or  the  Turnat,  which  are  winter  torrents  rather  than  streams,  and  are  overhung
by  steep  banks,  precipitous  as  a  wall  above  a  moat ;  sometimes  they  took  refuge
upon  some  wooded  height  and  awaited  attack  amid  its  rocks  and  pine  woods.
Assyria  was  suj)erior  to  all  of  them,  if  not  in  the  valour  of  its  troops,  at  least
numerically,  and,  towering  in  the  midst  of  them,  she  could  single  out  at  will
whichever  tribe  offered  the  easiest  prey,  and  falling  on  it  suddenly,  would  crush
it  by  sheer  force  of  weight.  In  such  a  case  the  surrounding  tribes,  usually
only  too  well  pleased  to  witness  in  safety  the  fall  of  a  dangerous  rival,  would
not  attempt  to  interfere ;  but  their  turn  was  ere  long  sure  to  come,  and  the
pity  which    they   had   declined   to   show   to    their   neighbours    was   in    like

*  [For  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  see  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  21,  note  1.— Tr.]

'  It  will  be  seen  later  on  (pp.  28-30  of  the  present  volume)  that  he  did  not  make  the  presence  of

CoesEean  trnops  among  the  allies  of  tlie  Sukhi  a  casus  belli,  even  though  they  were  commanded  by  a

brother  and  by  one  of  the  principal  officers  of  the  King  of  Babylon.


METHODS    OF  ASSYRIAN   CONQUEST.


13


manner  refused  to  them.  The  Assyrians  ravaged  their  country,  held  their
chiefs  to  ransom,  razed  their  strongholds,  or,  when  they  did  not  demolish  them,
garrisoned  them  with  their  own  troops  who  held  sway  over  the  country.  The
revenues  gleaned  from  these  conquests  would  swell  the  treasury  at  Nineveh,
the  native  soldiers  would  be  incorporated  into  the  Assyrian  army,  and  when
the  smaller  tribes  had  all  in  turn  been  subdued,  their  conqueror  would,  at
length,  find  himself  confronted  with  one  of  the  great  states  from  which  he  had


THE    ESCARPMENTS  OF   THE  ZAB.'

been  separated  by  these  buffer  communities ;  then  it  was  that  the  men  and
money  he  had  appropriated  in  his  conquests  would  embolden  him  to  provoke
or  accept  battle  with  some  tolerable  certainty  of  victory.

Immediately  on  his  accession,  Assur-nazir-pal  turned  his  attention  to  the
parts  of  his  frontier  where  the  population  was  most  scattered,  and  therefore  less
able  to  offer  any  resistance  to  his  projects.-     He  marched  towards  the  north-

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Binder,  sent  by  Father  Scheil.

"  The  principal  document  for  the  history  of  Assur-nazLr-pal  is  the  "  Monolith  of  Nimrud,"
discovered  by  Layard  in  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Xinip;  it  bears  the  same  inscription  on  both  its
sides.  It  is  a  compilation  of  various  documents,  comprising,  first,  a  consecutive  account  of  the
campaigns  of  the  king's  first  sis  years,  terminating  in  a  summary  of  the  results  obtained  during  that
period ;  secondly,  the  account  of  the  campaign  of  his  sixth  year,  followed  by  three  campaigns  not
dated,  the  last  of  which  was  in  Syria ;  and  thirdly,  the  history  of  a  last  campaign,  that  of  his  eighteentli
year,  and  a  second  summary.  The  inscription,  of  which  several  copies  (mostly  incimplete)  are
known,  has  been  published  by  H.  Rawlixsox,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pis.  17-21!;  cf.  pi.  27,
and  vol.  iii.  pi.  6.  It  has  been  translated  in  extenso  into  French  by  Oppert,  Hist,  des  Empires
de  Chaldfe  et  d'Assyrie,  pp.  72-102,  and  by  Mexaxt,  Annates  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  6G-93;
into  English  by  Rodwell,  Annals  nj  Assur-nasir-pal.  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  iii.


14         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.


western  point  of  his  territory,  suddenly  invaded  Nummi,^  and  in  an  incredibly
short  time  took  Gubbe,  its  capital,  and  some  half-dozen  lesser  places,  among
them  Surra,  Abuku,  Arura,  and  Arubi.  The  inhabitants  assembled  upon  a
mountain  ridge  which  they  believed  to  be  inaccessible,  its  peak  being  likened
to  "the  point  of  an  iron  dagger,"  and  the  steepness  of  its  sides  such  that  "no
winged  bird  of  the  heavens  dare  venture  on  them."  In  the  short  space  of
three  days  Assur-nazir-pal  succeeded  in  climbing  its  precipices  and  forcing  the
entrenchments  which  had  been  thrown  up  on  its  summit :  two  hundred  of  its
defenders  perished  sword  in  hand,  the  remainder  were  taken  prisoners.  The
Kirruri,-  terrified  by  this  example,  submitted  unreservedly  to  the  conqueror,
yielded  him  their  horses,  mules,  oxen,  sheep,  wine,  and  brazen  vessels,  and
accepted  the  Assyrian  prefects  appointed  to  collect  the  tribute.  The  neighbour-
ing districts,  Adaush,  Gilzan,  and  Khubushkia,  followed  their  example ;  ^  they

pp.  37-80,  aud  by  S.vyce,  The  Standard  Iincription  of  Assur-natsir-pal,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,
2nd  ser.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  128-177;  into  German  by  Peiser,  Inech.  Aschur-nusir-abal's,  in  Schradeii,  Keil.
Bibl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  50-119 ;  a  translation  of  the  first  column  (11.  i-'J'.)),  with  a  specimen  of  a  detailed
commentary,  was  edited  in  1885  by  H.  Lhotzky,  Die  Annalen  Asurnazirpals  (884-8(10  B.C.),  etc,  A
monolith  found  in  the  ruins  of  Kurkh,  at  some  distance  from  Diarbekir,  and  published  by
H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  6,  contains  some  important  additions  to  the  account  of
the  campaigns  of  the  fifth  year  (11.  42-52).  The  other  numerous  inscriptions  of  Assur-nazir-pal
which  have  come  down  to  us  do  not  contain  any  information  of  importance  which  is  not  found  in  the
text  of  the  Annals;  the  dedication  of  the  plaques  (Lav.\rd,  Ins.  in  the  Cun.  Character,  pis.  1-11),
fragments  of  which  are  dispersed  in  the  various  museums  of  Europe,  has  been  translated  into
English  by  Fox  Talbot,  Standard  Inscription  of  Ashur-akh-bal,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,
vol.  vii.  p.  9,  et  seq.,  and  into  German  by  Schhadeh,  Tnsch.  Assur-tiasir-hahars,  etc.,  1879.  The
inscription  of  the  broken  Obelisk,  from  which  I  have  often  quoted.,  contains  in  the  second  column  some
mention  of  the  works  underttiken  by  this  king.

'  Nummi  or  Nimmi,  mentioned  already  in  the  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  (col.  iv.  1.  71),  has
been  placed  by  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  554)  in  the  mountain  group  which  separates  Lake  Van
from  Lake  TJrumiah,  but  by  Tiele  in  the  regions  situated  to  the  south-east  of  Nineveh  (^Bah.  Ass.
Gesch.,  p.  180);  the  observations  of  Delattre  (Encore  un  mot  sur  la  G^oyraphie  Ass.,  pp.  6-12)  show
that  we  ought  perhaps  to  look  for  it  to  the  north  of  the  Arzania,  certainly  in  the  valley  of  that
river.  It  appears  to  me  to  answer  to  the  cazas  of  Varto  and  Boulanik  in  the  sandjak  of  Mush.  If
the  name  of  the  capital,  read  Libie-Libu  by  Oppert  {Hist,  des  Empires  de  Cliald.  et  d'Ass.,  p.  7G),
ought  to  be  read  Gubbi-Gubbe,  as  Peiser  believes  (Insoh.  Aschar-ndsir-abal's,  in  Schuader,  Keil.
Bibl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  60,  61,  1.  46),  it  may  be  identified  with  the  present  Gop,  cliiof  town  of  the  caza  of
Boulanik  (Vital  Cuinet,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  588,  589) ;  in  this  case  Aliuku  might  be
represented  by  tlie  village  of  Biyonkh.

'  The  Kirruri  must  have  had  their  habitat  in  the  depression  around  Lake  Urumiah,  on  the  western  side
of  the  lake,  if  we  are  to  believe  Sehrader(Ket7.  und  Gesch.,  pp.  163-169),  whose  identifications  on  this
subject  have  been  accepted  with  certain  reservations  by  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  554),  by  Tiele
(Bah.-acs.  Gesc7t,,pp.  168, 172,  ISO),  by  Delitzsch  and  Miirdter  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  161),
aud  by  AVinckler  (Gefch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  215)  ;  Delattre  has  pointed  out  that  it  ought  to  be  sought
elsewhere,  near  the  sources  of  the  Tigris,  not  far  from  the  Murad-su  (Encore  un  mot,  etc.,  p.  10,  note  4).
The  connection  in  which  it  is  here  cited  obliges  us  to  place  it  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
Nummi,  and  its  relative  position  to  Adaush  and  Gilzan  makes  it  probable  that  it  is  to  be  sought  to
the  west  and  south-west  of  Lake  Van,  in  the  cazas  of  Mush  and  Sassun  in  the  sandjak  of  Mush.

^  For  Adaush,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  646,  note  2.  Kirzau,  also  transcribed  Gilzan  and
Guzan,  has  been  relegated  by  the  older  Assyriologists  to  Eastern  Armenia,  and  the  site  further
specified  as  being  between  the  ancient  Araxes  and  Lake  Urumiah,  in  the  Persian  provinces  of  Khoi
and  Maraud,  by  Sohrader  (Keilinsch.  und  Geschichisforschunq,  pp.  167-169 ;  cf.  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.
und  Ass,  p.  554;  Tiele,  Bab.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  168,  187;  Winckler,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  197.
200).     The  indications  given  in  our  text  and  the  passages  brought  together  by  Schrader,  which


ASSUR-NAZIR-PAVS  FIRST  CAMPAIGN  IN  NAIRL


15


.^-->..;K^


THE  CAMPAIG^S  ^  Taiii

opASSBR-NAZm-PAL

IN  naTri.  ^,„  ^„

Scale  ><?>


sent  the  king  consiflerable  presents  of  gold,  silver,  lead,  and  copper,  and  their

alacrity  in  buying  off  their  conqueror  saved  them  from  the  ruinous  infliction  of  a

garrison.   The  Assyrian  army  defiling  through  the  pass  of  Khulun  next  fell  upon

the  Eirkhi,  dislodged  the

troops   stationed  in  the

fortress  of  Nishtun,  and

pillaged    the    cities    of

Khatu,  Khatara,  Irbidi,

Arzania,  Tela,  and  Kha-

lua ;  ^    Bubu,   the  Chief

of  Nishtun,^  was  sent  to

Arbela,  flayed  alive,  and

his   skin    nailed    to   the

city  wall.  In  a  small  town

near  one  of  the  sources  of

the  Tigris,  Assur-nazir-

pal  founded  a  colony  on  which  he  imposed  his  name ;  he  left  there  a  statue  of

himself,  with  an  inscription  celebrating  his  exploits  carved  on  its  base,  and

having  done  this,  he  returned  to  Nineveh  laden  with  booty.^    A  few  weeks  had

sufficed  for  him  to  complete,  on  this  side,  the  work  bequeathed  to  him  by  his

place  Gilzin  in  direct  connection  with  Kirruri  on  one  side  and  witli  Karklii  on  the  other,  oblige  us
to  locate  the  country  in  the  upper  basin  of  the  Tigris,  and  I  should  place  it  near  Bitlis-tchai,
where  different  forms  of  the  word  occur  many  times  on  the  map,  such  as  Ghalzan  in  Ghalzan-ilagh  ;
Kharzan,  the  name  of  a  caza  of  the  sandjak  of  Sert  (Ccixet,  ia  Turquie  el'Asie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  612-61-!:) ;
Khizau,  the  name  of  a  caza  of  the  sandjak  of  Bitlis  (Idem.,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  .566-568).  Girzan-Kilzan
would  thus  be  the  Roman  province  of  Arzauene,  Ardzii  in  Armenian,  in  which  the  initial  g  or  h  of
the  ancient  name  has  been  replaced  in  the  process  of  time  by  a  soft  aspirate.  Khubushkia  or
Khutushkia  has  been  placed  by  Lenormant  to  the  east  of  the  Upper  Zab,  and  south  of  Arapkha,
and  tliis  identification  has  been  approved  by  Schrader  (Keilinsch.  und  Gesch.,  pp.  163-167)  and  also
by  Delitzseh  (Die  Sprache  der  Kossaer,  p.  33,  et  seq.);  according  to  the  passages  that  Schrader  him-
self has  cited,  it  must,  however,  have  stretched  northwards  as  far  as  Shatakh-su,  meeting  Gilzan  at
one  point  of  the  sandjaks  of  Van  and  Hakkiari.

'  Assur-nazir-pal,  in  going  from  Kirruri  to  Kirkhi  in  the  basin  of  the  Tigris  (ef.,  for  Kirkhi  or
Kurkhi,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  643,  note  4),  could  go  either  by  the  pass  of  Bitlis  or  that  of
Sassun  ;  that  of  Bitlis  is  excluded  by  the  fact  that  it  lies  in  Kirruri,  and  Kirruri  is  not  mentioned  in
what  follows.  But  if  the  route  chosen  was  by  the  pass  of  Sassun,  Khuluu  necessarily  must  have
occupied  a  position  at  the  entrance  of  the  defiles,  perhaps  that  of  the  present  town  of  Khorukh.  The
name  Khatu  recalls  that  of  the  Khoith  tribe  which  the  Armenian  historians  mention  as  in  this  locality
(ToMASCHEE,  Sassoun  und  das  Quellengebief  des  Tigris,  pp.  6-8,  etc.).  Khaturu  is  perhaps  Hatera  in
the  caza  of  Lidjc,  in  the  sandjak  of  Diarbekir,  and  Arzania  the  ancient  Arzan,  Arzn.  the
ruins  of  which  may  be  seen  near  Sheikh-Yuiius.  Tila-Tela  is  not  the  same  town  as  the  Tela  in
Mesopotamia,  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of  later,  but  is  probably  to  be  identified  with
Til  or  Tilleh,  at  the  confluence  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Bohtan-tcha.  Finally,  it  is  possible  that  the
name  Khalua  may  be  preserved  in  that  of  Halewi,  which  Layard  gives  as  belonging  to  a  village
situated  almost  halfway  between  Eundvan  and  Til  (Nineveh  and  Babylon,  map  1).

'  Nishtun  was  probably  the  most  important  spot  in  this  region ;  from  its  position  on  the  list,
between  Khuluu  and  Khataru  on  one  side  and  Arzania  on  the  other,  it  is  evident  we  must  look  for  it
Bomeyvhere  In  Sassun  or  in  the  direction  of  JIayafarrikin.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  43-69;  cf.  Peisek,  Inschriften  Asdiur-nasir-ahal's,  in
ScHKADEB,  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  58-63.


16       THE  ASSYRIAN  BEVIVAL   AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

father,  and  to  open  up  the  neighbourhood  of  the  north-east  provinces ;  he  was
not  long  in  setting  out  afresh,  this  time  to  the  north-west,  in  the  direction  of
the  Taurus.^  He  rapidly  skirted  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris,  burned  some  score
of  scattered  liamlets  at  the  foot  of  Nipur  and  Pazatu,-  crossed  to  the  right  bank,
above  Amidi,  and,  as  he  approached  the  Euphrates,  received  the  voluntary
homage  of  Kummukh  and   the    Mushku.^     But  while  he  was  complacently


TUK    silt    ..u      -IIAi.iiiA^.Ni    AX    AREAN,    ON    THE    KUAIU  1..

engaged  in  recording  the  amount  of  vessels  of  bronze,  oxen,  sheep,  and  jars  of  wine
which  represented  their  tribute,  a  messenger  of  bad  tidings  appeared  before  him.
Assyria  was  bounded  on  the  east  by  a  line  of  small  states,  comprising  the  Katna^

•  The  text  of  the  "  Annals  "  declares  that  these  events  took  place  "  in  this  same  limmu  "  (col.  i.
1.  69),  in  what  the  king  calls  higher  up  in  the  column  "  the  beginning  of  my  royalty,  the  first  year
of  my  reign"  (col.  i.  11.  43,  44).  We  must  therefore  suppose  that  he  asceuded  the  throne  almost  at  the
beginning  of  the  year,  since  he  was  able  to  make  two  campiiigns  under  the  same  eponym  (Tiele,
Hab.  Axs.  Gesch,,  p.  17!) ;   Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  552,  553).

-  Nipur  or  Nibur  is  the  Nibaros  of  Strabo  (XI.  xiv.  §  2,  p.  527),  as  Finzi  recognized  (Bicerclw
per  lo  Studio  delV  AniicMl'a  Assira,  pp.  244-246;  cf.  Delattke,  The  People  and  (lie  Empire  of  the
Medes,  p.  71).  If  we  consider  tlie  general  direction  of  the  campaign,  we  are  inclined  to  jjlace  Nipur
close  to  the  bank  of  the  Tigris,  east  of  tlie  regions  traversed  in  the  preceding  campaign,  and  to
identify  it,  as  also  Pazatu,  with  the  group  of  liigh  hills  called  at  the  present  day  the  Ashit-dagh,
between  the  Kharzan-su  and  the  Batman-tclmi  (CuiNET,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii.  p.  551).

'  t'f.  what  is  said  of  Kummukh  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  500,  note  6.  The  Mushku
(Moschiano  or  Wcshek)  mentioned  here  do  not  represent  the  main  body  of  the  tribe,  established  in
Cappadocia  (cf.  on  this  subject,  ibid.,  pp.  591,  643);  they  are  the  descendants  of  such  of  the
Mushku  as  had  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  contested  the  possession  of  the  regions  of  Kashiari  with
the  Assyrians  (Hommel,  Geseh.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  557).

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  taken  by  Layard,  Ninereh  and  Babylon,  p.  232.

=  The  name  has  been  read  sometimes  Katna  (Oppert,  Etst.  des  Empires  de  Chald.  et  d'Ass.,  p.  91 ;
Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  557),  sometimes  Shuna  (E.  Meter,  Gesch.  des  Allerthums,  vol.  i.
p.  333  ;  Delattre,  L'Asie  Occidentale,  etc.,  pp.  8-11 ;  Winckleb,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass ,  pp.  183,  184 ;
Peiser,  Die  Insch.  Aschur-nusir-abaVs,  pp.  64,  65,  96,97).     The  country  included  the  two  towns  of


ASSUB-NAZIB-rAL'S   CAMPAIGN   ON   THE  KHABUR.


17


ONE  OF  THE  WINGED  BULLS  FODND  AT  AKBAN.-


aud    the    Bit-Khalupi,^    whose
towns,   placed  alternately  like
seutriesoneach  side  the  Khabur,
protected  her  from  the  incursions
of  the  Bedawin.   They  were  vir-
tually Chaldsean  cities,  having
been,  like  most  of  those  which
flourished  in  the  Mesopotamian
plains,  thoroughly  impregnated
with     Babylonian    civilisation.
Shadikanni,  the  most  important
of  them,  commanded  the  right
bank  of  the  Khabur,  and  also
the  ford  where  the  road  from
Nineveh  crossed  the  river  on
the  roiite  to  Han  an  and  Car-
chemish.     The  palaces  of  its
rulers   were    decorated    with
winged  bulls,  lions,  stelse,  and  bas-reliefs  carved  in  marble  brought  from  the  hills

Kamani  and  Dur-Katlimi  {AnnaU  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  11.  4-6),  and  on  the  south  adjoined  Bit-
Khalupi;  this  identifies  it  with  the  districts  of  Margada  and  Sheddadiyeh,  and,  judging  by  the
information  with  which  Assur-nazir-pal  himself  furnishes  us,  it  is  not  impossible  tliat  Dur-Katlimi
may  have  been  on  the  site  of  the  present  Magarda,  and  Kamani  on  that  of. Sheddadiyeh.  Ancient
ruins  have  been  pointed  out  on  both  these  spots  (Lataed,  Nineveh  and  Balylon,  pp.  254,  255  ;
Sachau,  Reise  in  Syrien  und  Mempotamien,  p.  296).

'  Peiser  {Die  Inschriflen  Aschur-ndsir-ahaV s,  pp.  64,
05,  96,  97)  and  Winckler  {Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.
1S3-186)  read  as  Bit-Khadippi  the  name  that  Oppert
transcribed  Bit-Khalupi  (Hist,  des  Einp.  de  Chald.  et
d'Assyrie,  pp.  78,  91,  92).  Suru,  the  capital  of  Bit-
Khalupi,  was  built  upon  the  Khabur  itself  where
it  is  navigable,  for  Assur-nazir-pal  relates  further  on
(Annals,  col.  iii.  11.  28,  29)  that  he  had  his  royal
barge  built  there  at  the  time  of  the  cruise  which  he
undertook  on  the  Euphrates  in  tlie  VI"'  year  of  his
reign.  The  itineraries  of  modern  travellers  mention  a
place  called  es-Sauar  or  es-Saur,  eight  hours'  march
from  the  mouth  of  the  Khabur  oa  the  right  bank  of  the
river,  situated  at  the  foot  of  a  hill  some  220  feet  high ;
the  ruins  of  a  fortified  enclosure  and  of  an  ancient
town  are  still  visible  (Sachau,  Beise  in  Syrien  und
Mesopolamien,  p.  292).  Following  Tomkins  (AWes  ojj
the  Geography  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates,  in  the  Bah.
and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  iii.  p.  114),  I  should  there
place  Suru,  the  chief  town  of  KLalupi ;  Bit-Khahipi
would  be  the  territory  in  the  neighbourhood  of  es-Saur.

^  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by
Layabd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  242  ;  cf.  pp.  235,  2.^7.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layard's  sketch,
ibid.,  p.  237.  stele  from  aeban.^


18  THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

of  Singar.^  The  people  seem  to  have  been  of  a  capricious  temperament,  and,  not-
withstanding the  supervision  to  which  they  were  subjected,  few  reigns  elapsed
in  which  it  was  not  necessary  to  put  down  a  rebellion  among  them.  Bit-Khalupi
and  its  capital  Suru  had  thrown  off  the  Assyrian  yoke  after  the  death  of  Tukulti-
ninip;  the  populace,  stirred  up  no  doubt  by  Aramaean  emissaries,  had  assassinated
the  Hamathite  who  governed  them,  and  had  sent  for  a  certain  Akhiababa,  a  man
of  base  extraction  from  Bit-Adini,-  whom  they  had  proclaimed  king.  This  defec-
tion, if  not  promptly  dealt  with,  was  likely  to  entail  serious  consequences,  since  it
left  an  important  point  on  the  frontier  exposed;  and  there  now  remained  nothing
to  prevent  the  people  of  Adini  or  their  allies  from  spreading  over  the  country
between  the  Khabur  and  the  Tigris,  and  even  pushing  forward  their  marauding
bands  as  far  as  the  very  walls  of  Singar  and  Assur.  Without  losing  a  moment,
Assur-nazir-pal  marched  down  the  course  of  the  Khabur,  hastily  collecting  the
tribute  of  the  cities  through  which  he  passed.  The  defenders  of  Suru  were  dis-
concerted by  his  sudden  appearance  before  their  town,  and  their  rulers  came
out  and  prostrated  themselves  at  the  king's  feet :  "  Dost  thou  desire  it  ?  it  is
life  for  us; — dost  thou  desire  it?  it  is  death; — dost  thou  desire  it?  what  thy
heart  chooseth,  that  do  to  us ! "  But  the  appeal  to  his  clemency  was  in  vain  ;
the  alarm  had  been  so  great  and  the  danger  so  pressing,  that  xlssur-nazir-pal
was  pitiless.  The  town  was  handed  over  to  the  soldiery,  all  the  treasure  it  con-
tained was  confiscated,  and  the  women  and  children  of  the  best  families  were
made  slaves ;  some  of  the  ringleaders  paid  the  penalty  of  their  revolt  on  the
spot ;  the  rest,  with  Akhiababa,  were  carried  away  and  flayed  alive,  some  at .
Nineveh,  some  elsewhere.  An  Assyrian  garrison  was  installed  in  the  citadel,
and  an  ordinary  governor,  Azilu  by  name,  replaced  the  dynasty  of  native  princes.
The  report  of  this  terrible  retribution  induced  the  Laqi  ^  to  tender  their  sub-
mission, and  their  example  was  followed  by  Khaian,  king  of  Khindanu  on  the

'  Shadikanni,  which  has  been  read  Gardikanni  (Peisek,  Inscli.  Aschur-nazir-ahaV s,  in  Schradeu,
Keil.  Bibl,  vol.  i.  pp.  64, 65,  96,  97  ;  Wisckler,  Gesch.  Bab.  unil  A^s.,  pp.  183,  184),  is  certainly  Arban
<m  the  Khabur,  as  Eawlinson  has  already  shown  (The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  205,
and  vol.  ii.  p.  84  ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Hid.  of  Ass.,  p.  37 ;  Ed.  Meyek,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  333,
334  ;  HoMMEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  557,  558).  For  the  ruins  of  Arban,  cf.  Layard,  Nineveh  and
Bahylon,  pp.  230-242 ;  the  possible  identification  of  the  prince  whose  name  is  met  with  on  the
sculptures  of  tliis  locality,  with  a  personage  mentioned  on  a  cylinder  found  at  Sherif-Klian,  has
been  pointed  out  by  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Ass.,  p.  37,  and  admitted  by  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,
vol.  i.  p.  33i.  Winckler  attributes  these  monuments  to  the  pre- Assyrian  age  of  Mesopotamia,  anterior
to  the  time  of  the  Aramrean  invasion  (Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  150,  and  Altorientalische  Forschungen,
vol.  i.  p.  385,  note  2).  It  is  impossible  to  decide  whether  this  is  the  case  as  long  as  we  possess  merely
rough  sketches  which  do  not  permit  us  to  judge  of  the  technique  or  the  artistic  merit  of  the  objects
in  (juestion.

'  For  the  position  of  Bit-Adini  on  both  banks  in  the  bend  of  the  Euplirates,  cf.  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  p.  590,  note  9.

'  The  Laqi  were  situated  on  both  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  principally  ou  the  right  bank,  between
the  Khabur  .and  the  Balikh  (Delattre,  L'Asie  Occidentale  dans  hs  Inscrip.  Ass.,  pp.  12-16  ;  Hommel,
Gesch.  Bab.  mid  Ass.,  p.  557),  interspersed  among  the  Sukhi,  of  whom  they  were  perhaps  merely  a
dissentient  fraction .


ASSUR-NAZIR-PAVS  SECOND    CAMPAIGN  IN  NAIRI.  19

Euphrates.  He  bought  off  the  Assyrians  with  gold,  silver,  lead,  precious
stones,  deep-hued  purple,  and  dromedaries ;  he  erected  a  statue  of  Assur-nazir-
pal  in  the  centre  of  his  palace  as  a  sign  of  his  vassalage,  and  built  into  the  wall
near  the  gates  of  his  town  an  inscription  dedicated  to  the  gods  of  the  con-
queror.^ Sis,  or  at  the  most  eight,  months  had  sufficed  to  achieve  these  rapid
successes  over  various  foes,  in  twenty  different  directions — the  expeditions  in
Nummi  and  Kirruri,  the  occupation  of  Kummnkh,  the  flying  marches  across  the
mountains  and  plains  of  Mesopotamia — during  all  of  which  the  new  sovereign
had  given  ample  proof  of  his  genius.  He  had,  in  fine,  shown  himself  to  be  a
thorough  soldier,  a  conqueror  of  the  type  of  Tiglath-pileser,  and  Assyria  by  these
victories  had  recovered  her  rightful  rank  among  the  nations  of  Western  Asia.

The  second  year  of  his  reign  was  no  less  fully  occupied,  nor  did  it  prove  less
successful  than  the  first.  At  its  very  beginning,  and  even  before  the  return  of
the  favourable  season,  the  Sukhi  on  the  Euphrates  made  a  public  act  of  sub-
mission, and  their  chief,  Ilubani,  brought  to  Nineveh  on  their  behalf  a  large
sum  of  gold  and  silver.  He  had  scarcely  left  the  capital  when  the  news  of  an
untoward  event  effaced  the  good  impression  he  had  made.  The  descendants  of
the  colonists,  planted  in  bygone  times  by  Shalmaneser  I.  on  the  western  slope  of
the  Masios,  in  the  district  of  Khalzidipkha,  had  thrown  off  their  allegiance,  and
■their  leader,  Khulai,  was  besieging  the  royal  fortress  of  Damdamusa.^  Assur-
nazir-pal  marched  direct  to  the  sources  of  the  Tigris,  and  the  mere  fact  of  his
presence  sufficed  to  prevent  any  rising  in  that  quarter.  He  took  advantage  of
the  occasion  to  set  up  a  stele  beside  those  of  his  father  Tulailti-ninip  and  his
ancestor  Tiglath-pileser,^  and  then  having  halted  to  receive  the  tribute  of  Izalla,*
he  turned  southwards,  and  took  up  a  position  on  the  slopes  of  the  Kashiari.    At

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  69-99;  cf.  Peisek,  Inscli.  Aschur-ndiir-ahaVs,  pp.  62-69.

'  The  position  of  Khalzidipkha  or  Khalzilukha,  as  well  as  that  of  Kinabu,  its  stronghold,  is  shown
approximately  by  what  follows.  Assur-uazir-pal,  marching  from  the  sources  of  the  Supnat  towards
Tela,  could  pass  either  to  the  east  or  west  of  the  Karajah-dagh  ;  as  the  end  of  the  campaign  finds
him  at  Tushkhan,  to  the  south  of  the  Tigris,  and  he  returns  to  Nairi  and  Kirkhi  by  the  eastern  side
of  the  Karajah-dagh,  we  arc  led  to  conclude  that  the  outgoing  march  to  Tela  was  by  the  western  side,
through  the  country  situated  between  the  Karajah-dagh  and  the  Euphrates.  [See  p.  20,  note  2. — Tk.]
On  referring  to  a  modern  map,  two  rather  important  places  will  be  found  in  this  locality  :  the  first,
Arghana,  commanding  the  road  from  Diarbekir  to  Kharput ;  the  other,  Severek,  on  the  route  from
Diarbekir  to  Orfah.  Arghana  appears  to  me  to  correspond  to  the  royal  city  of  Damdamusa,  which  would
thus  have  prelected  the  approach  to  the  plain  on  the  north-west.  Severek  corresponds  fairly  well  to
the  position  which,  according  to  the  Assyrian  text,  Kinabu  must  have  occupied  ;  lieuce  the  country
of  Khalzidipkha  (Khalzilukha)  must  be  the  district  of  Severek.

'  Cf.  the  'mention  of  these  stelae  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp,  658,  (359  [The  Supnat  is
there  written  Subnat. — Tr.],  and  p.  G  of  the  present  volume.

*  Izalla,  written  also  Izala,  Azala,  paid  its  tribute  in  sheep  and  oxen,  and  also  produced  a  wine
for  which  it  continued  to  be  celebrated  down  to  the  time  of  Nebuchadrezzar  II.  (Fr.  Lenokjiant,
Etude  sur  qudques  parties  des  SijUah.  cun.,  pp.  122,  123 ;  Delattre,  L'Asie  Occidentale,  pp.  24,  25.
Lenormant  and  Finzi  (Ricerche  per  lo  Studio  dell'  Antichila  Assira,  pp.  Ill,  558)  place  this  country
near  to  Nisihis,  where  the  Byzantine  and  Syrian  writers  mention  a  district  and  a  mountain  of  the
same  name,  and  this  conjecture  is  borne  out  by  the  passages  of  the  Annuls  of  Assur-nazir-pal
(col.  ii.  11.  21,  22,  col.  iii.  11.  57-60)  which  place  it  in  the  vicinity  of  Bit-Adini  and  Bit-Bakhiani.  It
has  also  been  adopted  by  most  of  the  historians  who  have  recently  studied  the  question.


20         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

the  first  news  of  his  approach,  Khulai  had  raised  the  blockade  of  Damdamusa
and  had  entrenched  himself  in  Kinabu ;  the  Assyrians,  however,  carried  the  place
by  storm,  and  six  hundred  soldiers  of  the  garrison  were  killed  in  the  attack.
The  survivors,  to  the  number  of  three  thousand,  together  with  many  women  and
children,  were  thrown  into  the  flames.  The  people  of  Mariru  hastened  to  the
rescue ;  ^  the  Assyrians  took  three  hundred  of  them  prisoners  and  burnt  them
alive;  fifty  others  were  ripped  up,  but  the  victors  did  not  stop  to  reduce  their
town.  The  district  of  Nirbu  was  next  subjected  to  systematic  ravaging,  and
half  of  its  inhabitants  fled  into  the  Mesopotamian  desert,  while  the  remainder
souc^ht  refuge  in  Tela  at  the  foot  of  the  Ukhira.'-  The  latter  place  was  a  strong
one,  being  surrounded  by  three  enclosing  walls,  and  it  offered  an  obstinate  resist-
ance. Notwithstanding  this,  it  at  length  fell,  after  having  lost  three  thousand
of  its  defenders : — some  of  its  garrison  were  condemned  to  the  stake,  some  had
their  hands,  noses,  or  ears  cut  off,  others  were  deprived  of  sight,  flayed  alive,
or  impaled  amid  the  smoking  ruins.  This  being  deemed  insufficient  punish-
ment, the  conqueror  degraded  the  place  from  its  rank  of  chief  town,  transfer-
ring this,  together  with  its  other  privileges,  to  a  neighbouring  city,  Tushkhan,
which  had  belonged  to  the  Assyrians  from  the  beginning  of  their  conquests.*
The  king  enlarged  the  place,  added  to  it  a  strong  enclosing  wall,  and  installed
within  it  the  survivors  of  the  older  colonists  who  had  been  dispersed  by  the  war,
the  majority  of  whom  had  taken  refuge  in  Shupria.'  He  constructed  a  palace
there,  built  storehouses  for  the  reception  of  the  grain  of  the  province ;  and,  in

'  The  site  of  Mariru  is  unknown ;  according  to  the  text  of  the  Annals,  it  ought  to  lie  near
Severek  (Kinabu)  to  the  south-east,  since,  after  having  mentioned  it,  Assur-nazir-jjal  speaks  of  the
people  of  Nirbu  whom  he  engaged  in  the  desert  before  marching  against  Tela.

'  Tila  or  Tela  is  the  Tela  Antoninopolis  of  the  writers  of  the  Roman  period  and  the  present
Veranshehr.  The  district  of  Nirbu,  of  which  it  was  the  capital,  lay  ou  the  southern  slope  of  the
Karajah-dagh  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ukhira,  the  central  group  of  the  range.  The  name  Kashiari  is
applied  to  the  whole  mountain  group  which  separates  the  basins  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  to  the
south  and  south-west  (Hojimel,  Gesch  Bah.  und  A$s„  pp.  SCS-oGS.

=  From  this  passage  we  learn  that  Tushkhan,  also  called  Tushkha,  was  situated  on  the  border  of
Nirbu,  while  from  another  passage  in  the  campaign  of  the  V"'  year  we  find  that  it  was  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Tigris  {AimaJs,  col.  ii.  11.  103-105).  FoUowiug  H.  Eawlinson  (Assyrian  Discovery,  in  the
Aihunienm,  1S03,  vol.  i.  p.  228 ;  cf.  G.  Eawlixson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  SI.  note  5),  I
place  it  at  Kurkh,  near  the  Tigris,  to  the  east  of  Diarbekir,  where  the  monolith  was  found  mentioned
on  p.  13,  note  2,  of  this  volume.  The  existence  iu  that  locality  of  an  inscription  of  Assur-nazii'-pal
appears  to  prove  the  correctness  of  this  identification  ;  we  are  aware,  in  fact,  of  the  particular  favour
in  which  this  prince  held  Tushkhan,  for  he  speaks  with  pride  of  the  buildings  -with  which  he
embellished  it  {Annals,  col.  ii.  1.  7).  Hommel  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  572,  note  5),  however,  identifies
Kurkh  with  the  town  of  Matiate,  of  which  mention  is  made  further  on  (see  p.  26).

*  Shupria  or  Shupri,  a  name  which  has  been  read  Kuri,  had  been  brought  into  submission  from
the  time  of  Shalmaneser  I.  (cf.  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  60S).  We  gather  from  the  passages  in
which  it  is  mentioned  that  it  was  a  hilly  country,  producimg  wine,  rich  in  flocks  {Annals,  col.  ii.
11.  12-14),  and  lying  at  a  short  distance  from  Tushkhan;  perhaps  Mariru,  mentioned  above,
note  1,  was  one  of  its  towns.  I  think  we  may  safely  place  it  on  the  north-western  slopes  of  the
Kashiari,  iu  the  modern  caza  of  Tcheruik,  which  possesses  several  vineyards  held  in  high  estimation
(V.  CciKET,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii,  p.  493).  Knudtzon,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  reading  of
this  name,  places  the  country  rather  further  north,  within  the  fork  formed  by  the  two  upper  branches
of  the  Tigris  {Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonnenr/ott,  vol.  ii.  pp.  151,  152).


THE   THIRD    CAMPAIGN   OF  ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL   IN  NAIRL  21

short,  transformed  the  town  into  a  stronghold  of  the  first  order,  capable  of
serving  as  a  base  of  operations  for  his  armies.  The  surrounding  princes,  in
the  meanwhile,  rallied  round  him,  including  Ammibaal  of  Bit-Zamani,  and  the
rulers  of  Shupria,  Nairi,  and  Urumi  ;^  the  chiefs  of  Eastern  Nirbu  alone  held
aloof,  emboldened  by  the  rugged  nature  of  their  mountains  and  the  density  of
their  forests.  Assur-nazir-pal  attacked  them  on  his  return  journey,  dislodged
them  from  the  fortress  of  Ishpilibria  where  they  were  entrenched,  gained  the
pass  of  Buliani,  and  emerged  into  the  valley  of  Luqia.^  At  Ardupa  a  brief  halt
was  made  to  receive  the  ambassadors  of  one  of  the  Hittite  sovereigns  and  others
from  the  kings  of  Khanigalbat,  after  which  he  returned  to  Nineveh,  where  he
spent  the  winter.^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  these  were  but  petty  wars,  and  their
immediate  results  appear  at  the  first  glance  quite  inadequate  to  account  for
the  contemporary  enthusiasm  they  excited.  The  sincerity  of  it  can  be  better
understood  when  we  consider  the  miserable  state  of  the  country  twenty
years  previously.  Assyria  then  comprised  two  territories,  one  in  the  plains
of  the  middle,  the  other  in  the  districts  of  the  upper,  Tigris,  both  of  consider-
able extent,  but  almost  without  regular  intercommunication.  Caravans  or
isolated  messengers  might  pass  with  tolerable  safety  from  Assur  and  Nineveh
to  Singar,  or  even  to  Nisibis ;  but  beyond  these  places  they  had  to  brave  the
narrow  defiles  and  steep  paths  in  tlie  forests  of  the  Masios,  through  which
it  was  rash  to  venture  without  keeping  eye  and  ear  ever  on  the  alert.  The
mountaineers  and  their  chiefs  recognized  the  nominal  suzerainty  of  Assyria,
but  refused  to  act  upon  this  recognition  unless  constrained  by  a  strong  hand ;
if  this  control  were  relaxed  they  levied  contributions  on,  or  massacred,  all  who
came  within  their  reach,  and  the  king  himself  never  travelled  from  his  own  city
of  Nineveh  to  his  own  town  of  Amidi  unless  accompanied  by  an  army.  In  less
than  the  short  space  of  three  years,  Assur-nazir-pal  had  remedied  this  evil.
By  the  slaughter  of  some  two  hundred  men  in  one  place,  three  hundred  in

'  The  position  of  Bit-Zamani  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  was  determined  by  Delattre,  L'Asie
Occidentale,  etc.,  pp.  39,  40.  Urumi  (see  Tlie  Struggh  of  the  Nations,  p.  6i5)  was  situated  on  tiie  right
bank  of  the  same  river  in  the  neighbourhoood  of  Sumeisat,  and  the  name  has  survived  in  that  of
"Drima,  a  town  in  the  vicinity  so  called  even  as  late  as  Roman  times  (Ptolemy,  v.  15,  §  14).  Nirdun,
with  Madara  as  its  capital,  occupied  part  of  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Kashiari  towards  Ortaveran,
as  we  gather  from  the  Annals  of  Assxir-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  98-101,  compared  with  Annals,  col.  ii.  1. 13

^  Hommel  identifies  the  Luqia  with  the  northern  affluent  of  the  Euphrates  called  on  the  ancient
monuments  Lykos,  and  he  places  the  scene  of  the  war  in  Armenia  (^Gescli.  Bah.  and  Ass.,  pp.  562,  563).
The  context  obliges  us  to  look  for  this  river  to  the  south  of  the  Tigris,  to  the  north-east  and  to  the
east  of  the  Kashiari.  Tlie  king  coming  from  Nirbu,  the  pass  of  Buliani,  in  which  he  finds  the
towns  of  Kirkhi,  must  be  the  valley  of  Khaneki,  in  which  the  road  winds  from  Mardin  to
Diarbekir,  and  the  Luqia  is  probably  the  most  important  stream  in  this  region,  the  Slieikhan-Su,
which  waters  Savur,  chief  town  of  the  caza  of  Aviiieh  (V.  Cdijjet,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii.  p.  518).
Ardupa  must  have  been  situated  near,  or  on  the  actual  site  of,  the  present  Mardin,  whose  Assyrian
name  is  unknown  to  us ;  it  was  at  all  events  a  military  station  on  the  road  to  Nineveh,  along  which
the  king  returned  victorious  with  the  spoil.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  99-118,  col.  ii.  11.  1-13;  cf  Peiser,  Inschriften  Aschur-
ndsir-abaV s,  in  Schkader,  Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  68-75.


22         TEE  ASSYRIAN  liEVIVAL   AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

another,  two  or  three  thousand  in  a  third,  by  dint  of  impaling  and  flaying  re-
fractory sheikhs,  burning  villages  and  dismantling  strongholds,  he  forced  the
marauders  of  Nairi  and  Kirkhi  to  respect  his  frontiers  and  desist  from  pillaging
his  country.  The  two  divisions  of  his  kingdom,  strengtliened  by  the  military
colonies  in  Nirbu,  were  united,  and  became  welded  together  into  a  compact  whole
from  the  banks  of  the  Lower  Zab  to  the  sources  of  the  Khabur  and  the  Supnat.
During  the  following  season  the  course  of  events  diverted  the  king's  efforts
into  quite  an  opposite  direction  (B.C.  882).  Under  tiie  name  of  Zamua  there
existed  a  number  of  small  states  scattered  along  the  western  slope  of  the
Iranian  Plateau  north  of  the  Cossa^ans.^  Many  of  them — as,  for  instance,  the
Lullume — had  been  civilized  by  the  Chaldseans  almost  from  time  immemorial ;
the  most  southern  among  them  were  perpetually  oscillating  between  the
respective  areas  of  influence  of  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  according  as  one  or
other  of  these  cities  was  in  the  ascendant,  but  at  this  particular  moment  they
acknowledged  Assyrian  sway.  ^Yere  they  excited  to  rebellion  against  the  latter
power  by  the  emissaries  of  its  rival,  or  did  they  merely  think  that  Assur-nazir-pal
was  too  fully  absorbed  in  the  affairs  of  Nairi  to  be  able  to  carry  his  arms  effec-
tively elsewhere  ?  At  all  events  they  coalesced  under  Nurramman,  the  sheikh
of  Dagara,  blocked  the  pass  of  Babiti  which  led  to  their  own  territory,  and  there
massed  their  contingents  behind  the  shelter  of  hastily  erected  ramparts.^  Assur-
nazir-pal  concentrated  his  army  at  Kakzi,^  a  little  to  the  south  of  Arbela,  and
promptly  marched  against  them ;  he  swept  all  obstacles  before  him,  killed
fourteen  hundred  and  sixty  men  at  the  first  onslaught,  put  Dagara  to  fire
and  sword,  and  soon  defeated  Nurramman,  but  without  effecting  his  cap-
ture. As  the  campaign  threatened  to  be  prolonged,  he  formed  an  entrenched
camp   in   a  favourable   position,  and  stationed  in  it  some  of  his   troops  to

'  AccorJing  to  Hommel  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  565,  599)  and  Tiele  (Bah.  Ass.  Gusch.,  p.  199),
Zamua  would  be  the  couutry  extending  from  tbe  sources  of  the  Eadanu  to  the  southern  shores  of  the
lake  of  Urumiah ;  Schrader  (  Die  Namen  der  Meei-e,  p.  194)  believes  it  to  have  occupied  a  smaller
area,  and  places  it  to  the  east  and  south-west  of  the  lesser  Zab.  Delattre  (Encore  un  mot  sur  la
Ggjgrapliie  Ass.,  pp.  15-18)  has  shown  that  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  Zamua  on  Lake  Van
and  the  well-known  Zamua  upon  the  Zab.  Zamua,  as  described  by  Assur-nazir-pal,  answers  appro.\i-
mately  to  the  present  saudjak  of  Suleimaniyeh  in  the  vilayet  of  Mossul.

'  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  5G7)  believes  that  Assur-uazir-pal  crossed  the  Zab  near
Altin-kcupru,  and  he  is  certainly  correct ;  but  it  appears  to  me  from  a  passage  in  the  Annals  (col.  ii.
11.  51-55),  of  which  a  summary  wUl  be  found  below  (see  pp.  23,  21),  that  instead  of  taking  the  road
which  leads  to  Bagdad  by  Kerkuk  and  Tuz-Khurmati,  he  marched  along  that  which  leads  eastwards
in  the  direction  of  Suleimaniyeh.  The  puss  of  Babiti  nmst  have  lain  between  Gawardis  and  Biban,
facing  the  Kisse-tchai,  which  forms  the  western  branch  of  the  Eadanu.  Dagara  would  thus  be
represented  by  the  district  to  the  east  of  Kerkuk  at  the  foot  of  the  Kara-dagh.

'  Kakzi,  sometimes  read  Kalzi,  must  have  been  situated,  as  Oppert  has  pointed  out  {E.cpeditioH  en
MiSupotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  318;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Hisl.  ofSeiiuacherih,  pp.  1G5, 166;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  utidAss.,
p.  566,  n.  5),  at  Shemamek  or  Shamimik,  near  Hazeli,  to  the  south-west  of  Erbil,  the  ancient  Arbela,  at
the  spot  where  Jones  noticed  important  Assyrian  ruins  {Topography  of  Nineveh,  in  Jour,  of  It.  Asiatic
Soc.  vol.  XV.  p.  371)  excavated  by  Layard  {Nineveh  and  Bah.,  p.  189).  Bricks  from  Kakzi  are  mentioned
in  Eawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  IF.  As.,  vol.  i.  pis.  vii.  and  viii.,  H ;  cf.  Oppebt,  Exp.  en  M€sop.,  vol.  i.  p.  226.


ASSUR-XAZIR-PAL   IN  ZAMUA.


23


guard  the  booty,  while  he  dispersed  the  rest  to  pillage  the  country  on  all  sides.
One  expedition  led  him  to  the  mountain  group  of  Nizir,  at  the  end  of  the
chain  known  to  the  people  of  Lullume  as  the  Kinipa.'     He  there  reduced  to
ruins  seven   towns  whose  inhabitants  had  barricaded  themselves   in  urgent
haste,  collected  the  few  herds  of  cattle  he  could  find,  and  driving  them  back  to
the  camp,  set  out  afresh
towards  a  part   of  Nizir
as  yet  unsubdued  by  any
conqueror.     The   strong-
hold of  Larbusa  fell  be-
fore the  battering-ram,  to
be  followed  shortly  by  the
capture  of  Bara.     There-
upon the  chiefs  of  Zamua,
convinced  of  their  helpless-
ness, purchased  the  king's
departure  by  presents  of
horses,  gold,  silver,  and
corn."    Nurramman  alone
remained  impregnable  in  his  retreat  at  Nishpi,  and  an  attempt  to  oust  him
resulted  solely  in  the  surrender  of  the  fortress  of  Birutu.^      The  campaign,
far  from  having  been  decisive,  had  to  be  continued  during  the  winter  in  another
direction  where  revolts  had  taken  place, — in  Khudun,  in  Kissirtu,  and  in  tlie  fief
of  Arashtua,'*  all  three  of  which  extended  over  the  upper  valleys  of  the  lesser
Zab,   the   Eadanu,   the    Turnat,  and  their   affluents.     The   king   once   more
set  out  from  Kakzi,  crossed  the  Zab  and  the  Eadanu,  through  the  gorges  of
Babiti,  and  halting  on  the  ridges  of  Mount  Simaki,  peremptorily  demanded
tribute  from  Dagara.^     This  was,  however,  merely  a  ruse  to  deceive  the  enemy,

'  See  what  is  said  of  Nizir  in  the  Dawn  of  CiviUzaiion,  p.  570,  note  1 :  Mount  Kinipa  is  a  part  of
Nizir,  the  Khallchallin-dagh,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  direction  of  the  Assyrian  campaign.

''  None  of  these  places  can  be  identified  with  certainty.  The  gist  of  the  account  leads  us  to
gather  that  Bara  was  situated  to  'the  east  of  Dagara,  and  formed  its  frontier ;  we  shall  not  be  far
wrong  in  looking  for  all  these  districts  in  the  fastnesses  of  the  Kara-dagh,  in  the  caza  of  Suleima-
niyeh.     Mount  Nishpi  is  perhaps  the  Segirme-dagh  of  the  present  day.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  23-49 :  cf.  Peiser,  Inschriften  Aschur-ndsir-ahal's,  pp.  74-79.
The  Assyrian  compiler  appears  to  have  made  use  of  two  slightly  differing  accounts  of  this  campaign  ;
he  has  twice  repeated  the  same  facts  without  noticing  bis  mistake.

'  The  fief  of  Arashtua,  situated  beyond  the  Turnat,  is  probably  the  district  of  Suleimaniyeh
(HoMMEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  566-568) ;  it  is,  indeed,  at  this  place  only  that  the  upper  course
of  the  Turnat  is  sufficiently  near  to  that  of  the  Eadanu  to  make  the  marches  of  Assiu'-nazir-pal  in
the  direction  indicated  by  the  Assyrian  scribe  possible.  According  to  the  account  of  the  Annals
(col.  ii.  11.  54-59),  it  seems  to  me  that  we  must  seek  for  Khudun  and  Kissirtu  to  the  south  of  the
fief  of  Arashtua,  in  the  modern  cazas  of  Gulanbar  or  Shehrizor.

*  The  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal  go  on  to  mention  (col.  ii.  11.  82, 83)  that  Mount  Simaki  extended  as


t24         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

for  takin-   one   evening   the  lightest  of  his   chariots   and   the   best  of  his
horsemen,  he  galloped  all  night  without  drawing  rein,  crossed  the  Turnat  at
dawn  and  pushing  straight  forward,  arrived  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day
before  the  walls  of  Ammali,  in  the  very  heart  of  the  fief  of  Arashtua.^    The  town
vainly  attempted  a  defence;  the  whole  population  was  reduced  to  slavery  or
dispersed  in  the  forests,  the  ramparts  were  demolished,  and  the  houses  reduced
to  ashes.     Khudun  with  twenty,  and  Kissirtu  with  ten  of  its  villages,  Bara,
Kirtiara,   Dur-Lullume,   and   Bunisa,  offered  no   further  resistance,    and  the
invading  host  halted  within  sight  of  the  defiles  of  Khashmar.^     One  kinglet,
however"  Amika  of  Zamru,  showed  no  intention  of  capitulating.     Entrenched
behind  a  screen  of  forests  and  frowning  mountain  ridges,  he  fearlessly  awaited
the  attack      The  only  access  to  the  remote  villages  over  which  he  ruled,  was
by  a  few  rough  roads  hemmed  in  between  steep  cliffs  and  beds  of  torrents;
difficult  and  dangerous  at  ordinary  times,  they  were  blocked  in  war  by  temporary
barricades,  and  dominated  at  every  turn  by  some  fortress  perched  at  a  di.zy
height  above  them.     After  his  return  to  the  camp,  where  his  soldiers  were
allowed  a  short  respite,  Assur-nazir-pal  set  out  against  Zamru,  though  he  was
careful  not  to  approach  it  directly  and  attack  it  at  its  most  formidable  points
Between  two  peaks  of  the  Lara  and  Bidirgi  ranges  he  discovered  a  path  which
had  been  deemed  impracticable  for  horses,  or  even  for  heavily  armed  men.     By
this  route,  the  king,  unsuspected  by  the  enemy,  made  his  way  through  the  moun-
tains, and  descended  so  unexpectedly  upon  Zamru,  that  Amika  had  barely  ime  to
make  his  escape,  abandoning  everything  in  his  alarm-palace,  treasures,  harem,
and  even  his  chariot.^     A  body  of  Assyrians  pursued  him  hotly  beyond  the
fords  of  the  Lallu,  chasing  him  as  far  as  Mount  Itini ;  then,  retracing  then-  steps
to  headquarters,  they  at  once  set  out  on  a  fresh  track,  crossed  the  Idir  and
proceeded  to  lay  waste  the  plains  of  Ilaniu  and  Suani.*     Despairing  of  taking

,.  a.  tUe  Tu.nat.  and  that  it  .as  Oo.e  to  ^^^^^^  ^^^-^^::::':^:1^^
which  the  opening  of  the  campaign  is  described  (.'=°'- ";  ""  f '  ='^^;  g^'^^^^.j^^u.  The  fortress  of
SiniaM  ond  Azira  two  parts  of  the  Shehr.zor  «^""' P^^'^^^J^j^^J^  be  th    present  Guran-kaleh.

it  is,  at  all  events,  on  this  side  that  we  -^^fl'^ll^LT.oieni  Mount  Khashniar-Khashmir  in  the
"""fThif ;Jd'  Sdch  started  fiw  the  same  point  as  the  preceding  one  ran  eastwards  in  an  opposite

rerSlns  h;rnd:irand°Suleinianabad,  and  Itini  the  mountain  which  separates  this  river
''r  ?:LSf  :::'S -S^iBe  the  anient  name  of  Ilanin  in  that  of  Alan,  now  home  by  a  district  on


ZAMUA   REDUCED    TO   A   PROVINCE.


25


Amika  prisoner,  Assur-nazir-pal  allowed  him  to  lie  hidden  among  the
brushwood  of  Mount  Sabua,  while  he  himself  called  a  halt  at  Parsindu,^  and  set
to  work  to  organise  the  fruits  of  his  conquest.  He  placed  garrisons  in  the
principal  towns — at  Parsindu,  Zamru,  and  at  Arakdi  in  Lullume,  which  one  of
his    predecessors  had  re-named  Tukulti-Ashshur-azbat,^ — "I  have  taken  the


rUL   ZAB   BELOW  THE  PASSLs   ol'   ALAV,  THE   ANCIENT  ILANIU.^

help  of  Assur."  He  next  imposed  on  the  surrounding  country  an  annual
tribute  of  gold,  silver,  lead,  copper,  dyed  stuffs,  oxen,  sheep,  and  wine.  Envoys
from  neighbouring  kings  poured  in — from  Khudun,  Khubushkia,  and  (iilzan,
and  the  whole  of  Northern  Zamua  bowed  "before  the  splendour  of  his  arms  ;  "
it  now  needed  only  a  few  raids  resolutely  directed  against  Mounts  Azira  and
Simaki,  as  far  as  the  Turnat,  to  achieve  the  final  pacification  of  the  South.

tlie  Turlvisli  and  Persian  frontier,  situated  between  Kunekdji-dagli  and  tlie  town  of  Serdcsht.  The
expedition,  eomiug  from  the  tief  iif  Arashtua,  must  have  marched  northwards :  the  Idir  in  this  ease
must  be  the  Tchami-KiziUljik,  and  Mount  Sabua  tlie  cliain  of  mountains  above  Serdesht.

'  Parsindu,  mentioned  between  Mount  Ilaniu  and  tlie  town  of  Zamru,  ought  to  lie  somewhere  in
the  valley  of  Tchami-Kizildjik,  near  Murana.

^  The  approximate  site  of  Arakdi  is  indicated  in  the  itinerary  of  Assur-nazir-pal  itself  (^Annals,
col.  ii.  11.  70-78) ;  the  king  comes  from  Zamru  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Suleiinauabad,  crosses  Mount
Lara,  which  is  tlie  northern  part  of  the  Azmir-dagli,  and  arrives  at  Arakdi,  possibly  somewhere  in
Surtash.  In  the  course  of  the  preceding  campaign  {Annals,  col.  ii.  11.  48,  49),  after  having  laid  waste
Bara  (cf.  p.  23,  note  2),  he  set  out  from  this  same  town  (Arakdi)  to  subdue  Nishpi  (see  p.  28),  all  of
which  bears  out  the  position  I  have  indicated.  The  present  town  of  Baziau  would  answer  fu::.y  '.veil
for  the 'site  of  a  place  destined  to  protect  tlie  Assyrian  frontier  on  this  side.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Morgan ;  cf.  J.  de  Morgan,  Mission  en  Perse,
vol.  iv.  pi.  xxiv.,  and  vol.  ii.  pi.  iii.,  where  the  same  view  is  given  under  the  title  of  "  Valley  of  the
Lesser  Zab  at  Bechast."


26  THE   ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE   STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

While  in  this  neighbourhood,  his  attention  was  directed  to  the  old  town  of
Atlila,^  built  by  Sibir/  an  ancient  king  of  Karduuiash,  but  which  had  been
half  ruined  by  the  barbarians.  He  re-named  it  Dur-Assur,  "  the  fortress  of
Assur,"  and  built  himself  within  it  a  palace  and  storehouses,  in  which  he
accumulated  large  quantities  of  corn,  making  the  town  the  strongest  bulwark
of  his  power  on  the  Cossrean  border.  The  two  campaigns  of  B.C.  S82  and  881  had
cost  Assur-nazir-pal  great  efforts,  and  their  results  had  been  inadequate  to  the
energy  expended.  His  two  principal  adversaries,  Nurramman  and  Amika,  had
eluded  him,  and  still  preserved  their  independence  at  the  eastern  extremities  of
their  former  states.  Most  of  the  mountain  tribes  had  acknowledged  the  king's
supremacy  merely  provisionally,  in  order  to  rid  themselves  of  his  presence  ;  they
had  been  vanquished  scores  of  times,  but  were  in  no  sense  subjugated,  and  the
moment  pressure  was  withdrawn,  they  again  took  up  arms.  The  districts  of
Zamua  alone,  which  bordered  on  the  Assyrian  plain,  and  had  been  occupied  by
a  military  force,  formed  a  province,  a  kind  of  buffer  state  between  the  moun-
tain tribes  and  the  plains  of  the  Zab,  protecting  the  latter  from  incursions.

Assur-nazir-pal,  feeling  himself  tolerably  safe  on  that  side,  made  no  further
demands,  and  withdrew  his  battalions  to  the  westward  part  of  his  northern
frontier.  He  hoped,  no  doubt,  to  complete  the  subjugation  of  the  tribes  who  still
contested  the  possession  of  various  parts  of  the  Kashiari,  and  then  to  push  forward
his  main  guard  as  far  as  the  Euphrates  and  the  Arzania,  so  as  to  form  around
the  plain  of  Amidi  a  zone  of  vassals  or  tutelary  subjects  like  those  of  Zamua.
With  this  end  in  view,  he  crossed  the  Tigris  near  its  source  at  the  traditional
fords,  and  made  his  way  unmolested  in  the  bend  of  the  Euphrates  from  tlie
palace  of  Tilluli,  where  the  accustomed  tribute  of  Kummukh  was  brought  to
him,  to  the  fortress  of  Ishtarati,  and  from  thence  to  Kibaki.  The  town  of
Matiate,  having  closed  its  gates  against  him,  was  at  once  sacked,  and  this
example  so  stimulated  the  loyalty  of  the  Kurkhi  chiefs,  that  they  hastened  to
welcome  him  at  the  neighbouring  military  station  of  Zazabukha.  The  king's
progress  continued  thence  as  before,  broken  by  frequent  halts  at  the  most  favour-
able points   for   levying   contributions   on   the  inhabitants.^     Assur-nazir-pal

'  Given  its  position  on  the  Chaldsean  frontier,  Atlila  ia  probably  to  be  identified  with  tlie  Kcrkuk
of  the  present  day.

"  Hommel  is  inclined  to  believe  that  Sibir  was  the  immediate  predecessor  of  Xabubaliddin,  who
reigned  at  Babylon  at  the  same  time  as  Assur-nazir-pal  at  Nineveh  CGesch.  Bab.  unci  Ass.,  p.  570),  as
we  shall  see  further  ou  (p.  2S);  consequently  he  would  be  a  contemporary  of  Bamman-nirari  III.
and  of  Tukulti-ninip  II.  Peiser  and  Kost  have  identified  him,  as  we  have  seen,  with  Simmash-shikhu ;
see  p.  4,  note  8,  of  the  present  work.

'  It  is  difficult  to  place  any  of  these  localities  on  the  map :  they  ought  all  to  be  found  between
the  ford  of  the  Tigris,  at  Diarbekir  and  the  Euphrates,  probably  at  the  foot  of  the  Mihrab-dagh
and  the  Kirwantchemen-dagh.  Matiale  may  have  been  situated  at  Tchernik  (V.  Cciset,  La  Turquie
d'Asie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  492,  493),  and  Tilluli  near  the  environs  of  Lake  Geuldlik.  Eawlinson  places
Matiate  at  Midi-id  (T/ie  FU-e  Great  Monarchus,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  S6),  but  this  does  not  fall  in  with
the  facts  given  in  the  Assyrian  text.


ASSUR-NAZIB-PAV S  FOURTH  CAMPAIGN  IN  NAIRL  27

encountered  no  serious  difficulty  except  on  the  northern  slopes  of  the  Kashiari,
but  there  again  fortune  smiled  on  him  ;  all  the  contested  positions  were  soon
ceded  to  him,  including  even  Madara,  whose  fourfold  circuit  of  walls  did  not
avail  to  save  it  from  the  conqueror.^  After  a  brief  respite  at  Tushkhan,  he
set  out  again  one  evening  with  his  lightest  chariots  and  the  pick  of  his  horse-
men, crossed  the  Tigris  on  rafts,  rode  all  night,  and  arrived  unexpectedly  the
next  morning  before  Pitura,  the  chief  town  of  the  Dirraeans.'^  It  was  surrounded
by  a  strong  double  enceinte,  through  which  he  broke  after  forty-eight  hours  of
continuous  assault :  800  of  its  men  perished  in  the  breach,  and  700  others  were
impaled  before  the  gates.  Arbaki,  at  the  extreme  limits  of  Kirkhi,  was  the  next
to  succumb,  after  which  the  Assyrians,  having  pillaged  Dirra,  carried  the  passes
of  Matni  after  a  bloody  combat,  spread  themselves  over  Nairi,  burning  250  of
its  towns  and  villages,  and  returned  with  immense  booty  to  Tushkhan.  They  had
been  there  merely  a  few  days  when  the  news  arrived  that  the  people  of  Bit-
Zamani,  always  impatient  of  the  yoke,  had  murdered  their  jsrince  Ammibaal,
and  had  proclaimed  a  certain  Burramraan  in  his  place.  Assur-nazir-pal
marched  upon  Sinabu  ^  and  repressed  the  insurrection,  reaping  a  rich  harvest
of  spoil — chariots  fully  equipped,  600  draught-horses,  130  pounds  of  silver
and  as  much  of  gold,  6G0O  pounds  of  lead  and  the  same  of  copper,  19,800
pounds  of  iron,  stuffs,  furniture  in  gold  and  ivory,  2000  bulls,  500  sheep,  the
entire  harem  of  Ammibaal,  besides  a  number  of  maidens  of  noble  family  together
with  their  dresses.  Burramman  was  by  the  king's  order  flayed  alive,  and  Arteanu
his  brother  chosen  as  his  successor.  Sinabu  and  the  surrounding  towns  formed
part  of  that  network  of  colonies  which  in  times  past  Shalmaneser  I.  had
organised  as  a  protection  from  the  incursions  of  the  inhabitants  of  Nairi ;
Assur-nazir-pal  now  used  it  as  a  rallying-place  for  the  remaining  Assyrian
families,  to  whom  he  distributed  lands  and  confided  the  guardianship  of  the
neighbouring  strongholds.  The  results  of  this  measure  were  not  long  in
making  themselves  felt :  Shupria,  Ulliba,  and  Nirbu,  besides  other  districts,

'  Madara  belonged  to  a  certain  Lapturi,  son  of  Tubusi,  mentioned  in  the  campaigo  of  the  king's
second  year  {Annals,  col.  ii.  12,  13).  In  comparing  the  facts  given  in  the  two  passages,  we  see  it  was
situated  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Kashiari,  not  far  from  Tushkhan  on  one  side,  and  Ardupa — that
is  probably  Mardin  (cf.  p.  21,  note  2) — on  the  other.  The  position  of  Ottayeran,  or  of  one  of  the
"  tells"  in  its  neighbourhood,  answers  fairly  well  to  these  conditions.

'  According  to  the  details  given  in  the  Annals,  col.  ii.  11.  103-110,  we  must  place  the  town  of
Bitura  (or  Pitura)  at  about  19  mUes  from  Kurkh,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tigris,  in  a  north-
easterly direction,  and  consequently  the  country  of  Dirra  would  be  between  the  Hazu-tchai  and  the
Batmau-tchai.  The  Matni,  with  its  passes  leading  in  to  Xairi,  must  in  this  case  be  the  mountain
group  to  the  north  of  Mayafarrikin,  known  as  the  Dordoseh-dagh  or  the  Darkosh-dagli.

^  Hommel  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  575)  thinks  that  Sinabu  is  very  probably  the  same  as  tlie
Kiuabu  mentioned  above  (p,  19,  note  2) ;  but  it  appears  from  Assur-nazir-pal's  own  account  {Annals,
col.  i.  11.  102-110)  that  this  Kinabu  was  in  the  jn-ovince  of  Khalzidipkha  (Khalzilukha)  on  the
Kashiari,  whereas  Sinabu  was  in  Bit-Zamaui  {Monolith  of  Kurkh,  1.  42,  supplementing  the  Annals,
col.  ii.  n.  118-125).


28         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

paid  their  dues  to  the  king,  and  Shura  in  Khamann,^  which  had  for  some
time  lield  out  against  the  general  movement,  was  at  length  constrained  to
submit  ^  (880  B.C.).  However  high  we  may  rate  the  value  of  this  campaign,
it  was  eclipsed  by  the  following  one.  The  Aramaeans  on  the  Khabur  and  the
middle  Euphrates  had  not  witnessed  without  anxiety  the  revival  of  Ninevite
activity,  and  had  begged  for  assistance  against  it  from  its  rival.  Two  of
their  principal  tribes,  the  Sukhi  and  the  Laqi,  had  addressed  themselves  to  the
sovereign  then  reigning  at  Babylon.  He  was  a  restless,  ambitious  prince,
named  Nabu-baliddiu,  who  asked  nothing  better  than  to  excite  a  hostile  feeling
against  his  neighbour,  provided  he  ran  no  risk  by  his  interference  of  beiug
drawn  into  open  warfare.  He  accordingly  despatched  to  the  Prince  of  Sukhi
the  best  of  his  Cosssean  troops,  commanded  by  his  brother  Zabdanu  and  one
of  the  great  officers  of  the  crown,  Bel-baliddin.^  In  the  spring  of  879  B.C.,
Assur-nazii--pal  determined  once  for  all  to  put  an  end  to  these  intrigues.
He  began  by  inspecting  the  citadels  flanking  the  line  of  the  Kharmish*
and  the  Khabur, — Tabiti,"^  jMagarisi,"  Shadikanni,  Shuru  in  Bit-Khalupi,
and  Sirki.''  Between  the  embouchures  of  the  Khabur  and  the  Balikh,  the
Euphrates  winds  across  a  vast  table-land,  ridged  with  marly  hills ;  the  left
bank  is  dry  and  sterile,  shaded  at  rare  intervals  by  sparse  woods  of
poplars  or  groups  of  palms.  The  right  bank,  on  the  contrary,  is  seamed  with
fertile  valleys,  sufficiently  well  watered  to  permit  the  growth  of  cereals  and
the  raising  of  cattle.  The  river-bed  is  almost  everywhere  wide,  but  strewn
with  dangerous  rocks  and  sandbanks  which  render  navigation  perilous.  On
nearing  the  ruins  of  Halebiyeh,  the  river  narrows  as  it  enters  the  Arabian  hills,
and  cuts  for  itself  a  regular  defile  of  three  or  four  hundred  paces  in  length,

'  Shura  is  mentioned  on  the  return  to  Nalri  {Monolith  of  KurM,  1.  52),  possibly  on  tiie  road
leading  from  Amidi  and  TusUkLau  to  Nineveh.  Hoinmel  believes  that  the  country  of  Khamanu  was
the  Amanos  in  Cilicia,  and  he  admits,  but  unwillingly,  that  Assur-nazir-pal  made  a  detour  beyond
the  Euphrates  (_6escli.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  575,  576).  I  should  look  for  Shura,  and  consequently  for
Khamanu,  in  the  Tur-Abdin,  and  should  identify  them  with  Saur  (Sachau,  Eeise  in  Htjrien  wnd
Mesop.,  p.  421),  in  spite  of  the  difference  of  the  two  initial  articulations.

-  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  86-125,  supplemented  by  the  text  of  the  Monolith  of  Kurkh,
11.  42-54;  cf.  Peisek,  Insch.  Aschur-ndsir-ahaVs,  in  the  Keil.  Bihliotheli,  vol.  i.  pp.  84-95.

=  Annals,  etc.,  col.  iii.  11.  17-20,  in  the  Eeil  Bibl,  vol.  i.  pp.  98,  99.

*  The  Kharmish  has  been  identified  with  the  Hirmas,  the  river  flowing  by  Nisibis,  and  now  called
the  Nahr-Jaghjagha  (G.  Eawlixson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  p.  87,  note  2 ;  ScJtkadek,
Keilinschriften  und  Gescli.,  pp.  140-532).  Noldeke  dismisses  this  identification  by  reminding  bis
readers  that  Hirmas  is  an  abbreviation  of  Nahr-Mda  (_Z.  d.  D.  M.  (?.,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  328) ;  Hommel
justly  remarks  (Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  577,  note  2)  that  Nahr-Mas  is  the  popular  interpretation  of
the  old  name  Hirmas,  and  he  rightly  maintains  the  identity  of  Hirmas  with  Kharmish.

=  Tahiti  is,  as  Hommel  has  pointed  out  (Gesch.  Bab.  mid  Ass.,  p.  577),  the  Thebeta  (Thebet)  of
Koman  itineraries  and  Syrian  writers  (Noldeke,  Zwei  Yolker  Vorderasiens,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  M.  G.,  vol.
xxxiii.  pp.  157,  158),  situated,  according  to  Peutinger's  Table,  33  miles  from  Nisibis  and  52  from
Singara.  on  the  Nahr-Hesawy  or  one  of  the  neighbouring  wadys.

"  Magarisi  ought  to  be  found  on  the  present  Nahr-Jaghjagha,  near  its  confluence  with  the
Nahr-Jerrahi  and  its  tributaries;  unfortunately,  this  part  of  Mesopotamia  is  still  almost  entirely
unexplored,  and  no  satisfactory  map  of  it  exists  as  yet.

•  Sirki  is  Circesium  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khabur,  as  Fox  Talbot  was  the  first  to  point  out  {Assyrian
Texts,  p.  31).


ASSUS-NAZIE-PAL'S    CAMPAIGN   ON   THE  EUPEPiATES.


29


which  is  approached  by  the  pilots  with  caution.^  Assur-nazir-pal,  on  leaving
Sirki,  made  his  way  along  the  left  bank,  levying  toll  on  Supri,  Naqarabaui,
and  several  other  villages  in  his  course.  Here  and  there  he  called  a  halt
facing  some  town  on  the  opposite  bank,  but  the  boats  which  could  have  put


him  across  had  been  removed,  and  the  fords  were  too  well  guarded  to  permit
of  his  hazarding  an  attack.  One  town,  however,  Khindanu,  made  him  a  volun-
tary offering  which  he  affected  to  regard  as  a  tribute,  but  Kharidi  and  Anat
appeared  not  even  to  suspect  his  presence  in  their  vicinity,  and  he  continued
on  his  way  without  having  obtained  from  them  anything  which  could  be
construed  into  a  mark  of  vassalage.-     At  length,  on  reaching  Shuru,  Shadadu,

'  Chesnei',  The  Expedition  of  the  Survey  of  the  Ricers  Euphrates  and  Titjris,  vol.  i.  pp.  4S,  49,  417-
419;  Petees,  Nippur  or  Explorations  and  Adventures  on  the  Euphrates,  vol.  i.  pp.  108-114.  It  ia  at
this  defile  of  El-Hammeh  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  577),  and  not  at  that  of  Bircjik  at  the
end  of  the  Taurus  (Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  173),  that  we  must  place  the  Khinqi  sha
Purati — the  narrows  of  the  Euphrates — so  often  mentioned  in  the  account  of  this  campaign
(Annals,  etc.,  col.  iii.  11.  29,  30,  44).  The  aspect  presented  by  the  country  at  this  spot  is  shown  in
the  illustration  on  p.  25  of  Tlie  Struggle  of  the  Natiotis.

'  The  detailed  narrative  of  the  Annals  (col.  iii.  11.  13,  14)  informs  us  that  Assur-nazir-pal
encamped  on  a  mountain  between  Khindanu  and  Bit-Shabaia,  and  this  information  enables  us  to
determine  on  the  map  with  tolerable  certainty  the  localities  mentioned  in  this  campaign.  The
mountain  in  question  can  be  none  other  than  El-Hammeh,  the  only  one  met  with  on  this  bank  of
the  Euphrates  between  the  coutiuents  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Khabur  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und
Ass.,  p.  577).  Khindanu  is  therefore  identical  with  the  ruins  of  Tabus,  tlie  Dabansa  of  Ptolemy
(Sachau,  Beise  in  Sijrien,  pp.  267-269  ;  Peters,  Nippur,  vol.  i.  p.  108) ;  hence  Supri  and  Naqabaraui
are  situated  between  this  point  and  Sirki,  the  former  in  the  direction  of  Tayebeh,  tlie  latter  towards
El-Hoseiuiyeh.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ruins  of  Kabr  Abu-Atish  (Sachau,  Reise  in  Syrieii,  pp.  255, 266 ;
Peters,  Nippur,  vol.  i.  p.  108)  would  correspond  very  well  to  Bit-Shabaia :  is  the  name  of  Abu-Sbe'
borne  by  the  Arabs  of  that  neighbourhood  a  relic  of  that  of  Shabaia  ?  Kharidi  ought  in  that  case  to  be
looked  for  on  the  opposite  bank,  near  Abu-Subiii  and  Aksubi,  where  Chesney  (The  Expedition  of  the
Survey,  vol.  i.,  map)  points  out  ancient  remains.     A  day's  march  beyond  Kabr  Abu-Atish  brings  us  to


30  THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL    AND    TEE   STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

the  Prince  of  Sukbi,  trusting  in  his  Cossseans,  offered  him  battle ;  but  he  was
defeated  by  Assur-nazir-pal,  who  captured  the  King  of  Babylon's  brother,  forced
his  way  into  the  town  after  an  assault  lasting  two  days,  and  returned  to  Assyria
laden  with  spoil.^  This  might  almost  be  considered  as  a  repulse ;  for  no
sooner  had  the  king  quitted  the  country  than  the  Aramteans  in  their  turn
crossed  the  Euphrates  and  ravaged  the  plains  of  the  Khabur.-  Assur-nazir-pal
resolved  not  to  return  until  he  was  in  a  position  to  carry  his  arms  into  the
heart  of  tlie  enemy's  country.  He  built  a  flotilla  at  Shuru  in  Bit-Khalupi  on
which  he  embarked  his  troops.  Wherever  the  navigation  of  the  Euphrates
proved  to  be  difScult,  the  boats  were  drawn  up  out  of  the  water  and  dragged
along  the  banks  over  rollers  until  they  could  again  be  safely  launched ;  thus,
partly  afloat  and  partly  on  land,  they  passed  through  the  gorge  of  Halebiyeh,
landed  at  Kharidi,  and  inflicted  a  salutary  punishment  on  the  cities  which  had
defied  the  king's  wrath  on  his  last  expedition.  Khindanu,  Kharidi,  and  Kipina
were  reduced  to  ruins,  and  the  Sukhi  and  the  Laqi  defeated,  the  Assyrians
pursuing  them  for  two  days  in  the  Bisuru  mountains  as  far  as  the  frontiers  of
Bit-Adini.^  A  complete  submission  was  brought  about,  and  its  permanency
secured  by  the  erection  of  two  strongholds,  one  of  which,  Kar-assur-nazir-jjal, com-
manded the  left,  and  the  other,  Nibarti-assur,  the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates.^
This  last  expedition  had  brought  the  king  into  contact  with  the  most  im-
portant of  the  numerous  Aramaean  states  congregated  in  the  western  region  of
Mesopotamia.  This  was  Bit-Adini,  which  lay  on  both  sides  of  the  middle
course  of  the  Euphrates.®     It  included,    on  the  right  bank,  to  the  north  of

El-Khass,  so  that  the  town  of  Anat  (Hat  in  Peiser,  Iiischrijten  Aschur,  etc.,  pp.  9S,  99)  would  be  in
the  Isle  of  Moglah,  as  Hommel  supposes  (^Gesch.  Bab.  mid  Ass.,  p.  57).  Shuru  must  be  somewhere
near  one  of  the  two  Tell-Menakhirs  on  this  side  the  Balikh.

'  Annals,  col.  iii.  11.  1-lG;  cf.  Peiseu,  Inschriften  Aschur.,  etc.,  pp.  96-99.

'  The  Annals  do  not  give  us  either  the  limmu  or  the  date  of  the  year  for  this  new  expedition
(col.  iii.  II.  26-28).  The  facts  taken  altogether  prove  that  it  was  a  continuation  of  the  preceding
one,  and  it  may  therefore  be  placed  in  the  year  B.C.  878  (Tiele,  Bab.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  174,  175;
HoMJiEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  578 ;  Delitzsch  and  MObdtei:,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  164  ;
"Winckler,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  184,  185).

=  The  campaign  of  B.C.  878  had  for  its  arena  that  part  of  the  Euphratts  wliich  lies  between  the
Kliabur  and  the  Balikh,  and  not,  as  Hommel  thinks  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  578),  the  course  of  the
Euphrates  below  the  mouth  of  the  Khabur ;  this  time,  however,  the  principal  opej-ations  took  place  on
the  right  bank.  If  Mount  Bisuru  is  the  Jebel-Bishri  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  579),  the  town  of
Kipina,  which  is  mentioned  between  it  and  Kharidi,  ought  to  be  located  between  Maidan  a-nd  Sabklia.

*  Annals,  col.  iii.  U.  26-50,  where  the  account  is  confused,  and  contains  perhaps  some  errors  with
regard  to  the  facts,  as  Tiele  has  pointed  out  (Bah.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  184,  185).  The  site  of  the  twr>
towns  is  nowhere  indicated,  but  a  study  of  the  map  shows  that  the  Assyrians  could  not  become
masters  of  the  country  without  occupying  the  passes  of  the  Euphrates  ;  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
Kar-assur-nazir-pal  is  El-Halobiyeb,  and  Nibarti-assur,  Zalebiyeh,  the  Zenobia  of  Eoman  times.  For
the  ruins  of  these  towns,  cf.  Sachau,  Beise  in  Syrien  und  Mesop.,  pp.  256-259,  and  Peters,  Nippur
or  Explorations  and  Adventures  on  the  Euphrates,  vol.  i.  pp.  109-114.

^  Of.  what  I  have  already  said  in  the  Strwjgle  of  the  Nations,  p.  590,  note  9.  Bit-Adini  appears
to  have  occupied,  on  the  right  bank  of -the  Euphrates,  a  part  of  the  cazas  of  Ain-Tab,  Rum-kaleh,  and
Birejik,  that  of  Suriiji,  minus  the  nakhiyeh  of  Harran,  the  larger  part  of  the  cazas  of  Membij
and  of  Bakkah,  and  part  of  the  caza  of  Zor,  the  cazas  being  those  represented  on  the  maps  of  Vital
CrixET,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii.


THE  SUBMISSION   OF   BIT-ALIA'I.  31

Carchemish,  between  the  bills  on  the  Sajur  and  Araban-Su,  a  mountainoiis  but
fertile  district,  dotted  over  with  towns  and  fortresses,  the  names  of  some  of  which
have  been  preserved — Pakarrukhbuni,  Sursunu,  Paripa,  Dabigu,and  Shitamrat.'
Tul-Bavsip,  the  capital,  was  situated  on  the  left  bank,  commanding  the  fords
of  the  modern  Birejik,^  and  the  whole  of  the  territory  between  this  latter  and
the  Balikli  acknowledged  the  rule  of  its  princes,  whose  authority  also  extended
eastwards  as  far  as  the  basaltic  plateau  of  Tul-Aba,  in  the  Mesopotamian  desert.
To  the  south-east,  Bit-Adini  bordered  upon  the  country  of  the  Sukhi  and  the
Laqi,^  lying  to  the  east  of  Assyria;  other  principalities,  mainly  of  Aramseau  origin,
formed  its  boundary  to  the  north  and  north-west — Shugab  in  the  bend  of  the
Euphrates,  from  Birejik  to  Samosata,*  Tul-Abni  around  Edessa,^  the  district
of  Harran,^  Bit-Zamani,  Izalla  in  the  Tektek-dagh  and  on  the  Upper  Khabur,''
and  Bit-Bakhiani  in  the  plain  extending  from  the  Khabur  to  the  Kharmish.^
Bit-Zamani  had  belonged  to  Assyria  by  right  of  conquest  ever  since  the  death
of  Ammibaal;^  Izalla  and  Bit-Bakhiani  had  fulfilled  their  duties  as  vassals
whenever  Assur-nazir-pal  had  appeared  in  their  neighbourhood ;  ^^  Bit-Adini
alone  had  remained  independent,  though  its  strength  was  moie  apparent
than  real.  .The  districts  which  it  included  had  never  been  able  to  form  a
basis  for  a  powerful  state.^^  If  by  chance  some  small  kingdom  arose  within
it,  uniting  under  one  authority  the  tribes  scattered  over  the  burning  plain
or  along  tiie  river  banks,  the  first  conquering  dynasty  which  sprang  up  in  the

'  Fb.  Delitzsch,  M'o  lag  das  Paradiesi  p.  264.  None  of  these  localities  can  be  identified  with
certainty,  except  perhaps  Dabigu,  a  name  we  may  trace  iu  that  of  the  modern  village  of  Dehljek.

^  The  identification  of  Tul-Barsip  with  Birejik,  proposed  by  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,
p.  34,  has  been  adopted  by  Schrader,  Keilinscliriften  and  Gesch.,  p.  219,  note  2,  by  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag
das  Paradiesi  p.  1G3,  and  by  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  and  Ass.,  p.  607.

^  In  his  previous  caujpaign  Assur-nazir-pal  had  taken  two  towns  of  Bit-Adini,  situated  ou  the  right
bank  of  the  Euphrates,  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  Mount  Bisuru  (for  this  mouutaiu  cf.  ji.  311,
note  3),  near  the  frontier  of  the  Lai|i  (Annah,  col.  iii.  11.  41-44).

'  The  country  of  Sliugab  is  mentioned  between  Birejik  (Tul-Earsiij)  and  Bit-Zamani,  in  one
of  the  campaigns  of  Shalmaneser  III.  (Monolith,  col.  ii.  11.  40,  41),  which  obliges  us  to  place  it  in  the
caza  of  Eum-kaleh ;  the  name  has  been  read  Sumu  (Winoklek,  Inschriften  Salmanassar' s  II.,  iu
Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  164,  165).

*  Tul-Abni,  which  was  at  first  sought  for  near  the  sources  of  the  Tigris  (Idem.,  ibid.,
\i.  195,  note  4),  has  been  placed  in  the  Mesopotamian  plain  by  Honimel  {Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  579,
note  3)  and  by  Delattre  {L'Asie  Occidenlale,  pp.  IS,  19).  The  position  which  it  occupies  among  the
other  names  (Annals,  col.  iii.  11.  55,'56,  63,  64)  obliges  us  to  put  it  near  Bit-Adini  and  Bit-Zamani :
the  only  possible  site  that  I  can  find  for  it  is  at  Orfah,  the  Bdessa  of  classicil  times.

"  The  country  of  Harran  is  nowhere  mentioned  as  belonging  either  to  Bit-Adini  or  to  Tul-Abni :
we  must  hence  conclude  that  at  this  period  it  formed  a  little  principality  independent  of  those  two
states.

■   For  Izalla,  cf.  p.  19,  note  4.

'  The  situation  of  Bit-BakUiaui  is  shown  by  the  position  which  it  occupies  in  the  account  of  the
campaign,  and  by  the  names  associated  with  it  in  another  passage  of  the  Anyials,  col.  ii.  11.  21-23
(ScHEADBR,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  74,  75).

°  See  the  mention  made  of  this  personage  above  on  p.  21.

'»  AnnaU,  col.  i.  1.  106,  col.  ii.  11.  21-23.

"  Tills  point  has  been  elucidated  by  Noldeke,  Harran,  in  tlie  Zeitschri/t  fur  Ass.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  107-
109;  cf.,  for  a  contrary  opinion,  Wincklek,  Jit.  Furschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  380,  et  seq.


32         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

neighbourhood  would  be  sure  to  eifect  its  downfall,  and  absorb  it  under  its  own
leadership.  As  Mitani,  saved  by  its  remote  position  from  bondage  to  Egypt,
had  not  been  able  to  escape  from  acknowledging  the  supremacy  of  the  Khati,'
so  Bit-Adini  was  destined  to  fall  almost  without  a  struggle  under  the  yoke  of
the  Assyrians.  It  was  protected  from  their  advance  by  the  volcanic  groups  of
the  TJraa  and  Tul-Aba,  which  lay  directly  in  the  way  of  the  main  road  from
the  marshes  of  the  Khabur  to  the  outskirts  of  Tul-Barsip.  Assur-nazir-pal,
who  might  have  worked  round  this  Hue  of  natural  defence  to  the  north  through
Nirbu,  or  to  the  south  through  his  recently  acquired  province  of  Laqi,  preferred
to  approach  it  in  front ;  he  faced  the  desert,  and,  in  spite  of  the  drought,  he
invested  the  strongest  citadel  of  Tul-Aba  in  the  month  of  June,  877  b.c.  The
name  of  the  place  was  Kaprabi,  and  its  inhabitants  believed  it  impregnable,
clinging  as  it  did  to  the  mountain-side  "like  a  cloud  in  the  sky."^  The  king,
however,  soon  demolished  its  wails  by  sapping  and  by  the  use  of  the  ram,
killed  800  of  its  garrison,  burned  its  houses,  and  carried  off  2400  men  with
their  families,  whom  he  installed  in  one  of  the  suburbs  of  Calah.  Akhuni,  who
was  then  reigning  in  Bit-Adini,  had  not  anticipated  that  the  invasion  would
reach  his  neighbourhood :  he  at  once  sent  hostages  and  purchased  peace  by  a
tribute ;  the  Lord  of  Tul-Abni  followed  his  example,  and  the  dominion  of
Assyria  was  carried  at  a  blow  to  the  very  frontier  of  the  Khati.-^  It  was
about  two  centuries  before  this  that  Assurirba  had  crossed  these  frontiers
with  his  vanquished  army,  but  the  remembrance  of  his  defeat  had  still
remained  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the  people,*  as  a  warning  to  the  sovereign
who  should  attempt  the  old  hazardous  enterprise,  and  repeat  the  exploits  of
Sargon  of  Agade  or  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  Assur-nazir-pal  made  careful  pre-
parations for  this  campaign,  so  decisive  a  one  for  his  own  prestige  and  for
the  future  of  the  empire.  He  took  with  him  not  only  all  the  Assyrian  troops
at  his  disposal,  but  requisitioned  by  the  way  the  armies  of  his  most  recently
acquired  vassals,  incorporating  them  with  his  own,  not  so  much  for  the  purpose
of  augmenting  his  power  of  action,  as  to  leave  no  force  in  his  rear  when  once  he
was  engaged  hand  to  hand  with  the  Syrian  legions.  He  left  Calah  in  the  latter
days  of  April,  876  b.c.,^  receiving  the  customary  taxes  from  Bit-Bakhiani,  Izalla,

'  Cf.  for  these  facts  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  35S,  590.

^  The  name  is  commonly  interpreted  "Great  Rock,"  and  divided  thus — Kap-rabi  (Fr.  Delitzsch,
Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  264 ;  HoMMEL,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  579).  It  may  also  be  considered,  like
Kapridargila  (Fk.  Dklitzsch,  ibid.,  p.  164)  or  Kapranisha  (^Annals,  col.  ii.  1.  89),  as  being  formed  of
Kapru  and  ahi ;  this  latter  element  appears  to  exist  in  the  ancient  name  of  Telaba,  Thallaba,  now
Tul-Aba.     Kapr-abi  might  be  a  fortress  of  the  province  of  Tul-Aba.

^  Annals,  col.  iii.  11.  50-50 ;  cf.  Peisee,  Inschriften  Aschur.,  etc.,  pp.  102-105.

*  For  Assurirba,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  665.  The  fact  of  his  defeat  is  known  only  from
a  passage  on  the  Monolith  of  Shalmaneser  III.  (11.  37,  yS).

'  On  the  Sth  lyyar  ^Annals,  col.  iii.  1.   56),  but  without  any  indication  of  limmti,  or  any  number


NORTHERN,  SYRIA   AT  THE    OPENING    OF   THE  NINTH   CENTURY.       33


and  Bit-Adini,  which  comprised  horses,  silver,  gold,  copper,  lead,  precious
stuffs,  vessels  of  copper  and  furniture  of  ivory  ;  having  reached  Tul-Barsip,  he
accepted  the  gifts  offered  by  Tul-Abni,  and  crossing  the  Euphrates  upon  rafts
of  inflated  skins,  he  marched  his  columns  against  Carchemish.^

The  political  organisation  of  Northern  Syria  had  remained  entirely  un-
altered since  the  days
when  Tiglath  -  pileser
made  his  first  victorious
inroad  into  the  country.
Tiie  Cilician  empire
which  succeeded  to  the
Assyrian — if  indeed  it
ever  extended  as  far  as
some  suppose— did  not
last  long  enough  to  dis-
turb the  balance  of  power
among  the  various  races
occupying  Syria  :  it  had
subjugated  them  for  a
time,  but  had  not  been
able  to  break  them  up
and  reconstitute  them.^
At  the  downfall  of  the
Cilician  Empire  the  small
states  were  still  intact,
and  occupied,  as  of  old,
the  territory  comprising
the  ancient  Naharaim  of
slopes  of  Taurus,  and  the  plains  of  Cilicia.  Of  these  states,  the  most  famous,
though  not  then  the  most  redoubtable,  was  that  with  which  the  name  of  the
Khati  is  indissolubly  connected,  and  which  had  Carchemish  as  its  capital.  This
ancient  city,  seated  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  still  maintained  its  supre-
macy there,  but  though  its  wealth  and  religious  ascendency  were  undiminished,
its  territory  had  been  curtailed.  The  people  of  Bit-Adini  had  intruded  them-
selves   between    this    state    and    Kummukh,  Arazik    hemmed    it    in    on    the

of  the  year  or  of  the  campaign ;  the  date  876  B.C.  is  admitted  by  the  majority  of  historians  (Ed.
Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  409 ;   Hommel,  Geschichte  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  580).

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  coL  iii.  11.  50-64 ;  cf.  Peiser,  Die  Inschriften  Aschur-nasir-ahal's,
pp.  104,  105.

'  For  the  state  of  Syria  in  the  time  of  tlie  wars  of  Tiglath-pUeser  I.,  cf.  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  pp.  588-592,  G56-658 ;  on  the  subject  of  the  Cilician  empire,  cf.  pp.  667-669  of  the  same  work.


the  Egyptians,  the
plateau  between
the  Orontes  and
the  Euphrates,
the  forests  and
marshy  lowlands
of  the  Amanos,
the        southern


34         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

south,  Khazazu  aud  Khalmau  confined  it  ou  the  west,  so  that  its  sway  was  only
freely  exercised  iu  the  basin  of  the  Sajur.^  On  the  north-west  frontier  of  the
Khati  lay  Gurguru,  whose  princes  resided  at  Marqasi  aud  ruled  over  the  central
valley  of  the  Pyramos  together  with  the  entire  basin  of  the  Ak-su.  Mikhri,^
laudi,  and  Samalla  lay  on  the  banks  of  the  Saluara,  and  in  the  forests  of  the
Amanos  to  the  south  of  Gurgum.  Kui  maintained  its  uneventful  existence
amid  the  pastures  of  Gilicia,  near  tlie  marshes  at  the  mouth  of  the  Pyramos.^  To
the  south  of  the  Sajur,  Bit-Agusi  *  barred  the  way  to  the  Oroutes ;  and  from
their  lofty  fastness  of  Arpad,  its  chiefs  kept  watch  over  the  caravan  road,  and
closed  or  opened  it  at  their  will.  They  held  the  key  of  Syria,  and  though
their  territory  was  small  in  extent,  their  position  was  so  strong  that  for  more


BAS-RELIEF   FROM   A   BUILDING   AT  SINJIKLI.'

than  a  century  and  a  half  the  majority  of  the  Assyrian  generals  preferred  to
avoid  this  stronghold  by  making  a  detour  to  the  west,  rather  than  pass  beneath
its  walls.  Scattered  over  the  plateau  ou  the  borders  of  Agusi,  or  hidden  in
the  valleys  of  Amanos,  were  several  less  important  principalities,  most  of  them
owing  allegiance  to  Lubarna,  at  that  time  king  of  the  Patina  and  the  most

'  The  territory  of  the  Khati  has  been  determineJ  with  precision  by  Scuradek,  Ktilinschriften  und
Gescldchts/orschung,  pp.  22l-23(i;  Assur-nazir-pal  understands  by  this  name  merely  the  kingdom  of
Carchemish  (Fk.  Delitzsch,.  Wo  Jag  das  Faradies '?  pp.  269,  270).

-  Mikhi'i  or  Ismikhri,  i.e.  ''the  country  of  larches,"  was  the  name  of  a  part  of  the  Amanos,  possibly
near  tlie  Pyramos  (Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  S30,  531 ;  cf.  Delattke,  L'Asie
Occidentale  dans  les  ImcHptions  Assyr.,  p.  50).

=  For  the  countries  of  Gurgum,  Samalla,  aud  Kui,  ef.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  590 ;  Sachau,
Inschri/t  des  Konigs  Fanammu,  iu  the  Ausgrabungen  in  Seudschirli,  vol.  i.  p.  58 ;  ai.d  Winoklee,
Altorienlaliiche  Funchungen,  vol.  i.  p.  1,  et  seq.

*  The  real  name  of  the  country  was  lakhanu  (Anuals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  1.  77),  but  it  was
called  BIt-Gusi  or  Bit-Agusi,  like  Bit-Adiui,  Bit-Bakhiaui,  Bit-Omri,  after  the  founder  of  the
reigning  dynasty  (Sohkadek,  Ktilinsch.  und  Gesch.,  p.  207,  note).  Delattre  (L'Asie  Occid.  dans
les  Inscr.  Assyr.,  pp.  52,  53)  places  lakhanu  near  the  sources  of  the  Kara-su  aud  tlie  Afrin ;  we
must  rather  place  it  to  the  south  of  Azaz,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arpad,  with  this  town  as  its
capital  (WiNOKLER,  Alt.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  8;  Maspero,  Notes  aujour  lejour,  §  o2,  in  tlie  Froceedings
of  the  Bjbl.  Arch.  Soc,  1898,  vol.  xx.  pp.  131-133).

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by  Pekeot  aud  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'art  dans  V Antiiiuit€,
vol.  iv.  p.  531;  cf.  Lcschan,  Ausgrah.  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  1.  p.  11.


THE   SYRIAN  STATES  AND    THEIR    CIVILISATION.


35


powerful  sovereign  of  the  district.  The  Patina  had  apparently  replaced  the
Alasia  of  Egyptian  times,  as  Bit-Adini  had  superseded  Mitani ;  the  fertile
meadow-lands  to  the  south  of  Samalla  on  the  Afrin  and  the  Lower  Orontes,
together  with  the  mountainous  district  between  the  Orontes  and  the  sea  as  far
as  the  neighbourhood  of  Eleutheros,  also  belonged  to  the  Patina.  On  the
southern  frontier  of  the  Patina  lay  the  important  Phoenician  cities,  Arvad,


JIBKIN,    A    VILLAGE    OF    CONICAL   HDTS,    ON    THE   I'LATEAU    OF    ALEI'l'O.'

Arka,  and  Sina ;  and  on  the  south-east,  the  fortresses  belonging  to  Hamath
and  Damascus.^  The  characteristics  of  the  country  remained  unchanged.*
Fortified  towns  abounded  on  all  sides,  as  well  as  large  walled  villages  of  conical
huts,  like  those  whose  strange  outlines  on  the  horizon  are  familiar  to  the
traveller  at  the  present  day.  The  manners  and  civilisation  of  Chaldsea
pervaded  even  more  than  formerly  the  petty  courts,  but  the  artists  clung
persistently  to  Asianic  tradition,  and  the  bas-reliefs  which  adorned  the  palaces
and  temples  were  similar  in  character  to  those  we  find  scattered  throughout  Asia
Minor ;  *  there  is  the  same  inaccurate  drawing,  the  same  rough  execution,  the
same  tentative  and  awkward  composition.  The  scribes  from  force  of  custom  still
employed  the  cuneiform  syllabary  in  certain  official  religious  or  royal  inscriptions,
but,  as  it  was  difficult  to  manipulate  and  limited  in  application,  the  speech  of
the  Aram;t'au   immigrants  and  the  Phoenician   alphabet  gradually  superseded

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pUotograph  reproduced  in  Peteks,  Nippur  or  Explorations  and
Adventures  on  the  Euphrates,  vol.  i.  p.  SI ;  ct".  Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  94.

-  For  tlio  Patiua,  of.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  589.  The  limits  of  this  country  have  been
indicated  by  Sourader,  Keilinschr.  und  Gesch.,  pp.  •214-221,  by  Delattre,  VAsie  Occid.  dans  les
Inscr.  Assijr.,  pp.  4.'J-o2,  aud  by  Winckler,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  3,  et  seq.

'  For  the  state  of  the  country  at  the  time  of  the  first  Assyrian  conquest,  cf.  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  p.  5S8.

'  Cf  what  is  said  about  this  Asianic  art  in  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  647-653.


36         THE   ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

the  ancient  language  and  mode  of  writing.^  Thus  these  Northern  Syrians
became  by  degrees  assimilated  to  the  people  of  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  much  as
the  inhabitants  of  a  remote  province  nowadays  adapt  their  dress,  their  archi-
tecture, their  implements  of  husbandry  and  handicraft,  their  military  equipment

and  organisation,  to  the
'  'iC  '*2  1  fashions  of  the  capital."^
^  *  Their  armies  were  mo-
delled on  similar  lines,
and  consisted  of  archers,
pikemen,  slingers,  and
those  troops  of  horsemen
which  accompanied  the
chariotry  on  flying  raids ;  ^
the  chariots,  moreover,
closely  followed  the  As-
syrian type,  even  down  to
""■^vt  Z\  the  padded  bar  with  em-
broidered  hangings  which
connected  the  body  of  the
chariot  with  the  end  of
the  pole.  The  Syrian
princes  did  not  adopt  the
tiara,  but  they  wore  the
long  fringed  robe,  confined
by  a  girdle  at  the  waist,
and  their  mode  of  life,
with  its  ceremonies,  duties,
and  recreations,  differed  little  from  that  prevailing  in  the  palaces  of  Calah
or  Babylon.  They  hunted  big  game,  including  the  lion,  according  to  the
laws  of  the  chase  recognised  at  Nineveh,  priding  themselves  as  much  on  their

'  There  is  no  monument  bearing  an  in8cription  in  this  alphabet  which  can  be  referred  with  any
certainty  to  the  time  of  Aasur-nazir-pal,  but  the  iaseriptions  of  the  kings  of  Samalla  date  back  to  a  period
not  more  than  a  century  and  a  lialf  later  than  his  reign  (Sachau,  Inschr.  des  Kdnigs  Panammu.  in
Au^grab.  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pp.  81-S4) ;  we  may  therefore  consider  the  Aramsan  alphabet  as
being  in  current  use  in  Northern  Syria  at  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  some  forty  years  before
the  dale  of  Mesha's  inscription  (i.e.  the  Moabite  stone).

-  One  can  judge  of  their  social  condition  from  the  enumeration  of  the  objects  which  formed  their
tribute  {Annah  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  11.  65-68,  71,  73-76,  78;  Monolith  of  Shalmaneser  III.,
col.  i.  1.  41,  col.  ii.  11.  12,  13,  20-30,  82-86),  or  the  spoil  which  the  Assyrian  kings  carried  off  from
their  country.

'  The  composition  of  the  Syrian  armies  is  determined  by  various  passages  in  the  Annals  of  Assur-
nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  11.  68,  69,  77.

■"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  bas-relief  not  yet  published,  discovered  by  Fossey  and  Perdrizet.


I


THE    WAK-CHARIOT    OP   THE   KHATI    OF   THE   XISTH    CEKTOEY.'


SmiAN  ARTS,   ARMIES,   AND   RELIGIONS.


37


exploits  in  hunting,  as  on  their  triumphs  in  war.     Their  religion  was  derived
from  the  common   source  which  underlay  all   Semitic   religions,  but  a  con-


THE  ASSTKIAN  WAR-CHAEIOT   OP   THE  NINTH  CENTURY   B.C.'

siderable  number  of  Babylonian  deities  were  also  worshipped  ;  these  had  been
introduced  in  some  cases  without  any  modification,  whilst  in  others  they  had


A   KING  OF  THE  KHATI  HUNTING  A   LION  IN   HIS   CHARIOT.^

been  assimilated  to  more  ancient  gods  bearing  similar  characteristics  :  at  Nerab,
among  the  Patina,  Nusku  and  his  female  companion  Nikal,  both  of  Chaldsean
origin,  claimed  the  homage  of  the  faithful,  to  the  disparagement  of  Shahr

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gadin,  from  a  bronze  baa-relief  on  the  gates  of  Balawat.
-  Drawn   by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Hogarth,  published  in  the  Eeeueil  de   Travaux,
vol.  xvii.  p.  25.


THE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STItUOGLE  FOE    STBTA.


the  moon  and  Shamash  the  sun.^  Local  cults  often  centred  round  obscure
deities  held  in  little  account  by  the  dominant  races;  thus  Samalla  reverenced
Uru  the  light,  Kekubel  the  wind,  the  chariot  of  El,  not  to  mention  El
himself,  Eesheph,  Hadad,  and  the  Cabiri,  the  servants  of
Resheph.2  These  deities  were  mostly  of  the  Assyrian
type,  and  if  one  may  draw  any  conclusion  from  the
few  representations  of  them  already  discovered,  their
rites  must  have  been  celebrated  in  a  manner  similar  to
that  followed  in  the  cities  on  the  Lower  Euphrates.
Scarcely  any  signs  of  Egyptian  influence  survived,
though  here  and  there  a  trace  of  it  might  be  seen  in  the
figures  of  calf  or  bull,  the  vulture  of  Mut  or  the  sparrow-
hawk  of  Horns.  Assur-nazir-pal,  marching  from  the
banks  of  the  Khabur  to  Bit-Adini,  and  from  Bit-Adini
passing  on  to  Northern  Syria,  might  almost  have
imagined  himself  still  in  his  own  dominions,  so  gradual
and  imperceptible  were  the  changes  in  language  and
civilisation  in  the  country  traversed  between  Nineveh
and  Assur,  Tul-Barsip  and  Samalla.

His  expedition  was  unattended  by  danger  or  blood-
shed. Lubarna,  the  reigning  prince  of  the  Patina,
was  possibly  at  that  juncture  meditating  the  formation
of  a  Syrian  empire  under  his  rule.  Unki,  in  which  lay
Ids  capital  of  Kunulua,  was  one  of  the  richest  countries
of  Asia,*  being  well  watered  by  the  Afrin,  Orontes,  and
Saluara ;  ^  no  fields  produced  such  rich  harvests  as  his,  no  meadows  pastured
such  cattle  or  were  better  suited  to  the  breeding  of  war-horses.     His  mountain  .


THE    uuLi    iiAl.Al..


1  Clebmont-Ganneau,  i:tudes  d' Archeologie  Orientale,  vol.  ii.  pp.  182-223 ;  Hoffmann,  Aramaliche
Iiischriften  aus  Ngral)  lei  Aleppo,  in  the  Zeitschrift  far  Assyriologie,  vol.  xi.  pp.  258-272 ;  Jensen,
Mk{k)al-SdMrratu,  in  the  Zeitschr.  fur  Assyr.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  293-301.

-  For  these  gods,  who  are  enumerated  in  the  Aramiean  inscriptions  at  Sinjirii,  of.  Halevy,  Les
deux  InscrqMons  heteennes  de  Zindjirli,  in  the  Eevue  Simitique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  25-31.

^  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  in  Luschan,  Ausgrah.  in  Sendgchirli,  vol.  i.  pi.  vi.

*  The  Unki  of  the  Assyrians,  the  Uniuqa  of  the  Egyptians  (Makiette,  Karnah,  pi.  20,  No.  147),  is
the  valley  of  Antioch,  the  'AjuiJktjs  mhlov  of  Polybius  (v.  59),  the  Amk  of  the  present  day  (Satce,
Monuments  of  the  Hiitites,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  292  ;  Fr.  Lenormant.
Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  324;  Tomkins,  Notes  on  the  Geography  of  Northern  Syria,  in  the
Babyl.  and  Orient.  Record,  vol.  iii.  p.  6 ;  Winokler,  AUorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  9).  Kunulua  or  Kinalia,
the  capital  of  the  Patina,  has  been  identified  with  the  Gindaros  of  Greek  times  (Satce,  Mon.  of
the  Hiitites,  in  the  Transactions,  vol.  vii.  p.  292) ;  I  prefer,  with  Tomkins  {Notes  on  the  Geography  of
Northern  Syria,  p.  6),  to  identify  it  with  the  existing  Tell-Kunana,  written  for  Tell-Kun^Ia  by  the
commonlsubstitution  of  n  for  I  at  the  end  of  proper  names.

=  The  Saluara  of  the  Assyrian  texts  is  the  present  Kara-su,  which  flows  into  the  Ak-Deniz,  the
lake  of  Antioch  (Delattre,  L'Asie  Occid.  dajis  les  Inscr.  Assyr.,  p.  52 ;  Sachau,  Zur  historischen
Geographie  von  Nordayrien,  pp.  17-24 ;  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  7,  note  3).


SUBMISSIOX   OF  THE  HITTITE  STATES  AND    THE  PATINA.


39


RELIGIOCS   SCEJTE   DISPLAYING   EGYPTIAN   FEATURES.'


provinces  yielded  him  wood  and  minerals,  and  provided  a  reserve  of  semi-savage
woodcutters  and  herdsmen   from  which   to  recruit  his  numerous   battalions.
The  neighbouring   princes,  filled  with   uneasiness  or  jealousy   by   his  good
fortune,  saw  in   the  Assyrian  monarch  a  friend  and  a  liberator  rather  than
an   enemy.      Carchemish    opened   its   gates   and   laid   at   his   feet   the   best
of  its  treasures — twenty  talents  of  silver,  ingots,  rings  and  daggers  of  gold,
a    hundred    talents  of   copper,   two   hundred    talents   of  iron,   bronze    bulls,
cups   decorated  with  scenes
in   relief    or  outline,   ivory
in    the    tusk    or    curiously
wrought,    purple   and    em-
broidered    stuffs,    and    the
state   chariot    of   its    King
Shaugara.        The      Hittite
troops,  assembled  in   haste,
joined      forces     with      the
Aramaean     auxiliaries,    and
the  iinited  host  advanced  on
Ccele  -  Syria.       The     scribe
commissioned  to  record  the
history  of  this  expedition  has  taken  a  delight  in  inserting  the  most  minute
details.     Leaving  Carchemish,  the  army  followed  the  great  caravan  route,  and,
winding  its  way  between  the  hills  of  Munz'igani  and  Khamurga,  skirting  Bit-
Agusi,  at  length  arrived  under  the  walls  of  Khazazu  among  the  Patina.^    The
town  having  purcliased  immunity  by  a  present  of  gold  and  of  finely  woven  stuffs,
the  army  proceeded  to  cross  the  Aprie,  on  the  bank  of  which  an  entrenched
camp  was  formed  for  the  storage  of  the  spoil.     Lubarna  offered  no  resist-
ance,  but   nevertheless   refused  to  acknowledge   his   inferiority ;    after  some
delay,  it  was  decided  to  make  a  direct  attack  on  his  capital,  Kunulua,  whither
he  had  retired.      The  appearance  of  the  Assyrian  vanguard  put  a  speedy  end
to  his  ideas  of  resistance :'  prostrating  himself  before  his  powerful  adversary,
he  offered  hostages,  and  emptied  his  palaces  and  stables  to  provide  a  ransom.
This  comprised  twenty  talents  of  silver,  one  talent  of  gold,  a  hundred  talents
of  lead,  a  hundred  talents  of  iron,  a  tliousand   bulls,  ten    thousand   sheep,

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  impression  taken  from  a  Hittite  cylinder.

'  Khazazu  being  the  present  Azaz  (Sayce,  Mon.  of  the  Eittites,  in  the  Transactions,  vol.  yii.
p.  292 ;  Fk.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  294),  the  Assyrian  army  must  have  followed  the  route
which  still  leads  from  Jerabis  to  this  town.  Mounts  Munzigani  and  Khamurga,  mentioned  between
Carchemish  and  Akhauu  or  lakhanu  (cf.  supra,  p.  34,  note  4),  must  lie  between  the  Sajur  and  the
Kowelk,  near  Shehab,  at  the  only  point  on  the  route  where  the  road  passes  between  two  ranges
of  lofty  hUIs.


40  THE  ASSYSTAN  REVIVAL    AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR    STRIA.

daughters  of  his  nobles  with  befitting  changes  of  garments,  and  all  the  para-
phernalia of  vessels,  jewels,  and  costly  stuffs  which    formed   the   necessary
furniture  of  a  princely  household.     The  effect  of  his  submission  on  his  own
vassals  and  the  neighbouring  tribes  was  shown  in  different  ways.    Bit-Agusi  at
once  sent  messengers  to  congratulate  the  conqueror,  but  the  mountain  provinces
awaited  the  invader's  nearer  approach  before  following  its  example.     Assur-
nazir-pal,  seeing  that  they  did  not  take  the  initiative,  crossed  the  Orontes,
probably  at  the  spot  where  the  iron  bridge  now  stands,  and  making  his  way
through  the  country  between  laraku  and  laturi,^  reached  the  banks  of  the
Sano-ura'^  without  encountering  any  difficulty.     After  a  brief  halt  there  in
camp,  he  turned  his  back  on  the  sea,  and   passing   between   Saratini   and
Duppani,^  took  by  assault  the  fortress  of  Aribua."     This  stronghold  commanded
all  the  surrounding  country,  and  was  the  seat  of  a  palace  which  Lubarna  at
times  used  as  a  summer  residence.    Here  Assur-nazir-pal  took  up  his  quarters,
and  deposited  within  its  walls  the  corn  and  spoils  of  Lukhuti ;  =  he  established
here  an  Assyrian  colony,and,besides  being  tlie  scene  of  royal  festivities,  it  became
henceforth  the  centre  of  operations  against  the  mountain  tribes.    The  forts  of
the  latter  were  destroyed,  their  houses  burned,  and  prisoners  were  impaled
outside  the  gates  of  their  cities.    Having  achieved  this  noble  exploit,  the  king
crossed  the  intervening  spurs  of  Lebanon  and  marched  down  to  the  shores  of

>  The  spot  where  Assur-nazir-pal  must  have  crossed  the  Orontes  is  determined  by  the  respective
positions  of  Kunulua  and  Tell-Kunana.  At  the  iron  bridge,  the  modern  traveller  has  the  choice  of
two  roads-  one,  passing  Antioch  and  Belt-el-Ma,  leads  to  Urdeh  on  the  Nahr-el-Kebir ;  the  other
reaches  the  same  point  by  a  direct  route  over  the  Gebel  Kosseir.  If,  as  I  believe,  Assur-nazir-pal
took  the  latter  route,  the  country  and  Mount  laraku  must  be  the  northern  part  of  Gebel  kosseir
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Antioch,  and  laturi  the  southern  part  of  the  same  mountain  near  Derkush;
cf  Delattee  L'Asie  Occid.  dans  les  Inscr.  Asmjrie7mes,  p.  49.  laraku  is  mentioneil  m  the  same  position
by  Shalmaneser  III.,  who  reached  it  after  crossing  the  Orontes,  on  descending  from  the  Amanoa
(Layaed   Inscr.  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pi.  47,  1.  23)  en  route  for  the  country  of  Hamath.

"  The'  Sangura  or  Sagura  has  been  identified  by  Delattre  (LMstV  Occid.  dan»  Us  Inscr.  Assyr.,
p  50)  with  the  Nahr-el-Keblr,  not  that  river  which  the  Greeks  called  the  Eleutheros,  but  that
which  flows  into  the  sea  near  Latakia;  cf  Hommel,  Gesch.  Babyloniens  und  Jssyr.,  p.  581;
WiNCKLER  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  5.  Before  naming  the  Sangura,  the  Annals  mention  a
country,  whose  name,  half  eBaced,  ended  in  -hu  (col.  iii.  1.  80):  I  think  we  may  safely  restore  this
name  as  [Ashtama]kou,  mentioned  by  Shalmaneser  III.  in  this  region,  after  the  name  of  laraku
(Layakd,  Inscr.  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pi.  47,  1.  23).  The  country  of  Ashtamaku  wouH  thus
be  the  present  canton  of  Urdeh,  which  is  traversed  before  reaching  the  banks  of  the  Nahr-el-KebSr.
=  The  mountain  cantons  of  Saratini  and  Duppani  (Kalpani'r  Adpani?),  situated  immediately  to

the  south  of  the  Nahr-el-Kebir,  correspond  to  the  southern  part  of  6ebel-el-Akrad,  but  I  cannot

discover  any  names  on  the  modern  map  at  all  resembling  them.

'  Beyond  Duppani,  Assur-nazir-pal  encamped  on  the  banks  of  a  river  whose  name  is  unfortunately

effaced  (Annals,  col.  iii.  1.  81),  and  then  reached  Aribua ;  this  itinerary  leads  us  to  the  eastern  slope
of  the  Gebel  Ansarieh  in  the  latitude  of  Hamath.     The  only  site  I  can  find  in  this  direction  fulfilling

the  requirements  of  the  text  is  that  of  Masiad,  where  there  still  exists  a  fort  of  the  Assassins.     The

name  Aribua  is  perhaps  preserved  in  that  of  Kabao,  er-Kabahu,  which  is  applied  to  a  wady  and

village  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Masiad.

'  Lukhuti  must  not  be  sought  in  the  plains  of  the  Orontes,  where  Assur-nazir-pal  would  have  run

the  risk  of  an  encounter  with  the  King  of  Hamath  or  his  vassals  ;  it  must  represent  the  part  of  the

mountain  of  Ansarieh  liyng  between  Kadmus,  Masiad,  and  Tortosa.


1


TEE  ASSYRIAN  ABMY  BEACHES   THE  MEDITERRANEAN.  41

the  Mediterrauean.  Here  he  bathed  his  weapons  in  the  waters,  and  offered
the  customary  sacrifices  to  the  gods  of  the  sea,  while  the  Phoenicians,  with
their  wonted  prudence,  hastened  to  anticipate  his  demands — Tyre,  Sidon,  Byblos,
Mahallat,  Maiza,  Kaiza,i  the  Amorites  and  Arvad,-  all  sending  tribute.  One
point  strikes  us  forcibly  as  we  trace  on  the  map  the  march  of  this  victorious
hero,  namely,  the  care  with  which  he  confined  himself  to  the  left  bank  of  the
Orontes,  and  the  restraint  he  exercised  in  leaving  untouched  the  fertile  fields
of  its  valley,  whose  wealth  was  so  calculated  to  excite  his  cupidity.  This
discretion  would  be  inexplicable,  did  we  not  know  that  there  existed  in  that
region  a  formidable  power  which  he  may  have  thought  it  imprudent  to  provoke.
It  was  Damascus  which  held  sway  over  those  territories  whose  frontiers  he
respected,  and  its  kings,  also  suzerains  of  Hamath  and  masters  of  half  Israel,
were  powerful  enough  to  resist,  if  not  conquer,  any  enemy  wlio  might  present
himself.  The  fear  inspired  by  Damascus  naturally  explains  the  attitude
adopted  by  the  Hittite  states  towards  the  invader,  and  the  precautions  taken
by  the  latter  to  restrict  his  operations  within  somewhat  narrow  limits.  Having
accepted  the  complimentary  presents  of  the  Phoenicians,  the  king  again  took
his  way  northwards — making  a  slight  detour  in  order  to  ascend  the  Amanos  for
the  purpose  of  erecting  there  a  stele  commemorating  his  exploits,  and  of  cutting
pines,  cedars,  and  larches  for  ids  buildings — and  then  returned  to  Nineveh
amid  the  acclamations  of  his  people.^

In  reading  the  history  of  this  campaign,  its  plan  and  the  principal  events
which  took  place  in  it  appear  at  times  to  be  the  echo  of  what  had  happened
some  centuries  befoi-e.  The  recapitulation  of  the  lialting-places  near  the
sources  of  the  Tigris  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Upper  Euphrates,  the  marches
through  the  valleys  of  the  Zagros  or  on  the  slopes  of  Kashiari,  the  crush-
ing one  by  one  of  the  Mesopotamian  races,  ending  in  a  triumphal  progress
through  Northern  Syria,  is  almost  a  repetition,  both  as  to  the  names  and  order
of  the  places  mentioned,  of  the  expedition  made  by  Tiglath-pileser  in  the  first

'  For  these  three  towns,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  172.

-  The  point  where  Assur-nazir.pal  touched  the  sea-coast  cannot  be  exactly  determined  :  admitting
that  he  set  out  from  Masiad  or  its  neighbourhood,  he  must  have  crossed  the  Lebanon  by  the  gorge
of  the  Eleutheros,  and  readied  tlie  sea-board  somewhere  near  the  mouth  of  this  river.  The  assertion
that  he  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Nahr-el-Kelb  rests  on  a  false  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  the
Annals,  col.  iii.  1.  89,  where  he  relates  how  he  set  up  a  stele  recording  his  victories.  Boscawen
(I7ie  Monuments  and  Inscriptions  on  the  Rocks  at  the  Nahr-el-Kelb,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.
Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  339)  has  not  noticed  that  this  text  refers  to  the  Amanos,  and,  referring  it
to  the  Lebanon,  he  has  conjectured  that  one  of  the  stelae  now  illegible  on  the  Nahr-el-Kelb  might
be  attributed  to  Assur-nazir-pal.  Hommel  followed  him  in  this  mistake  (^Gesch.  Babyl.  und  Assyr.,
p.  582).  If  Assur-nazir-pal  liad  reached  the  Nahr-el-Kelb,  he  would  have  given  us  his  detailed
Itinerary,  noting  the  towns  along  the  route,  as  he  has  done  in  that  portion  of  his  campaign  which
has  to  do  with  the  Khati  and  the  Patina.

'  Annah  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.   iii.  11.  04-92;  cf.  Peiseb,  Die  Inschriften  Aschur-nasir-ahal's,

pp.  106-in.


42         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

live  years  of  his  reign.     The  question  may  well  arise  in  passing  whether  Assur-
nazir-pal  consciously  modelled  his  campaign  on  that  of  his  ancestor,  as,  in  Egypt,
Eamses  III.  imitated  Kamses  II.,i  or  whether,  in  similar  circumstances,  he  in-
stinctively and  naturally  followed  the  same  line  of  march.     In  either  case,  he
certainly  showed  on  all  sides  greater  wisdom  than  his  predecessor,  and  having
attained  the  object  of  his  ambition,  avoided  compromising  his  success  by  injudi-
ciously attacking  Damascus  or  Babylon,  the  two  powers  who  alone  could  have
offered  effective  resistance.    The  victory  he  had  gained,  in  879,  over  the  brother
of  Nabu-baliddin  had  immensely  flattered  his  vanity.     His  panegyrists  vied
with  each  other   in   depicting  Karduniash  bewildered  by   the  terror  of  his
majesty,  and  the  Chalda^ans  overwhelmed  by  tlie  fear  of  his  arms ;  =  but  he  did
not  allow  himself  to  be  carried  away  by  their  extravagant  flatteries,  and  con-
tinued to  the  end  of  his  reign  to  observe  the  treaties  concluded  between  the
two  courts  in  the  time  of  his  grandfather  Eamman-nirari.»     He  had,  however,
sufficiently  enlarged  his  dominions,  in  less  than  ten  years,  to  justify  some  dis-
play of  pride.     He  himself  described  his  empire  as  extending,  on  the  west  of
Assyria  proper,  from  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  near  Nineveh  to  Lebanon  and
the  Mediterranean ;  *  besides  which,  Sukhi  was  subject  to  him,  and  this  included
the  province  of  Bapiku  on  the  frontiers  of  Babylonia.^     He  had  added  to  his
older  provinces  of  Amidi,  Masios  and   Singar,  the  whole  strip  of  Armenian
territory  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus  range,  from  the  sources  of  the  Supnat  to
those  of  the  Bitlis-tchai,  and  he  held  the  passes  leading  to  the  banks  of  the
Arzania,  in  Kirruri  and  Gilzan,  while  the  extensive  country  of  Nairi  had  sworn
him  allegiance.     Towards  the  south-east  the  wavering  tribes,  which  alternately
gave  their  adherence  to  Assur  or  Babylon  according  to  circumstances,  had
ranged  themselves  on  his  side,  and  formed  a  large  frontier  province  beyond  the
borders  of  his  hereditary  kingdom,  between  the  Lesser  Zab  and  the  Turnat.«
But,  despite  repeated  blows  inflicted  on  them,  he  had  not  succeeded  in  welding
these  various  factors  into  a  compact  and  homogeneous  whole ;   some  small

'  Cf.  SirugoZe  0/ i7ie  A^ations,  pp.  454, 455.  ^     ,       i    ,         -•     i„r,    ;„

=  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ui.   11.  Za,  li,   ct.  rEisbK,  sjik
SoHRADEK,  EeiUnschr.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  98,  99.  ,   .      ,  ,       7        i    ■•

»  His  frontier  on  the  Chaldsean  side,  between  the  Tigris  and  the  mountains  (Jn«ak,  col  ii.
11.  129,  130,  col.  iii.  11.  123,  124),  was  the  boundary  fixed  by  Kamman-nirari  (ibynchronous  History,
col.  iii.  11.  20,  21) ;  cf.  sitpra,  pp.  5,  6.  ,  ,   ..

«  The  expression  emploved  in  this  description  and  in  similar  passages,  isUu  ibtrtan  naru(coi.  u.
11  127,  129,  col.  iii.  11.  121,  123),  translated /com  the  ford  over  the  river,  or  better, /ro.n  the  other  side
of  the  river,  must  be  understood  as  referring  to  Assyria  proper:  the  territory  subject  to  the  king  is
measured  in  the  direction  indicated,  starting  from  the  rivers  which  formed  the  boundaries  ot  his
hereditary  dominions.  From  the  other  bank  of  the  Tigris  means  from  the  bank  of  the  Tigris  opposite
Nineveh  or  Calah,  whence  the  king  and  his  army  set  out  on  their  campaigns.

=  Bapiku  IS  mentioned  in  several  tests  as  marking  the  frontier  between  the  Sukhi  and  Ohaldjea
(Sunchronms  History,  col.  ii.  1.  24 ;  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  1.  128,  col.  lii.  1.  121).  _

«  Annah  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  coin.  11.  127-131,  col.  iii.  11.  11S-12G ;  the  two  descriptions  con-
tained in  these  passages  differ  in  some  points  of  detail.


THE  EMPIEE  AFTER    THE    WARS   OF  ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL.  43

proportion  of  them  were  assimilated  to  Assyria,  and  were  governed  directly  by
royal  officials/  but  the  greater  number  were  merely  dependencies,  more  or
less  insecurely  held  by  the  obligations  of  vassalage  or  servitude.  In  some
provinces  the  native  chiefs  were  under  the  surveillance  of  Assyrian  residents ;  ^
these  districts  paid  an  annual  tribute  proportionate  to  the  resources  and
products  of  their  country :  thus  Kirruri  and  the  neighbouring  states  con-
tributed horses,  mules,  bulls,  sheep,  wine,  and  copper  vessels ;  ^  the  Aramseans
gold,  silver,  lead,  copper,  both  wrought  and  in  the  ore,  purple,  and  coloured  or
embroidered  stuffs;*  while  Izalla,  Nirbu,  Nirdun,  and  Bit-Zamani  had  to
furnish  horses,  chariots,  metals,  and  cattle.^  The  less  civilised  and  more
distant  tribes  were  not,  like  these,  subject  to  regular  tribute,  but  each  time
the  sovereign  traversed  their  territory  or  approached  within  reasonable  dis-
tance, their  chiefs  sent  or  brought  to  him  valuable  presents  as  fresh  pledges  of
their  loyalty.  Eoyal  outposts,  built  at  regular  intervals  and  carefully  fortified,
secured  the  fulfilment  of  these  obligations,  and  served  as  depots  for
storing  the  commodities  collected  by  the  royal  officials ;  such  outposts  were,
Damdamusa  on  the  north-west  of  the  Kashiari  range,^  Tushkhan  on  the  Tigris,'
Tilluli  between  the  Supnat  and  the  Eujihrates,^  Aribua  among  the  Patina,^  and
others  scattered  irregularly  between  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Zab,  on  the  Khabur,
and  also  in  Nairi.^"  These  strongholds  served  as  places  of  refuge  for  the
residents  and  their  guards  in  case  of  a  revolt,  and  as  food-depots  for  the  armies
in  the  event  of  war  bringing  them  into  their  neighbourhood.^^  In  addition  to
these,  Assur-nazir-pal  also  strengthened  the  defences  of  Assyria  proper  by
building  fortresses  at  the  points  most  open  to  attack;  he  repaired  or  com-
pleted the  defences  of  Kaksi,  to  command  the  plain  between  the  Greater  and

•  There  were  royal  governors  in  Suru  in  Blt-Khalupi  (^Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  i.  11.  75, 89),
in  Matiate  (col.  ii.  11.  90,  91),  in  Madara  (col.  ii.  1. 100),  and  in  Nairi  (H.  Bawlinson,  Cun.  Int.  W.  As.,
vol.  iii.  pi.  6,  11.  50,  51).

-  There  were  Assyrian  residents  in  Kirruri  and  the  neighbouring  countries  (^nnaZs  of  Assur-
nazir-pal,  col.  i.  1.  56),  in  Kirkhi  (col.  i.  1.  67),  and  in  Nairi  (col.  ii.  1.  15).
^  Tribute  from  Kirruri,  Siinisi,  Simira,  Adaush  (^Annals,  col.  i.  11.  54-56).

*  Tribute  from  Shadikanni  and  Katna  (Annals,  col.  i.  11.  7S,  79,  col.  iii.  1.  4),  from  the  kings  of
Laqi  (col.  i.  11.  94,  9.5),  from  Khindauu  (col.  i.  11.  96,  97,  col.  iii.  11.  13,  47,  48),  from  the  Aramaeans
round  the  Khabur  and  Euphrates  (col.  iii.  11.  6-7,  8-9,  9-10,  11),  from  Bit-Adini  (col.  iii.  11.  55,  56,
61,  62),  from  Bit-Bakhiani  (col.  iii.  11.  55-58),  from  Tul-Abni  (col.  iii.  11.  55,  56,  63,  64).

'  Tribute  from  Izalla  {Annals,  col.  i.  1.  106,  col.  ii.  II.  22,  23,  col.  iii.  11.  59,  60,  94,  95),  from  Nirbu
(col.  ii.  1.  11),  from  Nirdun  (col.  ii.  11.  101,  102),  from  Bit-Zamani  (col.  ii.  11.  12-14).

'  AnnaJs  of  Assur-nuzir-pal,  col.  i.  1.  103;  H.  Rawi.insox,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii,  pi.  6
11.  47,  48.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  2-7,  101,  102,  117,  118,  col.  iii.  11.  104-109;  H.  Eawlinso.n,
Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  ph  6,  11.  47,  48.

'  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  I.  87;  cf.  supra,  p.  26.

"  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  11.  81-83;  cf.  supra,  p.  40.

">  Atlila  or  Dur-Assur,  in  the  country  of  Zamua  (Annals,  col.  ii.  11.  84-8G);  cf.  supra,  p.  26.

"  Assur-nazir-pal  halted  at  Tilluli  (Annals,  col.  ii.  1.  87),  in  Tushkhiin  (col.  ii.  11.  101,  102),  in
Amidi  (col.  iii.  11.  107-109).


44         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE  STEUGOLE  FOR   SYRIA.
Lesser  Zab  and  the  Tigris  ;  he  rebuilt  the  castles  or  towers  which  guarded  the
river-iords  and  the  entrances  to  the  valleys  of  the  Gebel  Makhlub  and  erec    d
at  Calah  the  fortified  palace  which  his  successors  continued  to  inhabit  for  the

ensuing  five  hundred  years.  •      .    +i,^

Assur-nazir-pal  had  resided  at  Nineveh  from  the  time  of  his  accession  to  the
throne-  from  thence  he  had  set  out  on  four  successive  campaigns,  and  thither
he  had'returned  at  the  head  of  his  triumphant  troops  ;  ^  there  he  had  received
the  kinc^s  who  came  to  pay  him  homage,^  and  the  governors  who  implored  his


THE   MOCSDS  OF   CALAH."


help  against  foreign  attacks ;  *  thither  he  had  sent  rebel  chiefs,  and  there,  after
they  had  marched  in  ignominy  through  the  streets,  he  had  put  them  to  torture
and  to  death  before  the  eyes  of  the  crowd,  and  their  skins  were  perchance  still
hanging  nailed  to  the  battlements  when  he  decided  to  change  the  seat  of  his
capila^s  Tijg  ^^^^iej^t  palace  no  longer  suited  his  present  state  as  a  conqueror ;
the  accommodation  was  too  restricted,  the  decoration  too  poor,  and  probably
the  number  of  apartments  was  insufficient  to  house  the  troops  of  women  and
slaves  brought  back  from  his  wars  by  its  royal  master.  Built  on  the  very  bank
of  the  Tebilti,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Khusur,  and  hemmed  in  by  three

.  Campaigns  of  the  first  ye^r  (Annah  of  A^sur-nazir-pal,  col  i.  U.  69,70),  and  of  ^^^nd  year
(col  i  1.  101);  there  is  no  notice  of  the  ensuing  campaigns,  but,  in  the  account  ot  that  in  the  tourtn
year,  it  is  st.ted  that  the  kings  of  Zamua  had  representatives  at  Calah  (col.  ii.  U.  /a,  «"^;

=  Ilubani,  King  of  Sukhi,  came  in  the  second  year  to  pay  homage  to  the  kmg  in  Nineveh,  with
hisbrotherBaudsons(^»m(Ls  col.  i.  11.  99-101);  cf.  ««pra,  p.  19.  „„„^  nn  Hip

^  Drawn  by  Boudier  from  Latabd,  Mon.  of  Nineveh,  vol.  1.  pi.  98.  The  pointed  mound  on  the
left  near  the  centre  of  the  picture  represents  the  ziggurat  of  the  great  temple.  _

'  An„ahofAsmr-nazir.pal  col.  i.  11.  101-103,  where  the  king  at  Nineveh  receives  t.dmgsottne

revolt  of  KhJlai  (ef.  supra,  p.  19).     While  there,  too,  he  hears  of  tlie  insurrection  of  Dagara  (col.  u.

11  23-25),  and  of  that  of  Amika  (col.  ii.  U.  49,  50),  „^„„a„^

■  ^  Akliiababa  was  carried  to  Nineveh  and  flayed  alive  iAnnaU.  col.  i.  1.  93),  and  his  skin  csposea

on  the  wall ;  cf.  supra,  p.  18.


ERECTION   OF   THE  PALACE   AT   CALAH.


45


temples,  there  was  no  possibility  of  its  enlargement — a  difficulty  which  often
occurs  in  ancient  cities.^  The  necessary  space  for  new  buildings  could  only
have  been  obtained  by  altering  the  course  of  the
stream,  and  sacrificing  a  large  part  of  the  adjoining
quarters  of  the  city  :  Assur-nazir-pal  therefore  pre-
ferred to  abandon  the  place  and  to  select  a  new  site
where  he  would  liave  ample  space  at  his  disposal.
He  found  what  he  required  close  at  hand  in  the
half-ruined  city  of  Calah,  where  many  of  his  most
illustrious  predecessors  had  in  times  past  souglit
refuge  from  the  heat  of  Assiir.^  It  was  now  merely
an  obscure  and  sleepy  town  about  twelve  miles  south
of  Nineveh,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and
almost  at  the  angle  made  by  the  junction  of
this  river  with  the  Greater  Zab.  The  place
contained  a  palace  built  by  Shalmaneser  I.,
which,  owing  to  many  years'  neglect,  had  become
uninhabitable.  Assur-nazir-pal  not  only  razed
to  the  ground  the  palaces  and  temples,  but  also
levelled  the  mound  on  which  they  had  been
built;  he  then  cleared  away  the  soil  down  to
the  water-level,  and  threw  up  an  immense  and
almost  rectangular  terrace  on  which  to  lay  out
his  new  buildings.  The  king  chose  Ninip,  the
god  of  war,  as  the  patron  of  the  city,  and  dedicated  to  him,  at  the  north-west
corner  of  the  terrace,  a  ziggurat  with  its  usual  temple  precincts.  Here  the  god
was  represented  as  a  bull  with  a  man's  head  and  bust,  in  gilded  alabaster,
and  two  yearly  feasts  were  instituted  in  his  honour,  one  in  the  month  Sebat,
the  other  in  the  month  Ulul.  The  ziggurat  was  a  little  over  two  hundred
feet  high,  and  was  probably  built  in  seven  stages,  of  which  only  one  now
remains  intact :  *  around  it  are  found  several  independent  series  of  chambers


STELE   OF  ASSUE-NAZIB-PAL  AT  CALAH.'


'  These  details  are  borrowed  from  the  inscriptions  of  Sennacherib,  the  king  who  rebuilt  Nineveh
(Meissner  and  Kost,  Die  Bauinschriften  Sanherihs,  pp.  S,  9).

'  The  building  of  the  palace  and  temples  of  Calah  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Annals
of  Auur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  11.  131-135,  col.  iii.  11.  132-136,  and  iu  the  inscription  on  the  MonoUiU
(Rawlinson,  Cmi.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  27,  No.  2,  col.  i.  11.  1-23).  I  have  supplemeuted  the  in-
formation in  these  texts  from  the  results  of  Layard's  excavations,  as  described  in  his  two  chief  works,
Nineveh  and  its  Bemains,  and  Nineveh  and  Babylon.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Blansell ;  cf.  Layard,  Mon.  of  Nin.,
vol.  ii.  pi.  4.

'  Cf.  Latabd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  103-109,  fur  the  plan  and  elevation  of  the  ruins  as  they
existed  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  a.d.


46         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.


THE    WINGED    BOLLS    OP    ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL.'


and  passages,  which  may  have  been  parts  of  other  temples,  but  it  is  now
impossible  to  say  which  belonged  to  the  local  Belit,  which  to  Sin,  to  Gula,  to
Eamman,  or  to  the  ancient  deity  Ea.  At  the  entrance  to  the  largest  chamber,
on  a  rectangular  pedestal,  stood  a  stele  with  rounded  top,  after  the  Egyptian

fashion.  On  it  is  de-
picted a  figure  of  the
king,  standing  erect  and
facing  to  the  left  of  the
spectator;  he  holds  his
mace  at  his  side,  his  right
hand  is  raised  in  the
attitude  of  adoration,  and
above  him,  on  the  left
upper  edge  of  the  stele,
are  grouped  the  five
signs  of  the  planets ;  at
the  base  of  the  stele
stands  an  altar  with  a
triangular  pedestal  and  circular  slab  ready  for  the  offerings  to  be  presented  to  the
royal  founder  -  by  priests  or  people.  The  palace  extended  along  the  south  side
of  the  terrace  facing  the  town,  and  with  the  river  in  its  rear ;  it  covered  a  space
one  hundred  and  thirty-one  yards  in  length  and  a  hundred  and  nine  in  breadth.^
In  the  centre  was  a  large  court,  surrounded  by  seven  or  eight  spacious  halls,
appropriated  to  state  functions ;  between  these  and  the  court  were  many  rooms
of  different  sizes,  forming  the  offices  and  private  apartments  of  the  royal
house.  The  whole  palace  was  built  of  brick  faced  with  stone.  Three  gate-
ways, flanked  by  winged,  human-headed  bulls,  aflbrded  access  to  the  largest
apartment,  the  hall  of  audience,  where  the  king  received  his  subjects  or  the
envoys  of  foreign  powers.*  The  doorways  and  walls  of  some  of  the  rooms  were
decorated  with  glazed  tiles,  but  the  majority  of  them  were  covered  with  bands  of
coloured^  bas-reliefs  which  portrayed  various  episodes  in  the  life  of  the  king —

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  sketoli  of  Layard  {Nineveh  and  Bahylon,  p.  300).

-  Layakd,  Nintveh  and  Babylon,  pp.302,  30.3,  wliere  the  vignette  oa  p.  303  shows  ihe  situation  of
the  monument  to  the  riglit  of  the  door.  For  a  temple  of  tlie  time  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  discovered
between  the  pulaoe  and  the  ziggurat,  of.  the  short  notice  by  Hormuzd  Eassaji,  Excav.  and  Discov.  in
Assyria,  ia  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  viii.  pp.  57,  58  ;  and  Asshur  and  the  Land
of  Nimrod,  pp.  225-227.

'  Layard,  Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  vol.  i.  pp.  (32-71,  115,  ;11U,  124-130,  144-146,  331-347,  381-
390,  the  description  of  eacli  room  in  turn  with  the  sculptures  discovered  in  it ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  4-14,
76-79 ;  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  149-170.

*  At  the  east  end  of  the  hall  Layard  found  a  block  of  alabaster  covered  with  iuscriptions.,
forming  a  sort  of  platform  on  which  the  king's  throne  may  have  stood  {Nineveh  and  its  Remains,
vol.  i.  pp.  133,  134,  383,  No.  23).

=  Layard  points  out  the  traces  of  colouring  still  visible  when  the  excavations  were  made  {Nineveh


ASSYSIAN  ART  IN  TEE  NINTH  CENTURY.


47


Lis  state-councils,  his  lion-hunts,  the  reception  of  tribute,  marches  over
mountains  and  rivers,  chariot-skirmishes,  sieges,  and  the  torture  and  carrying
away  of  captives.^  Incised
in  bands  across  these  pic-
tures are  inscriptions  ex-
tolling the  omnipotence  of
Assur,  while  at  intervals
genii  with  eagles'  beaks,  or
deities  in  human  form,  im-
perious and  tierce,  appear
with  hands  full  of  oiiferings,
or  in  the  act  of  brandishing
thunderbolts  against  evil
spirits.'^  The  architect  who
designed  this  imposing  de-
coration, and  the  sculptors
who  executed  it,  closely  fol-
lowed the  traditions  of  an-
cient Chaldaja  in  the  drawing
and  composition  of  their  de-
signs, and  in  the  use  of  colour-
or  chisel ;  but  the  qualities
and  defects  peculiar  to  their  own  race  gave  a  certain  character  of  originality
to  this  borrowed  art.  They  exaggerated  the  stern  and  athletic  aspect  of  their
models,  making  the  figures  thick-set,  the  muscles  extraordinarily  enlarged,  and
the  features  ludicrously  accentuated.  Their  pictures  produce  an  impression  of
awkwardness,  confusion  and  heaviness,  but  the  detail  is  so  minute  and  the
animation  so  great  that  the  attention  of  the  spectator  is  forcibly  arrested ;
these  uncouth  beings  impress  us  with  the  sense  of  their  self-reliance  and  their

and  its  Bemains,  vol.  i.  pp.  64,  126,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  306-312 ;  cf.  G.  RAWLrasoN,  The  Five  Great
Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  357-365,  and  Pebrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  I'Antiquit^,
vol.  ii.  pp.  653-661).

'  A  certain  number  of  these  scenes  have  been  already  reproduced  in  Tlie  Dawn  of  Civilization,
Ttie  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  and  the  present  volume.  For  several  episodes  connected  with  the  hunting
of  the  liou  or  urus,  see  Tlie  Dawn  of  Cimlization,  pp.  558,  559, 769 ;  Struggle  of  tlie  Nations,  pp.  621-623 ;
for  soldiers,  see  ibid.,  pp.  559,  625 ;  for  chariots,  ibid.,  626,  632 ;  for  the  crossing  of  a  river,  ibid.,  p.
628,  and  supra,  p.  2 ;  for  a  camp,  a  fortified  town,  and  siege  scenes,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.
632-636,  and  sujrra,  pp.  10,  11 ;  for  a  convoy  of  prisoners.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  610;  for  apes
brought  as  tribute,  ibid.,  p.  662.

'  Cf.  the  eagle-headed  or  human-headed  genii  given  in  The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  539,  557 ;
a  fish-god,  ibid.,  p.  547 ;  the  strife  of  Bel-Marduk  with  Tiauiat,  ibid.,  p.  541.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  after  Layakd,  Moii.  of  Nin.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  55 ;  cf.  Perkot  and  Chipiez,  Hist,
de  VArt  dans  I'Antiq.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  siv.,  where  the  tile  Is  reproduced  in  its  original  colouring,  from  the
plate  in  Layard's  work.


GLAZED  TILE  FROM  PALACE  OP  CALAH.'


48         THE   ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR    STRIA.


confidence  in  their  master,  as  we  watch  them  brandishing  their  weapons  or
hurrying  to  the  attack,  and  see  the  shock  of  battle  and  the  death-blows  given
and  received.'     The    human-headed  bulls,  standing  on  guard   at  the  gates,

exhibit    the    calm    and     pensive


dignity  befitting  creatures  con-
scious of  their  strength,  while  the
lions  passant  who  sometimes  re-
place them,  snarl  and  show  their
teeth  with  an  almost  alarming
ferocity.  The  statues  of  men  and
gods,  as  a  rule,  are  lacking  in
originality.  The  heavy  robes
which  drape  them  from  head  to
foot  give  them  the  appearance  of
cylinders  tied  in  at  the  centre
and  slightly  flattened  towards  the
top.  The  head  surmounting  this
shapeless  bundle  is  the  only  life-
like part,  and  even  the  lower  half  of


LION    FROM    ASSCR-NAZIR-PAl's  PALACE.'


this  is  rendered  heavy  by  the  hair  and  beard,  whose  tightly  curled  tresses  lie
in  stiff  rows  one  above  the  other.  The  upper  part  of  the  face  which  alone  is
visible  is  correctly  drawn ;  the  expression  is  of  rather  a  commonplace  type  of
nobility— respectable  but  self-suflicient.  The  features— eyes,  forehead,  nose,
mouth— are  all  tliose  of  Assur-nazir-pal ;  the  hair  is  arranged  in  the  fashion
he  affected,  and  the  robe  is  embroidered  with  his  jewels ;  but  amid  all  this
we  miss  the  keen  intelligence  always  present  in  Egyptian  sculpture,
whether  under  the  royal  head-dress  of  Cheops  or  in  the  expectant  eyes  of  the
.sitting  scribe :  the  Assyrian  sculptor  could  copy  the  general  outline  of  his
model  fairly  well,  but  could  not  infuse  soul  into  the  face  of  the  conqueror,
whose  "  countenance  beamed  above  the  destruction  around  him."  ^

The  water  of  the  Tigris  being  muddy,  and  unpleasant  to  the  taste,  and  the
wells  at  Calah  so  charged  with  lime  and  bitumen  as  to  render  them  unwhole-
some, Assur-nazir-pal  supplied  the  city  with  water  from  the  neighbouring
Zab.*     An  abundant  stream  was  diverted  fronr  this  river  at  the  spot  now  called

>  G.  Kawlinson,  Tlie  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  :'!44-3t7;  Perrot  and  Chipiez,
Hist,  de  I'Art  dans  VAntiq.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  613-618.

"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  sculpture  in  the  British  Museum ;  cf.  Layard,
Mon.  of  Nin.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  2.

»  The  commonplace  character  of  Assyrian  statuary  has  been  noticed  by  all  observers:  G.
Eawlinson,  The  Fine  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  341;  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  VArl  dans
I'Antiq.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  536-540 ;  Babelox,  Maiiuel  d'Arch^ologie  Orientale,  pp.  96-99.

*  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  co\.  iii.  1.  135,  and  Inscription  on  Monolith,  co\.  i.  11.  5-10;  cf.  Peisee,


THE  TUNNEL    OF  NEGUB   AND    THE  PALACE   OF  BALAWAt.        49

Negiib,  and  conveyed  at  first  by  a  tunnel  excavated  in  the  rock,  and  thence  by
an  open  canal  to  the  foot  of  the  great  terrace :  at  this  point  the  flow  of  the
water  was  regulated  by  dams,  and  the  surplus  was  utilised  for  irrigation  ^
purposes  by  means  of  openings  cut  in  the  banks.  The  aqueduct  was  named
Babilat-khigal — the  bringer  of  plenty  ^^and,  to  justify  the  epithet,  date-palms,


A   CORXER   OF   THE    RCIXED   PALACE   OF   ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL    AT   CALAH.'


viues,  and  many  kinds  of  fruit  trees  were  planted  along  its  course,  so  that  both
banks  soon  assumed  the  appearance  of  a  shady  orchard  interspersed  with  small
towns  and  villas.  The  population  rapidly  increased,  partly  through  the  spon-
taneous influx  of  Assyrians  themselves,  but  still  more  through  the  repeated
introduction  of  bands  of  foreign  prisoners :  ^  forts,  established  at  the  fords  of

Inschriften  Aschur-ndsir-ahaVs.  in  Schrader,  Keilimchriftliche  BMiotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  114,  115,
118,  119.  Tlie  presence  of  bitumen  in  the  waters  of  Calah  is  due  to  the  hot  springs  which  rise  in
the  bed  of  the  brook  Shor-derreh  (JoxES,  Topography  of  Nineveh,  in  the  /.  E.  As.  P.,  vol.  xv.  p.  342).

'  The  canal  of  Negub — Negub  signifies  hole  in  Arabic — was  discovered  by  Layard,  who  describes
it  in  Nineveh  and  its  Pemains,  vol.  i.  pp.  80,  81,  and  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  525-527 ;  see  also
Jones  (  Topog.  of  Nineveh,  in  the  J.  P.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xv.  pp.  310,  311,  342,  343).  The  Zab  having
changed  its  course  to  tlie  south,  and  scooped  out  a  deeper  bed  for  itself,  the  double  arcli,  which  serves
as  an  entrance  to  the  canal,  is  actually  above  the  ordinary  level  of  the  river,  and  the  water  flows
througb  it  only  in  flood-time.

-  ilonolith  Inscription,  col.  i.  pp.  6,7;  iu  the  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,co].  iii.  1.  135,  the  name  is
given  in  the  form  Pati-lhigal.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Eassam,  contributed  by  Father  Scheil;  cf.  HoRsruzD
Eassam,  Asfhur  and  the  Land  of  Nimrod,  p.  222.

*  For  example,  Assur-nazir-pal  expressly  says  that  he  established  at  Calah  a  colony  of  2000
Aramaean  soldiers  taken  prisoners  at  Kaprabi,  in  Tul-Aba  (^Annals,  col.  iii.  11.  53,  54) ;  cf.  supra
p.  32.

E


50        TEE  ASSTEIJy  liEVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

the  Zab,  or  commanding  the  roads  which  cross  the  Gebel  Makhlub,  kept  the
country  in  subjection  and  formed  an  inner  line  of  defence  at  a  short  distance
from  the  capital.  Assur-nazir-pal  kept  up  a  palace,  garden,  and  small
temple,  near  the  fort  of  Imgur-Bel,  the  modern  Balawat :  thither  he  repaired
for  intervals  of  repose  from  state  affairs,  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the  chase
and  cool  air  in  the  hot  season.^  He  did  not  entirely  abandon  his  other
capitals,  Nineveh  and  Assur,  visiting  them  occasionally,  but  Calah  was  his
favourite  seat,  and  on  its  adornment  he  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  wealth
and  most  of  his  leisure  hours.  Only  once  again  did  he  abandon  his  peaceful
pursuits  and  take  the  field,  about  the  year  897  B.C.,  during  the  epouymy
of  Shamashuuri.  The  tribes  on  the  northern  boundary  of  the  empire  had
apparently  forgotten  the  lessons  they  had  learnt  at  the  cost  of  so  much
bloodshed  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign :  many  had  omitted  to  pay  the  tribute
due,  one  chief  had  seized  the  royal  cities  of  Amidi  and  Damdamusa,  and  the
rebellion  threatened  to  spread  to  Assyria  itself.  Assur-nazir-pal  girded  on  his
armour  and  led  liis  troops  to  battle  as  vigorously  as  in  the  days  of  his  youth.
He  hastily  collected,  as  he  passed  through  their  lauds,  the  tribute  due  from
Kipani,  Izalla,"  and  Kummukh,  gained  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  traversed
Gubbu  burning  everything  on  his  way,  made  a  detour  through  Dirria  and
Kirkiu,  and  finally  halted  before  the  walls  of  Damdamusa.  Six  hundred
soldiers  of  the  garrison  perished  in  the  assault  and  four  hundred  were  taken
prisoners :  these  he  carried  to  Amidi  and  impaled  as  an  object-lesson  round  its
walls;  but,  the  defenders  of  the  town  remaining  undaunted,  he  raised  the  siege
and  plunged  into  the  gorges  of  the  Kashiari.  Having  there  reduced  to
submission  Uda,  the  capital  of  Lapturi,  son  of  Tubusi,  he  returned  to  Calah,
taking  with  him  six  thousand  prisoners  whom  he  settled  as  colonists  around  his
favourite  residence.^  This  was  his  last  exploit :  he  never  subsequently  quitted
his  hereditary  domain,  but  there  passed  the  remaining  seven  years  of  his  life  in
peace,  if  not  in  idleness.  He  died  in  860  B.C.,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-five  years.
His  portraits  represent  him  as  a  vigorous  man,  with  a  brawny  neck  and
broad  shoulders,  capable  of  bearing  the  weight  of  his  armour  for  many  hours  at

'  Two  copies  of  an  inscription  discovered  by  H.  Eassam  at  Balawat  {Excav.  and  Discov.  in  Assi/r.,
in  tlie  Transactions  of  tiie  Bibl.  Arcli.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  53-55 ;  Asshur  and  the  Land  of  Nimrod.
pp.  216,  217),  translated  by  Budge  (On  a  recenHi/ liiscoTCred  Text  of  Aseur-natsir-pal,  in  the  Trails-
actions,  vol.  vii.  pp.  59-82),  and  by  A.  Strong  {A  Yolive  Inscription  of  Assur-natsir-pal,  in  the  Records
of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  80-85).

"  For  Izalla,  cf.  supra,  p.  10,  note  4.  Kipaui,  according  to  Lehmann,  corresponds  to  the  Kephenes
of  Stephen  of  Byzantium  and  the  Kephenia  of  Pliny  (Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ein  neuer  Merrscher  von
Khaldia,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ix.  p.  88,  note),  perhaps  between  Batman-tchai  and
Bitlis-tcbai.

=  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  iii.  11.  92-113 ;  cf.  Peisek,  Insehr.  Aschur-ndsir-alaV s,  in  Schrader,
Keilinschr.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  110-113.  The  new  localities  mentioned  in  this  passage  cannot  at
present  be  satisfactorily  identified  with  any  modern  site.


THE  LAST   YEARS    OF  ASSUR-NAZIR-PAL.


51


a  time.  He  is  short  in  the  head,  with  a  somewhat  flattened  skull  and  low
forehead  ;  his  eyes  are  large  and  deep-set  beneath  bushy  eyebrows,  his  cheek-
bones high,  and  his  nose  aquiline,  with  a  fleshy
tip  and  wide  nostrils,  while  his  mouth  and  chin
are  hidden  by  moustache  and  beard.  The  whole
figure  is  instinct  with  real  dignity,  yet  such
dignity  as  is  due  rather  to  rank  and  the  habitual
exercise  of  power,  than  to  the  innate  qualities
of  the  man.^  The  character  of  Assur-nazir-pal,
as  gathered  from  the  dry  details  of  his  Annals,
seems  to  have  been  very  complex.  He  was  as
ambitious,  resolute,  and  active  as  any  prince  in
the  world ;  yet  he  refrained  from  oflensive  warfare
as  soon  as  his  victories  bad  brought  under  his
rule  the  majority  of  the  countries  formerly  sub-
ject to  Tiglath-pileser  I.  He  knew  the  crucial
moment  for  ending  a  campaign,  arresting  his  pro-
gress where  one  more  success  might  have  brought
him  into  collision  with  some  formidable  neighbour;
and  this  wise  prudence  in  his  undertakings  en-
abled him  to  retain  the  principal  acquisitions
won  by  his  arms.  As  a  worshipper  of  the  gods
he  showed  devotion  and  gratitude  ;  he  was  just
to  his  subjects,  but  his  conduct  towards  his
enemies  was  so  savage  as  to  appear  to  us  cruel  even  for  that  terribly  pitiless
age :  no  king  ever  employed  such  horrible  punishments,  or  at  least  none  has
described  with  such  satisfaction  the  tortures  inflicted  on  his  vanquished  foes.
Perhaps  such  measures  were  necessary,  and  tiie  harshness  with  which  he  re-
pressed insurrection  prevented  more  frequent  outbreaks  and  so  averted  greater
sacrifice  of  life.  But  the  horror  of  these  scenes  so  appals  the  modern  reader,  that
at  first  he  can  only  regard -Assur-nazir-pal  as  a  royal  butcher  of  the  worst  type.^


SHALMAXESEIt    III.'


'  Menant,  Bemarques  sur  les  portraits  des  rois  assyro-chald^ens,  pp.  9,  10.  Perrnt  and  Chipiez  do
not  admit  that  tlie  Assyrian  sculptors  intended  to  represent  the  features  of  their  kings  ;  for  this
they  rely  chiefly  on  tlie  remarkahle  likeness  between  all  the  figures  in  tlie  same  series  of  bas-
reliefs  QBittoire  de  I'Art  dans  I'Antiquite,  vol.  ii.  pp.  550-552).  My  own  belief  is  that  in  Assyria,
as  in  Egypt,  the  sculptors  took  the  portrait  of  the  reigning  sovereign  as  the  model  for  all  their
figures.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier  from  a  photograph  by  Mansell,  taken  from  the  original  stele  in  the  British
Museum.

'  The  cruelties  of  Assur-nazir-pal  have  been  exaggerated  by  Gutschmid,  Neue  Beitriige  zur
Geschichle  des  Alt^n  Orients,  pp.  1-18-150,  and  palliated  by  Hoii.mel,  Gesch.  Babyl.  und  Assijr.,  p.  588.
Tiele  struck  the  right  note  on  the  subject  (Babylonisch-Assyrische  Geschiclite,  p.  177),  and  I  adopt  his
conclusions.


52         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    STRIA.

Assur-nazir-pal  left  to  his  successor  an  overflowing  treasury,  a  valiant  army,
a  people  proud  of  their  progress  and  fully  confident  in  their  own  resources,  and
a  kingdom  which  had  recovered,  during  several  years  of  peace,  from  the  strain  of
its  previous  conquests.  Shalmaneser  III.*  drew  largely  on  the  reserves  of  men
and  money  which  his  father's  foresight  had  prepared,  and  his  busy  reign  of
thirty-five  years  saw  thirty-two  campaigns,  conducted  almost  without  a  break,
on  every  side  of  the  empire  in  succession.^  A  double  task  awaited  him,  which
he  conscientiously  and  successfully  fulfilled.  Assur-nazir-pal  had  thoroughly
reorganised  the  empire  and  raised  it  to  the  rank  of  a  great  power:  he
had  confirmed  his  provinces  and  vassal  states  in  their  allegiance,  and  had
subsequently  reduced  to  subjection,  or,  at  any  rate,  penetrated  at  various
jjoiuts,  the  little  bufier  principalities  between  Assyria  and  the  powerful
kingdoms  of  Babylon,  Damascus,  and  Urartu ;  but  he  had  avoided  engaging
any  one  of  these  three  great  states  in  a  struggle  of  which  the  issue  seemed
doubtful.  Shalmaneser  could  not  maintain  this  policy  of  forbearance  with-
out loss  of  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  :  conduct  which  might  seem
prudent  and  cautious  in  a  victorious  monarch  like  Assur-nazir-pal  would  in
him  have  argued  timidity  or  weakness,  and  his  rivals  would  soon  have
provoked  a  quarrel  if  they  thought  him  lacking  in  the  courage  or  the  means
to  attack  them.  Immediately  after  his  accession,  therefore,  he  assumed  the
offensive,  and  decided  to  measure  his  strength  first  against  Urartu,  which  for
some    years    past   had    been    showing    signs   of   restlessness.     Few  countries

*  [The  Shalmaneser  III.  of  the  text  is  the  Shalmaneser  II.  of  the  notes. — Tr.]
'  A  fortunate  occurrence  has  preserved  for  us  the  summary  of  the  chief  events  of  thirty-one  out  of  the
thirty -five  years  of  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  III.  recorded  on  the  Black  Obelisk  of  Nimroud,  discovered
by  Layard  {Nineveh  and  its  Ilemains,  vol.  i.  pp.  315-347 ;  Monuments  of  Nineceh,  vol.  i.  pis.  53-5G  ;
and  Jnscr.  in  the  Cuneif.  Char.,  pis.  87-90;  cf.  Abel  and  Winckler,  Keilschri/ttexte,  pp.  7-12),  and
preserved  in  the  British  Museum :  the  inscription  has  been  translated  into  French  by  Oppert,
Expedition  de  M^sopotamie,  vol.  i.  pp.  342-347,  and  Eiit.  des  Empires  de  Chaldee  et  d'Assyrie,  pp.
108-117;  and  by  Menant,  Annates  des  Rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  97-104;  into  English  by  S.\ycE,  Tlie  Blach
Obelisk  Inscription  of  Shalmaneser  11.,  in  Records  of  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,  vol.  v.  p.  27;  and  by  Scheil.
Inscr.  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  38-52 ;  into  German  by  Wiscklek.
Amuihninsc.hrift  des  ObelisJcs  von  NimrHd,  in  Scheader,  Keilins.  BihUotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  128-151.  A
detailed  narration  of  the  events  which  occurred  in  the  first  six  years  was  inscribed  on  the  monolith
of  Kurkh  (H.  EAWLissoy,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pis.  7,8);  this  has  been  translated  into  French
by  Menant,  Annales  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  105-113;  into  English  by  Sayce,  Kiirhh  Inscr.  of
Shalmaneser,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  81-100;  by  Ckaig,  Monolith  Inscr.  of
Salmaneser  II,  1887,  New  Haven,  extract  from  Hebraica,  vol.  iii.  pp.  201-231  ;  and  by  Scheie,
Monolith  Inscr.  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  53-71  :  into  German  by
Peiser,  Die  MonoUth-Inschrift,  in  Schrades,  Xej'Zi'ns.  Bibliotheh;  vol.  i.  pp.  150-175.  Some  other  in-
scriptions engraved  on  the  two  bulls  from  Nimroud  (Latakd,  Inscr.  in  the  Cuneif.  Char.,  pp.  12-16,
46-47)  add  further  details  to  the  history  of  several  of  the  campaigns.  The  bronze  gates  of
Balawat  (Pinches,  The  Bronze  Gates  discovered  by  M.  Rassam  at  Balaicdt,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  89-111 ;  and  Scheie,  Inscr.  of  Shalmaneser  II.  on  the  Gates  of  Balaudt,
in  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  72-79)  give,  besides  a  written  text,  a  series  of  reliefs  in
bronze  (partly  published  by  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.)  illustrating  the  wars  which  occupied  the  early
years  of  the  reign.  All  these  documents  have  been  chronologically  classified,  transcribed,  and
translated  into  French  by  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  11.  roi  d'Assyrie,  860-824,
Paris,  1890.


SEALMANESER   III.   AND    UBARTU.


53


are  more  rugged  or  better  adapted  for  defence  than  that  in  which  his
armies  were  about  to  take  the  field.  The  volcanoes  to  which  it  owed  its
configuration  in  geological  times,  had  become  extinct  long  before  the
appearance  of  man,  but  the  surface  of  the  ground  still  bears  evidence  of  their
former  activity ;  layers  of  basaltic  rock,  beds  of  scoriae  and  cinders,  streams  of
half-disintegrated  mud  and  lava,  and  more  or  less  perfect  cones,  meet  the
eye  at  every  turn.     Subterranean  disturbances  have  not  entirely  ceased  even


THE    TWO   PEAKS    OP    MOUNT    ARARAT.'


now,  for  certain  craters — that  of  Tandurek,  for  example — sometimes  exhale
acid  fumes ;  while  hot  springs  exist  in  the  neighbourhood,  from  which
steaming  waters  escape  in  cascades  to  the  valley,  and  earthquakes  and  strange
subterranean  noises  are  not  unknown.  The  backbone  of  tliese  Armenian
mountains  joins  towards  the  south  the  line  of  the  Gordyajan  range ;  it
runs  in  a  succession  of  zigzags  from  south-east  to  north-west,  meeting  at
length  the  mountains  of  Pontus  and  the  last  spurs  of  the  Caucasus.
Lofty  snow-clad  peaks,  chiefly  of  volcanic  origin,  rise  here  and  there  among
them,  the  most  important  being  Akhta-dagh,  Tandurek,  Ararat,  Bingoel,  and
Palandoeken.  The  two  unequal  pyramids  which  form  the  summit  of  Ararat
are  covered  with  perpetual  snow,  the  higher  of  them  being  16,916  feet  above
the  sea-level.  The  spurs  which  issue  from  the  principal  chain  cross  each  other
in  all  directions,  and  make  a  network  of  rocky  basins  where  in  former  times
water  collected  and  formed  lakes,  nearly  all  of  which  are  now  dry  in  con-
sequence of  the  breaking  down  of  one  or  other  of  their  enclosing  sides.     Two


Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  A.  Tissandier.


54         TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGOLE  FOR    SYRIA.

onlv  of  tbese  mountain  lakes  still  remain,  entirely  devoid  of  outlet,  Lake  Van
in  the  south,  and  Lake  Urumiah^  further  to  the  south-east.  The  Assyrians
called  the  former  the  Upper  Sea  of  Nairi,  and  the  latter  the  Lower  Sea,^  and
both  constituted  a  defence  for  Urartu  against  their  attacks.  To  reach  the
centre  of  the  kingdom  of  Urartu,  the  Assyrians  had  either  to  cross  the
mountainous  strip  of  land  between  the  two  lakes,  or  by  making  a  detour  to  the
north-west,  and  descending  the  diiBcult  slopes  of  the  valley  of  the  Arzania,  to
approach  the  mountains  of  Armenia  lying  to  the  north  of  Lake  Van.  The
march  was  necessarily  a  slow  and  painful  one  for  both  horses  and  men,  along
narrow  winding  valleys  down  which  rushed  rapid  streams,  over  raging  torrents,
through  tangled  forests  where  tiie  path  had  to  be  cut  as  they  advanced,  and
over  barren  wind-swept  plateaux  where  rain  and  mist  chilled  and  demoralized
soldiers  accustomed  to  the  warm  and  sunny  plains  of  the  Euphrates.  The
majority  of  the  armies  wliich  invaded  this  region  never  reached  the  goal  of
the  expedition  :  they  retired  after  a  few  engagements,  and  withdrew  as  quickly
as  possible  to  more  genial  climes.  The  main  part  of  Urartu  remained  almost
always  unsubdued  behind  its  barrier  of  woods,  rocks,  and  lakes,  which  protected
it  from  the  attacks  levelled  against  it,  and  no  one  can  say  how  far  the
kingdom  extended  in  the  direction  of  the  Caucasus.  It  certainly  included
the  valley  of  the  Araxes  and  possibly  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Kur,  and  the
steppes  sloping  towards  the  Caspian  Sea.  It  was  a  region  full  of  contrasts,
at  once  favoured  and  ill-treated  by  nature  in  its  elevation  and  aspect :  rugged
peaks,  deep  gorges,  dense  thickets,  districts  sterile  from  the  heat  of  subter-
ranean fires,  and  sandy  wastes  barren  for  lack  of  moisture,  were  interspersed
with  shady  valleys,  sunny  vine-clad  slopes,  and  wide  stretches  of  fertile  land
covered  with  ricli  layers  of  deep  alluvial  soil,  where  thick-standing  corn  and
meadow-lands,  alternating  with  orchards,  repaid  the  cultivator  for  the  slightest
attempt  at  irrigation.^

History  does  not  record  who  were  the  former  possessors  of  this  land  j  but
towards  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  it  was  divided  into  several  princi-
palities, whose  position  and  boundaries  cannot  be  precisely  determined.  It  is
thought  that  Urartu  lay  ou  either  side  of  Mount  Ararat  and  on  both  banks

'  For  a  detailed  description  of  the  mountain  groups  of  Armenia  and  the  region  of  the  two  lakes,
cf.  EusEE  Eeolcs,  NouvtUe  Giographie  Universelle,  vol.  ix.  pp.  180-185,  321,  et  seq.

"  ScHKADER,  Die  Namen  dcr  Meere  in  den  Assyrischen  Inschri/ten,  pp.  189-193,  and  /ur  Geo-
graphie  des  Assyrischen  Eeichs,  p.  7.  Delattre,  who  strongly  combated  this  identification  {Esquisse  de
G^ogr.  Asfyr.,yp.  15-18),  was  afterwards  converted  to  Schrader's  opinion  {Encore  un  mot  sur  la  G^ogr.
Assyr.,  pp.  15-18).

'  The  renowned  fertility  of  Urartu,  specially  of  that  part  watered  by  the  Araxes,  is  attested,
among  others,  by  S.  Jerome:  "Ararat  autem  regio  in  Armenia  campestris  est,  per  quam  Araxes
fluit,  incredibilis  ubertatis,  ad  radices  Tauri  montis  qui  usque  illuc  extenditur  "  {Comm.  ad  Jes.,
xsxvii.  36,  et  seq.).


THE   TRIBES    OF   VRABTU.


55


of  the  Araxes,  that  Biainas  lay  around  Lake  Yau,i  and  that  the  Mannai
occupied  the  country  to  the  north  and  east  of  Lake  Urumiah ;  ^  the  j)ositions
of  the  other  tribes  on  the  different  tributaries  of  the  Euphrates  or  the  slopes
of  the  Armenian  mountains  are  as  yet  imcertain.  The  country  was  probably
peopled  by  a  very  mixed  race,  for  its  mountains  have  always  afforded  a  safe


THE  KINGDOM

OF  URARTU      ^...s^^      .  -


>r4


■-;  c.


/^


asylum  for  refugees,  and  at  each  migration,  which  altered  the  face  of  Western
Asia,  some  fugitives  from  neighbouring  nations  drifted  to  the  shelter  of
its   fastnesses.     The  principal  element,   the  Khaldi,^  were  akin  to  that  great


'  HyvERNAT,  in  Mi'LLER(-SraONis),  Bu  Caucase  au  Gol/e  Persique,  pp.  523,  524.  Urartu  is  the
only  name  by  which  the  Assyrians  knew  the  kingdom  of  Vnn ;  it  has  been  recognised  from  the  very
beginning  of  Assyriological  studies,  as  well  as  its  identity  with  the  Ararat  of  the  Bible  and
the  Alarodians  of  Herodotus  (H.  Eawlinson,  Oh  the  Alarodians  of  Herodotus,  in  G.  Eawlinsos,
Herodotus,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203-206).  It  was  also  generally  recognised  that  the  name  Biainas  in  the
Vannic  inscriptions,  which  Hincks  read  Bieda,  corresponded  to  the  Urartu  of  the  Assyrians,  but  in
consequence  of  this  mistaken  reading,  efforts  have  been  made  to  connect  it  with  Adiabene.  Sayce
was  the  first  to  show  that  Biainas  was  the  name  of  the  country  of  Van,  and  of  the  kingdom  of  which
Van  was  the  capital  (77^e  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  deciphered  and  translated,  in  the  J.  B.  As.
Sac,  new  series,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  38S-b9tJ) ;  the  word  Bitani  which  Sayce  connects  with  it  is  not  a
secondary  form  of  the  name  of  Van,  but  a  present  day  term,  and  should  be  erased  from  the  list  of
geographical  names  (Sohradee,  Keilins.  und  Geschichtsf.,  p.  117,  note,  and  Zur  Geographic  des
Assyrischen  Reichs,  p.  14,  note  1).

'  The  Mannai  were  at  first  identified  with  the  people  of  Van  (Fr.  Lenormant,  Lettres  assyrio-
logiques,  vol.  i.  p.  22).  Sayce  first  recognised  that  they  should  be  located  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Lake  Urumiah  (77te  Cuneif.  Inscript.  of  Van,  in  the  /.  R.  As.  Soc,  new  series,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  3S8-400),
to  the  north  and  east  of  that  lake  (Belck,  Das  Reich  der  Mannxer,  in  the  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner
anthropologischen  Gesellschaft,  1896,  p.  480).  They  are  the  Minni  of  .Jeremiah  (li.  27),  and  it  is  iu
their  country  of  Minyas  that  one  tradition  made  the  ark  rest  after  the  Deluge  (Nicholas  op
Damasccs,  Fragm.  70,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragnienta  Historicorum  Grmcorum,  vol.  iii.  p.  415 ;  of.
JosEPHCs,  Ant.  Jud.,  I.  iii.  §  6).

"  The  application  of  the  name  Khaldi  to  the  indigenous  race,  guessed  at  by  Sayce  (2'fte  ^ncien*


56


TEE  ASSYRIAN  BEVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGQLE  FOE    SYRIA.


family  of  tribes  which  extended  across  the  range  of  the  Taurus,  from  the  shores
of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Euxine,  and  included  the  Khalybes,  the  Mushku,
the  Tabal,  and  the  Khati.  The  little  preserved  of  their  language  resembles
what  we  know  of  the  idioms  in  use  among  the  people  of  Arzapi  and  Mitanni,
and  their  religion  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  analogous  to  the  ancient
worship  of  the  Hittites.^     The  character  of  the  ancient  Armenians,  as  revealed

to  us  by  the  monuments,  resembles  in  its  main
features  that  of  the  Armenians  of  the  present  time.
Tliey  appear  as  tall,  strong,  muscular,  and  determined,
full  of  zest  for  work  and  fighting,
and  proud  of  their  independence.^
Some  of  them  led  a  pastoral  life,
wandering  about  with  their  flocks
during  the  greater  part  of  the  year,
obliged  to  seek  pasturage  in  valley,
forest,  or  mountain  height  accord-
ing to  the  season,  while  in  winter
they  remained  frost-bound  in  semi-
subterrauean  dwellings  similar  to
those  in  which  their  descendants
immure  themselves  at  the  present
day.^  Where  the  soil  lent  itself  to
agriculture,  they  proved  excellent  husbandmen,  and  obtained  abundant  crops.
Their  ingenuity  in  irrigation  was  remarkable,  and  enabled  them  to  bring  water
by  a  system  of  trenches  from  distant  springs  to  supply  their  fields  and  gardens;^

Empires  of  the  East,  Herodotus  I.-III.,  p.  17,  note  6)  and  by  Hommel  (Gescliichte  Baiijl.  und  Assyr.,  p.
(327,  note  2),  haa  been  clearly  shown  by  Lehmann  (Belck  and  Lehii ann,  Ueher  neuerlich  aufge/undene
armeidsche  Keilinschriften,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologic,  1S92,  pp.  131,  132  ;  Ein  neuer  Herrscher
von  Chaldia,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  is.  pp.  83-90 ;  Otaldische  Forschungen,  in  the
Verhandlungeii  der  Berliner  anthropologischen  Geselhchaft,  1895,  pp.  578-592).  Jensen  alone  has  up
to  now  raised  objections  against  this  identification  (Gruudlagen  fur  eine  Entzijferung  der  Khafischeu
vder  Cilicischen  Imchriften,  p.  121 ;  cf.  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Geselh.,  vol.  xlviii.  p.  434).

'  Jensen,  Vurstudien  zur  Entzifferuug  des  Mitanni,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.
pp.  59, 60, 65,  et  seq.,  and  Grundlagen  fur  eine  Entzifferung,  p.  128,  et  seq.;  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ueher
neuerlich  aufgefundeue  Keilinschriften  in  russisch  und  tiirlcisch  Armenien,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir
Ethnolugie,  1892,  pp.  129, 130.  Fr.  Lenormant  tried  to  compare  the  inscriptions  of  Urartu  with  those
of  Georgia  {Leltres  assyriologiques,  vol.  i.  pp.  124-133).

"  Cf.  Xenophon  on  the  Khaldi  of  his  time :  'EAe'-yo^/TO  Si  ol  XaKSaioi  eKeveepoi  re  Ka.1  SAkijuoi  that
(^Anahasis,  IV.  iii.  §  4;  V.  v.  §17),  and  the  jiicture  he  gives  of  their  warlike  customs  in  the
Cyropxdia,  III.  ii.  §  7.

'  Elisee  Eeulcs,  Nouvelle  Geographic  Vniverselle,  vol.  ix.  p.  355.  Xenophon  describes  one  of
these  underground  villages  which  lay  between  the  Northern  Euphrates  and  the  country  of  the
Chalybes  (Anabasis,  IV.  v.  §§  25-27).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Hormuzd  Eassam ;  cf.  Hokmuzo  Kassam,
Asshur  and  the  Land  of  Nimrod,  p.  378.

'  For  the  irrigation  trenches,  and  tlje  traces  which  remain  of  them,  and  for  the  use  the  people  of


FRAGMENT  OF  A   VOTIVE   SHIELD   OF   UIlAIiTIAN   WOKK.'


CIVILISATION  OF   UBARTU.


57


besides  which,  they  knew  how  to  terrace  the  steep  hillsides  so  as  to
prevent  the  rapid  draining  away  of  moisture.  Industries  were  but  little
develoi^ed  among  them,  except  perhaps  the  working  of  metals ;  for  were  they
not  akin  to  those  Chalybes  of  the  Pontus,  whose  mines  and  forges  already
furnished  iron  to  the  Grecian  world  ?  Fragments  have  been  discovered
in  the  ruined  cities  of  Urartu  of  statuettes,  cups,  and  votive  shields,  either


SITE    OP   AN    CIIARTIAN   TOWN'    AT    TOPBAH-KALEH.'


embossed  or  engraved,  and  decorated  with  concentric  bands  of  animals  or
men,  treated  in  the  Assyrian  manner,  but  displaying  great  beauty  of  style  and
remarkable  finish  of  execution.  Their  towns  were  generally  fortified  or  perched
on  heights,  rendering  them  easy  of  defence,  as,  for  example,  Van  and  Toprah-
Kaleh.  Even  such  towns  as  were  royal  residences  were  small,  and  not  to  be
compared  with  the  cities  of  Assyria  or  Aram ;  their  ground-plan  generally
assumed   the   form   of  a   rectangular  oblong,  not  always   traced  with   equal

Urartu  made  of  them,  cf.  Belck  aud  Lehmann,  Veher  neuerlich  avfgefundene  Keilinschriften,  in  the
ZeiUchrifi  fiir  Elhnologie,  1802,  pp.  130-H7 ;  Miltheilang  iiber  weitere  Ergehnisse  Hirer  Studieit,  iu
the  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  anthrojjolog ischeii  Gesellschaft,  1892,  pp.  477-483 ;  and  Chaldische
Forschungeii,  in  the  same  periodical,  1890,  pp.  309-315.  Armenian  tradition,  agreeing  with  classical
tradition,  attributes  the  construction  of  these  canals  to  Semiramis,  Storia  di  Mose  Corenese,  Venice,
1841,  pp.  51-54.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Binder,  contributed  by  Father  Scheil.


58         THE  ASSrSIAX  REVIVAL   AXD    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    STRIA.

exactitude.  The  walls  were  built  of  blocks  of  roughly  hewn  stone,  laid  in
regular  courses,  but  without  any  kind  of  mortar  or  cement;  they  were
surmounted  by  battlements,  and  flanked  at  intervals  by  square  towers,  at  the
foot  of  which  were  outworks  to  protect  the  points  most  open  to  attack.  The
entrance  was  approached  by  narrow  and  dangerous  pathways,  which  sometimes
ran  on  ledges  across  the  precipitous  face  of  the  rock.^  The  dwelling-houses
were  of  very  simple  construction,  being  merely  square  cabins  of  stone  or  brick,
devoid  of  any  external  ornament,  and  pierced  by  one  low  doorway,  but  sometimes
surmounted  by  an  open  colonnade  supported  by  a  row  of  small  pillars ;  a  flat


THE  RUISS  OF  A  PALACE  OF  UEAKTU  AT  TOPKAH-KALEH.'


roof  with  a  parapet  crowned  the  whole,  though  this  was  often  replaced  by  a
gabled  top,  which  was  better  adapted  to  withstand  the  rains  and  snows  of
winter.  The  palaces  of  the  chiefs  differed  from  the  private  houses  in  the  size
of  their  apartments  and  the  greater  care  bestowed  upon  their  decoration.
Their  fafades  were  sometimes  adorned  with  columns,  and  ornamented  with
bucklers  or  carved  discs  of  metal ;  slabs  of  stone  covered  with  inscriptions
lined   the   inner  halls,  but  we   do   not   know  whether   the   kings   added   to

'  Belck  and  LEHMAxii,CAa?(Z;8cfte  Forschungen,  in  tlie  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  anthropologiscJien
Geselhchaft,  1S95,  pp.  601-G14.

-  Drawn  by  BouJier,  from  a  photograph  by  Hormuzd  Kassam ;  cf.  Hobmuzd  Kassam,  Asshur  and
the  Land  of  Nimrod,  p.  37C.


s^


s  pq

5  a


<  '-5

5  5


;=  f^


60        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOB   SYRIA.

their  dedications  to  the  gods  and  the  recital  of  their  victories,  pictures  of  the
battles  they  had  fought  and  of  the  fortresses  they  had  destroyed.  The  furniture
resembled  that  in  the  houses  of  Nineveh,  but  was  of  simpler  workmanship,  and
perhaps  the  most  valuable  articles  were  imported  from  Assyria  or  were  of
Aramasan  manufacture.  The  temples  seem  to  have  differed  little  from  the
palaces,  at  least  in  external  appearance.  The  masonry  was  more  regular  and
more  skilfully  laid ;  the  outer  court  was  filled  with  brazen  lavers  and  statues ;
the  interior  was  furnished  with  altars,  sacrificial  stones,  idols  in  human  or
animal  shape,  and  bowls  identical  with  those  in  the  sanctuaries  on  the
Euphrates,  but  the  nature  and  details  of  the  rites  in  which  they  were  employed
are  unknown. ^     One  supreme  deity,  Khaldis,  god  of  the  sky,  was,  as  far  as  we

can  conjecture,  the  protector
of  the  whole  nation,  and
their  name  was  derived
from  his,  as  that  of  the
Assyrians  was  from  Assur,
the  Cosseans  from  Kashshu,
and  the  Khati  from  Khatu.
This  deity  was  assisted  in
the  government  of  the  uni-
verse by  Teisbas,  god  of  the
air,  and  Ardiuis  the  sun-
god.  Groups  of  secondary
deities  were  ranged  around
this  sovereign  triad — Auis,
the  water  ;  Ayas,  the  earth ;
Selardis,  the  moon  ;  Kharu-
bainis,  Irmusinis,  Adarutas,  and  Arzimelas :  one  single  inscription  enumerates
forty-six,  but  some  of  these  were  worshi23ped  in  special  localities  only.  It
would  appear  as  if  no  goddesses  were  included  in  the  native  Pantheon.
Saris,  the  only  goddess  known  to  us  at  present,  is  probably  merely  a
variant  of  the  Ishtar  of  Nineveh  or  Arbela,  borrowed  from  the  Assyrians
at  a  later  date."

The  first  Assyrian  conquerors  looked  upon  these  northern  regions  as  an


ASSTBIAN  SOLDIEBS  CARRYING   OFF  OR  DESTROYING   THE
FDRNITUBE   OF  AX   URARTIAN  TEMPLE.'


'  Illustrations  of  tliese  may  be  seen  in  pis.  140,  141  oi  Monument  deNinice  by  Botta;  portions
of  them  are  reproduced  in  the  vignettes  on  pp.  59  and  60  of  the  present  work.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  Botta,  Monument  de  Ninive,  vol.  ii.  pi.  1 10.  Scribes  are
weighing  gold,  and  soldiers  destroying  the  statue  of  a  god  with  their  axes.

'  Sayue,  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van  deciphered  and  translated,  in  the  J.  E.  As.  Soc,  new
series,  vol.  xiv.  jjp.  412-417.


THE  FIRST  CAMPAIGN  OF  SEALMASESER  III.  AGAINST  URARTU.      61

integral  part  of  Nairi,  and  included  them  under  that  name.^  They  knew  of  no
single  state  in  the  district  whose  power  might  successfully  withstand  their  own,
hut  were  merely  acquainted  with  a  group  of  hostile  provinces  whose  inter-
necine conflicts  left  them  ever  at  the  mercy  of  a  foreign  foe.^  Two  kingdoms
had,  however,  risen  to  some  importance  about  the  beginning  of  the  ninth
century — that  of  the  Mannai  in  the  east,  and  that  of  Urartu  ia  the  centre  of
the  country.     Urartu  comprised  the  district  of  Ararat  proper,  the  province  of


SHALMAITESER  III.    CROSSING   THE  MOBNTAIKS  IN   HIS  CHARIOT.'

Biaina,  and  the  entire  basin  of  the  Arzania.  Arzashkun,  one  of  its  capitals,
situated  probably  near  the  sources  of  this  river,  was  hidden,  and  protected
against  attack,  by  an  extent  of  dense  forest  almost  impassable  to  a  regular
army.  The  power  of  this  kingdom,  though  as  yet  unorganised,  had  already
begun  to  inspire  the  neighbouring  states  with  uneasiness.  Assur-nazir-pal
speaks  of  it  incidentally  as  lying  on  the  northern  frontier  of  his  empire,*  but  the
care  he  took  to  avoid  arousing  its  hostility  shows  the  respect  in  which  he  held
it.  He  was,  indeed,  as  much  afraid  of  Urartu  as  of  Damascus,  and  though  he
approached  quite  close  to  its  boundary  in  his  second  campaign,  he  preferred  to
check  his  triumphant  advance  rather  than  risk  attacking  it.     It  appears  to

'  See  ScHRADER,  KeiJinf.  und  Geschichlsf.,  p.  579,  for  the  enumeration  of  the  countries  included
uuder  the  term  Nairi.  We  shall  see  further  on  how  one  of  the  most  powerful  kings  of  Urartu,
Arame,  called  himself  King  of  Xairi ;  cf.  infra,  p.  62.

"  The  single  inscription  of  Tiglath-pUeser  I.  contains  a  list  of  twenty-three  kings  of  Nairi
(Annals,  col.  iv.  11.  71-83),  and  mentions  sixty  chiefs  of  the  same  country  (ibid.,  11.  96-9S);  cf.
Maspero,  Struggle  of  ike  Nations,  pp.  C53,  654.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

•  Monolith  of  Shalmaneser  III.,  col.  ii.  11.  47-54.  Arzashku,  Arzashkun,  seems  to  be  the  Assyrian
form  of  an  Urartian  name  ending  in  -ha  (Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  pp.  429,  430,
436),  formed  from  a  proper  name  Arzash,  which  recalls  the  name  Arsene,  Arsissa,  applied  by  the
ancients  to  part  of  Lake  Van  (Strabo,  XI.  xiv.  §  S,  p.  529).  Arzashkun  might  represent  the  Ardzik
of  the  .\rmenian  historians,  west  of  Malasgert.


62        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.


have  been  at  tbat  time  under  the  undisputed  rule  of  a  certain  Sharduris,  son  of
Lutipri,^  and  subsequently,  about  the  middle  of  Assur-nazir-pal's  reign,  to  have
passed  into  the  hands  of  Avame,  who  styled  himself  King  of  Nairi,  and  whose
ambition  may  have  caused  those  revolts  which  forced  Assur-nazir-pal  to  take
up  arms  in  the  eigliteenth  year  of  his  reign.  On  this  occasion  the  Assyrians
acain  confined  themselves  to  the  chastisement  of  their  own  vassals,  and  checked

their  advance  as  soon  as


f  hey  approached  Urartu.^
Their  success  was  but
temporary ;  hardly  had
they  withdrawn  from  the
neighbourhood,  when
the  disturbanceswere  re-
newed with  even  greater
violence,  very  probably
at  the  instigation  of
Arame.  Shalmaneserlll.
found  matters  in  a  very
unsatisfactory  state  both
on  the  west  and  south
of  Lake  Van :  some  of
the  peoples  who  had
been  subject  to  his
father  —  the  Khubush-
kia,  the  pastoral  tribes  of  the  Gordyrean  mountains,  and  the  Aramreans  of  the
Euphrates  ^ — had  transferred  their  allegiance  elsewhere.  He  immediately  took
measures  to  recall  them  to  a  sense  of  their  duty,  and  set  out  from  Calah  only
a  few  days  after  succeeding  to  the  crown.  He  marched  at  first  in  an  easterly
direction,  and,  crossing  the  pass  of  Simisi,  burnt  the  city  of  Aridi,  thus  proving
that  he  was  fully  prepared  to  treat  rebels  after  the  same  fashion  as  his  father.^
The  lesson  had  immediate  effect.      All  the  neighbouring  tribes,  Khargseans,

■  The  position  of  Sliarduris,  who  must  be  called  for  the  present  Sharduris  I.,  has  been  indicated  by
Belck, -Das  Beich  der  Jlunnaer  (in  the  Vcrhandl.  der  Berliner  anthropol.  GeselUchaft,  1894,  p.  486),
and  by  Lehmann,  Schar  Kischschatl  (in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assijrioloyie,  vol.  xi.  p.  201,  202).

-  Cf.  the  story  of  this  campaign,  eupra,  p.  50.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  ttie  bas-reliefs  on  the  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

*  Lehmann  {Schar  Kischschati,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Aseyriologie,  pp.  201,  202)  has  with  reason
attributed  this  recoil  of  the  Assyrian  power  to  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Urartu.

=  A  passage  on  the  Black  Obelisk,  1.  190,  states  that  one  could  ''descend  to  the  borders  of
Khalman  by  tha  pass  of  Simisi,"  -which  decided  Hommel  (Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,
p.  593)  to  make  this  first  expedition  ascend  to  the  table-laud  of  Bledia  by  the  passes  near  Holwan.  The
same  names  occur  in  the  country  traversed  by  Shalmaneser  as  were  noted  by  Assur-nazir-pal  iu  one
of  his  campaigns,  and  consequently  it  must  be  sought  iu  the  east  or  north-eaat,  though  I  cannot
fix  the  exact  position  on  the  map  of  all  the  localities  mentioned.


=:2±1X


mmm


-ifisasi.


THE  PEOPLE  OF  SHtJGUKIA  FIGHTING  AGAINST  THE  ASSYRIANS."


SEALMANE8ER   III.    ON   THE   SHORES    OF  LAKE    VAN.


63


Kharmasseans,  Simisseans,  the  people  of  Simira,  Sirisha,  and  Ulmauia,  hastened
to  pay  him  homage  even  before  he  had  struck  his  camp  near  Aridi.  Hurrying
across  country  by  the  shortest  route,  which  entailed  the  making  of  roads  to  enable
his  chariots  and  cavalry  to  follow  him,  he  fell  upon  Khubushkia,  and  reduced  a
hundred  towns  to  ashes,  pursuing  the  king  Kakia  into  the  depths  of  the  forest,


PKISONERS    FROM    SHUGUXIA,    WITH    THEIR    ARMS    TIED    AND   YOKES    OX    THEIR   NECKS.'

and  forcing  him  to  an  unconditional  surrender.  Ascending  thence  to  Shugunia,
a  dependency  of  Arame's,  he  laid  the  principality  waste,  in  spite  of  the  desperate
resistance  made  on  their  mountain  slopes  by  the  inhabitants;  then  proceeding
to  Lake  Van,  he  performed  the  ceremonial  rites  incumbent  on  an  Assyrian  king
whenever  he  stood  for  the  first  time  on  the  shores  of  a  new  sea.  He  washed  his
weapons  in  the  waters,  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  casting  some  portions
of  the  victim  into  the  lake,  and  before  leaving  carved  his  own  image  on  the
surface  of  a  commanding  rock.  On  his  homeward  march  he  received  tribute
from  Gilzan.^  This  exjjedition  was  but  the  prelude  of  further  successes.  After
a  few  weeks'  repose  at  Nineveh,  he  again  set  out  to  make  his  authority  felt  in
the  western  portions  of  his  dominions.  Akhuni,  chief  of  Bit-Adini,  whose
position  was  the  first  to  be  menaced,  had  formed  a  league  with  the  chiefs  of
all  the  cities  which  had  formerly  bowed  before  Assur-nazir-pal's  victorious
arms,   Gurgum,    Samalla,   Kui,    the    Patina,    Carchemish,    and    the    Khati.


'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

*  The  summary  of  this  first  campaign  is  found  on  tlie  Blacli  Obelisk,  11.  22-26 ;  the  detailed  account
on  the  Monolith,  col.  i.  II.  14-29.  Cf  Peiser,  Die  Monolith- Imchrijt,  in  Sciirader,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,
vol.  i.  pp.  152-157,  and  Amiaud  and  Soheil,  Leg  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II ,  pp.  8-13.


64        TEE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL   ANT>    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

Shalmaneser  seized  Lalati^  and  Bumarana,  two  of  Akhuni's  towns,  drove  him
across  the  Euphrates,  and,  following  close  on  his  heels,  collected  as  he  passed
the  tribute  of  Gurgum,  and  fell  upon  Samalla.     Under  the  walls  of  Lutibu  ^  he
overthrew  the  combined  forces  of  Adini,  Samalla,  and  the  Patina,  and  raised
a  trophy  to  commemorate  his  victory  at   the  sources  of  the  Saluara ;  ^  then
turning  sharply  to  the  south,  he  crossed  the  Orontes  in  pursuit  of  Shapalulme,
King  o°f  the  Patina.    Not  far  from  Alizir  he  encountered  a  fresh  army  raised  by
\khuni  and  the  King  of  Samalla,  with   contingents  from  Carchemish,  Kui,
Cilicia   and  lasbuki  :^  having  routed  it,  he  burnt  the  fortresses  of  Shapalulme,
and  after  occupying  himself  by  cutting  down  cedars  and  cypress  trees  on  the
\manos   in   the   province   of    Atalur,   he   left   a  triumphal    stele    engraved
on  the  mountain-side.      Next   turning   eastwards,  he   received   the   homage
offered  with  alacrity  by  the  towns  of  Taia;"'  Khazazu,  Nulla,  and  Butamn,
and    with  a  final   tribute  from  Agusi,  he  returned  in  triumph  to  Nmeveh.'
The'  motley  train  which  accompanied  him  showed  by  its  variety  the  immense
extent   of  country  he   had   traversed   during   this   first    campaign.     Among
the  prisoners   were  representatives   of  widely    differing   races  ;-Khati  with
Ion-  robes  and  cumbrous   head-dresses,  following  naked  mountaineers  from
Shugunia,  who  marched  with  yokes  on  their  necks,  and  wore  those  close-fitting
helmets  with  short  crests  which  have  such  a  strangely  modern  look  on  the
Assyrian  bas-reliefs.     The  actual  results  of  the  campaign  were,  perhaps,  hardly
commensurate  with  the  energy  expended.     This  expedition  from  east  to  west
had  certainly  inflicted  considerable  losses  on  the  rebels  against  whom  it  had
been  directed ;  it  had  cost  them  dearly  in  men  and  cattle,  and  booty  of  all
kinds    and  had  extorted  from  them  a  considerable  amount   of  tribute,  but
they  'remained,  notwithstanding,  still  unsubdued.     As  soon  as  the  Assyrian
troops  had  quitted  their  neighbourhood,  they  flattered  tliemselves  they  were


,  T  w  •  .T,»Wv  the  I  ulati  of  the  Egyptians  (,List  of  Thutmdsii  III.,  No.  142)  as  recognised
W  '^::€:^::^^^J^  An.,  in  .JBa^ylon^a.  a„.  OHental  U.eora,  vol.  u.
p:  42.     The  modern  ^fjl^^^!^^^^'  T^^TlZin.Uon  -i,  of  certain  proper  na.es

1.  i.  p.  9.     Perhaps  Tibtibu,  Dibdibu,  may  correspond  with  the  modem  village


in

vol.  i.  p

Dumdum  Huyuk.


'  The  Karasu,  as  was  stated  in  Maspeeo,  Struggle  o}  the  Nattons  p.  /,  ""^^  ^^  mentioned

<  The  country  of  lasbuki  is  represented  by  IsUbak   a  son  of  Abraham  -^f^^-^J;  -f,f ^

in  Genesis  (xxv.  2)  in  connection  with  Shuah  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  A.synohgi.che  ^ot>zen  zum  Alten

Testament,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  KeiJforschung.yol.  II.  V-^^)-  ,

"tL  may  be  Kefer-Daya  on  Key's  map,  a  place  situated  some  way  south  of   .\zaz   and

Tennft"L?(A^oe.  o„  ^Geo^r.  o/A.%r,-a.inthei.ab,Zo„,a^

nrefers    he  Kefr-Taiof  Sachau  {Itei.e  in  Syrien  und  Me^opotamzen,  p.  4o9)  to  the  west  "f  Aleppo
^BMlisk.  U.  26-31,  and  Monoim,  col.  i.  11.  20-54,  col.  ii.  11. 1-13;  cf.  Peisek^  "^^^^'^
Inschrlft,  in  Schkadek,  Keili,^.  BiUiothel^,  vol.  i.  pp.  136-161,  and  A^iaud  and  Scheil,  Les  laser.
Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  12-19.


g  3

3  r-

^  a

o


66        TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE  STBUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

safe  from  further  attack.  No  doubt  they  thought  that  a  show  of  submission
would  satisfy  the  new  invader,  as  it  had  satisfied  his  father;  but  Shalmaneser
was  not  disposed  to  rest  content  with  this  nominal  dependence.  He  intended
to  exercise  effective  control  over  all  the  states  won  by  his  sword,  and  the  proof
of  their  subjection  was  to  be  the  regular  payment  of  tribute  and  fulfilment  of
other  obligations  to  their  suzerain.  Year  by  year  he  unfailingly  enforced  his
rights,  till  the  subject  states  were  obliged  to  acknowledge  their  master  and
resign  themselves  to  servitude.

The  narrative  of  his  reiterated  efforts  is  a  monotonous  one.  The  king
advanced  against  Adini  in  the  spring  of  859  B.C.,  defeated  Akhuni  near
Tul-barsip,  transported  bis  victorious  regiments  across  the  Euphrates  on  rafts
of  skins,  seized  Surunu,  Paripa,  and  Dabigu,'  besides  six  fortresses  and  two
hundred  villages,  and  then  advanced  into  the  territory  of  Carchemish,  which
he  proceeded  to  treat  with  such  severity  that  the  other  Hittite  chiefs  hastened
to  avert  a  similar  fate  by  tendering  their  submission.  The  very  enumeration
of  their  offerings  proves  not  only  their  wealth,  but  the  terror  inspired  by
the  advancing  Assyrian  host :  Shapalulme  of  the  Patina,  for  instance,  yielded
up  three  talents  of  gold,  a  hundred  talents  of  silver,  three  hundred  talents  of
copper,  and  three  hundred  of  iron,  and  paid  in  addition  to  this  an  annual
tribute  of  one  talent  of  silver,  two  talents  of  purple,  and  two  hundred  great
beams  of  cedar-wood.  Samalla,  Agusi,  and  Kummukh  were  each  laid  under
tribute  in  proportion  to  their  resources,  but  their  surrender  did  not  necessarily
lead  to  that  of  Adini.-  Akhuni  realised  that,  situated  as  he  was  on  the  very
borders  of  Assyrian  territory,  there  was  no  longer  a  chance  of  his  preserving  his
semi-independence,  as  was  the  case  with  his  kinsfolk  beyond  the  Euphrates  ;
proximity  to  the  capital  would  involve  a  stricter  servitude,  which  would  soon
reduce  him  from  the  condition  of  a  vassal  to  that  of  a  subject,  and  make  him
merely  a  governor  where  be  had  hitherto  reigned  as  king.  Abandoned  by
the  Khati,  he  sought  allies  further  north,  and  entered  into  a  league  with  the
tribes  of  Nairi  and  Urartu.  When,  in  858  B.C.,  Shalmaneser  III.  forced  an
entrance  into  Tul-barsip,  and  drove  back  what  was  left  of  the  garrison  on  the
right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  a  sudden  movement  of  Arame  obliged  him  to  let

'  Fr.  Lenormant  (Les  Origines  de  VBistoire,  vol.  iii.  p.  328)  identified  the  Assyrian  Paripa  with
the  Fariua  of  the  Egyptians  (list  of  Thutmosis  III.,  No.  247) ;  the  site  of  the  modern  El-Fara,
proposed  for  both  by  Tomkins  (Notes  on  the  Geography  of  N.  Syria,  in  the  Bahjl.  and  Orient.  Record,
vol.  iii.  p-  42),  is  too  far  to  the  south.  Shalmaneser  crossed  the  Euphrates  near  Tul-barsip,  which
would  lead  liim  into  the  country  between  Birejik,  Eum-kuleh,  and  Aintab,  and  It  is  in  that  district
that  we  must  look  for  the  towns  subject  to  Akhuni.  Dabigu,  I  consider,  corresponds  to  Dehbek
on  Key's  map,  a  little  to  the  north-east  of  Aintab  (cf.  supra,  p.  31,  note  1) ;  the  sites  of  Paripa
and  Surunu  are  unknown.

2  OheUsh,ll.  32-35,  and  Monolith,  col.  ii.  11. 13-30 ;  cf.  Peisek,  Die  Monolith-Inschrift,  in  Schbader,
Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  160-163,  and  Amiacd  and  Soheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,
pp.  18-23.


TEE   CONQUEST   OP  BIT-ADINJ  AND    OF  NAIRL


67


the  prey  escape  from  liis  grasp.  Kapidly  fortifying  Tul-barsip,  Nappigi,
Aligu,  Pitru,  and  Mutkinu,  and  garrisoning  tliem  with  loyal  troops  to  com-
mand the  fords  of  the  river,  as  his  ancestor  Shalmaneser  I.  had  done  six
centuries  before,*  he  then  re-entered  Nairi  by  way  of  Bit-Zamani,  devastated
Inziti  with  lire  and  sword,  forced  a  road  through  to  the  banks  of  the  Arzania,
pillaged  Sukhnii  and  Dayaini,  and  appeared  under  the  walls  of  Arzashkun.
Arame  withdrew  to  Mount  Adduri  and  awaited  his  attack  in  an  almost
impregnable  position ;  he  was  nevertheless  defeated :  3400  of  his  soldiers  fell
on  the  field  of  battle ;  his  camp,  his  treasures,  his  chariots,  and  all  his  baggage


'ij^i^  H#-  K-'^T  >(■<-(  A


^V.  ^^A  T<'<j5i-^


SHLA,    KlNli    UF   GII.ZAN,    BBIXGISG    A    WAUHUICbE    FULLY    CAPARISONED   TO   SHAIMANESEK.''

passed  into  the  hands  of  the  conqueror,  and  he  himself  barely  escaped  with
his  life.  Shalmaneser  ravageil  the  country  "  as  a  savage  bull  ravages  and
tramples  under  his  feet  the  fertile  fields ; "  he  burnt  the  villages  and  the
crops,  destroyed  Arzashkun,  and  raised  before  its  gates  a  pyramid  of  human
heads,  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  prisoners  impaled  on  stakes.  He  climbed
the  mountain  chain  of  Iritia,  and  laid  waste  Aramali  and  Zanziuna  at  his
leisure,  and  descending  for  the  second  time  to  the  shores  of  Lake  Van,
renewed  the  rites  he  had  performed  there  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  and
engraved  on  a  neighbouring  rock  an  inscription  recording  his  deeds  of  prowess.

'  Cf.  Maspero,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  657,  (;65.  Pitru,  the  Petlior  of  the  Bible  QXumb.  sxii.
5),  is  situated  near  the  confluence  of  tlie  Sajur  and  the  Euphrates  {Monolith  of  Shalmaneser,  col.  ii.
1.  36),  somewhere  near  the  encampment  called  Oshe'riye'h  by  Sachau  {Reise  in  Sijrien,  pp.  156-15S).
Mutkinu  was  on  the  other  bank,  perhaps  at  Kharbet-Beddai,  nearly  opposite  Pitru.  Nappigi  was
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  which  excludes  its  identification  with  Mabog-Hierapolis,  as
proposed  by  Hommel  (Gesch.  Bahyl.  unci  Assyr.,  p.  607)  ;  Nabigath,  mentioned  by  Tomkins  (A'ofcs
on  the  Geography  of  N.  Syria,  iu  the  Babyl.  and  Orient.  Eecord,  vol.  iii.  p.  42),  is  too  far  east.
Kappigi  and  Aligu  must  both  be  sought  iu  the  district  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  town  of  Saruj.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  Black  Obelisk ;  cf.  Layaud,  Mon.
of  Nin^veli,  vol.  i.  pi.  54.


68        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

He  made  bis  way  back  to  Gilzao,  where  its  king,  Shua,  brought  him  a  war-
borse  fully  caparisoned,  as  a  token  of  homage.  Shalmaneser  graciously
deigned  to  receive  it,  and  further  exacted  from  the  king  the  accustomed
contributions  of  chariot-horses,  sheep,  and  wine,  together  with  seven  drome-
daries, whose  strange  forms  amused  the  gaping  crowds  of  Nineveh.  After
quitting  Gilzan,  Shalmaneser  encountered  the  people  of  Khubushkia,  who
ventured  to  bar  his  way ;  but  its  king,  Kakia,  lost  his  city  of  Shilaia,  and  three
thousand  soldiers,  besides  bulls,  horses,  and  sheep  innumerable.  Having
enforced  submission  in  Khubushkia,  Shalmaneser  at  length  returned  to  Assur


BROMEDAKrES  FROM   GILZAX.'


through  the  defiles  of  Kirruri,  and  came  to  Calah  to  enjoy  a  well-earned  rest
after  the  fatigues  of  his  campaign.^  But  Akhuni  had  not  yet  lost  heart.
Though  driven  back  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  he  had  taken
advantage  of  the  diversion  created  by  Arame  in  his  favour,  to  assume  a  strong
position  among  the  hills  of  Shitamrat  with  the  river  in  his  rear.^  Shalmaneser
attacked  his  lines  in  front,  and  broke  through  them  after  three  days'  pre-
liminary skirmishing ;  then  finding  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  battle  array  before
their  last  stronghold,  the  king  charged  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  drove
them  back  and  forced  them  to  surrender.  Akhuni's  life  was  spared,  but  he
was  sent  with  the  remainder  of  his  army  to  colonise  a  village  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Assur,  and  Adini  became  henceforth  an  integral  part  of
Assyria.  The  war  on  the  western  frontier  was  hardly  brought  to  a  close  when
another  broke  out  in  the  opposite  direction.    The  king  rapidly  crossed  the  pass

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefg  on  the  bronze  gates  of  Balawat.

=  Obelisk,  11.  35-44: ;  hucripiion  of  Balaiodt,  col.  ii.  11.  5,  6,  col.  iii.  11.  1-3 ;  Monolith,  col.  ii.
11.  30-66  :  cf.  Peisee,  Die  Monolith-Inschri/t,  in  Schkader,  Keilins.  BiUiothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  162-169,  and
Amiaud  and  Scheie,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  22-31.

^  The  position  of  Sbitamrat  may  answer  to  the  ruins  of  the  fortress  of  Rum-kaleh,  which  protected
a  ford  of  the  Euphrates  iu  Byzantine  times.


THE  FIRST  ATTACK   ON  DAMASCUS.


69


of  Bunagislilu  and  fell  upon  Mazamua :  the  natives,  disconcerted  by  his
impetuous  onslaught,  nevertheless  hoped  to  escape  by  putting  out  in  their
boats  on  the  broad  expanse  of  Lake  Urumiah.  Shalmaneser,  however,  con-
structed rafts  of  inflated  skins,  on  which  his  men  ventured  in  pursuit  right
out  into  the  open.  The  natives  were  overpowered ;  the  king  "  dyed  the  sea
with  their  blood  as  if  it  had  been  wool,"  and  did  not  withdraw  lontil  he  had
forced  them  to  appeal  for  mercy.^

In  five  years  Shalmaneser  had  destroyed  Adini,  laid  low  Urartu,  and  con-
firmed the  tributary  states  of  Syria  in  their  allegiance;  but  Damascus  and


Tj^^


'l\£^i^v\\^^


Babylon  were  as  yet  untouched,  and  the  moment  was  at  hand  when  he  would
have  to  choose  between  an  arduous  conflict  with  them,  or  such  a  repression  of
the  warlike  zeal  of  his  opening  years,  that,  like  his  father  Assur-nazir-pal,  be
would  have  to  repose  on  his  laurels.  Shalmaneser  was  too  deeply  imbued
with  the  desire  for  conquest  to  choose  a  peaceful  policy :  he  decided  at  once  to
assume  the  oSensive  against  Damascus,  being  probably  influenced  by  the  news
of  Ahab's  successes,^  and  deeming  that  if  the  King  of  Israel  had  gained  the
ascendency  unaided,  Assur,  fully  confident  of  its  own  superiority,  need  have  no
fear  as  to  the  result  of  a  conflict.  The  forces,  however,  at  the  disposal  of  Ben-
hadad  II.  (Adadidri)  were  sufficient  to  cause  the  Assyrians  some  uneasiness.
The  King  of  Damascus  was  not  only  lord  of  Ccele-Syria  and  the  Hauran,  but
he  exercised  a  suzerainty  more  or  less  defined  over  Hamath,  Israel,  Ammon,

'  Ofce/(sfc,  11.  45-52 ;  InscriptioH  of  Balaicdi,  col.  iii.  11.  3-6;  and  Monolith,  col.  ii.  11.  06-7S  :  cl'.
Peiseb,  Die  Monolith-Inschrift,  in  Schrader,  Keilins.  Bibliothel;  vol.  i.  pp.  168-171,  and  Ajuacd
and  ScHEiL,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  30,  31.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  cue  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  Black  Obelisk ;  of.  Lataed,  The
Monmncntg  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  56.

'  For  the  wars  of  Ahab  with  Ben-hadad  (Adadidri),  of.  Maspebo,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  785,  et  seq.


70        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    TEE  STBUOOLE  FOR    SYRIA.

the  Arabian  and  Idumean  tribes,  Arvad  and  the  principalities  of  Northern
Phcenicia,  Usanata,  Shi;mu,  and  Irkanata  ;^  in  all,  twelve  peoples  or  twelve  kings
owned  his  sway,  and  their  forces,  if  united  to  his,  would  provide  at  need  an
army  of  nearly  100,000  men :  a  few  years  might  see  these  various  elements
merged  in  a  united  empire,  capable  of  withstanding  the  onset  of  any  foreign
foe.^  Shalmaneser  set  out  from  Nineveh  on  the  lith  day  of  the  month  lyyar,
854  B.C.,  and  chastised  on  his  way  the  Aramfeans  of  the  Balikh,  whose  sheikh
Giammu  had  shown  some  inclination  to  assert  his  independence.  He  crossed
the  Euphrates  at  Tul-barsip,  and  held  a  species  of  durbar  at  Pitru  for  his
Syrian  subjects:  Sangar  of  Carchemish,  Kuudashpi  of  Kummukh,  Aranie
of  Agusi,  Lalli  of  Melitene,  Khaiani  of  Samalla,  Garparuda  who  had  succeeded
Shapalulme  among  the  Patina,  and  a  second  Garparuda  of  Gurgum,^  rallied
around  him  with  their  presents  of  welcome,  and  probably  also  with  their  troops.
This  ceremony  concluded,  he  hastened  to  Khalman  and  reduced  it  to  sub-
mission, then  plunged  into  the  hill-country  between  Khalman  and  the  Orontes,
and  swept  over  the  whole  territory  of  Hamath,  A  few  easy  victories  at  the  outset
enabled  him  to  exact  ransom  from,  or  burn  to  the  ground,  the  cities  of  Adinnu,
Mashga,  Argana.and  Qarqar,  but  just  beyond  Qarqar  he  encountered  the  advance-
guard  of  the  Syrian  army.^    Ben-hadad  had  called  together,  to  give  him  a  fitting

'  Irkunata,  the  Egyptian  Arqanatu  (Max  MI'ller,  Asieii  unci  Europa,  p.  24(j),  perhaps  the  Irqata
of  the  Tel-el-Ainarna  tablets  (Winckler,  Vie  ThonUtfeln  von  Tdl-il-Aniarna,  pp.  170-173),  is  the
Arka  of  Phoenicia.  The  other  countries  enumerated  are  likewise  situated  in  the  same  locality.
Shianu  (for  a  long  time  read  as  Shizanu),  the  Sin  of  the  Bible  (Gen.  x.  17),  is  mentioned  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.  under  the  name  Siauu  (cf.  Maspero,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  172,  note  5).
Ushanat  is  called  Uznu  by  Tiglath-pileser,  and  Delitzsch  thought  it  represented  the  modern  Kalaat-
el-Ho3u  (IFo  lag  dui  Paradiesi  p.  282).  With  Arvad  it  forms  the  ancient  Zahi  of  the  Egyptians,
which  was  then  subject  to  Damascus.

•  The  suzerainty  of  Ben-hadad  over  these  twelve  peoples  is  proved  by  the  way  in  which  they  are
enumerated  in  the  Assyrian  documents :  his  name  always  stands  at  the  head  of  the  list  (ObeKsfc,
11.  59-61,  88,  89,  Suit  Ko.  1,  in  Layard,  Inscriptions,  pi.  14,  11.  16,  17,  32,  33,  37,  38,  4.5,  46,  and
Monolith,  col.  ii.  11.  90-95.)  The  manner  in  which  the  Assyrian  scribes  introduce  the  names  of  these
kings,  mentioning  sometimes  one,  sometimes  two  among  them,  without  subtracting  them  from  the  total
number  12,  has  been  severely  criticised,  and  Schrader  excused  it  by  saying  that  12  is  here  used  as  a
round  number  somewhat  vaguely  {Keilinschri/tea  und  Geschiclitsforschung,  p.  46).  The  detailed  list  on
the  Monolith,  11.  90-95,  contaios  only  11  kings.  'When  the  scribe  speaks  of  Ben-hadad,  Irkhulini  and
the  12  kings  of  Syria,  I  think  he  intends  to  include  tije  two  he  has  named  in  the  twelve.  The  proof  of
the  correctness  of  this  view  is  furnished  by  the  various  renderings  of  the  tame  story:  thus,  where  the
Ohelisli,  11.  91,  92,  speaks  of  12  kings,  without  naming  any  iudividually,  the  Bull  No.  1, 11.  45,  4(;,
mentions  Ben-hadad  (Adadidri),  Irkhulini,  with  12  kings;  aud  where  the  OieZ/efc,  li.  59-61,  gives
Adadidri,  Irkhulini,  "  with  the  kings  of  the  Khati,"  the  Bull  No.  1  mentions  Adadidri,  Irkhulini,  "  with
12  kings  of  the  sea-coast,"  and  the  Monolith,  11.  90-95,  enumerates  11  kings.  Has  one  of  the  twelve
been  forgotten?  It  is  quite  certain  that,  in  the  phraseology  of  Shalmaneser,  Ben-hadad,  Irkhulini,
with  12  kings  really  signifies  Ben-hadad,  Irkhulini,  and  others ;  in  all,  12  kings  of  Syria  and  Phoenicia.
'  Winckler((Jesc/i.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  193)considers  that  the  Karparuda  or  Kalparuda  of  Gurgum  is  the
same  as  the  Karparuda  of  the  Patina  :  the  Patina  and  Gurgum  would  in  this  case  be  two  provinces  of  a
single  kingdom,  and  the  Assyrian  scribes  must  have  had  two  lists  before  them  in  drawing  up  this  por-
tion of  the  Annals,  one  calling  Karparuda  King  of  the  Patina,  the  other  entitling  him  King  of  Gurgum.
•  The  position  of  these  towns  is  uncertain :  the  general  plan  of  the  campaign  only  proves  that
they  must  lie  on  the  main  route  from  Aleppo  to  Kalaat-Sejor,  by  Bara  or  by  Maaret-en-N6man  and
Kalaat-el-Mudiq.  It  is  agreed  that  Qarqar  must  be  sought  not  far  from  Hamath,  whatever  the  exact
site  may  be.    An  examination  of  the  map  shows  us  that  Qarqar  correspondsjto  the  present  Kalaat-el


THE  BATTLE    OF   QARQAB.


71


reception,  the  whole  of  the  forces  at  his  disposal:  1200  chariots,  1200  horse,  20,000
foot-soldiers  from  Damascus  alone;  700  chariots,  700  horse  and  10,000  foot
from  Hamath;  2000  chariots  and  10,000  foot  belonging  to  Ahab,  500  soldiers
from  Kui,  1000  mountaineers  from  the  Taurus,^  10  chariots  and  10,000  foot
from  Irkanata,  200  from  Arvad,  200  from  Usanata,  30  chariots  and  10,000
foot  from  Shianu,  1000  camels  from  G-indibu  the  xirab,  and  1000  Ammonites.


^M^T^T  ^  ^.^^<^^J^^^,J[.r^7^^^  \


TRIEfTE    FUOM    GARPARCDA,    KING    OF    THE    PATINA.'

The  battle  was  long  and  bloody,  and  the  issue  uncertain ;  Shalmaneser  drove
back  one  wing  of  the  confederate  army  to  the  Orontes,  and  forcing  the  other  wing
and  the  centre  to  retire  from  Qarqar  to  Kirzau,  claimed  the  victory,  though  the
losses  on  both  sides  were  equally  great.^  It  would  seem  as  if  the  battle  were  in-
decisive— the  Assyrians,  at  any  rate,  gained  nothing  "by  it ;  they  beat  a  retreat
immediately  after  their  pretended  victory,  and  returned  to  their  own  land  without
prisoners  and  almost  witbout  booty.^  On  the  whole,  this  first  conflict  had  not
been  unfavourable  to  Damascus :  it  had  demonstrated  the  power  of  that  state  in
the  eyes  of  the  most  incredulous,  and  proved  how  easy  resistance  would  be,  if  only

Mudiq,  the  ancient  Apamma  of  Lebanon ;  the  confederate  armj'  would  command  the  ford  which  led
to  the  plain  of  Hamath  by  Kalaat-Sejar.

'  For  Kui,  cf  Maspero,  Slruagle  of  the  Nations,  p.  590,  note  3.  The  people  of  the  Muzri  next
enumerated  have  long  been  considered  as  Egyptians;  the  juxtaposition  of  ttieir  name  with  that  of
Kui  sliows  that  it  refers  here  to  the  Muzri  of  the  Taurus;  the  use  of  the  name  is  discussed  in
Maspero,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  008,  note  3,  and  p.  655  (Tiele,  Bahyhnisch-Assi/rische  Geschichte,
p.  201,  note  1  ;  Hojimel,  Gesch.  Bab.  unci  Ass.,  p.  609  ;  Wincklee,  Alttestament.  Forsch.,  p.  172).

-  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  on  tlie  Black  Obelisk  ;  cf.  Latard,  Mo7i.
of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  53.

'  The  number  of  the  slain  varies  in  different  aocouuts  of  the  battle :  the  Obelisk,  11.  65,  6G,  gives
20,500 ;  the  Bull  No.  1,  1.  18,  25,000 ;  the  Monolith,  11.  97,  98,  only  14,1100.  On  these  divergencies,  cf.
ScHKADER,  Keilins.  und  Geschichts/orsch  img,  p.  47.

•*  Obelisl:,  11.  54-66;  Monulith,  col.  ii.  II.  78-102;  Bull  No.  i,  11.  12-19:  cf.  Veis^s,  Die  Monolith-
Insch.,  in  Sohrader,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  170-175,  and  Amiacd  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de
Salmaiiasar  II.,  pp.  36-18.  The  detailed  history  on  the  Monolith  ends  in  a  very  abrupt  manner
just  after  the  battle  of  Qarqar.


72        TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

the  various  princes  of  Syria  would  lay  aside  their  differences  and  all  unite
under  the  command  of  a  single  chief.  The  effect  of  the  battle  in  Northern
Syria  and  among  the  recently  annexed  Aramaean  tribes  was  very  great ;
they  began  to  doubt  the  omnipotence  of  Assyria,  and  their  loyalty  was  shaken.
Sangar  of  Carchemish  and  the  Khati  refused  to  pay  their  tribute,  and  the
Emirs  of  Tul-Abni  and  Mount  Kashiari  broke  out  into  open  revolt.  Shalmaneser
spent  a  whole  year  in  suppressing  the  insurrection ;  ^  complications,  moreover,
arose  at  Babylon  which  obliged  him  to  concentrate  his  attention  and  energy
on  Chaldaean  affairs.  Nabu-baliddin  had  always  maintained  peaceful  and
friendly  relations  with  Assyria,  but  he  had  been  overthrown,  or  perhaps
assassinated,  and  his  son  Marduk-nadin-shumu  had  succeeded  him  on  the
throne,"  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  a  section  of  his  subjects.  Another  son  of
Nabu-baliddin,  Marduk-belusate,  claimed  the  sovereign  power,  and  soon  won
over  so  much  of  the  country  that  Marduk-nadin-shumu  had  fears  for  the  safety
of  Babylon  itself.  He  them  probably  remembered  the  pretensions  to  Kardu-
niash,^  which  his  Assyrian  neighbours  had  for  a  long  time  maintained,  and
applied  to  Shalmaneser  to  support  his  tottering  fortunes.  The  Assyrian
monarch  must  have  been  disposed  to  lend  a  favourable  ear  to  a  request  which
allowed  him  to  intervene  as  suzerain  in  the  quarrels  of  the  rival  kingdom :  he
mobilised  his  forces,  offered  sacrifices  in  honour  of  Kamman  at  Zaban,  and
crossed  the  frontier  in  853  B.C.*

The  war  dragged  on  during  the  next  two  years.  The  scene  of  hostilities
was  at  the  outset  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris,  which  for  ten  centuries  had
served  as  the  battle-field  for  the  warriors  of  both  countries.  Shalmaneser,  who
had  invested  Me-Turnat  at  the  fords  of  the  Lower  Diyalah,  at  length  captured
that  fortress,  and  after  having  thus  isolated  the  rebels  of  Babylonia  proper,
turned  his  steps  towards  Gananate.^  Marduk-belusate,  "a  vacillating  king,
incapable  of  directing  his  own  affiiirs,"  came  out  to  meet  him,  but  although
repulsed  and  driven  within  the  town,  he  defended  his  position  with  such
spirit  that  Shalmaneser  was  at  length  obliged  to  draw  off  his  troojjs  after
having  cut  down  all  the  young  corn,  felled  the  fruit  trees,  disorganised  the
whole  system  of  irrigation, — in  short,  after  having  effected  all  the  damage

>  Obeliih,  11.  67-72,  and  Bull  No.  1,  20-23;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inset,  de  Salmanasar  II.,
11.  42,  43.

-  Sijnclironous  History,  col.  iii.  11.  22-27 ;  cf.  Peiser  and  Winokler,  Die  sogenannte  Synchroni-
stische  Geschichte,  in  Schrader,  Die  Keilim.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  200,  201.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  11,  12.

*  Inscriptioti  of  Balawdl,  col.  iv.  11.  1-3 ;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,
pp.  46,  47.    The  town  of  Zaban  is  situated  on  the  Lesser  Zab,  but  it  is  impossible  to  fix  the  exact  site.

^  Me-Turnat,  Me-Turni,  "  the  water  of  the  Turnat,"'.  stood  upon  the  Diyalah,  probably  near  the
site  of  Bakuba,  where  the  most  frequented  route  crosses  the  river ;  perhaps  we  may  identify  it  with  the
Artemita  of  classical  authors  (Isidouos  of  Charax,  in  the  Georjraphi  Gneci  Minores,  ed.  Muller-Didot,
vol.  i.  pp.  249,  250).  Gauanate  must  be  souglit  higher  up  near  the  mountains,  as  the  context  points  out  ;
I  am  inclined  to  place  it  near  the  site  of  Khanekin,  whose  gardens  are  still  celebrated,  and  the  stra-
tegic importance  of  which  is  considerable  (Vital  Cuijjet,  La  Turcpde  d'Asie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  126,  127).


THE    WAR   AGAINST  BABYLON.  73

he  could.  He  returned  ia  the  following  spring  by  the  most  direct  route ;
Lakhiru  fell  into  his  hands,^  but  Marduk-belusate,  having  no  heart  to  contend
with  liim  for  the  possession  of  a  district  ravaged  by  the  struggle  of  the
preceding  summer,  fell  back  on  the  mountains  of  Yasubi  and  concentrated
his  forces  round  Arman.-  Shalmaneser,  having  first  wreaked  his  vengeance
upon  Gananate,  attacked  his  adversary  iu  his  self-chosen  position ;  Arman
fell  after  a  desperate  defence,  and  Marduk-belusate  either  perished  or  dis-
appeared in  a  last  attempt  at  retaliation.  Marduk-nadin-shumu,  although  rid
of  his  rival,  was  not  yet  master  of  the  entire  kingdom.  The  Aramaeans  of  the
Marshes,  or,  as  they  called  themselves,  the  Kalda,  had  refused  him  their
allegiance,  and  were  ravaging  the  regions  of  the  Lower  Euphrates  by  their
repeated  incursions.^  They  constituted  not  so  much  a  compact  state,  as  a  con-
federation of  little  states,  alternately  involved  in  petty  internecine  quarrels,  or
temporarily  reconciled  under  the  precarious  authority  of  a  sole  monarch.  Each
separate  state  bore  the  name  of  the  head  of  the  family — real  or  mythical — from
whom  all  its  members  prided  themselves  on  being  descended, — Bit-Dakkuri,
Bit-Adini,  Bit-Amukkani,  Bit-Shalani,  Bit-Shalli,  and  finally  Bit-Yakin,
which  in  the  end  asserted  its  predominance  over  all  the  rest.*  In  demanding
Shalmaneser's  help,  Marduk-nadin-shumu  had  virtually  thrown  on  him  the
responsibility  of  bringing  these  turbulent  subjects  to  order,  and  the  Assyrian
monarch  accepted  the  duties  of  his  new  position  without  demur.  He  marched  to
Babylon,  entered  the  city  and  went  direct  to  the  temple  of  E-shaggil :  the  people
beheld  him  approach  with  reverence  their  deities  Bel  and  Belit,  and  visit  all  the
sanctuaries  of  the  local  gods,  to  whom  he  made  endless  propitiatory  libations
and  pure  offerings.  He  had  worshipped  Ninip  in  Kuta ;  he  was  careful  not  to
forget  Nabo  of  Borsippa,  while  on  the  other  hand  he  officiated  in  the  temple  of
Ezida,and  consulted  its  ancient  oracle,  offering  upon  its  altars  the  flesh  of  splendid
oxen  and  fat  lambs.     The  inhabitants  had  their  part  in  the  festival  as  well  as

'  Lakhiru  comes  before  Gananate  on  the  direct  road  from  Assyria,  to  the  south  of  the  Lower  Zab,
as  we  learu  from  the  account  of  the  campaign  itself:  we  shall  not  do  wrong  in  placing  this  town
either  at  Kifri,  or  in  its  neighbourhood  on  the  present  caravan  route.

^  For  the  identity  of  Arman  with  Khalman,  and  of  both  these  with  the  present  Holwan,  cf.
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  lUI,  note  2,  615,  61G.  Mount  Yasubi  is  the  mountainous  district  which
separates  Khanekiu  from  Holwan.

'  For  the  Kalda,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  C09,  and  p.  -1  of  the  present  volume.  The  part  played
by  the  Kalda  was  first  defined  by  Delattee,  Les  Chaldeeus  jusqu'ti  la  formation  de  I'empire  de
Nahuchodonosor  (extracted  from  the  Revue  des  Questions  historiques,  1877,  and  republished  in  1889
with  Consiilgratians  sur  un  recent  livre  de  M.  Hugo  Winchler),  then  by  Winokler,  Untersuchungen  zur
Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  47-64 ;  cf.  Wincklek,  Plagiat  ?  Antwort  auf  die  von  A.  J.  Delattre  S.  J.  gegeu
mich  erhobenen  Bescliuldigungen,  18S9,  and  Del.^ttbe,  Beponse  au  Plaidoyer  de  M.  H.  Winokler,  1889.

*  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Faradies  ?  pp.  201-203.  As  far  as  we  can  judge.  Bit-Dakkuri  and  Bit-
Adini  were  the  most  northerly,  the  latter  lying  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphrates  (Inscrip.  of  Balawdt,
col.  vi.  11.  6,  7),  the  former  on  the  west  of  the  Euphrates,  to  the  south  of  the  Bahr-i-Nejif ;  Bit-Yakin
was  at  the  southern  extremity  near  the  mouthsof  the  Euphrates,  and  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Persian
Gulf.  For  Bit-Amukkani  the  inscription  of  the  Bull  Ao.  2,  1.  29,  has  the  variant  Bit-Ukani,  perhaps,
as  Hommel  points  out  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass ,  p.  5913,  note  2),  through  the  intermediate  form  Aukani.


74        TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

the  goils;  Shalruaneser  summoned  them  to  a  public  banquet,  at  which  he  dis-
tributed to  them  embroidered  garments,  and  plied  them  with  meats  and  wine  ;
then,  after  renewing  his  homage  to  the  gods  of  Babylon,  he  recommenced  his
campaign,  and  set  out  in  the  direction  of  the  sea.  Baqaui,  the  first  of  the
Chaldfeau  cities  which  lay  on  his  route,  belonged  to  Bit-Adini,i  one  of  the
tribes  of  Bit-Dakkuri ;  it  appeared  disposed  to  resist  him,  and  was  therefore
promptly  dismantled  and  burnt — an  example  whicli  did  not  fail  to  cool  the
warlike  inclinations  which  had  begun  to  manifest  themselves  in  other  parts  of
Bit-Dakkuri.  He  next  crossed  the  Euphrates,  and  pillaged  Enzudi,  the  fate
of  which  caused  the  remainder  of  Bit-Adini  to  lay  down  arms,  and  the  submis-
sion of  the  latter  brought  about  that  of  Bit-Yakin  and  Bit-Amukkani.  These
were  all  rich  provinces,  and  they  bought  off  the  conqueror  liberally :  gold,  silver,
tin,  copper,  iron,  acacia-wood,  ivory,  elephants'  skins,  were  all  showered  upon
the  invader  to  secure  his  mercy.^  It  must  have  been  an  intense  satisfaction  to
the  pride  of  the  Assyrians  to  be  able  to  boast  that  their  king  had  deigned  to
offer  sacrifices  in  the  sacred  cities  of  Accad,  and  that  he  had  been  borne  by
his  war-horses  to  the  shores  of  the  Salt  Sea;  these  facts,  of  little  moment
to  us  now,  appeared  to  the  people  of  those  days  of  decisive  importance.  No
king  who  was  not  actually  master  of  the  country  would  have  been  tolerated
within  the  temple  of  the  eponymous  god,  for  the  purpose  of  celebrating  the
rites  which  the  sovereign  alone  was  empowered  to  perform.  Marduk-nadin-
shiimu,  in  recognising  Shalmaneser's  right  to  act  thus,  thereby  acknowledged
that  he  himself  was  not  only  the  king's  ally,  but  his  liegeman.  This  bond  of
supremacy  doubtless  did  not  weigh  heavily  upon  him  ;  as  soon  as  his  suzerain
had  evacuated  the  country,  the  two  kingdoms  remained  much  on  the  same
footing  as  had  been  established  by  the  treaties  of  the  three  previous  gene-
rations. Alliances  were  made  between  private  families  belonging  to  both,  jjeace
existed  between  the  two  sovereigns,  interchange  of  commerce  and  amenities
took  place  between  the  two  peoples,  but  with  one  point  of  difference  which  had
not  existed  formerly:  Assur  protected  Babel,  and,  by  taking  precedence  of  Marduk,
he  became  the  real  head  of  the  peoples  of  the  Euphrates  valley.^  Assured  of  the
subordination,  or  at  least  of  the  friendly  neutrality  of  Babylon,  Shalmaneser
had  now  a  free  hand  to  undertake  a  campaign  in  the  remoter  regions  of  Syria,

'  The  site  of  Baqani  is  unknown ;  it  should  be  sought  for  between  Lamlum  and  Warka,  and
Bit-Adiui  iu  Bit-Dakkuri  should  be  placed  between  the  Shatt-et-Kaher  and  the  Arabian  desert,  if  the
name  of  Enzudi,  the  other  royal  town,  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Euphrates,  is  found,  as  is  possible,
under  a  popular  etymology,  in  that  of  Kaiaat  ain-Said  or  Kalaat  ain-es-Said  in  the  modern  maps.

^  Obelisk,  11.  73-84  ;  Bull  No.  1, 11.  2.S-29  ;  Balawut  Inscrip.,  cols,  iv.-vi. :  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,
Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  i^i-.pp.  42-51.  The  account  is  very  succinct,  and  the  two  campaigns
are  not  distinguished  in  tlie  Synchronous  Hislorij,  col.  iii.  11.  22-35 ;  cf.  Peiseb  and  Wincklek,  Die
sogenannle  Synch.  Gesch.,  in  Scdrader,  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  i.  11.  200,  201.

^  For  the  nature  of  this  suzerainty,  cf.  Wincklee,  Vntersuchungen,  etc.,  pp.  50,  51 ;  for  the  con-
sequent changes  which  this  would  produce  in  the  Protocol  of  tlie  Kings  of  Assyria,  cf.  Wixckler,
Ein  Beilrag  zur  Gesclt.  der  Assyriologie  in  Deulscldand,  pp.  20-23,  42,  43.


HOSTILITIES  AGAINST  DAMASCUS  RESUMED.  75

without  being  constantly  haunted  by  the  fear  that  bis  rival  might  suddenly
swoop  down  upon  him  in  the  rear  by  the  valleys  of  the  Kadanu  or  the  Zabs.
He  now  ran  no  risks  in  withdrawing  his  troops  from  the  south-eastern  frontier,
and  in  marshalling  his  forces  on  the  slopes  of  tlie  Armenian  Alps  or  on  the
banks  of  the  Orontes,  leaving  merely  a  slender  contingent  in  the  heart  of
Assyria  proper  to  act  as  the  necessary  guardians  of  order  in  the  capital.

Since  the  indecisive  battle  of  Qarqar,  the  western  frontier  of  the  empire
had  receded  as  far  as  the  Euphrates,  and  Shalmaueser  had  been  obliged  to
forego  the  collection  of  the  annual  Syrian  tribute.  It  would  have  been  an
excellent  opportunity  for  the  Khati,  wliile  they  enjoyed  this  accidental
respite,  to  come  to  an  understanding  with  Damascus,  for  the  purpose
of  acting  conjointly  against  a  common  enemy ;  but  they  let  the  right
moment  slip,  and  their  isolation  made  submission  inevitable.  The  effort
to  subdue  them  cost  Shalmaneser  dear,  both  in  time  and  men ;  in  the  spring
of  each  year  he  appeared  at  the  fords  of  Tul-barsip  and  ravaged  the  environs
of  Carchemish,  then  marched  upon  the  Orontes  to  accomplish  the  systematic
devastation  of  some  fresh  district,  or  to  inflict  a  defeat  on  such  of  his
adversaries  as  dared  to  encounter  him  in  the  open  field.  In  850  B.C.  the  first
blow  was  struck  at  the  Khati ;  Agusi  -  was  the  next  to  suffer,  and  its  king,
Arame,  lost  Arnie,  his  royal  city,  with  some  hundred  more  townships  and
strongholds.^  In  849  B.C.  it  was  the  turn  of  Damascus.  The  league  of  which
Ben-hadad  had  proclaimed  himself  the  suzerain  was  still  in  existence,  but  it
had  recently  narrowly  escaped  dissolution,  and  a  revolt  had  almost  deprived
it  of  the  adherence  of  Israel  and  tlie  house  of  Omri — after  Hamath,  the
most  active  of  all  its  members.  The  losses  suffered  at  Qarqar  had  doubtless
been  severe  enough  to  shake  Ahab's  faith  in  the  strength  of  his  master
and  ally.  Besides  this,  it  would  appear  that  the  latter  had  not  honourably
fulfilled  all  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  of  peace  he  had  signed  three  years

'  Historians  have  up  to  the  present  admitted  that  this  campaign  of  the  year  S50  took  place  in
Armenia (TiELE,  Bab.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  187,  201  ;  Wincklek,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  197).  The  context
of  the  account  itself  shows  us  that,  in  his  tenth  year,  Shalmaneser  advanced  against  the  towns  of
Arame,  immediately  after  having  pillaged  the  country  of  the  Khati,  which  inclines  me  to  think  that
these  towns  were  situated  in  Northern  Syria.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Arame  in  question  is  not
the  Armenian  king  of  that  name,  but,  as  Fr.  Lenormant  {Lettres  assyriologlques,  vol.  i.  jx  138)
thought,  Arame  the  sovereign  of  Bit-Agusi,  who  is  named  several  times  in  the  Annals  of  Shalmaneser
{Monolith,  col.  ii.  11.  12,  83) ;  cf  Maspero,  A'oies  an  Jour  lejour.  §  32.  in  the  Proceedings  of  tlie  Soc.  of
Bibl.  Archaeology,  1898,  vol.  xx.  pp.  130-133.

-  Obelisk,  11.  85, 86 ;  Bull  No.  1, 11.  29-82  :  cf.  Amiadd  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasarll.,
pp.  50-53.  The  text  of  Bull  No.  1  adds  to  the  account  of  the  war  against  Arame,  that  of  a  war
against  the  Damascene  league  (11.  32-31).  which  merely  repeats  the  account  of  Shalmaneser's  eleventh
year.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  war  against  Arame  falls  during  his  tenth  year,  and  the  war
against  Ben-hadad  during  his  eleventh  year.  The  scribes  must  have  had  at  their  disposal  two
different  versions  of  one  document,  in  which  tliese  two  wars  were  described  witliout  distinction  of  year.
The  compiler  of  the  inscription  of  the  Bulls  would  have  considered  them  as  forming  two  distinct
accounts,  which  he  has  placed  one  after  the  other  (Tiele,  Bah.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  201,  202;  Homjiel,
Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  Ill,  note  4).  For  the  interpretation  which  I  have  adopted  in  the  text,  cf.
Kasfeko,  Notes  au  jour  lejour,^  32,  in  Proccedtnf/sof  theSoc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  189S,  vol.  xx.  pp.  125-133.


76        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

previously;^  he  still  lield  the  important  fortress  of  Kamoth-gilead,ancl  he  delayed
handing  it  over  to  Ahab  in  spite  of  his  oath  to  restore  it.  Finding  that  he
could  not  regain  possession  of  it  by  fair  means,  Ahab  resolved  to  take  it  by
force.^  A  great  change  ia  feeling  and  politics  had  taken  place  at  Jerusalem.
Jehoshaphat,  who  occupied  the  throne,  was,  like  his  father  Asa,  a  devout
worshipper  of  Jahveh,  but  his  piety  did  not  blind  him  to  the  secular  needs  of
the  moment.  The  experience  of  his  predecessors  had  shown  that  the  union
of  the  twelve  tribes  under  the  rule  of  a  scion  of  Judah  was  a  thing  of  the  past
for  ever ;  all  attempts  to  restore  it  had  ended  in  failure  and  bloodshed,  and  the
house  of  David  had  again  only  lately  been  saved  from  ruin  by  the  deai'ly  bought
intervention  of  Ben-hadad  I.  and  his  Syrians.^  Jehoshaphat  from  the  outset
clearly  saw  the  necessity  of  avoiding  these  errors  of  the  past;  he  accepted
the  situation  and  sought  the  friendship  of  Israel.  An  alliance  between  two
princes  so  unequal  in  power  could  only  result  in  a  disguised  suzerainty  for
one  of  them  and  a  state  of  vassalage  for  the  other;  what  Ben-hadad's  alliance
was  to  Ahab,  that  of  Ahab  was  to  Jehoshaphat,  and  it  served  his  purpose  in
spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  prophets.*  The  strained  relations  between
the  two  countries  were  relaxed,  and  the  severed  tribes  on  both  sides  of  the
frontier  set  about  repairing  their  losses ;  while  Hiel  the  Bethelite  at  length
set  about  rebuilding  Jericho  on  behalf  of  Samaria,^  Jehoshaphat  was
collecting  around  him  a  large  army,  and  strengthening  himself  on  the  west
against  the  Philistines  and  on  the  south  against  the  Bedawin  of  the  desert."
The  marriage  of  his  eldest  son  Jehoram  *  with  Athaliah  subsequently  bound  the
two  courts  together  by  still  closer  ties  ; '  mutual  visits  were  exchanged,  and  it

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  the  subject  of  this  peace  in  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  786,  787.

-  1  Kings  xxii.  3,  where  the  LXX.  reads  Bama  of  Gilead.

'  Cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  778,  779.

'  The  subordinate  position  of  Jehoshaphat  is  clearly  indicated  by  the  reply  which  he  makes  to
Ahab  when  the  latter  asks  him  to  accompany  him  on  this  expedition  :  "  I  am  as  thou  art,  my  people
as  thy  people,  my  horses  as  tliy  horses"  (1  Kings  xxii.  4).  This  dependence  of  Judah,  suspected
by  Kittel  {Gesch.  der  Hebneer,  vol.  ii.  p.  39),  has  been  fully  demonstrated  by  Winckler  (Gesch.  Israels,
vol.  i.  pp.  145,  146,  162-164,  IC.o,  176).

'  1  Kings  xvi.  34,  where  the  writer  has  preserved  the  remembrance  of  a  double  human  sacrifice,
destined,  according  to  the  common  custom  in  the  whole  of  the  East,  to  create  guardian  spirits  for
the  new  building:  "he  laid  the  foundation  thereof  with  the  loss  of  Abiram  his  firstborn,  and  set
vip  the  gates  thereof  with  the  loss  of  his  youngest  son  Segub ;  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."
[For  the  curse  pronounced  on  whoever  should  rebuild  Jericho,  see  Josh.  vi.  26. — Tr.]

'  2  ChroH.  xvii.  10-19,  where  the  narrative  must  have  some  basis  of  trutli.

*  [Following  the  distinction  in  spelling  given  in  2  Kings  viii.  25,  I  have  everywhere  written
Joram  (of  Israel)  and  Jehoram  (of  Judah),  to  avoid  confusion.— Tk.]

'  Athaliah  is  sometimes  called  the  daughter  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  viii.  18),  and  soruetimes  the  daughter
of  Omri  (2  Kings  viii.  26 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxii.  2),  and  several  authors  prefer  the  latter  filiation  (Eenax,
Eistoire  du  Peuple  d'Jsrael,  vol.  ii.  p.  310),  while  the  majority  see  in  it  a  mistake  of  the  Hebrew
scribe  (Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  524,  note  2).  It  is  possible  that  both  attributions
may  be  correct,  for  we  see  by  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  that  a  sovereign  is  called  the  son  of  the  founder
of  his  line  even  when  he  was  several  generations  removed  from  him :  thus,  Merodach-Ijaladan,  the
adversary  of  Sargon  of  Assyria,  calls  himself  son  of  lakln,  although  the  founder  of  the  Bit-Iakin  had
been  dead  many  centuries  before  his  accession.  The  document  used  in  2  Kiiigs  viii.  26  may  have
employed  the  term  daughter  of  Omri  in  the  same  manner  merely  to  indicate  that  the  Queen  of  Jeru-
salem belonged  to  the  house  of  Omri.


THE  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  ISBAEL  AND  JUDAFI — DEATH  OF  AEAB.      77

was  on  tlie  occasion  of  a  stay  made  by  Jehosliaphat  at  Jezreel  that  the  expedi-
tion against  Ramoth  was  finally  resolved  on.  It  might  well  have  appeared
a  more  than  foolhardy  enterprise,  and  it  was  told  in  Israel  that  Micaiah,  a
prophet,  the  son  of  Imlab,  had  predicted  its  disastrous  ending.  "  I  saw,"
exclaimed  the  prophet,  •'  the  Lord  sitting  on  His  throne,  and  all  the  host  of
heaven  standing  on  His  right  hand  and  on  His  left.  And  the  Lord  said,  Who
shall  entice  Ahab  tliat  he  may  go  up  and  fall  at  Ramoth-gilead  ?  And  one
said  on  this  manner,  and  another  said  on  that  manner.  And  there  came  forth
a  spirit,  and  stood  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  I  will  entice  him.  And  the
Lord  said  unto  him.  Wherewith  ?  And  he  said,  I  will  go  forth,  and  will  be  a
lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  his  projjhets.  And  He  said.  Thou  shalt  entice
him,  and  shalt  prevail  also :  go  forth,  and  do  so.  Now  therefore,  behold,  the
Lord  hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  these  thy  prophets ;  and  the
Lord  hath  spoken  evil  concerning  thee."  ^

The  two  kings  thereupon  invested  Ramoth,  and  Ben-hadad  hastened  to  the
defence  of  his  fortress.  Selecting  thirty-two  of  his  bravest  charioteers,  he
commanded  them  to  single  out  Ahab  only  for  attack,  and  not  fight  with  others
until  they  had  slain  him.  This  injunction  happened  in  some  way  to  come  to
the  king's  ears,  and  he  therefore  disguised  himself  as  a  common  soldier,  while
Jehoshaphat  retained  his  ordinary  dress.  Attracted  by  the  richness  of  the
latter's  armour,  the  Syrian?  fell  upon  him,  but  on  his  raising  his  war-cry  they
perceived  their  mistake,  and  turning  from  the  King  of  Judah  they  renewed
their  quest  of  the  Israelitish  leader.  While  they  were  vainly  seeking  him,  an
archer  drew  a  bow  "  at  a  venture,"  and  pierced  him  in  the  joints  of  his  cuirass.
"  Wherefore  he  said  to  his  charioteer.  Turn  thine  hand,  and  carry  me  out  of
the  host ;  for  I  am  sore  wounded."  Perceiving,  however,  that  the  battle  was
going  against  him,  he  revoked  the  order,  and  remained  on  the  field  the  whole
day,  supported  by  his  armour-bearers.  He  expired  at  sunset,  and  the  news
of  his  death  having  spread  panic  through  the  ranks,  a  cry  arose,  "  Every  man
to  his  city,  and  every  man  to  his  country ! "  The  king's  followers  bore  his
body  to   Samaria,^  and  Israel  again  relapsed  into  the  position  of  a  vassal,

'  1  Kings  xxii.  5-23,  reproduced  in  2  Citron,  xviii.  4-22.

-  1  Kings  xxii.  29-38  (cf.  2  Chron.  xviii.  2S-3i),  with  interpolations  in  verses  35  and  38.  It  is
impossible  to  establish  the  clironology  of  this  period  with  any  certainty,  so  entirely  do  the  Hebrew
accounts  of  it  differ  from  the  Assyrian.  The  latter  mention  Ahab  as  alive  at  the  time  of  the  battle
of  Qarqar  in  8.51  B.C.,  and  Jehu  on  tiie  throne  in  842  B.C.  We  must,  therefore,  place  in  the  inter-
vening twelve  years,  first,  the  end  of  Ahab's  reign ;  secondly,  the  two  years  of  Ahaziali ;  tliirdly,
the  twelve  years  of  Joram;  fourthly,  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jehu — in  all,  possibly  fourteen
years.  The  reign  of  Joram  has  been  prolonged  beyond  reason  by  tlie  Hebrew  annalists,  and  it  alone
lends  itself  to  be  ourtailed.  Admitting,  as  I  have  done  (Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  785,  note  5i.
that  the  siege  of  Samaria  preceded  the  battle  of  Qarqar,  we  may  surmise  that  the  three  years  whicli
elapsed,  according  to  the  tradition  (1  Kings  xxii.  1),  between  the  triumph  of  Ahab  and  his  death,
fall  into  two  unequal  periods,  two  previous  to  Qarqar,  and  one  after  it,  in  such  a  manner  tliat  the
revolt  of  Israel  wf.uld  have  been  the  result  of  the  defeat  of  tlie  Damascenes ;  Ahab  must  have  died
in  853  B.C.,  as  most  modern  historians  agree  (Schr.^deb,  Keilinschri/ten  und  Geschiclitsforschung,
pp.  350,  357 :   Ed.  Metek,   Geich.  des  AUerthums,  vol.  i.  p.  393 ;  Winckler,  Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.


78         THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE   STRUOGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

probably  under  the  same  conditions  as  before  the  revolt.     Ahaziah  survived

his  father  two  jears,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Jorani.^     When  Shal-

maneser,  in  849  B.C.,  reappeared  in  the  valley  of  the  Orontes,  Joram  sent  out

against  him  his  prescribed  contingent,  and  the  conquered  Israelites  once  more

fought  for  their   conqueror.      The  Assyrians  had,  as   usual,  maltreated  the

Khati.      After   having  pillaged  the   towns  of  Carchemish  and  Agusi,  they

advanced  on  the  Amanos,  held  to  ransom  the  territory  of  the  Patina  enclosed

within  the  bend  of  the  Orontes,  and  descending  upon  Hamatli  by  way  of  the

districts  of  laraku  and  Ashtamaku,  they  came  into  conflict  with  the  army  of

the  twelve  kings,  though  on  this  occasion  the  contest  was  so  bloody  that  they

were  forced  to  withdraw  immediately  after  their  success.     They  had  to  content

themselves  with  sacking  Apparazu,  one  of  the  citadels  of  Arame,  and  with

collecting  the  tribute  of  Garparuda  of  the  Patina ;  which  done,  they  skirted  the

Amanos  and  provided  themselves   with    beams   from  its  cedars.'^     The   two

following  years  were  spent  in  harrying  the  people  of  Paqarakhbuni,  on  the

right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  in  the  dependencies  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of

Adini  (848  B.c),  and  in  plundering  the  inhabitants  of  Ishtarate  iu  the  country

of  laiti,  near  the  sources  of  the  Tigris  (847  b.c.),^  till  in  846  they  returned

to  try  their  fortune  again  in  Syria.     They  transported   120,000  men  across

the  Euphrates,  hoping  perhaps,  by  the  mere  mass  of  such  a  force,  to  crush

their  enemy  in  a  single  battle ;  but  Ben-hadad  was  supported  by  his  vassals,  and

their  combined  army  must  have  been  as  formidable  numerically  as  that  of  the

Assyrians.     As  usual,  after  the  engagement,  Shalmaneser  claimed  the  victory,

but  he  did  not  succeed  in  intimidating  the  allies  or  in  wresting  from  them  a

single  rood  of  territory.*     Discouraged,  doubtless,  by  so  many  fruitless  attempts,

he  decided  to  suspend  hostilities,  at  all  events  for  the  present.     In  845  B.C.  he

visited  Naiii,  and  caused  an  "  image  of  his  royal  Majesty  "  to  be  carved  at  the

pp.  164,  165).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  Jehu  ascended  the  throne  at  the  very
moment  that  Shalmaneser  was  defeating  Hazael  in  842  B.C. ;  we  can  only  carry  back  his  accession
to  the  preceding  year,  possibly  843.  The  duration  of  two  years  for  the  reign  of  Ahaziah  can  only  be
reduced  by  a  few  months,  if  indeed  as  much  as  that,  as  it  allows  of  a  full  year,  and  part  of  a  second
year  (cf.  1  Kings  xxii.  51,  where  it  is  said  that  Ahaziah  ascended  the  throne  iu  the  17th  year  of
Jehosliaphat,  and  2  Kings  iii.  1,  where  it  states  that  Joram  of  Israel  succeeded  Ahaziali  in  the  18th
year  of  tlie  same  Jehoshaphat) ;  in  placing  these  two  years  between  853  and  851,  there  will  remain
for  the  reign  of  Joram  the  period  comprised  between  851  and  843,  namely,  eight  years,  instead  of
the  twelve  attributed  to  him  by  biblical  tradition.

'  The  Hebrew  documents  merely  make  mention  of  Ahaziah's  accession,  length  of  reign,  and
death  (1  Kings  sxii.  40, 51-53,  and  2  Kings  i.  2-17).  The  Assyrian  tests  do  not  mention  his  uame,  but
they  state  that  in  849  "the  twelve  kings"  fought  against  Shalmaneser,  and,  as  we  have  already  seen
(cf.  supra,  p.  70,  note  1),  one  of  the  twelve  was  King  of  Israel,  here,  therefore  necessarily  Aliaziah,
whose  successor  was  Joram.

-  Obelisk,  11.  SS,  89  ;  Ball  No.  1, 11.  35-41 ;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,
pp.  52-55.

»  Ohelisl;  11.  89-91 ;   BM  No.  1, 11.  41-44:  cf.  Amtj^ud  and  Scheil,  ibid.,  pp.  54-57.

*  Obelisk,  11.  91,  92;  Bull  No.  1, 11.  44-47  :  cf.  Amiacd  and  Scheil,  ibid.,  pp.  56,  57.  The  care
which  the  king  takes  to  specify  that  "with  120,000  men  he  crossed  the  Euphrates  in  flood-time"
very  probably  shows  that  this  number  was  for  him  in  some  respects  an  unusual  one.


DAMASCUS  SUCCESSFULLY  liESISTS   THE  ATTACKS   OF   ASSYRIA.      79

source  of  tlie  Tigris  close  to  the  very  spot  where  the  stream  first  rises.
Pushing  forward  through  the  defiles  of  Tunibuni,  he  next  invaded  Urartu,
and  devastated  it  as  far  as  the  sources  of  the  Euphrates ;  on  reaching
these  he  jjurified  his  arms  in  the  virgin  spring,  and  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the
gods.  On  his  return  to  the  frontier,  the  chief  of  Dayaini  "  embraced  his  feet,"
and  presented  him  with  some  thoroughbred  horses.^  In  844  B.C.  he  crossed
the  Lower  Zab  and  plunged  into  the  heart  of  Namri ;  this  country  had  long
been  under  Babylonian  influence,  and  its  princes  bore  Semitic  names.  Marduk-
mudammiq,  who  was  then  its  ruler,  betook  himself  to  the  mountains  to  preserve
his  life;  but  his  treasures,  idols,  and  troops  were  carried  off  to  Assyria,  and  he
was  superseded  on  tlie  throne  by  lanzu,  the  son  of  Khamban,  a  noble  of  CossEean
origin.^  As  might  be  expected  after  such  severe  exertions,  Shalmaneser
apparently  felt  that  he  deserved  a  time  of  repose,  for  his  chroniclers  merely
note  the  date  of  843  B.C.  as  that  of  an  inspection,  terminating  in  a  felling  of
cedars  in  the  Amanos.^  As  a  fact,  there  was  nothing  stirring  on  the  frontier.
Chaldaea  itself  looked  upon  him  as  a  benefactor,  almost  as  a  suzerain,  and  by
its  position  between  Elam  and  Assyria,  protected  the  latter  from  any  quarrel
with  Susa.  The  nations  on  the  east  continued  to  pay  their  tribute  without
coercion,  and  Namri,  which  alone  entertained  pretensions  to  independence,  had
just  received  a  severe  lesson.  Urartu  had  not  acknowledged  the  supremacy
of  Assur,  but  it  had  suffered  in  the  last  invasion,  and  Arame  had  shown  no
further  sign  of  hostility.  The  tribes  of  the  Upper  Tigris — Kummukh  and
Adini — accepted  their  position  as  subjects,  and  any  trouble  arising  in  that
quarter  was  treated  as  merely  an  ebullition  of  local  dissatisfaction,  and  was
promptly  crushed.  The  Khati  were  exhausted  by  the  systematic  destruction  of
their  towns  and  their  harvests.  Lastly,  of  the  principalities  of  the  Amanos,
Gurgum,  Samalla,  and  the  Patina,  if  some  had  occasionally  taken  part  in  the
struggles  for  independence,  the  others  had  always  remained  faithful  in  the
performance  of  their  duties  as  vassals.  Damascus  alone  held  out,  and  the  valour
with  which  she  had  endured  all  the  attacks  made  on  her  showed  no  signs  of  abate-
ment ;  unless  any  internal  disturbance  arose  to  diminish  her  strength,  she  was
likely  to  be  able  to  resist  the  growing  power  of  Assyria  for  a  long  time  to  come.
It  was  at  the  very  time  when  her  supremacy  appeared  to  be  thus  firmly
established  that  a  revolution  broke  out,  the  effects  of  which  soon  undid  the
work  of  the  preceding  two  or  three  generations.  Ben-hadad,  disembari-assed  of
Shalmaneser,  desired  to  profit  by  the   respite  thus   gained  to  make  a  final

'  Obelisk,  II.  92,  03  ;  Bull  No.  1, 11. 47-50 :  cf.  Amiacd  and  Scheil,  Les  Inser.  de  Salmanasar  II.,
pp.  56-59.

^  Obelisk,  11. 92,  93 ;  Bull  JVo.  1,  11.  47-50  :  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  ibid.,  pp.  56-59.  lanzu,  the  name
of  the  new  Prince  of  Namri,  appears  to  be  a  Cosssean  term  signilying  king,  applicable  to  all  sovereigns,
as  that  of  Pharaoh  in  Egypt  (Fe.  Delitzsoh,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossaer,  pp.  25,  37-39)  ;  c£  Struggle  of
the  Nations,  p.  114.

'  Obelisk,  11.  96,  97 ;  cf.  Amiatjd  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  5S,  59.


80        TEE  ASSTEIAN  BEVIVAL   AND    THE   STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

reckoning  with  the  Israelites.  It  would  appear  that  their  fortune  had  been  on
the  wane  ever  since  tlie  heroic  death  of  Ahab.  Immediately  after  the  disaster
at  Eamoth,  the  Moabites  had  risen  against  Ahaziali,^  and  their  king,  Mesha,  sou
of  Kamoshgad,  bad  seized  the  territory  north  of  the  Arnon  which  belonged  to
the  tribe  of  Gad  ;  he  had  either  killed  or  carried  away  the  Jewish  population
in  order  to  colonise  the  district  with  Moabites,  and  he  had  then  fortified  most
of  the  towns,  beginning  with  Dhibon,  his  capital.'-  Owing  to  the  shortness  of
his  reign,  Ahaziah  had  been  unable  to  take  measures  to  hinder  him  ;  but  Joram,
as  soon  as  he  was  firmly  seated  on  the  throne,  made  every  effort  to  regain
possession  of  his  province,  and  claimed  the  help  of  his  ally  or  vassal
Jehoshaphat.^  The  latter  had  done  his  best  to  repair  the  losses  caused  by  the
war  with  Syria.  Being  Lord  of  Edom,  he  had  been  tempted  to  follow  the
example  of  Solomon,  and  the  deputy  who  commanded  in  his  name  had
constructed  a  vessel  *  at  Eziou-geber  "  to  go  to  Ophir  for  gold ;  "  but  the
vessel  was  wrecked  before  quitting  the  port,  and  the  disaster  was  regarded  by
the  king  as  a  punishment  from  Jahveh,  for  when  Ahaziah  suggested  that  the
enterprise  should  be  renewed  at  their  joint  expense,  he  refused  the  offer.''  But
the  sudden  insurrection  of  Moab  threatened  him  as  much  as  it  did  Joram,  and
he  gladly  acceded  to  the  latter's  appeal  for  help.  Apparently  the  simplest
way  of  approaching  the  enemy  would  have  been  from  the  north,  choosing  Gilead
as  a  base  of  operations  ;  but  the  line  of  fortresses  constructed  by  Mesha  at  this
vulnerable  point  of  his  frontier  was  so  formidable,  that  the  allies  resolved  to
attack  from  the  south  after  passing  the  lower  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea.
They  marched  for  seven  days  in  an  arid  desert,  digging  wells  as  they  proceeded
for   the  necessary  supply  of  water.      Mesha  awaited  them  with  his  hastily

'  2  Kings  iii.  5.  The  text  does  not  name  Ahaziah,  and  it  might  be  concluded  that  the  revolt  took
place  under  Joram  (Winckler,  Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  20(J,  207);  the  expresaiou  employed  by  the
Hebrew  writer,  however,  "  when  Ahab  was  dead  .  .  .  the  King  of  Moab  rebelled  against  the  King
of  Israel,"  does  not  permit  of  it  being  placed  otherwise  than  at  the  opening  of  Ahaziah's  reign.

-  Inscription  of  Mesha,  II.  7-33;  the  name  of  the  father  of  Blesha  is  uncertain,  and  the  latter
part  of  it  has  been  read  "  malak :  "  Kamosli-malak  would  answer  as  well  as  Kamoshgad.

'  2  Kings  iii.  6,  7,  where  Jehoshaphat  replies  to  Joram  in  the  same  terms  which  he  had  used
to  Ahab  (cf.  supra,  p.  76,  note  4).  The  chronological  difficulties  induced  Ed.  Meter,  Gesch.  des
Alterihums,  vol.  i.  p.  395,  to  replace  the  name  of  Jehoshaphat  iu  this  passage  by  that  of  his  son
Jehoram.  As  Stade  has  remarked  (_Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  53G,  note  1),  the  presence  of  two
kings  both  bearing  the  name  of  Jehoram  in  the  same  campaign  against  Moab  would  have  been  one
of  those  facts  which  strike  the  popular  imagination,  and  would  not  have  been  forgotten ;  if  the
Hebrew  author  has  connected  the  Moabite  war  with  the  name  of  Jehoshaphat,  it  is  because  his
sources  of  information  furnished  him  with  that  king's  name.

*  [Both  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  LXX.  (MS.  A.)  the  ships  aie  in  the  plural  number  in  1  Kings
xxii.  48,  49..— Tr.]

*  1  Kings  xxii.  48, 49,  where  the  Hebrew  writer  calls  the  vessel  constructed  by  Jehoshaphat  a  "  ship
of  Tarshish  ; "  that  is,  a  vessel  built  to  make  long  voyages.  The  author  of  the  Chronicles  tliought  that
the  Jewish  expedition  to  Ezion-geber  on  the  Red  Sea  was  destined  to  go  to  Tarshish  iu  Spain.  He  has,
moreover,  transformed  the  vessel  into  a  fleet,  and  has  associated  Ahaziah  in  the  enterprise,  contrary
to  the  testimony  of  the  Booh  of  Kings;  finally,  he  has  introduced  into  the  account  a  propliet  named
Eliezer,  who  represents  the  disaster  as  a  cliastisement  for  the  alliance  with  Ahaziah  (2  Chron.  xx.  35-37) .


MOAB   DELIVERED   FBOM  ISRAEL — MESBA.


il


assembled  troops  on  the  confines  of  the  cultivated  laud  ;  the  allies  routed  him
and  blockaded  him  within  his  city  of  Kir-hareseth.^  Closely  beset,  and  despair-
ing of  any  help  from  man,  he  had  recourse  to  the  last  resource  which  religion

provided  for  his  salvation  ;  tak-  ___.,__

ing  his  firstborn  son,  he  offered
him  to  Chemosh,  and  burnt  him
on  the  city  wall  in  sight  of  the
besiegers.  The  Israelites  knew
what  obligations  this  sacrifice
entailed  upon  the  Moabite  god,
and  the  succour  which  he
would  be  constrained  to  give
to  his  devotees  in  consequence.
They  therefore  raised  the  siege
and  disbanded  in  alldirections.^
Mesha,  delivered  at  the  very
moment  that  his  cause  seemed
hopeless,  dedicated  a  stele  in
the  temple  of  Dhibou,  on  which
he  recorded  his  victories  and
related  what  measures  he  had
taken  to  protect  his  people.^
He  still  feared  a  repetition  of
the  invasion,  but  this  misfor-
tune was  spared  him ;  Jeho-
shaphat  was  gathered  to  his
fathers,^  and  his  Edomite  sub-
jects revolted  on  receiving  the
news  of  liis  death.     Jehoram,

his  son  and  successor,  at  once  took  up  arms  to  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  their
duty ;  but  they  surrounded  Jiis  camp,  and  it  was  with  difKculty  that  he  cut  his

'  Kir-Hareaeth  or  Kir-Moab  is  the  present  Kerak,  the  Krak  of  medifeval  times.

■  The  account  of  the  campaign  (2  Kings  iil.  S-27)  belongs  to  the  prophetic  cycle  of  Elisha,  and
seems  to  give  merely  a  popular  version  of  the  event.  A  king  of  Edom  is  mentioned  (9-10,  12-13),
while  elsewhere,  under  Jehoshaphat,  it  la  stated  "there  was  no  king  in  Edom"  (1  Kings  xxii.  47);
the  geography  also  of  the  route  taken  by  the  expedition  is  somewhat  confused.  Finally,  the  account
of  tlie  siege  of  Kir-hareseth  is  mutilated,  and  the  compiler  has  abridged  the  episode  of  the  human
sacrifice,  as  being  too  conducive  to  the  honour  of  Chemosh  and  to  the  dishonour  of  Jahveh.  The  main
facta  of  the  account  are  correct,  but  the  details  are  not  clear,  and  do  not  all  bear  the  stamp  of  veracity.

"  This  is  the  famous  Jloabite  Stone  or  stele  of  Dhlbon,  discovered  by  Clermont-Ganneau  in  1868,
and  now  preserved  in  the  Louvre.

*  From  a  photograph  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  retouched  by  Massiaa  from  the  original  in  the  Louvre.
The  fainter  parts  of  the  stele  are  the  portions  restored  in  the  original.

=  The  date  of  the  death  of  Jehoshaphat  may  be  fixed  as  849  or  SIS  e.g.  The  biblical  documents
give  us  for  the  period  of  the  history  of  Judah  following  on  the  death  of  Ahab  :  First,  eight  yeara

G


THE   MOABITE   STONE   OK  STELE   OF   ME3HA.*


82        TEE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

way  through  their  ranks  and  escaped  during  the  night.  The  defection  of  the
old  Canaanite  city  of  Libnah  followed  quickly  on  this  reverse,^  and  Jehoram  was
powerless  to  avenge  himself  on  it,  the  Philistines  and  the  Bedawin  having
threatened  the  western  part  of  his  territory  and  raided  the  country.^  In
the  midst  of  these  calamities  Judah  had  no  leisure  to  take  further  measures
against  Mesba,  and  Israel  itself  had  suffered  too  severe  a  blow  to  attempt
retaliation.  The  advanced  age  of  Ben-hadad,  and  the  unsatisfactory  result  of
the  campaigns  against  Shalmaueser,  had  furnished  Joram  with  an  occasion  for
a  rupture  with  Damascus.  War  dragged  on  for  some  time  apparently,  till  the
V  tide  of  fortune  turned  against  Joram,  and,  like  his  father  Abab  in  similar  cir-

cumstances, he  shut  himself  within  Samaria,  where  the  fal.<e  alarm  of  an  Egyptian
or  Hittite  invasion  produced  a  panic  in  the  Syrian  camp,  and  restored  the
fortunes  of  the  Israelitish  king.^  Ben-hadad  did  not  long  survive  the  reverse
he  had  experienced ;  be  returned  sick  and  at  the  point  of  death  to  Damascus,
where  he  was  assassinated  by  Hazael,  one  of  his  captains.  Hebrew  tradition
points  to  the  influence  of  the  prophets  in  all  these  events.  The  aged  Elijah
had  disappeared,  so  ran  the  story,  caught  up  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  but
his  mantle  had  fallen  on  Elisha,  and  his  power  still  survived  in  his  disciple.^
From  far  and  nearElisha's  counsel  was  sought,alike  by  Gentiles  as  by  the  followers
of  the  true  God  ;  whether  the  suppliant  was  the  weeping  Shuuamite  mourning
for  the  loss  of  her  only  son,^'  or  Naaman  the  captain  of  the  Damascene  chariotry,''

•of  Jehoshapliat,  from  the  17tU  year  of  his  reigu  (1  Kivtis  xxii.  51)  to  his  25th  (and  last)  year
(1  Kings  xxii.  42) ;  secondly,  eight  years  of  Jehoram,  son  of  .Jchoshaphat  (2  Kings  viii.  17)  ;  thirdly,
one  year  of  Ahazinh,  son  of  Jehoram  (2  Kings  viii.  26) — in  all  17  years,  ■niiich  must  be  reduced  and
condensed  into  the  period  between  853  B.C.,  the  probable  date  of  the  battle  of  Kamoth,  and  843,  the
equally  probable  date  of  the  accession  of  Jehu.  The  reigns  of  the  two  Ahaziahs  are  too  short  to  be
further  abridged ;  we  must  therefore  place  the  campaign  against  Moab  at  the  earliest  in  850,  during
the  months  which  followed  the  accession  of  Joram  of  Israel,  and  lengthen  Jehoshaphat's  reign  from
850  to  849.  There  will  then  be  room  between  849  and  844  for  five  years  (instead  of  eight)  for  the
reign  of  Jehoram  of  Judah.

'  2  Kings  viii.  20-22  ;  cf.  2  Chrmi.  xxi.  8-10.

-  This  war  is  mentioned  only  in  2  Citron,  xxi.  16,  17,  where  it  is  represented  as  a  chastisement
from  Jahveh;  the  Philistines  and  "  the  Arabs  which  are  beside  the  Ethiopians"  (Kush)  seem  to  have
taken  Jerusalem,  pillaged  the  palace,  and  carried  away  the  wives  and  children  of  the  king  into  capti-
vity, "  so  that  there  was  never  a  son  left  him,  save  Jehoahaz  (Ahaziah),  the  youngest  of  his  sons."  The
occurrence  of  the  name  of  Kush,  which  had  heljjed  to  discredit  this  passage,  was  first  explained  by
Vfmcklet  (Alttestaineniliclie  Unttrsuchungen,  p.  635,  etc.),  who  imagined  it  denoted  the  Cossajans;
and  subsequently  by  Hommel  (Inschri/tliche  Ergehnisse  tier  vierten  Reise  Eduard  Glaser's,  in  the
Acles  du  Congres  de  Geneve,  2nd  sect.,  p.  112),  who  recognised  in  it  the  Kusliites  of  Arabia,  as
did  Glaser  (Shizze,  vol.  ii.  p.  339).  Winckler  {Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.  pp.  1-3)  has  since  adopted
the  opinion  shared  by  Glaser  and  Hommel.

'  Kuenen  has  proposed  to  take  the  -whole  account  of  the  reign  of  Joram,  son  of  Ahab.  and  transfer
it  to  that  of  Jehoahaz,  son  of  Jehu,  and  this  theory  has  been  approved  by  several  recent  critics  and
historians  (Kittel,  Geschiclite  der  Eebrxer,  vol.  ii.  pp.  186,  235,  249,  250;  Coenill,  Einleitnng  in  das
Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  127).  On  the  otlier  hand,  some  have  desired  to  connect  it  with  the  account
of  the  siege  of  Samaria  iu  Ahab's  reign  (Winckler,  Gesch.  Israeh,  vol.  i.  pp.  150,  151).  I  fail  to  see
any  reasonable  argument  which  can  be  brought  against  the  authenticity  of  the  main  fact,  whatever
opinion  may  be  held  with  regard  to  the  details  of  the  biblical  narrative.

*  2  Kings  ii.  1-15.  =  2  Kings  iv.  8-37.  «  2  .


THE  DEATH   OF  BABADEZER   AND    THE  ACCESSION   OF  HAZAEL.     83

he  granted  their  petitions,  and  raised  the  child  from  its  bed,  and  healed  the
soldier  of  his  leprosy.  During  the  siege  of  Samaria,  he  had  several  times
frustrated  the  enemy's  designs,  and  had  predicted  to  Joram  not  only  the  fact
but  the  hour  of  deliverance,  and  the  circumstances  which  would  accompany  it.^
Ben-hadad  had  sent  Hazael  to  the  prophet  to  ask  him  if  he  should  recover,
and  Elisha  had  wept  on  seeing  the  envoy — "  Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou
wilt  do  unto  the  children  of  Israel ;  their  strongholds  wilt  thou  set  on  fire,  and
their  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the  sword,  and  wilt  dash  in  pieces  their
little  ones,  and  rip  up  their  women  with  child.  And  Hazael  said.  But  what
is  thy  servant  which  is  but  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing  ?  And
Elisha  answered,  The  Lord  hath  showed  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king  over
Syria."  On  returning  to  Damascus  Hazael  gave  the  results  of  his  mission  in  a
reassuring  manner  to  Beu-hadad,  but  "on  the  morrow  ...  he  took  the  coverlet
and  dipped  it  in  water,  and  spread  it  on  his  face,  so  that  he  died."  ^

The  deed  which  deprived  it  of  its  king,  seriously  affected  Damascus  itself.
It  was  to  Ben-hadad  that  it  owed  most  of  its  prosperity ;  he  it  was  who  had
humiliated  Hamath  and  the  princes  of  the  coast  of  Arvad,  and  the  nomads  of
the  Arabian  desert.  He  had  witnessed  the  rise  of  the  most  energetic  of  all  the
Israelite  dynasties,  and  he  had  curbed  its  ambition ;  Omvi  had  been  forced  to
pay  him  tribute  ;  Ahab,  Ahaziab,  and  Joram  had  continued  it ;  and  Ben-hadad's
suzerainty,  recognised  more  or  less  by  their  vassals,  had  extended  through
Moab  and  Judah  as  far  as  the  Eed  Sea.  Not  only  had  he  skilfully  built  up
this  fabric  of  vassal  states  whicli  made  him  lord  of  two-thirds  of  Syria,  but  he
had  been  able  to  preserve  it  unshaken  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  in  spite
of  rebellions  in  several  of  his  fiefs  and  reiterated  attacks  from  Assyria ;
Shalmaneser,  indeed,  had  made  an  attack  on  his  line,  but  without  breaking
through  it,  and  had  at  length  left  him  master  of  the  field.  This  superiority,
however,  which  no  reverse  could  shake,  lay  in  himself  and  in  liimself  alone  ;
no  sooner  had  he  passed  away  than  it  suddenly  ceased,  and  Hazael  found
himself  restricted  from  the  very  outset  to  the  territory  of  Damascus  proper.*
Hamath,  Arvad,  and  the  northern  peoples  deserted  the  league,  to  return  to  it
no  more ;  Joram  of  Israel  called  on  his  nephew  Ahaziah,  who  had  just  succeeded
to  Jehoram  of  Judah,  and  both  together  marched  to  besiege  Ramoth.  The
Israelites  were  not  successful  in  their  methods  of  carrying  on  sieges ;  Joram,
wounded  in  a  skirmish,  retired  to  his  palace  at  Jezreel,  where  Ahaziah  joined
him  a  few  days  later,  on  the  pretext  of  inquiring  after  his  welfare.*     The

'  2  Kings  vi.  8-.'33;  vii.  =  2  Kingf  viii.  7-15.

'  From  tbis  point  onward,  tlie  Assyrian  texts  which  mentioned  tlie  twelve  kings  of  the  Khali,
Irkhnlini  of  Hiiinath  and  Adadidri  (Ben-badad)  of  Damascus  (of.  supra,  p.  70,  note  '-!),  now  only  name
Ehazailu  of  the  countrij  of  Damascns  (Obelisk,  11.  97,  98,  103 ;  cf.  H.  Rawlixson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.
iii.  pi.  5,  No.  G,  p.  41).  '  2  Kings  viii.  28,  29.


84        TEE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL   AKD    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.

prophets  of  both  kingdoms  and  their  followers  had  never  forgiven  the  family  of
Ahab  their  half-foreign  extraction,  nor  their  eclecticism  in  the  matter  of  religion.
They  had  numerous  partisans  in  both  armies,  and  a  conspiracy  was  set  on  foot
against  the  absent  sovereigns  ;  Elisha,  judging  the  occasion  to  be  a  propitious
one,  despatched  one  of  his  disciples  to  the  camp  with  secret  instructions.  The
generals  were  all  present  at  a  banquet,  when  the  messenger  arrived  ;  he  took
one  of  them,  Jehu,  the  son  of  Nimshi,  on  one  side,  anointed  him,  and  then
escaped.  Jehu  returned,  and  seated  himself  amongst  his  fellow-officers,  who,
unsuspicious  of  what  had  happened,  questioned  him  as  to  the  errand.  "  Is
all  well  ?  Wherefore  came  this  mad  fellow  to  thee  ?  And  he  said  unto
them.  Ye  know  the  man  and  what  his  talk  was.  And  they  said,  It  is
false ;  tell  us  now.  And  he  said,  Thus  and  thus  spake  he  to  me,  saying,
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel.  Then  they
hasted,  and  took  every  man  his  garment  and  put  it  imder  him  on  the  top  of
the  stairs,  and  blew  the  trumpet,  saying,  Jehu  is  king."  He  at  ouce  marched
on  Jezreel,  and  the  two  kings,  surprised  at  this  movement,  went  out  to  meet
him  with  scarcely  any  escort.  The  two  parties  had  hardly  met  when  Joraiu
asked,  "  Is  it  peace,  Jehu  ?  "  to  which  Jehu  replied,  "  What  peace,  so  long  as
the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother  Jezebel  and  her  witchcrafts  are  so  many  ?  "
Whereupon  Joram  turned  rein,  crying  to  his  nephew,  "  There  is  treachery,
0  Ahaziah."  But  an  arrow  pierced  him  through  the  heart,  and  he  fell
forward  in  his  chariot.  Ahaziah,  wounded  near  Ibleam,  managed,  however,  to
take  refuge  in  Megiddo,  where  he  died,  his  servants  bringing  the  body  back
to  Jerusalem.^  When  Jezebel  heard  the  news,  she  guessed  the  fate  which
awaited  her.  She  painted  her  eyes  and  tired  her  head,  and  posted  herself  in
one  of  the  upper  windows  of  the  palace.  As  Jehu  entered  the  gates  she
reproached  him  with  the  words,  "  Is  it  peace,  thou  Zimri — -thy  master's
murderer?  And  he  lifted  up  his  face  to  the  window  and  said.  Who  is
on  my  side — wiio  ?  Two  or  three  eunuchs  rose  up  behind  the  queen,  and
he  called  to  them.  Throw  her  down.  So  they  threw  her  down,  and  some
of  her  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  wall  and  on  the  horses ;  and  he  trode  her
under  foot.  And  when  he  was  come  in  he  did  eat  and  drink  ;  and  he  said.
See  now  to  this  cursed  woman  and  bury  her ;  for  she  is  a  king's  daughter."
But  nothing  was  found  of  her  except  her  skull,  hands,  and  feet,  which  they
buried  as  best  they  could.  Seventy  princes,  the  entire  family  of  Ahab,  were
slain,  and  their  heads  piled  up  on  either  side  of  the  gate.  The  priests  and
worshippers  of  Baal  remained  to  be  dealt  with.     Jehu  summoned  them  to

'  According  to  the  very  curtailed  account  in  2  Chivn.  xxii.  9,  Aliaziah  appears  to  have  bidden
himself  in  Samaria,  where  he  was  discovered  and  taken  to  Jehu,  who  had  him  killed.  This  account
may  perhaps  have  belonged  to  the  different  version  of  which  a  fragment  lias  been  preserved  in
2  Kings  x.  12-17  (cf.  infra,  p.  85,  note  2).


TEE  FALL    OF  THE  HOUSE   OF  OMRI—JEHU.  85

Samaria  on  the  pretext  of  a  sacrifice,  and  massacred  them  before  the  altars  of

their  god.^     According  to  a  doubtful  tradition,  the  brothers  and  relatives  of

Ahaziah,  ignorant  of  what  had  happened,  came  to  salute  Joram,  and  perished

in  the  confusion  of  the  slaughter,  and  the  line  of  David  narrowly  escaped

extinction  with  the  house  of  Omri.-     Athaliah  assumed  the  regency,  broke  the

tie  of  vassalage  which  bound  Judah  to  Israel,  and  by  a  singular  irony  of  fate,

Jerusalem  oifered   an  asylum  to  the  last  of  the   children   of  Ahab.^     The

treachery  of  Jehu,  in  addition  to  his  inexpiable  cruelty,  terrified  the  faithful,

even  while  it  served  their  ends.     Dynastic  crimes  were  common  in  those  days,

but  the  tragedy  of  Jezreel  eclipsed  in  horror  all  others  that  had  preceded  it;  it

was  at  length  felt  that  such  avenging  of  Jahveh  was  in  His  eyes  too  ruthless,

and  a  century  later  the  Prophet  Hosea  saw  in  the  misery  of  his  people  the

divine  chastisement  of  the  house  of  Jehu  for  the  blood  shed  at  his  accession.*

The  report  of  these  events,  reaching  Calah,  awoke  the  ambition  of
Shalmaneser.  Would  Damascus,  mistrusting  its  usurper,  deprived  of  its
northern  allies,  and  ill-treated  by  the  Hebrews,  prove  itself  as  invulnerable
as  in  the  past  ?  At  all  events,  in  842  B.C.,  Shalmaneser  once  more  crossed
the  Euphrates,  marched  along  the  Orontes,  probably  receiving  the  homage  of
Hamath  and  Arvad  by  the  way.  Restricted  solely  to  the  resources  of
Damascus,  Hazael  did  not  venture  to  advance  into  Coele-Syria  as  Ben-
hadad  had  always  done ;  he  barricaded  the  defiles  of  Anti-Lebanon,  and,  en-
trenched on  Mount  Shenir  with  the  flower  of  his  troops,  prepared  to  await
the  attack.  It  proved  the  most  bloody  battle  that  the  Assyrians  had  up  to  that
period  ever  fought.  Hazael  lost  16,000  foot-soldiers,  470  horsemen,  1121
chariots,  and  yet  succeeded  in  falling  back  on  Damascus  in  good  order.
Shalmaneser,  finding  it  impossible  to  force  the  city,  devastated  the  surrounding
country,  burnt  numberless  villages  and  farms,  and  felled  all  the  fruit  trees  in
the  Hauran  up  to  the  margin  of  the  desert.  This  district  had  never,  since  the
foundation  of  the  kingdom  by  Rezon  a  century  before,  suffered  at  the  hands  of
an  enemy's  army,  and  its  population,  enriched  as  much  by  peaceful  labour  as
by  the  spoil  of  its  successful  wars,  offered  a  prize  of  incalculable  value.  On
his  return  march  Shalmaneser  raided  the  Bekaa,  entered  Phoenicia,  and  carved  a

'  2  Kings  ix. ;  s.  l-l'i,  18-27.  For  the  date  843  B.C.,  which  I  should  ascribe  to  these  events,  cf.
eupra,  p.  77,  note  2.

^  2  Kings  x.  12-li.  Stade  {Miscellen,  iu  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Alttestamentliche  Wissenschaft,  vol.  v.
p.  275,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Gesch.  des  Vollces  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  544, 545)  has  shown  that  this  account  is  iu  direct
contradiction  with  its  immediate  context,  and  that  it  belonged  to  a  version  of  the  events  differing  iu
detail  from  the  one  which  has  come  down  to  ua.  According  to  the  latter,  Jehu  must  at  once  have
met  Jehonadab  the  eon  of  Kechab,  and  have  entered  Samaria  in  his  company  (vers.  15-17) ;  this  would
have  been  a  poor  way  of  iuspiring  the  priests  of  Baal  with  the  confidence  necessary  for  drawing  them
into  the  trap.  According  to  2  Cluun.  xsii.  8,  the  massacre  of  the  princes  of  Judah  preceded  the
murder  of  Ahaziah.

'  2  Kings  xi.  1 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxii.  10.  *  Hosea  i.  4,  5.


86


THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR    SYRIA.


triumphal  stele  on  one  of  the  rocks  of  Baalirasi.^  The  Kings  of  Tyre  and
Sidon  hastened  to  ofi'er  him  numerous  gifts,  and  Jehu,  who  owed  to  his
presence  temporary  immunity  from  a  Syrian  invasion,  sent  his  envoys  to  greet
him,  accompanied  by  offerings  of  gold  and  silver  in  bars,  vessels  of  gold  of
various  forms,  situlx,  salvers,  cups,  drinking-vessels,  tin,  sceptres,  and  wands
of  precious  woods.  Shalmaneser's  pride  was  flattered  by  this  homage,  and
he  carved  on  one  of  his  monuments  the  representation  of  this  first  official
connection  of  Assyria  with   Israel.     The   chief  of  the   embassagre   is   shown


^0-Ti  >Tne^^)&T^  ^-'


JEHU,   KING    OP   ISRAEL,    SENDS   PRESENTS   TO   SHALMANESER.^

prostrating  himself  and  kissing  the  dust  before  the  king,  while  the  rest
advance  in  single  file,  some  with  vessels  in  their  hands,  some  carrying  sceptres,
or  with  metal  bowls  supported  on  their  heads.  The  prestige  of  the  house  of
Omri  was  still  a  living  influence,  or  else  the  Ninevite  scribes  were  imperfectly
informed  of  the  internal  changes  which  had  taken  place  in  Israel,  for  the
inscription  accompanying  this  bas-relief  calls  Jehu  the  son  of  Omri,  and
grafts  the  regicide  upon  the  genealogical  tree  of  his  victims.^  Shalmaneser's
victory  had  been  so  dearly  bought,  that  the  following  year  the  Assyrians
merely  attempted  an  expedition  for  tree-felling  in  the  Amanos  (841  B.C.).
Their  next  move  was  to  push  forward  into  Kui,  in  the  direction  of  the  Pyramos

'  The  Bite  of  Baalirasi  is  left  undecided  by  Assyriologists.  Fr.  Delitzsch  places  it  in  the  ueigh-
bourhoud  of  Tyre  or  Siilon  (TTo  lag  das  Faradiesi  J).  104),  and  Schrader  confines  himself  to  trans-
lating the  name  {Die  Keilinschriften,  etc.,  2nd  ed.,  p.  211).  The  events  which  follow  enable  us  to
afl5rm  with  tolerable  certainty  that  the  point  on  the  coast  where  Shalmaneser  received  the  tributes  of
Tyre  and  Sidou  is  none  other  than  the  mouth  of  the  Nahr-el-Kelb  :  the  name  Baalirasi,  "  the  master
of  the  head,"  would  then  be  applicable  to  the  rocky  point  which  rises  to  the  south  of  the  river,  and
on  which  Egyptian  kinjjs  had  already  sculptured  their  stelas  (cf.  Strugijle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  278,  427).

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  scenes  represented  on  the  Black  Obelisk ;  cf.  Layard,
The  Monumnnts  of  Nmeveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  53.  Cf.  another  bas-relief  of  the  same  monument,  representing
the  Jews,  on  the  opposite  page.

'■'  Obelisk,  11.  07-99,  where  Ihe  defeat  of  Hazael  is  alone  mentioned.  The  other  events  are  known
to  us  from  a  fragment  published  in  H.  Eawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  5,  No.  6,  11.  40-G5  ;
cf.  Amiauu  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  5(J-59.


THE  DEFEAT   OF  HA  Z  A  EL   AND    THE  HOMAGE   OF  JEHU.


87


and  Saros  (840  B.C.).'  In  the  summer  of  839  they  once  more  ventured
southwards,  but  this  time  Hazael  changed  his  tactics :  pitched  battles  and
massed  movements,  in  which  the  fate  of  a  campaign  was  decided  by  one  cast  of
the  dice,  were  now  avoided,  and  ambuscades,  guerilla  warfare,  and  long  and
tedious  sieges  became  the  order  of  the  day.  By  the  time  that  four  towns  had
been  taken,  Shalmaneser's  patience  was  worn  out ;  he  drew  off  his  troops  and


tm^


!^^>^>rT^Tf  ht^  nvF  ^i^T


.-i;ai,l  s   '1UII;1


II  \1  M  \.M  -I.


fell  back  on  Phoenicia,  laying  Tyre,  Sidon,  and  Byblos  under  tribute  before
returning  into  Mesopotamia.^  Hazael  had  shown  himself  possessed  of  no  less
energy  than  Ben-hadad  ;  and  Damascus,  isolated,  had  proved  as  formidable  a
foe  as  Damascus  surrounded  by  its  vassals  ;  Shalmaneser  therefore  preferred
to  leave  matters  as  they  were,  and  accept  the  situation.  Indeed,  the  results
obtained  were  of  sufiBcient  importance  to  warrant  his  feeling  some  satisfaction.
He  had  ruthlessly  dispelled  the  dream  of  Syrian  hegemony  which  had  buoyed
up  Ben-hadad,  he  had  forced  Damascus  to  withdraw  the  suzerciinty  it  had
exercised  in  the  south,  and  he  had  conquered  Northern  Syria  and  the  lower
basin  of  the  Orontes.  Before  running  any  further  risks,  he  judged  it  prudent
to  strengthen  his  recently  acquired  authority  over  these  latter  countries,  and
to  accustom  the  inhabitants  to  their  new  position  as  subjects  of  Nineveh.

He  showed  considerable  wisdom  by  choosing  the  tribes  of  the  Taurus  and
of  the  Cappadocian  marches  as  the  first  objects  of  attack.  lu  regions  so
difficult  of  access,  war  could  only  be  carried  on  with  considerable  hardship  and

'   Obelisk,  II.  99-102 ;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Imcriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  GO,  01.
''  Drawn  by  Paucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  Black  Obelisk;  cf.  Layarp,  The
Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  50.

'  Obelisk,  11.  102-104 ;  cf  Amiaud  and  Scueil,  ibid.,  pp.  00-03.


88        TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

severe  loss.  The  country  was  seamed  by  torrents  and  densely  covered  with
undergrowth,  while  the  towns  and  villages,  which  clung  to  the  steep
sides  of  the  valleys,  had  no  need  of  walls  to  become  effective  fortresses,
for  the  houses  rose  abruptly  one  above  another,  and  formed  so  many  re-
doubts which  the  enemy  would  be  forced  to  attack  and  take  one  by  one.
Few  pitched  battles  could  be  fought  in  a  district  of  this  description ;  the
Assvrians  wore  themselves  out  in  incessant  skirmishes  and  endless  petty  sieges.


A    MUU>.TA1N    VILLAGE.'


and  were  barely  compensated  by  the  meagre  spoil  which  such  warfare  yielded.
In  838  B.C.  Shalmaneser  swept  over  the  country  of  Tabal  and  reduced  twenty-
four  of  its  princes  to  a  state  of  subjection ;  proceeding  thence,  he  visited  the
mountains  of  Turat,"  celebrated  from  this  period  downwards  for  their  silver
mines  and  quarries  of  valuable  marbles.  In  837  he  seized  the  stronghold  of
Uetash  in  Melitene,  and  laid  Tabal  under  a  fresh  contribution  ;  this  constituted
a  sort  of  advance  jjost  for  Assyria  in  the  sight  of  those  warlike  and  continually
fluctuating  races  situated  between  the  sources  of  the  Halys  and  the  desert
border  of  Asia  Minor.^     Secure  on  this  side,  he  was  about  to  bring  matters  to

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  i^Jfred  Boissier.

"  The  position  of  the  mountains  of  Turat  is  indicated  by  the  nature  of  their  products :  '■  We  know
of  a  silver  mine  at  Marash  and  an  iron  mine  not  worked,  and  two  fine  quarries,  one  of  pink  and
the  other  of  black  marble"  (Vital  Cuiket,  La  Turquie  d'Asie,  vol.  ii.  p.  138;  cf.  p.  231).  Turat,
therefore,  must  be  the  Marash  mountain,  the  Aghir-Dagh  and  its  spurs ;  hence  the  two  sorts  of  stone
mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  text  would  be,  the  one  the  pink,  the  other  the  black  marble  (Maspero,
Notei  au  jour  le  jour,  §  33,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1898,  vol.  xx.  pp.  133,  134).

^  Obelisk,  11.  lOi-llO;  cf.  Amiacd  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  G2,  63.  A
fragment  of  an  anonymous  list,  discovered  by  Belitzsch,  puts  the  expedition  against  the  Tabal  in
S37  B.C.  instead  of  in  S3S,  and  consequently  makes  the  entire  series  of  ensuing  expeditions  one  year


WARS  IN  CILICIA   AND   NAMRl.


89


a  close  in  Cilicia,  when  the  defection  of  lanzu  recalled  him  to  the  opposite
extremity  of  the  empire.  He  penetrated  into  Namri  by  the  defiles  of
Kbashmur,^  made  a  hasty  march  through  Sikhisatakh,  Bit-Tamul,  Bit-Shakki,


ELi.l'HA>,T    AND    .lloNKEVS    BKoLl.HT    AS    A     iUlBLlr,    1  u    M.St\ha    i',\     iUh    1  Lull.t    wt     31 1  ZKl."


and  Bit-Shedi,  surprised  the  rebels  and  drove  them  into  the  forests ;  he  then

bore  down  on  Parsua  ^  and  plundered  twenty-seven  petty  kings  consecutively  ;

skirting  Misi,  Amadai,  Araziash,^   and  Kharkhar,  and   most   of  the   districts

later,  up  to  the  revolt  of  Assur-daln-pal.  This  ia  evidently  a  mistake  of  the  scribe  who  compiled
this  edition  of  the  Canon,  and  the  chronology  of  a  contemporary  monument,  such  as  the  Black
Obelisk,  ought  to  obtain  until  further  light  can  be  thrown  on  the  subject.

'  For  the  site  of  Khashmur  or  Khashmar,  cf.  supra,  p.  24,  note  2.  The  other  localities  cannot  as
yet  be  identified  with  any  modern  site ;  we  may  conjecture  that  they  were  scattered  about  the  basin
of  the  upper  Dlyalah.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiii,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  Black  Obelisk :  cf.  Layaed,  The
Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  55.

^  Parsua,  or  with  the  native  termination  Parauash,  has  been  identified  first  with  Persia  and  then
with  Parthia,  and  Eost  still  persists  in  its  identification,  if  not  with  the  Parthia  of  classical
geograi^hers,  at  least  with  the  Parthian  people  QUntersuchimgen  zur  altorientalischen  Geschichte,
p.  74,  note  2).  Schrader  has  shown  that  it  ought  to  be  sought  between  Xamri  on  the  south  and  the
Mannai  on  the  north,  in  one  of  the  valleys  of  the  Gordysean  mountains  (Keilinschri/ten,  etc.,  pp.  169-
179),  and  his  demonstration  has  been  accepted  with  a  few  modifications  of  detail  by  most  scholars
(Delattbe,  Le  Peuple  et  I'Empire  dea  Medes,  pp.  lJS-72 ;  Homjiel,  Gesch.  Bab.  itnd  Ass.,  pp.  593,  594 ;
WiJJCKLER,  Gesch.  Sab.  uiid  Ass.,  p.  199).  I  believe  it  to  be  possible  to  determine  its  position  with
still  further  precision.  Parsua  on  one  side  lay  on  the  border  of  Xamri,  which  comprises  the  districts
to  the  east  of  the  Diyalah  in  the  direction  of  Zohab  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations  for  Namar  or  Namri,
p.  606),  and  was  contiguous  to  the  Medes  on  the  other  side  (^Obelisl:,  11.  119-121),  and  also  to  the
Mannai,  who  occupied  the  southern  regions  of  Lake  Urumiah  (Great  Inscription  of  Samsi-rammdn,
col.  ii.  11.  39,  40,  Slab  Inscription  of  Ramman-niruri,  1.  8,  Cylinder  Inscription  of  Sargon,  1.  15) ;  it
also  lies  close  to  Bit-Khamban,  the  principal  of  the  Cossaean  triljes  (Fk.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der
Kossaer,  pp.  35-37),  as  it  would  appear  {Cylinder  Inscr.  of  Sargon,  1.  15).  I  can  find  only  one  position
on  tlie  map  which  would  answer  to  all  these  requirements :  this  is  in  the  main  the  basin  of  the
Gave-rud  and  its  small  affluents,  the  Ardelan  and  the  sources  of  the  Kizil-Uzen,  and  I  shall  there
place  Parsua  until  further  information  is  forthcoming  on  the  subject.

*  Amadai  is  a  form  of  Madai,  with  a  prothetical  a,  like  Agusi  or  Azala,  by  the  side  of  Guzi  and
Zala.  The  inscription  of  Shalmaneser  III.  thus  gives  us  the  first  mention  of  the  classical  Medes,  as
H.  Rawlinson  has  from  the  first  pointed  out  (/.  B.  As.  Soc,  let  ser.,  vol.  xv.  p.  242).  This  identifica-
tion has  not  been  contested  of  latter  years  except  by  Delattre  (Le  Peuple  et  I'Empire  des  Medes,  p.  74).
Araziash,  placed  too  far  to  the  east  in  Sagarteue  by  Fr.  Lenormant  (Lettres  Assyriologiques,  vol.  i.


•)0        THE  ASSmiAN'  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

lying  on  the  middle  heights  of  the  table-land  of  Iran,  he  at  length  came  up
with  lanzu,  whom  he  seized  and  brought  back  prisoner  to  Assyria,  together  with
his  family  and  his  idols.^  It  was  at  this  juncture,  perhaps,  that  he  received
from  the  people  of  Muzri  the  gift  of  an  elephant  and  some  large  monkeys,
representations  of  which  he  has  left  us  on  one  of  his  bas-reliefs.  Elephants
were  becoming  rare,  and  it  was  not  now  possible  to  kill  them  by  the  hundred,
as  formerly,  in  Syria  :^  this  particular  animal,  therefore,  excited  the  wonder  of
the  Ninevites,  and  the  possession  of  it  flattered  the  vanity  of  the  conqueror.
This  was,  however,  an  interlude  of  short  duration,  and  the  turbulent  tribes  of
the  Taurus  recalled  him  to  the  west  as  soon  as  spring  set  in.  He  laid  waste
Kui  in  836  B.C.,  destroyed  Timur,  its  capital,  and  on  his  return  march  revenged
himself  on  Arame  of  Agusi,  whose  spirit  was  still  unbroken  by  his  former  mis-
fortunes. Tanakun  and  Tarsus  fell  into  his  hands  835  B.C. ;  Shalmaneser  replaced
Kati,  the  King  of  Kui,  by  his  brother  Kirri,  and  made  of  his  dominions  a  kind
of  buiier  state  between  his  own  territory  and  that  of  Pamphylia  and  Lycaonia.^
He  had  now  occupied  the  throne  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  not  a  year  of
which  had  elapsed  without  seeing  the  monarch  gird  on  his  armour  and  lead
his  soldiers  in  person  towards  one  or  other  points  of  the  horizon.  He  was  at
length  weary  of  such  perpetual  warfare,  and  advancing  age  perchance  pre-
vented him  from  leading  his  troops  with  that  dash  and  vigour  which  are
necessary  to  success ;  however  this  might  be,  on  his  return  from  Cilicia  he  laid
aside  his  armour  once  for  all,  and  devoted  himself  to  peaceful  occupations.

But  he  did  not  on  that  account  renounce  all  attempts  at  conquest.  Con-
ducting his  campaigns  by  proxy,  he  delegated  the  command  of  his  army  to
his  Tartan  Dayan-assur,*  and  the  northern  tribes  were  the  first  on  whom  this
general  gave  proof  of  his  prowess.  Urartu  had  passed  into  the  hands  of
another  sovereign  since  its  defeat  in  845  B.C.,  and  a  second  Sharduris  ^  had

p.  25),  has  been  located  further  westwards  by  Schrader  (Keilingcliriften,  etc.,  p.  ITS),  near  the  upper
eourse  of  the  Kerkha ;  but  the  documents  of  all  periods  which  Schrader  himself  cites  {op.  cit.,  p.  172,
173)  show  us  that  on  one  side  it  adjoined  Kharkhar,  that  is  the  basin  of  the  Gamas-ab,  on  the  other
side  Media,  that  is  the  country  of  Hamadan.  It  must,  therefore,  be  placed  between  tlie  two,  in  the
northern  pai't  of  the  ancient  Cambadene  (IsiDOROS  of  Chakax,  §  85,  in  Muller-JJidot,  Geographi  Grseci
minores,  vol.  i.  p.  250),  in  the  present  Tchamabadan.  Kharkhar  in  this  case  would  be  in  the  southern
part  of  Cambadene,  on  the  main  road  which  leads  from  the  gates  of  the  Zagros  to  Hamadan,  as
Lenormant  pointed  out  some  time  ago,  while  ascribing  too  large  an  area  to  it  (Letlres  Aesi/riulogiques,
vol.  i.  pp.  24,  43,  44) ;  an  examination  of  the  general  features  of  the  country  leads  me  to  believe  that
the  town  of  Kharkhar  should  occupy  the  site  of  Kirmanshahan,  or  rather  of  the  ancient  city  which
preceded  that  town  (J.  de  Morgan,  Mission  Scientijique  en  Perse,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  100-104).

'  Oi)e?(sJr,  11. 110-126;  ct  Athiavd  and  Screil,  Les  Intcriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  62-65;  KosT,
Vntersuclmngen  zur  alt.  Gesch.,  pp.  74-76.

-  See  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  265,  284,  285.

'  Obelisk,  11. 126-141 ;  cf.  Amiacd  and  Scbiel,  op.  cit.,  pp.  64-67.  The  fragment  of  the  eponjin  list,
pointed  out  by  Delitzsch  (Hommel,G('s.  Bab.  undAss.,  p.  616,  n.),  inserts  here,  by  mistake,  a  fresh  expedi-
tion to  Kui,  which  obliges  the  scribe  to  antedate  by  a  year  all  the  ensuing  espeditions(cf.  supro,  p.  88,  n.  'S).

*  For  the  function  of  the  Tartan,  and  the  rank  occupied  by  this  officer  at  the  Assyrian  court,  cf.
Struggle  vf  the  Nations,  pp.  620,  621.

*  The  name  is  written  Siduri  or  Seduri  in  the  text  of  the  Obelisk  ij.  144),  probably  in  accordance


TEE  LAST  CAMPAIGNS    OF  SHALMANESER   III.  91

taken  the  place  of  the  Arame  who  had  ruled  at  the  beginning  of  Shalmaneser's
reign.  It  would  a^ipear  that  the  accession  of  this  prince,  who  was  probably
young  and  active,  was  the  signal  for  a  disturbance  among  the  people  of  the
Upper  Tigris  and  the  JIasios — a  race  always  impatient  of  the  yoke,  and  ready
to  make  common  cause  with  any  fresh  enemy  of  Assyria.  An  insurrection
broke  out  in  Bit-Zamani  and  the  neighbouring  districts.  Dayan-assur  quelled
it  ofifhand  ;  then,  quitting  the  basin  of  the  Tigris  by  the  defiles  of  Armash,
he  crossed  the  Arzania,  and  entered  Urartu.  Sharduris  came  out  to  meet  him,
and  was  defeated,  if  we  may  give  credence  to  the  official  record  of  the
campaign.  Even  if  the  account  be  an  authentic  one,  the  victory  was  of  no
advantage  to  the  Assyrians,  for  they  were  obliged  to  retreat  before  they  had
subjugated  the  enemy,^  and  an  insurrection  among  the  Patina  prevented  them
from  returning  to  the  attack  in  the  following  year.  With  obligations  to
their  foreign  master  on  one  hand  and  to  their  own  subjects  on  the  other,  the
princes  of  the  Syrian  states  had  no  easy  life.  If  they  failed  to  fulfil  their
duties  as  vassals,  then  an  Assyrian  invasion  would  pour  in  to  their  country,
and  sooner  or  later  their  ruin  would  be  assured  ;  they  would  have  before  them
the  prospect  of  death  by  imjjaling  or  under  the  knife  of  the  flayer,  or,  if  they
escaped  this,  captivity  and  exile  in  a  far-off  land.  Prudence  therefore  dictated
a  scrupulous  fidelity  to  their  suzerain.  On  the  other  hand,  if  they  resigned
themselves  to  their  dependent  condition,  the  people  of  their  towns  would  chafe
at  the  payment  of  tribute,  or  some  ambitious  relative  would  take  advantage  of
the  popular  discontent  to  hatch  a  plot  and  foment  a  revolution,  and  the  prince
thus  threatened  would  escape  from  an  x\ssyrian  reprisal  only  to  lose  his  throne
or  fall  by  the  blow  of  an  assassin.  In  circumstances  such  as  these  the  people
of  the  Patina  murdered  their  king,  Lubarna  II.,  and  proclaimed  in  his  room
a  certain  Surri,  who  had  no  right  to  the  crown,  but  who  doubtless  undertook
to  liberate  them  from  the  foreigner.  Dayan-assur  defeated  the  rebels  and
blockaded  the  remains  of  their  army  in  Kinalua.  They  defended  themselves
at  first  energetically,  but  on  the  death  of  Surri  from  some  illness,  their
courage  failed  them,  and.  they  offered  to  deliver  over  the  sons  of  their  chief
if  their  own  lives  might  be  spared.  Dayan-assur  had  the  poor  wretches
impaled,  laid  the  inhabitants  under  a  heavy  contribution,  and  appointed  a
certain  Sasi,  son  of  Uzza,^  to  be  their  king.  The  remainder  of  Syria  gave  no
further  trouble — a  fortunate  circumstance,  for  the  countries  on  the  Armenian

with  some  popular  pronunciation,  in  which  the  r  was  but  slightly  rolled  and  finally  disappeared.  The
identity  of  Seduri  and  Sharduris,  pointed  out  by  Sayce  {Tlie  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  the
J.  B.  As.  Soe.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  41),  has  been  adopted  by  recent  historians  (Tiele,  Babylonisch-Assyrische
Gesch.,  pp.  203,  215 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  unci  Ass.,  pp.  600-602  ;  Winckleis,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,
pp.  197,  19S).  Belck  and  Lehmann  have  shown  tliat  this  Seduri  was  not  Sharduris,  son  of  Lutipris,
but  a  Sharduris  II.,  probably  the  son  of  Arame  ;  of.  for  this  first  Sharduris,  p.  62  of  the  present  work.

'  Black  Ohelisl:,  11.  141-146  ;  cf.  Ami.\ud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Sabnanasar  II.,  pp.  66, 67.

-  Black  Obelisk,  11.  146-156;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  ibid.,  pp.  66,  67.


92         THE  ASSTRIAN  BEVIVAL    AND    THE   STRUGGLE  EOB   SYRIA.


border  revolted  iu  832  B.C.,  and  the  whole  year  was  occupied  in  establishing  order
among  the  herdsmen  of  Kirkhi.     In  831  B.C.,  Dayan-assur  pushed  forward  into

Khubushkia,  and  traversed  it  from  end  to  end  with-
out encountering  any  resistance.  He  next  attacked
the  Mannai.  Their  prince,  Ualki,  quailed  before  his
onslaught ;  he  deserted  his  royal  city  Zirtn,^  and
took  refuge  in  the  mountains.  Dayan-assur  pursued
him  thither  in  vain,  but  he  was  able  to  collect  con-
siderable booty,  and  turning  in  a  south-easterly
direction,  he  fought  his  way  along  the  base  of  the
Gordy;can  mountains  till  he  reached  Parsua,  which
he  laid  under  tribute.-  In  830  B.C.  it  was  the  turn
of  Muzazir,  which  hitherto  had  escaped  invasion,
to  receive  a  visit  from  the  Tartan.  Zapparia,  the
capital,  and  fifty -six  other  towns  were  given  over  to
the  flames.  From  thence,  Dayan-assur  passed  into
Urartu  proper;  after  having  plundered  it,  he  fell  back
on  the  southern  provinces,  collecting  by  the  way
the  tribute  of  Guzan,  of  the  Mannai,  of  Andiu,^  and
Parsua ;  he  then  pushed  on  into  the  heart  of  Namri,
and  having  razed  to  the  ground  two  hundred  and  fifty
of  its  towns,  returned  with  his  troops  to  Assyria  by
the  defiles  of  Shimishi  and  through  Khalman.^  This
was  perhaps  the  last  foreign  campaign  of  Shalman-
eser  III.'s  reign ;  it  is  at  all  events  the  last  of  which
we  possess  any  history.  The  record  of  his  exploits
ends,  as  it  had  begun  more  than  thirty  years
•  previously,  with  a  victory  in  Namri.
The  aged  king  had,  indeed,  well  earned  the  right  to  end  his  allotted  days
in  peace.     Devoted  to  Calah,  like  his  predecessor,  he  had  there  accumulated

'  The  town  is  elsewhere  called  Izirtu  {Great  Inscription  of  Sargon  at  Khorsahad,  1.  42),  and  appears
to  have  been  designated  in  the  inscriptions  of  Van  by  the  name  of  Sisiri-Khadiris  (Satce,  The  Cunei-
form Inscriptions  of  Van,  iu  the  J.  B.  As.  Soc.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  400).

-  Slack  Ohelisk,U.  106-174;  cf.  Asiiaud  and  Scheil,  ies  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  //.,pp.  G6-69.

'  Andia  or  Audiu  is  contiguous  to  Nairi  {Slab  Inscr.  of  Ranimdn-nirdri  IV.,  1.  19;  cf.  L.  Abel,
Inschriften  Rammdn-nirdri's  III.,  in  Schkader,  Keilinschriften  Bibl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  18S,  189).  to  Zikirtu
and  to  Karalla,  whicli  latter  borders  on  Mauna  {Inscription  on  the  Bulls  of  Sargon,  11.  S,  9) ;  it  bordered
on  the  country  of  Misa  or  Misi,  into  which  it  is  merged  uuder  the  name  of  Misiauda  in  the  time  of
Sargon  {Inscription  des  Pastes,  1.  37).  Delattre  {Le  Peuple  et  V Empire  des  Medes,  pp.  82,  S.3)  places
Andiu  in  the  country  of  the  classical  Matienaj,  between  the  Matisenian  mountains  and  Lake  Urumiah.
The  position  of  Misu  on  the  confines  of  Araziash  and  Media,  somewhere  in  the  neiglibourhood  of
Talvantu-Dagh,  obliges  us  to  place  Andiu  lower  down  to  the  south-east,  near  the  district  of  Kurdasir.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  cast  in  the  Louvre.   [The  original  is  in  the  Brit.  Mus. — Tr.]

^  Obelisk,  11.  174-190  ;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Soheil,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  70, 71.  The
fragment  of  the  eponymous  list  pointed  out  by  Delitzsch  (cf.  supra,  p.  SS,  note  3)  omits  this  last


BLACK  OBELISK  OF  SHALMASESER  III.'


THE  BUILDING    WORKS    OF  SHALMANESER   III.


93


the  spoils  of  his  campaigns,  and  had  made  it  the  wealthiest  city  of  his  empire.
He  contiuued  to  occupy  the  palace  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  which  he  had  enlarged.
Wherever  he  turned  within  its  walls,  his  eyes  fell  upon  some  trophy  of  his
wars  or  panegyric  of  his  virtues,  whether  recorded  on  mural  tiles  covered  with
inscriptions  and  bas-reliefs,  or  celebrated  by  statutes,  altars,  and  triumphal
stelse.  The  most  curious  among  all-these  is  a  square-based  block  terminating
in  three  receding  stages,  one  above  the  other,  like  the  stump  of  an  Egyptian
obelisk  surmounted  by  a  stepped  pyramid.  Five  rows  of  bas-reliefs  ou  it
represent  scenes  most  flattering  to  Assyrian  pride ; — the  reception  of  tribute


^J^    /T  TT  >v   ^  >-««T7TT^TTTi


Ct  "l^fS^  TT  ^  i^^W^  ^  ^^^fe^


STAG    AND    LIOJJS    OF   THE    COl'NTKY   OF    SUKHl.'

from  Gilziin,  Muzri,  the  Patina,  the  Israelitish  Jehu,  and  Marduk-abal-nzur,
Xing  of  the  land  of  Sukhi.  The  latter  knew  his  suzerain's  love  of  the  chase,
and  he  provided  him  with  animals  for  his  preserves,  including  lions,  and  rare
species  of  deer.  The  inscription  on  the  monument  briefly  relates  the  events
which  had  occurred  between  the  first  and  the  thirty-first  years  of  Shalmaneser's
reign; — the  defeat  of  Damascus,  of  Babylon  and  Urartu,  the  conquest  of
Northern  Syria,  of  Cilicia,  and  of  the  countries  bordering  on  the  Zagros.^
When  the  king  left  Calah  for  some  country  residence  in  its  neighbourhood,
similar  records  and  carvings  would  meet  his  eye.  At  Imgur-Bel,  one  of  the
gates  of  the  palace  was  covered  with  plates  of  bronze,  on  which  the  skilful
artist  has  embossed  and  engraved  with  the  chisel  episodes  from  the  campaigns

expedition,  for  which  no  available  place  could  be  found,  after  the  insertion  of  the  campaign
against  the  Kui,  mentioned  on  p.  90,  note  3,  of  the  present  work.  For  Khalman,  see  Struggle
of  the  Nations,  p.  G15  ;  as  it  corresponds,  as  Lenormant  was  the  tirst  to  point  out  {Lettres  Assyriologiques,
vol.  i.  p.  41 ;  cf.  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Eossder,  pp.  31,  34),  to  Khalone  (Diodorcs  Sioulus,  xvii.
110)  or  to  Khahi  (Isidokos  of  Charax,  §  53,  in  MtLLER-DiDOT,  Geographi  Gneci  Mtnores,  vol.  i.  p.  250)
of  the  classical  period,  the  passes  of  Simishi  necessarily  coincide  with  the  gates  of  the  Zagros
(Lenormant,  Lettres  Aseyriologiques,  vol.  i.  p.  41).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  tlie  Black  Obelisk  ;  ef.  Latard,  Tlie
Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  53.

=  Most  of  the  scenes  on  the  Black  Obelisk  of  Shalmaneser  III.  have  been  reproduced  in  the
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  661,  and  on  pp.  86,  87.  89,  and  93  of  the  present  work.


94        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

on  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  the  crossing  of  mountains  and  rivers,  the
assault  and  burning  of  cities,  the  long  lines  of  captives,  the  melee  with
the  enemy  and  the  pursuit  of  the  chariots.^  All  the  cities  of  Assyria, —
Nineveh,^  Arbela,  Assur,  even  to  the  more  distant  towns  of  Harrau  ^  and
Tushkhan,* — vied  with  each  other  in  exhibiting  proofs  of  his  zeal  for  their  gods
and  his  affection  for  their  inhabitants;  but  his  predilection  for  Calah  filled
them  with  jealousy,  and  Assur  particularly  could  ill  brook  the  growing
aversion  with  which  the  Assyrian  kings  regarded  her.  It  was  of  no  avail
that  she  continued  to  be  the  administrative  and  religious  capital  of  the
empire,  the  storehouse  of  the  spoil  and  annual  tribute  of  other  nations,^
and  was  continually  embellishing  herself  with  fresh  monuments:''  a  spirit
of  discontent  was  daily  increasing,  and  merely  awaited  some  favourable
occasion  to  break  out  into  open  revolt.  Shalmaneser  enjoyed  the  dignity
of  limmu  for  the  second  time  after  thirty  years,  and  had  celebrated  this
jubilee  of  his  inauguration  by  a  solemn  festival  in  honour  of  Assur  and
Kamman.''  It  is  possible  that  lie  may  have  thought  this  a  favourable
moment  for  presenting  to  the  people  the  sou  whom  he  had  chosen  from
among  his  children  to  succeed  him.  At  any  rate,  Assur-dain-pal,  fearing
that  one  of  his  brothers  might  be  preferred  before  him,  proclaimed  himself
king,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  Assyria  gathered  around  his  standard.  Assur
and  twenty-six  more  of  the  most  important  cities  revolted  in  his  favour —
Nineveh,  Imgurbel,  Sibaniba,  Durbalat,  Arbela,  Zabau  in  the  Chaldaean
marches,  Arrapkha  in  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Zab,  and  most  of  the  colonies,

'  Tbis  monument,  discovered  by  native  diggers,  was  first  brought  into  notice  by  G.  Schlumberger,
•who  bought  small  fragments  of  it,  which  were  at  once  explained  by  Fr.  Lenormant  {Bas-reliefs  de
bronze  Assyriens,  in  the  Gazette  Arch€ologiqiie,  1S7S,  pp.  119-129,  and  pis.  xxii.-xxiv.).  Nearly  all  the
bas-reliefs  were  subsequently  discovered  and  acquired  for  the  authorities  of  tlie  British  Museum  by
Hormuzd  Eassam,  and  published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.  (Birch,  Tlie  Bronze  Orna-
ments of  the  Palace  Gate  f  rum  Balawdt,  Nos.  1-4  ;  cf  Hormczd  Kassam,  Asshur  and  the  Land  of  Nimrod,
p.  200,  et  seq.).  Numerous  parts  of  them  have  been  reproduced  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  629,
630,  631,  63S,  639,  611,  657,  658,  660,  and  also  on  pp.  7,  8,  9,  37,  61,  62,  63,  65,  68  of  the  present  work.

'  Nineveh  is  mentioned  as  the  starting-place  of  nearly  all  the  first  campaigns  in  the  inscription
on  the  Monolith,  col.  i.  No.  29,  col.  ii.  11.  14,  30,  67,  78 ;  also  in  the  Balawat  inscription,  col.  iv.  1.  5 ;
on  the  other  hand,  towards  the  end  of  the  reign,  Calah  is  given  as  the  residence  of  the  king  on  the
Black  Obelisk,  11.  14t;,  147,  159,  160,  175,  176.

'  Jleution  of  the  buildings  of  Shalmaneser  III.  at  Harran  occurs  in  an  inscription  of  Nabonidus
(H.  Eawlinson,  Gun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.  pi.  64,  col.  ii.  1.  4  ;  cf.  Latbille,  Der  Nahonid  Cylinder  V  R  64,
in  the  Zeitschrift  fUr  Keil/orschung,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246,  247,  335).

*  The  Monolith  discovered  atKurkh  (Rawlijjson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pis.  7,  8)  is  in  itself  a
proof  that  Shalmaneser  executed  works  in  this  town,  the  Tu8hkha,n  of  tlie  inscriptions  (cf.  for  this
town,  supra,  p.  20).

'  Indications  of  booty  and  tribute  brought  in  to  the  city  of  Assur,  Monolith,  col.  i.  11.  27-29,
col.  ii.  11.  23,  24,  64,  65,  75-81 ;  Blach  Obelisk,  1.  140.

°  These  works  are  described  in  the  inscription  on  the  statue  of  Kalah-Shergat  (Latakd,  Inscrip-
tions in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pis.  76,  77 ;  cf.  Amiaud  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.
74-77;  J.  A.  Craig,  The  Throne- Inscription  of  Salmanasar  II ,  in  Hebraica,  vol.  ii.  pp.  140-146).

■  Obelisk,  11.  174,  175  ;  cf.  AjiiArn  and  Scheil,  Les  Inscr.  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  70, 71.  .\ny  con-
nection established  between  this  thirty-year  jubilee  and  the  thirty  years'  festival  of  Egypt  (Tiele,
Bab.  Ass.  Gesch.,  p.  204)  rests  on  facts  which  can  be  so  little  relied  ou,  that  it  must  be  accepted  with
considerable  reserve.


TEE  REVOLT   OF  ASSVR-DAIN-PAL.


95


both  of  ancient  and  recent  foundation — Amidi  on  the  Tigris,  Khindanu  near  the

mouths  of  the  Kliabur  and  Tul-Abni  on  the  southern  sloj^es  of  the  Masios.

The  aged   king   remained   in   possession   only  of  Calah   and   its   immediate

environs — Nisibis,  Harran,  Tushkhan,  and  the  most  recently  subdued  provinces

on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates

and  the  Orontes.    It  is  probable,

however,  that  the  army  remained

faithful  to  him,  and  the  support

which     these    well-tried     troops

afforded   him  enabled   the  king

to  act  with   promptitude.      The

weight  of  years  did  not  permit

him  to  command  in  person ;  he

therefore  entrusted  the  conduct

of  operations  to  his  son  Samsi-

ramman,  but  he  did  not  live  to

see  the  end  of  the  struggle.     It

embittered  his  last  days,  and  was

not  terminated  till  822  B.C.,  at

which  date  Shalmaneser  had  been

dead  two  years-^    This  prolonged

crisis  had  shaken  the  kingdom  to

its  foundations ;  the  Syrians,  the

Medes,    the     Babylonians,    and

the    peoples    of    the   Armenian

and  Aramaean    marches  were   rent  from  it,  and   though    Sainsi-ramman  IV.

waged  continuous  warfare  during  the  twelve  years  that  he  governed,  he  could

only  partially  succeed  in  regaining  the  territory  which  had  been  thus  lost*

'  Eponym  Canon  in  Delitzsch,  art.  Sanhertb,  in  the  Bihel-Lexicon,  p.  392,  where,  from  the  thirty-
third  year  of  Shalmaneser  (827  b.o.)  to  the  third  year  of  Samsi-rammau  (822),  we  read,  after  the
eponymous  name,  the  word  for  "  revolt ; "  the  list  of  the  rebel,  towns  has  been  preserved  at  the
beginning  of  the  MoiwUth  Inscription  of  Samsi-ramman,  col.  i.  11.  35-53  ;  cf.  AsiiArD  and  Scheil,  Les
Imcripiions  de  Salmanasar  II.,  pp.  84,  So,  and  Scheil,  Imcription  Assyrienne  urchalque  de  Shamshi-
Bammdn  IV.,  pp.  G,  7.  Tiele  attributes  the  revolt  of  Assur-dain-pal  to  the  jealousy  w^liioh  tljat
prince  entertained  for  the  Tartan  Dayau-assur  {Bah.  Ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  193, 194)  ;  Hommel  believes  that
Assur-dain-pal  had  hoped  to  be  called  to  the  throne  after  the  celebration  of  the  thirtieth  year,  and
that  the  disappointment  he  felt  induced  him  to  revolt  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  015,  616).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  sketch  by  PiNOHES,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bib}.  Arch.
Sac,  vol.  vii.,  plate  between  pp.  86  and  87.

^  All  that  we  know  of  the  reigo  of  Samsi-ramman  IV.  comes  from  the  inscription  in  archaic
characters,  publislied  in  H.  Eawlixsox,  Cun.  Lis.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pis.  29,  34,  translated  into  English  by
SilYC^.  Monolith  Inscription  cf  Samas-Rimmon,  in  the  Records  of  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,  vol.  i.  pp.  9-22;
into  German  by  L.  Abel,  Inschrifl  Schamschi-Ramman's,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothek,
vol.  i.  pp.  174-187  ;  into  French  by  Oppekt,  Hist,  des  Empires  de  Chald€e  ct  d'Assyrie,  pp.  122-128;
by  Mexaxt,  Annales  des  Bois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  119-124;  and  by  Scheie,  VInscription  de  Shamsht-
Ramman  IV.  roi  d'Assyrie  (824-811  B  c),  etc.,  1S89,  in-i".  It  contaius  the  account  of  four
campaigns,  without  giving  the  years  of  each  reign  or  the  limmu,  and  historians  have  classified  them


the  broxze-covered  gates  of  balawat.=


96        TEE  ASSYHIAN  BEVIVAL   AXD    THE  STRUOOLE  FOR   SYRIA.

His  first  three  campaigns  were  directed  against  the  north-eastern  and  eastern
proyinces.  He  hegan  by  attempting  to  collect  the  tribute  from  Nairi,  the
payment  of  which  had  been  suspended  since  the  outbreak  of  the  revolution,
and  he  re-established  the  dominion  of  Assyria  from  the  district  of  Paddir
to  the  township  of  Kar-Shulmauasharid,  which  iiis  father  had  founded  at  the
fords  of  the  Euphrates  opposite  to  Carchemish  ^  (821  B.C.).  In  the  follow-
ing campaign  he  did  not  personally  take  part,  but  the  Rabshakeh  Mutarriz-
assur  pillaged  the  shores  of  Lake  Urumiah,  and  tlien  made  his  way  towards
Urartu,  where  he  destroyed  three  hundred  towns  '^  (820).  The  tliird  expedition
was  directed  against  Misi  and  Gizilbunda  beyond  the  Upper  Zab  and  Mount
Zilar.^  Tlie  inhabitants  of  Misi  entrenched  themselves  on  a  wooded  ridge
commanded  by  three  peaks,  but  were  defeated  in  spite  of  the  advantages
which  their  position  secured  for  them;''  the  people  of  Gizilbunda  were  not
more  fortunate  than  their  neighbouz's,  and  six  thousand  of  tliem  perished  at
the  assault  of  Urash,  their  capital."     Mutarriz-assur  at  once  turned  upon  the

in  difierent  ways.  Tide  believes  that  tlie  hist  of  them  falls  at  the  latest  in  818  (Bah.-Ass.
Gesch.,  pp.  204,  205),  and  that  nune  of  the  expeditions  mentioned  in  it  answer  to  those  contained  in
the  Eponym  Canon  (ScuiiADEK,  Keil.  Bill,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209);  to  this  opinion  Winckler  gives
his  adhesion  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  202,  203).  Hommel  distributes  them  over  the  whole  length
of  the  reign,  the  three  first  from  822  to  818  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  U20),  the  fourth  in  815  {Id.,  p.  623).

'  Monolith  Inscription  of  Samsi-rammdn  IV.,  col.  i.  1.  53,  col.  ii.  11.  l-l(j ;  cf.  L.  Abel,  Inschrift
Schamschi-Bamman' s,  in  Schkader,  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  i.  pp.  178, 179,  and  Scheil,  Inscription  assyrienne
archaique  de  Shamshi-Rammun  IV.,  pp.  0-9.

-  Monolith  Inscription  of  Samsi-rammdn  IV.,  col.  ii.  11.  16-3-t;  cf.  L.  Aijel,  Inschrift
Schamschi-Rammdn's,  pp.  178,  179,  and  Scheil,  Inscription  ass.  archaique,  etc.,  pp.  8-11.

'  Mount  Zilar  (GuUar  in  Scheil,  op.  cit..  pp.  10,  11)  is  beyond  the  Upper  Zab,  on  one  of  the
roads  which  lead  to  the  basin  of  Lake  Urumiah,  probably  in  Khubushkia.  'J'here  are  two  of  these
roads — that  wliich  passes  over  the  neck  of  Kelishiu,  and  the  other  which  runs  through  the  gorges
of  Alan;  "with  the  exception  of  these  two  points  the  mountain  chain  is  absolutely  impassable"
(J.  de  Mokgan,  Mission  scientifique  en  Perse,  Etudes  giorjraphiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  4G).  According  to  the
general  direction  of  the  campaign,  it  appears  to  me  probable  that  the  king  crossed  by  the  passes  of
Alan ;  Mount  Zilar  would  therefore  be  the  group  of  chains  which  cover  the  district  of  Pishder,  and
across  which  the  Lesser  Zab  passes  before  descending  to  the  plain.

■■  The  country  of  Misi  adjoined  Gizilbunda  {Monolith  Inscr.,  etc.,  col.  ii.  11.  41-59),  Media,
Araziash  {Inscr.  of  Rammdn-nirdri  IV.,  11.  6,  7),  and  Andiu  (cf.  supra,  p.  92,  note  3).  All  tliese
circumstances  incline  us  to  place  it  in  the  south-eastern  part  of  Kurdistan  of  Sihmeh,  in  the  upper
valley  of  Kisil-Uzen.  The  ridge,  overlooked  by  three  peaks,  on  which  the  inhabitants  took  refuge,
cannot  be  looked  for  on  the  west,  where  there  are  few  important  heights  :  I  should  rather  identify  it
with  the  part  of  the  Gordysean  mountains  which  bounds  the  basin  of  the  Kisil-Uzen  on  the  west,  and
which  contains  three  peaks  of  12,000  feet — the  Tchehel-tchechma,  the  Derbend,  and  the  Nau-Kan
(J.  DE  MoEGAN,  Mission  scientifique  en  Perse,  Etudes  geofjra phiques,  vol.  ii.  p.  51).

'  The  name  of  the  country  has  been  read  Giratbunda  (Oppebt,  Hist,  des  Empires  d'Assyrie  et  de
Clialdde,  p.  125;  Menant,  Annates  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  p.  121),  Ginunbunda  (Schradek,  Keil,  und
Geschichtsforschung,  p.  71,  note  2),  Girubbunda(SATCE,  iUo»o?i'Wj  Inscription  of  Samas  Rimmon,  in  the
Records  of  the  Past.  vol.  i.  p.  10) ;  a  variant,  to  which  no  objections  can  be  m.ade,  has  furnished
Gizilbunda  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  625,  note  2;  L.  Abel,  Inschrift  Schamschi-Rammdn's,
in  ScHRADEE,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  i.  p.  18(1).  It  was  contiguous  on  one  side  to  the  Medes  (Monolith  Inscr.,
etc.,  col.  iii.  11.  7-27,  Inscription  of  Rammdn-nirdri  IV.,  1.  7),  and  on  the  other  to  the  Manual  (op.  cit.,
11.  7,  8),  which  obliges  us  to  place  it  in  Kurdistan  of  Gerrus,  on  the  Kizil-Uzen.  It  may  be  asked
if  the  word  Kizil  wliich  occurs  several  times  in  the  topographical  nomenclature  of  these  regions  is
not  a  relic  of  the  name  in  question,  and  if  Gizil-bunda  is  not  a  compound  of  the  same  class  as
Kizil-uzen,  Kizil-gatchi,  Kizil-aluu,  Kizil-lok,  whether  it  be  that  part  of  the  population  spoke  a
language  analogous  to  the  dialects  now  in  use  in  these  districts,  or  that  the  ancient  word  has  been
preserved  by  later  conquerors  and  assimilated  to  some  well-known  word  in  their  own  language.


TEE  FIRST  CAMPAIGNS    OF  SAMSI-RAMMAN  IV.


97


JVledes,  vanquislied  them,  and  drove  them  at  the  point  of  the  sword  into  their
remote  valleys,  returning  to  the  district  of  Araziash,  which  he  laid  waste.
A  score  of  chiefs  with  barbarous  names,  alarmed  by  this  example,  hastened
to  prostrate  themselves  at  his  feet,  and  submitted  to  the  tribute  which  he

imposed  on  them.    Assyria  thus  regained  in  these  —  ■^.

regions  the  ascendency  which  the  victories  of
Shalmaneser  III.  in  their  time  had  won  for  her.'
Babylon,  which  had  endured  the  suzerainty
of  its  rival  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  seems  to
have  taken  advantage  of  the  events  occurring
in  Assyria  to  throw  off  the  yoke,  by  espousing
the  cause  of  Assur-dain-pal.  Samsi-ramman,
therefore,  as  soon  as  he  was  free  to  turn  his
attention  from  Media  (818),  directed  his  forces
against  Babylonia.  Meturnat,  as  usual,  was  the
first  city  attacked  ;  it  capitulated  at  once,  and
its  inhabitants  were  exiled  to  Assyria.  Kami
to  the  south  of  the  Turnat,  and  Dibina  on
Mount  Yalman,  suffered  the  same  fate,  but
Gananate  held  out  for  a  time;  its  garrison,
however,  although  reinforced  by  troops  from
the  surrounding  country,  was  utterly  routed
before  its  walls,  and  the  survivors,  who  fled
for  refuge  to  the  citadel  in  the  centre  of  the
town,  were  soon  dislodged.  Tlie  Babylonians,
who  had  apparently  been  taken  by  surprise
at  the  first  attack,  at  length  made  prejjarations  to  resist  the  invaders.  The
Prince  of  Dur-papsukal,  who  o\vned  allegiance  to  Marduk-balatsu-ikbi,
King  of  Babylon,  had  disposed  his  troops  so  as  to  guard  the  fords  of  the
Tigris,  in  order  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  reaching  his  capital.  But
Samsi-ramman  dispersed  -  this  advanced  force,  killing  thirteen  thousand,
besides  taking  three  thousand  prisoners,  and  finally  reduced  Dur-papsukal
to  ashes.  The  respite  thus  obtained  gave  Marduk-balatsu-ikbi  sufficient
time  to  collect  the  main  body  of  his  troops:  the  army  was  recruited
from  Kalda  and  Elamites,  soldiers  from  Namri,  and  Aramaean  contingents,
and  the  united  force  awaited  the  enemy  behind  the   ruins  of  Dur-papsukal,

'  Monolith  Inscription  of  Samsi-rammdit  IV.,  col.  ii.  11.  34-.)9;  col.  iii.  11.  1-70;  of.  L.  Abel,
Inschrift  Schamachi-Hammdii's,  in  Schbader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  178-1S3,  and
ScHEiL,  Inscr.  aseyrienne  archa'ique  de  Sliamshi-Ramtndn  IV.,  pp.  10-21.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Mansell.  The  original  is  in  the  British
Mnseum.

H


MOSOLITH   OF    S.\.JIsI-r.AMMAN    IV."


98        THE  ASSYRIAN  BEVIVAL   AND  -THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

along  the  banks  of  the  Daban  canal.  Five  thousand  footmen,  two
hundred  horsemen,  one  hundred  chariots,  besides  the  king's  tent  and  all  his
stores,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians.  The  victory  was  complete ;
Babylon,  Kuta,  and  Borsippa  capitulated  one  after  the  other,  and  the  invaders
penetrated  as  far  as  the  land  of  the  Kalda,  and  actually  reached  the  Persian
(xulf.  Samsi-ramman  offered  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  as  his  father  had  done
before  him,  and  concluded  a  treaty  with  Marduk-balatsu-ikbi,  the  terms  of
which  included  rectification  of  boundaries,  payment  of  a  subsidy,  and  the
other  clauses  usual  in  such  circumstances  ;  the  peace  was  probably  ratified  by
a  matrimonial  alliance,  concluded  between  the  Babylonian  princess  Sammu-
ramat  and  Eamman-nirari,  son  of  the  conqueror.*  In  this  manner  the
hegemony  of  Assyria  over  Karduniash  was  established  even  more  firmly
than  before  the  insurrection  ;  but  all  available  resources  had  been  utilised
in  the  effort  necessary  to  secure  it.  Samsi-ramman  had  no  leisure  to
reconquer  Syria  or  Asia  Minor,  and  the  Euphrates  remained  the  western
frontier  of  his  kingdom,  as  it  had  been  in  the  early  days  of  Shalmaueser  III.^
The  peace  with  Babylon,  moreover,  did  not  last  long ;  Bau-akhiddiu,  who  had
succeeded  Marduk-balatsu-ikbi,  refused  to  observe  the  terms  of  the  treaty,
and  hostilities  again  broke  out  on  the  Turnat  and  the  Tigris,  as  they  had
done  six  years  previously.  This  war  was  prolonged  from  813  to  812  B.C.,
and  was  still  proceeding  when  Samsi-rammtin  died.  His  son  Eamman-nirari  III.
quickly  brought  it  to  a  successful  issue.  He  carried  Bau-akhiddin  captive  to
Assyria,  with  bis  family  and  the  nobles  of  his  court,  and  placed  on  the  vacant
throne  one  of  his  own  partisans,  while  he  celebrated  festivals  in  honour  of
his  own  supremacy  at  Babylon,  Kuta,  and  Borsippa.''  Karduniash  made  no
attempt  to  rebel  against  Assyria  during  the  next  half-century.  Ramman-
nirari  proved  himself  an  energetic  and  capable  sovereign,  and  the  thirty  years

'  Monolith  Inscription  of  Samsi-ramman  IV.,  col.  iii.  11.  70, 1  -45 ;  the  history  of  the  same  expedition
is  recounted,  but  with  several  omissions,  in  the  Synchronous  Ristorij  (Peiseb  and  Wlnckler,  Die  soge-
nannte  Synchrotiistische  Geschichte,  in  Sohkader,  KeilinschriftUche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  200-20.S).
The  marriage  of  Sammu-ramat  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of  the  inscriptions  referring  to  tliis  war.
For  the  possible  identification  of  this  princess  with  the  legendary  Semiramis,  cf.  Oppert,  Hist,  des
Empires  d' Assyria  et  de  Chald^e,  pp.  128-130;  G.  Kawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.
pp.  110-121 ;  HoMiiEL,Gesofttc7iie  Babyluniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  C28-G32.  I  agree  with  Tiele  {Bahy-
lonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  213,  214)  that  we  must  not  attach  much  importance  to  this  identifica-
tion. It  is  not  certain  that  Sammu-ramat  was  the  wife  of  Eamman-uirfiri;  several  historians  think
she  was  his  mother  (Tiele,  op.  cit.,  pp.  212,  213 ;  Hommel,  oi>.  eit.,  p.  631).

-  For  the  extent  of  the  Assyrian  Empire  in  the  time  of  Samsi-ramman  IV.,  cf.  Schrader,  Keilins.
und  Geschichtsforschung,  p.  172,  et  seq. ;  and  also  Delattke,  Le  Peuple  et  VEmpire  det  Medes,  pp.  72-74,
and  Esquisse  de  Geographie  assyrienne,  pp.  11-13.

^  The  notice  of  the  wars  of  813-812  against  Clialdjea  is  taken  from  The  Eponym  Canon  (Schbader,
Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209) ;  that  of  the  wars  of  Kammau-nirari  from  the  Synchronous
Bistory  (co\.  Jv.  1\.  1-21;  cf.  Peisee  and  Wi.nxkler,  Die  sogenannte  Synchronistische  Geschichte,  in
Schrader,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  202,  203).  I  agree  with  Winckler  {Untersuchungen  zur  altorientalischen
Geschichte,  p.  25  ;  Gesch.  Babyl.  und  Assyr.,  pp.  117-120,  203  ;  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Geschichte  der  Assyrio-
logie  in  Deutschland,  pp.  24-27,  41,  42)  that  the  fragment  of  the  Synchronous  Bistory,  col.  iv.  11.  1-14,
refers  to  Eamman-nirari.


ramman-nirAri  in.  99

of  his  reign  were  by  no  means  inglorious.  We  learn  from  the  eponym
lists  what  he  accomplished  during  that  time,  and  against  which  countries  he
waged  war ;  but  we  have  not  yet  recovered  any  inscription  to  enable  us  to
fill  in  this  outline,  and  put  together  a  detailed  account  of  his  reign.'  His  first
expeditions  were  directed  against  Media  -  (810),  G-ozau  (809),  and  the  Mannai
(808-807) ;  he  then  crossed  the  Euphrates,  and  in  four  successive  years
conducted  as  many  vigorous  campaigns  against  Arpad  (806),  Khazazu  (805),
the  town  of  Baali  (804),  and  the  cities  of  the  Phcenician  sea-board  (803).  The
plague  interfering  with  his  advance  in  the  latter  direction,  he  again  turned  his
attention  eastward  and  attacked  Khubushkia  in  802,  792,  and  784 ;  Media  in
801-800,  794-793,  and  790-787  ;  Lushia  in  799 ;  Namri  in  798  ;  Diri  in  796-
795  and  785 ;  Itua  in  791,  783-782 ;  Kishki  in  785.  This  bare  enumeration
conjures  up  a  vision  of  an  enterprising  and  victorious  monarch  of  the  type  of
Assur-nazir-pal  or  Shalmaneser  III.,  one  who  perhaps  succeeded  even  where
his  redoubtable  ancestors  had  failed.  The  panoramic  survey  of  his  empire,  as
unfolded  to  us  in  one  of  his  inscriptions,  includes  the  mountain  ranges  of
Illipi  as  far  as  Mount  Siluna,  Kharkhar,  Araziash,  Misu,  Media,  the  whole
of  Gizilbunda,  Man,  Parsua,  Allabria,  Abdadana,'  the  extensive  territory  of
Nairi,  far-off  Andiu,  and,  westwards  beyond  the  Euphrates,  the  Khati,  the
entire  country  of  the  Amorites,  Tyre,  Sidon,  Israel,  Edom,  and  the  Philistines.
Never  before  had  the  Assyrian  empire  extended  so  far  east  in  the  direction  of
the  centre  of  the  Iranian  tableland,  nor  so  far  to  the  south-west  towards  the
frontiers  of  Egypt.*

In  two  only  of  these  regions,  namely,  Syria  and  Armenia,  do  native
documents  add  any  information  to  the  meagre  summary  contained  in  the
Annals,  and  give  us  glimpses  of  contemporary  rulers.  The  retreat  of
Shalmaneser,  after  his  partial  success  in  839,  had  practically  left  the  ancient

'  The  Eponym  Canon,  in  Sohrader,  Keilinschri/tliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  202-205.  The  only
inscription  which  contains  any  historical  details  has  been  published  by  H.  Eawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.
As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  35,  No.  i.,  and  translated  into  French  by  Oppekt,  Hisloire  des  Empires  de  Chald^e  et
d'Aseyrie,  pp.  130,  131,  and  again  by  Menant,  Annales  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  126,  127,  and  into
German  by  L.  Abel,  Inschr.  Ranmt&n-niruri' s  111.,  in  Sohkadek,  op.  eit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  190-193.

■  The  name  is  written  in  this  place  in  the  Canon  (Schradeb,  op.  cil.,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209),  mat  AA
(mat-ai),  which  G.  Smith  had  already  identified  with  Madai,  Malal,  the  current  name  of  Media,  but
Schiadei  (zur  Kritik  der  Inschriften  Tiglath-Pileser's  IT.,  p.  2G,  note)  had  refused  to  accept  this  inter-
pretation, and  Delitzsch  considered  it  a  variant  of  the  name  Ala,  borne  by  a  district  of  Kurdistan  (  Wo
lag  das  Paradies  '?  p.  247).  Proofs  that  Smith's  opinion  is  well  founded  are  given  by  Hommel  {Gesch.
Bah.  und  Assyr.,  p.  633,  note  1),  and  in  Rost  (^KeilschriftteMe  Tiglat-Pileser's  III,,  vol.  i.  p.  xxv.).

'  On  this  survey,  cf.  especially  Delattre,  Le  Peuple  et  V Empire  des  Medcs,  pp.  75-84,  and  Esquissr
de  G€ogr.  assyr.,  pp.  22-29.

*  Allabria  or  .\llabur  is  on  the  borders  of  Parsua  (Inscr.  of  Rammdn-nirdri,  1.  8)  and  of  Karalla
iAnmils  of  Sargon,  11.  48,  49),  which  allows  us  to  locate  it  in  the  basins  of  the  Kerkhorah  and  the
Saruk,  tributaries  of  the  Jagatu,  which  flow  into  Lake  Urumiah.  Abdadana,  which  borders  on
Allabria,  and  was,  according  to  Kamman-uuari,  at  the  extreme  end  of  Nairi  (Jnscr.  of  Rammdn-
nirdri,  11.  8,  9),  was  a  little  further  to  the  east  or  north-east ;  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  it  corresponds
pretty  nearly  to  Uriad,  on  the  banks  of  the  Kizil-Uzen.


100      TEE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR    STRIA.

allies  of  Ben-hadad  II.  at  the  mercy  of  Hazael/  the  new  King  of  Damascus,  but
he  did  not  apparently  attempt  to  assert  his  supremacy  over  the  whole  of
Coele-Syria,  and  before  long  several  of  its  cities  acquired  considerable  im-
portance, first  Mansuate,  and  then  Hadracli,-^  both  of  which,  casting  Hamath
into  the  shade,  succeeded  in  holding  their  own  against  Hazael  and  his
successors.  He  renewed  hostilities,  however,  against  the  Hebrews,  and  did  not
relax  his  efiforts  till  he  had  thoroughly  brought  them  into  subjection.  Jehu
suffered  loss  on  all  his  frontiers,  "  from  Jordan  eastward,  all  the  land  of  Gilead,
the  Gadites,  the  Eeubenites,  and  the  Manassites,  from  Aroer,  which  is  by  the
valley  of  Arnon,  even  Gilead  and  Bashan."  ^  Israel  became  thus  once  more
entirely  dependent  on  Damascus,  but  the  sister  kingdom  of  Judah  still  escaped
its  yoke  through  the  energy  of  her  rulers.  Athaliah  reigned  seven  years,  not
ingloriously ;  but  she  belonged  to  the  house  of  Ahab,  and  the  adherents  of  the
prophets,  whose  party  had  planned  Jehu's  revolution,  could  no  longer  witness
with  equanimity  one  of  the  accursed  race  tlius  prospering  and  ostentatiously
practising  the  rites  of  Baal-worship  within  sight  of  the  great  temple  of
Jahveh.  On  seizing  the  throne,  Athaliah  had  sought  out  and  put  to  death
all  the  members  of  the  house  of  David  who  had  any  claim  to  the  succession ;
but  Jehosheba,  half-sister  of  Ahaziah,  had  with  difficulty  succeeded  in  rescuing
Joash,  one  of  the  king's  sons.  Her  husband  was  the  high  priest  Jehoiada,
and  he  secreted  his  nephew  for  six  years  in  the  precincts  of  the  temple ;  at  the
end  of  that  time,  he  won  over  the  captains  of  the  royal  guard,  bribed  a  section
of  the  troops,  and  caused  them  to  swear  fealty  to  the  child  as  their  legitimate
sovereign.  Athaliah,  hastening  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  uproar,  was
assassinated.  Mattan,  chief  priest  of  Baal,  shared  her  fate ;  and  Jehoiada  at
once  restored  to  Jahveh  the  pre-eminence  which  the  gods  of  the  alien  had  for
a  time  usurped  *  (837).     At  first  his  influence  over  his  pupil  was  supreme,  but

'  Cf.  the  account  of  these  events  given  supra,  pp.  85-87.

-  Mausuati  successfully  resisted  Rainman-iiirai-i  in  797  B.C.  {The  Eponym  Canon,  in  Schkaber,
Keilinschriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209),  but  he  probably  caused  its  ruin,  for  after  this  the
Caiioii  only  mentions  expeditions  against  Hadraeh.  Mansuati  was  in  the  basin  of  the  Orontes
(ScHKADEK,  KeiUnschrfften  unci  GeschicJdsforscltung,  pp.  121,  122),  and  the  manner  in  which  the
Assyrian  tests  mention  it  in  connection  with  Ziinyra  seems  to  show  that  it  commanded  the  opening
in  the  Lebanon  range  between  Ccele-Syria  and  Plicenicia.  The  site  of  Khatarika,  the  Hadraeh  of
Zecli.  ix.  1,  is  not  yet  precisely  determined ;  but  it  must,  as  well  as  Mansuati,  have  been  in  tlie
neighbourhood  of  Hamath  (SCHRADEE,  Xei/ins.  und  Geschichtsf.,  pp.  121,  122;  Fb.  Delitzsch,  TTo  lug
das  Paradies  ?  p.  279),  perhaps  between  Hamath  and  Damascus.  It  appears  for  the  first  time  in  772
{Tlie  Eponym  Canon,  in  Sohrader,  Eeilins.  Sihliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211).

'  2  Kings  x.  32,  33.  Even  if  verse  33  is  a  later  addition  (Stade,  Miscellen,  in  the  Zeitsclirift  Jilr
das  Alttestameidliche  Wissenschaff,  vol.  v.  1885,  p.  179),  it  gives  a  correct  idea  of  the  situation,  except
as  regards  Bashan,  which  had  been  lost  to  Israel  for  some  time  already.

■•  2  Kings  xi. ;  cf.  2  Chro7i.  xxii.  10-12,  and  xxiiL  The  author  of  2  Chron.  xxii.  11  alone
states  that  Jehosheba  was  the  wife  of  the  high  priest.  For  the  value  of  the  account  as  it  stands,  and
the  several  sources  which  may  be  distinguished  in  the  narrative,  cf.  Stade,  in  the  Zeitsclirift  fur
AUtesfamentliche  Wissenschaft,  1885,  vol.  v.  p.  279,  et  seq.


ISRAEL   AND    JUDAH    VASSALS    OF  HAZAEL.  101

before  long  the  memory  of  his  services  faded  away,  and  the  king  sought  only
how  to  rid  himself  of  a  tutelage  which  had  grown  irksome.     The  temple  had
suffered  during  the  late  wars,  and  repairs  were  much  needed.     Joash  ordained
that  for  the  future  all  moneys  put  into  the  sacred  treasury — which  of  right
belonged  to  the  king— should  be  placed  unreservedly  at  the  disposal  of  the
priests  on  condition  that  they  should  apply  them  to  the  maintenance  of  the
services  and  fabric  of  the  temple :  the  priests  accepted  the  gift,  but  failed  in
the  faithful  observance  of  the  conditions,  so  that  in  814  B.C.  the  king  was
obliged  to  take  stringent  measures  to  compel  them  to  repair  the  breaches  in
the  sanctuary  walls :  ^   he  therefore  withdrew  the  privilege  which   they  had
abused,  and  henceforth  undertook  the  administration  of  the  Temple  Fund  in
person.     The  beginning  of  the  new  order  of  things  was  not  very  successful.
Jehu  had  died  in  815,  after  a  disastrous  reign,  and  both  he  and  his  son  Jehoahaz
had  been  obliged  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Hazael :  not  only  was  he  in
the  position  of  an  inferior  vassal,  but,  in  order  to  preclude  any  idea  of  a  revolt,
he  was  forbidden  to  maintain  a  greater  army  than  the  small  force  necessary  for
purposes  of  defence,  namely,  ten  thousand  foot-soldiers,  fifty  horsemen,  and  ten
chariots.^     The  power  of  Israel  had  so  declined  that  Hazael  was  allowed  to
march  through  its  territory  unhindered  on  his  way  to  wage  war  in  the  country
of  the  Philistines ;  which  he  did,  doubtless,  in  order  to  get  possession  of  the
main  route  of  Egyptian  commerce.     The  Syrians  destroyed  Gath,^  reduced
Pentapolis   to   subjection,   enforced   tribute   from   Edom,  and  then  marched
against  Jerusalem.     Joash  took  from  the  treasury  of  Jahveh  the  reserve  funds
which  his  ancestors,  Jehoshaphat,  Joram,  and  Ahaziah,  had  accumulated,  and
sent  them  to  the  invader,*  together  with  all  the  gold  which  was  found  in  the
king's  house.     From  this  time  forward  Judah  became,  like  Israel,  Edom,  the
Philistines    and    Ammonites,   a  mere   vassal   of    Hazael;   with  the  possible
exception  of  Moab,  all  the  peoples  of  Southern  Syria  were  now  subject  to
Damascus,   and   formed   a   league  as  strong  as  that  which  had  successfully
resisted    the    power    of    Shalmaneser.      Kamman-nirari,   therefore,   did    not

'  2  Kings  xii.  4-16 ;  of.  2  Chfon.  xxiv.  l-l-t.  The  beginning  of  the  narrative  is  lost,  and  the
whole  has  probably  been  modified  to  make  it  agree  with  2  Kings  xxii.  3-7 ;  of.  Stade,  Miscellen,
in  the  Zeiischriftfur  AUtestamentliche  Wissenschaft,  18S5,  vol.  v.  p.  290.

-  2  Kings  xiii.  1-7.  It  may  be  noticed  tliat  the  number  of  foot-soldiers  given  in  the  Bible  is
identical  with  that  which  the  Assyrian  texts  mention  as  Ahab's  contingent  at  the  battle  of  Qarqai-,
viz.  10,000 ;  the  number  of  the  chariots  is  very  difi'erent  in  the  two  cases  (cf.  supra,  p.  71).  Kuenen
and  other  critics  would  like  to  assign  to  the  reign  of  Jehoahaz  the  siege  of  Samaria  by  the  Syrians,
which  the  actu.il  text  of  the  Book  of  the  Kings  attributes  to  the  reign  of  Joram  (of  supra,  p.  82,  note;5).

^  The  text  of  2  Kings  xii.  17  merely  says  that  Hazael  took  Gath.  Gath  is  not  named  by  Amos
among  the  cities  of  the  Philistines  (Amos  i.  6-8),  but  it  is  one  of  the  towns  cited  by  that  prophet
as  examples  to  Israel  of  the  wrath  of  Jahveh  (vi.  2).  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  it  was  already
destroyed  in  his  time  (Stade,  GeschicMe  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  506).

'  2  Kings  xii.  17,  18 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxiv.  22-24,  where  the  expedition  of  Hazael  is  represented  ;is
a  punishment  for  the  murder  of  Zeoliariah,  son  of  Jehoiada.


102       TEE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL  AND    TEE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

venture  to  attack  Syria  during  the  lifetime  of  Hazael ;  but  a  change  of
sovereign  is  always  a  critical  moment  in  the  history  of  an  Eastern  empire,
and  he  took  advantage  of  the  confusion  caused  by  the  death  of  the  aged  king  to
attack  his  successor  Mari  (803  B.C.).  Mari  essayed  the  tactics  which  his  father
had  found  so  successful :  he  avoided  a  pitched  battle,  and  shut  himself  up  in

Damascus.  But  he  was  soon  closely  blockaded,  and
forced  to  submit  to  terms ;  Kamman-nirari  demanded
as  the  price  of  withdrawal,  23,000  talents  of  silver,
20  talents  of  gold,  3000  of  copper,  5000
of  iron,  besides  embroidered  and  dyed
stuffs,  an  ivory  couch,  and  a  litter  inlaid
with  ivory, — in  all  a  considerable  part
of  the  treasures  amassed  at  the  expense
of  the  Hebrews  and  their  neighbours.^
It  is  doubtful  whether  Eamman-nirari
pushed  further  south,  and  penetrated
in  person  as  far  as  the  deserts  of  Arabia
Petrsea — a  suggestion  which  the  men-
tion  of  the  Philistines  and  Edomites
among  the  list  of  his  tributary  states
might  induce  us  to  accept.  Probably
it  was  not  the  case,  and  he  really  went
no  further  than  Damascus.  But  the  sub-
mission of  that  city  included,  in  theory  at  least,  the  submission  of  all  states
subject  to  her  sway,  and  these  dependencies  may  have  sent  some  presents  to
testify  their  desire  to  conciliate  his  favour;  their  names  appear  in  the
inscriptions  in  order  to  swell  the  number  of  direct  or  indirect  vassals  of  the
empire,  since  they  were  subject  to  a  state  which  had  been  effectually  con-
quered.*

Eamman-nirari  did  not  meet  with  such  good  fortune  in  the  North ;  not
onlv  did  he  fail  to  obtain  the  brilliant  successes  which  elsewhere  attended  his


TKIUMPHAL    STELE    OF    3IENUAS   AT   KELISHIS.^


'  Inscription  of  Ramman-nirdri,  11.  15-21,  in  H.  RAWXEfsoN',  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  35,  Xo.  iii.
The  expedition  mentioned  here  must  be  that  of  803  B.C.,  "  against  the  countries  of  the  sea-coast "
{The  Epomjm  Canon,  in  Schradeb,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209).  Mari  is  generally
looked  upon  as  a  son  of  Hazael.  and  his  name  is  interpreted  '•my  lord  "  (Tiele,  Bahyloniich-assyrische
Geschichte,  pp.  211,  212),  but  Hommel  places  him  after  Ben-hadad  III.,  and  assigns  the  expedition  of
Ramman-nirari  to  797  (Geseh.  Bab.  und  As»yr.,  pp.  634,  635).  Others  identify  Mari  with  the
Biblical  Ben-hadad  III.  (Kittel,  Geschichte  der  Eehrseer,  vol.  ii.  p.  250,  note  5 ;  Wiscklek,  Alttesta-
mentliche  Untersuchungen,  pp.  66,  67,  and  Geschichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  154).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  J.  de  Morgan ;  cf.  J.  de  Morgan,  Mission
Arch^olofjique  en  Perse,  vol.  iv.  pi.  xsv.

'  H.  Rawlksos,  Cun.  Ins.  IF.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  35,  Xo.  iii.  II.  11-14.


THE   GROWTH  AND   POWER    OF   URARTU.  103

arms,  but  he  ended  by  sustaining  considerable  reverses.  The  Ninevite
historians  reckoned  the  two  expeditions  of  808  and  807  B.C.  against  the  Mannai
as  victories,  doubtless  because  the  king  returned  with  a  train  of  prisoners  and
loaded  with  spoil ;  but  the  Vannic  inscriptions  reveal  that  Urartu,  which  had
been  rising  into  prominence  during  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser,  had  now  grown
still  more  powerful,  and  had  begun  to  reconquer  those  provinces  on  the  Tigris
and  Euphrates  of  which  the  Assyrians  thought  themselves  the  undoubted
lords.  Sharduris  II.  had  been  succeeded,  about  828,  by  his  son  Ishpuiuis,  who
had  perhaps  measured  his  strength  against  Samsi-ramman  IV.^  Ishpuinis
appears  to  have  conquered  and  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  province  the
neighbouring  principality  of  Biainas,  which  up  to  that  time  had  been  governed
by  a  semi-independent  dynasty ;  at  all  events,  he  transferred  thence  his  seat  of
government,  and  made  Dhuspas  his  favourite  residence.^  Towards  the  end
of  his  reign  he  associated  with  him  on  the  throne  his  son  Menuas,^  and  made
him  commander-in-chief  of  the  army.  Menuas  proved  a  bold  and  successful
general,  and  in  a  few  years  had  doubled  the  extent  of  his  dominions.  He  first
delivered  from  the  Assyrian  yoke,  and  plundered  on  his  father's  account,  the
tribes  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Urumiah,  ^Muzazir,  Gilzan,  and  Kirruri ;  then,
crossing  the  Gordyaeau  mountains,  he  burnt  the  towns  in  the  valley  of  the  Upper
Zab,  which  bore  the  uncouth  names  of  Terais,  Ardis,  Khanalis,  Bikuras,
Khatqanas,  Inuas,  and  Nibur,  laid  waste  the  more  fertile  part  of  Khubushkia,
and  carved  triumphal  stelse  in  the  Assyrian  and  Vannic  scripts  upon  the
rocks  in  the  pass  of  Kowandiz.*  It  was  probably  to  recover  this  territory  that
Ramman-nirari  waged  war  three  times  in  Khubushkia,  in  802,  792,  and  785,
in  a  district  which  had  formerly  been  ruled  by  a  prefect  from  Nineveh,  but  had
now  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.^     Everywhere  along  the  frontier,  from

'  Ishpuinis  is  probably  the  Ushpina  mentioned  by  Samai-ramman  among  the  conquered  kings  of
Nairi  (Monulith  Inscr.  of  Samsi-ramman,  col.  iv.  11.  16-30 ;  of.  Scheil,  L' Jnecriptioii  de  Shamshi-
Bammdii  IV.,  pp.  8-1 1 ;  and  L.  Abel,  Inschrift.  Schamschi-Eammdn's,  in  Schrader,  KeiUnschri/tliche
Bibliothel:,  vol.  i.  pp.  178,  179;.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Belck  and  Lehmann  {Weitere  Ergebnisse
Hirer  Studien  an  den  neugefundenen  armenischer  Keilinschri/ten,  in  the  Verhandlimgen  der  Berliner
anthropoJogischen  Gesellschaft,  1892,  p.  483).

'  Bklck  and  Lehmanu,  Chaldische  Furschungen,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1896,  pp.  593-595.

'  A  certain  number  of  Vannic  inscriptions  belong  to  the  joint  reign  of  Ishpuinis  and  Menuas,
Nos.  v.,  Ivi.,  Iviii.,  in  Sayce  (Tlte  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Fan,  in  the  /.  B.  As.  Soc,  new  series,  vol
xiv.  pp.  461-495,  G63-673;  and  vol.  xx.  pp.  21-23)  and  No.  3  in  Belck  {Ueber  neuerlich  aufgefundene
Keilinschriften  in  riissisch  und  tUrkisch  Armenien,  in  the  Zeitsohrift  fiir  Ethnologie,  1892,  p.  124).

'  SteL-B  of  Eowandiz,  the  most  imiwrtunt  of  whicli,  discovered  by  Schulz,  has  been  transcribed
and  translated  by  Sayce  (pp.  cit.,  pp.  663-673,  No.  Ivi.),  and  published  more  fully  by  Soheil  and  de
Morgan  {La  Stele  de  Kel-i-cliin,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,\o\.  xiv.  pp.  153-160).  On  the  different
steles  of  the  same  kind  which  exist  in  this  region,  and  on  the  confusion  to  which  they  have  given
rise,  cf.  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ueber  die  Kelisldn-Stele,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1893,  pp.  389-400,
and  Chaldische  Forschungen,  1896,  p.  594.

^  HoMMEL,  Geschichte  Bab.  und  Assijr.,  p.  633,  note  2.  It  is  probable  that  the  stele  of  Kelishin,
belonging  to  the  joint  reign  of  Ishpuinis  and  Menuas,  was  intended  to  commemorate  the  events  whicli
led  Kamman-nirari  to  undertake  his  first  expedition  ;  the  conquest  by  Menuas  will  fall  then  in  804


104      THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE   STRUaOLE  FOR    SYRIA.

the  Lower  Zab  to  the  Euphrates,  Menuas  overpowered  and  drove  back
the  Assyrian  outposts.  He  took  from  them  Aldus  and  Erinuis  on  the
southern  shores  of  Lake  Van,^  compelled  Dayaini  to  abandon  its  allegiance,
and  forced  its  king,  Udhupursis,  to  surrender  his  treasure  and  his  chariots ;
then  gradually  descending  the  valley  of  the  Arzania,  he  crushed  Seseti,
Kulme,  and  Ekarzu."  In  one  year  he  pillaged  the  Mannai  in  the  east,  and
attacked  the  Khati  in  the  west,  seizing  their  fortresses  of  Surisilis,  Tarkhigamas,
and  Sarduras;  in  the  province  of  Alzu  he  left  2113  soldiers  dead  on  the  field
after  one  engagement ;  ^  Gupas  yielded  to  his  sway,  followed  by  the  towns  of
Khuzanas  and  Puteria,  whereupon  he  even  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  levied
tribute  from  Melitene.*  But  the  struggle  against  Assyria  absorbed  only  a
portion  of  his  energy ;  we  do  not  know  what  he  accomplished  in  the  east,  in
the  plains  sloping  towards  the  Caspian  Sea,  but  several  monuments,  discovered
near  Armavir  and  Erzerum,  testify  that  he  pushed  his  arms  a  considerable
distance  towards  the  north  and  north-west.^  He  obliged  Etius  to  acknowledfre
his  supremacy,  sending  a  colony  to  its  capital,  Luniinis,  whose  name  he  changed
to  Menua-lietziliuis."  Towards  the  end  of  his  reign  he  partly  subjugated  the
Mannai,  planting  colonies  throughout  their  territory  to  strengthen  his  hold  on
the  country.'  By  these  campaigns  he  had  formed  a  kingdom,  which,  stretch-
ing from  the  south  side  of  the  Araxes  ®  to  the  upper  reaches  of  the  Zab  and  the

or  803  B.C.  The  inscription  'of  Meher-Kapussl  (Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  461-195)  contains  the
names  of  the  divinities  belonging  to  several  conquered  towns,  and  may  have  been  engraved  on  the
return  from  this  war  (Satoe,  ojj.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  669).

'  Inscriptions  of  Aghtamar,  in  Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  the  /.  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.
xiv.  pp.  537-54U,  No.  xxix.  A-B.  These  inscriptions  were  removed  to  the  mainland  thirty  years  ago
(Belck  and  Lkhmaxn,  Weiterc  Erfjehnisse  ihrer  Studien,  in  tlie  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  anthro-
pologische  Gesellschnft,  1892,  p.  478,  cf.  1893,  p.  219).

-  Inscriptions  cf  Yazli-tash  and  Ismerd,  in  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  540-550,  No.  xxx.,  and  pp.  468-570,
No.  XXXV.  A.

'  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  555-558,  No.  xxxii.,  and  vol.  xx.  p.  11.

'  Inscription  of  Palu,  first  published  in  Lavard,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pi.  64,
translated  and  commented  on  in  Satce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  558-592,  No.  xxsiii. ;  Sayce  recognises  in  Puteria
the  ancient  name  of  the  walled  village  of  Palu,  where  the  inscription  was  discovered,  and  in  Khuzanas
the  name  Khozan,  the  district  in  which  Palu  is  situated.  Gupas  is  perhaps  the  district  round  the
town  Gubbi,  pillaged  by  Assur-nazir-pal  (see  p.  14  of  the  present  work).

'  The  inscription  of  Erzerum,  discovered  by  F.  de  Saulcy  and  published  by  him  (Voyage  autour  de
la  Mer  Morie,  pi.  ii.  1),  shows  tliat  Menuas  was  in  possession  of  the  district  in  which  *:his  town  is
situated,  and  that  he  rebuilt  a  palace  there  (Satce,  op.  cit.,  p.  567,  No.  xxxv.).

"  Inscriptions  of  Yazli-tash  and  Zolakert,  in  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  562-577,  No.  xxxiv.,
and  vol.  XX.  pp.  11-13.  It  follows  from  these  texts  that  the  country  of  Etius  is  the  district  of
Armavir,  and  Lununis  is  the  ancient  name  of  this  city.  The  new  name  by  whicli  Jlenuas  replaced
the  name  Lununis  signifies  the  abode  of  the  people  of  Menuas;  like  many  names  arising  from  special
circumstances,  it  naturally  passed  away  with  the  rule  of  the  people  who  had  imposed  it.

'  Inscription  of  Tash-tepe,  rediscovered  and  interpreted  by  Belck  and  Lehmanx,  Das  Reich  der
Mannai-r,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1893,  pp.  481,  482.

'  Belck  and  Lehmauu  think  that  the  conquests  of  Menuas  did  not  extend  beyoud  the  Araxes
{Ohaldische  nova,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1893,  p.  221),  and  their  opinion  is  confirmed  by  the  position
of  the  monuments  at  present  discovered  ;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  the  country  has  been  very  little


TEE   CONQUESTS    OF  MENU  AS.  105

Tigris,  was  quite  equal  to  Assyria  in  size,  and  probably  surpassed  it  in  density
of  population,  for  it  contained  no  barren  steppes  such  as  stretched  across
Mesopotamia,  affording  support  merely  to  a  few  wretched  Bedawin.  As  their
dominions  increased,  the  sovereigns  of  Biainas  began  to  consider  themselves  on
an  equality  with  the  kings  of  Nineveh,  and  endeavoured  still  more  to  imitate
them  in  tlie  luxury  and  display  of  their  domestic  life,  as  well  as  in  the  energy
of  their  actions  and  the  continuity  of  their  victories.  They  engraved  everywhere
on  the  rocks  triumphal  inscriptions,  destined  to  show  to  posterity  their  own
exploits  and  the  splendour  of  their  gods.  Having  made  this  concession  to
their  vanit}^,  they  took  effective  measures  to  assure  possession  of  their  conquests.
They  selected  in  the  various  provinces  sites  diificult  of  access,  commanding
some  defile  in  the  mountains,  or  ford  over  a  river,  or  at  the  junction  of  two
roads,  or  the  approach  to  a  plain ;  on  such  spots  they  would  build  a  fortress  or
a  town,  or,  finding  a  citadel  already  existing,  they  would  repair  it  and  remodel
its  fortifications  so  as  to  render  it  impregnable.^  At  Kalajik,^  Ashrut-Darga,*
and  the  older  Mukhrapert  ^  may  still  be  seen  the  ruins  of  ramparts  built
by  Ishpuinis.  Mannas  finished  the  buildings  his  father  had  begun,  erected
others  in  all  the  districts  where  he  sojourned,  in  time  of  peace  or  war,  at
Shushanz,'   Sirka,^   Anzaff,^   Arzwapert,*   Geuzak,"   Zolakert,'"   Tashtepe,  and

explored  as  yet,  and  that  a  methodical  search  might  lead  to  discoveries  which  would  oblige  us  to
modify  opinions  formed  on  the  basis  of  our  present  knowledge.

'  On  the  system  of  construction  adopted  by  the  people  of  Urartu  in  their  palaces  and  fortresses,
cf.  the  short  account  on  pp.  57-GO  of  the  present  work.

-  Inscription  of  Kalajik,  the  Aralesk  of  the  Armenians,  in  Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions
of  Van,  in  the  J.  E.  As.  Sac.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  453-460,  No.  iii ;  cf.  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Archmologische
Forschungen  iti  Armenien,  in  the  Verhandhmgen  der  Berliner  anthropologiachen  Gesellscltaft,  1893,
p.  78.

'  Information  on  this  locality  may  be  found  in  D.  H.  MUller,  Die  Keilinschrift  von  Ashrdt-
Darga;  cf.  Sayce,  o}].  ait.,  vol.  xx.  p.  21.  The  inscription  of  Ashrut-Darga  belongs  to  the  joint  reign
of  Ishpuinis  and  Menuas.

'  Belck  and  Lehmann,  TJeber  neuerlich  aufgefundene  Keilinschriften  in  riissisch  und  iiirkisch
Armenien,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie,  1892,  p.  124 ;  and  Arclimologisclie  Forschungen  in
Armenien,  in  the  Verhandhmgen,  1893,  p.  80  ;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  5.  The  inscription  of
ancient  Mukhrapert  also  belongs  to  the  joint  reign  of  Ishpunis  and  Menuas.

^  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  499,  500,  Nos.  viii.,  is. ;  and  pp.  505,  506,  Nos.  xii.,  xiii. ;  cf.  Belck
and  Lehmann,  Chaldische  Forschungen,  in  the  Verhandhmgen,  1898,  p.  613.

''  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  500-504,  Nos.  x.,  xi. ;  the  name  of  the  ancient  place  coiTesponding
to  the  modern  village  of  Sirka  was  probably  Artsunis  or  Artsuyunis,  according  to  the  Tannic
inscriptions.

'  Belck  and  Lehjiann,  Ueher  neuerlich  aufgefundene  Keilinschriften,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur
Ethnologie,  1892,  p.  125,  and  Archseologische  Forschungen,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1893,  p.  79.

*  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ueher  neuerlich  aufgefundene  Keilinschriften,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir
Ethnologie,  1S92,  p.  125;  and  Ueher  weitere  Ergebnisse  Hirer  Studien,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1892,
pp.  478,  479.  The  town  appears  to  have  been  called  Kuerainas,  "belonging  to  the  god  Kueras;"
cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  496,  No.  vi.  A,  1.  4.

°  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ueher  neuerlich  aufgefundene  Keilinschriften,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir
Ethnologie,  1892,  p.  125,  and  Chaldische  Forschungen,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1895,  p.  582.

'"  NiKOLSKY^,  L'inscription  cun^iforme  de  KSlanij-Kirlany  (^Alutschahi)  et  autres  inscriptions  cunfi-
formes  ingdites  de  I'Armgnie  russe.  No.  3;  cf.  Belck  and  LEHilANN,  Chaldische  Forschungen,  in  the
Verhandlungen,  1895,  p.  606.


106       THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

in  the  country  of  the  Mannai/  and  it  is  possible  that  the  fortified  village  of
Melasgerd  still  bears  his  name.^  His  wars  furnished  him  with  the  men  and
materials  necessary  for  the  rapid  completion  of  these  works,  while  the  statues,
valuable  articles  of  furniture,  and  costly  fabrics,  vessels  of  silver,  gold,  and
copper  carried  off  from  Assyrian  or  Asiatic  cities,  provided  him  with  surround-
ings as  luxurious  as  those  enjoyed  by  the  kings  of  Nineveh.  His  favourite
residence  was  amid  the  valleys  and  hills  of  the  south-western  shore  of  Lake
Van,  the  sea  of  the  rising  sun.  His  father,  Ishpuinis,  had  already  done  much
to  embellish  the  site  of  Dhuspas,  or  Khaldinas  as  it  was  called,  from  the  god
Khaldis;  he  had  surrounded  it  with  strong  walls,  and  witliin  them  had  laid
the  foundations  of  a  magnificent  palace.  Menuas  carried  on  the  work,  brought
water  to  the  cisterns  by  subterranean  aqueducts,  planted  gardens,  and  turned
the  whole  place  into  an  impregnable  fortress,  where  a  small  but  faithful
garrison  could  defy  a  large  army  for  several  years.  Dhuspas,  thus  completed,
formed  the  capital  and  defence  of  the  kingdom  during  the  succeeding  century.
Menuas  was  gathered  to  his  fathers  shortly  before  the  death  of  Eamman-
nirari,  perhaps  in  784  B.c.^  He  was  engaged  up  to  the  last  in  a  quarrel  with  the
princes  who  occupied  the  mountainous  country  to  the  north  of  the  Araxes,  and
his  son  Argistis  spent  the  first  few  years  of  his  reign  in  completing  his
conquests   in  this  region.^     He   crushed   with   ease   an  attempted   revolt   in

'  Inscription  of  Kelishin,  interpreted  by  Belck,  Bas  Scidi  der  Mann'der,  in  the  Verhandlungen
tier  Berliner  anthropologischen  Gesellecha/t,  1S94,  pp.  480-482.

'  A  more  correct  form  than  Melas-gcrd  is  Manas-gert,  the  ci'tij  of  Manas,  where  Manas  would
represent  Menuas :  one  of  the  inscriptions  of  Aghtamar  (Sayce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Va7i,
in  the  J.  E.  As.  Soc.,  new  ser.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  538,  No.  xxix.  B.)  speaks  of  a  certain  Menuakhinas,  city  of
Menuas,  which  may  be  a  primitive  version  of  the  same  name  (Belck  and  Lehmans,  TJeber  weitere
Ergehnisse  Hirer  Studieii,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1892,  p.  478).

'  This  date  seems  to  agree  with  tlie  test  of  the  Annals  of  Argistis,  as  far  as  we  ore  at  present
acquainted  with  them  (Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  571-628,  Nos.  xxxvii.-xliv.) ;  Miiller  has  shown,  in
fact,  that  they  contain  the  .account  of  fourteen  campaigns,  probably  the  first  fourteen  of  the  reign  of
Argistis  {Tnschrift  von  Aschrut-Darga,  p.  27,  et  seq.),  and  he  has  recognised,  in  accordance  with  the
observations  of  Stanislas  Guyard,  the  formula  which  separates  the  campaigns  one  from  another.
There  are  two  campaigns  against  the  peoples  of  the  Upper  Euphrates  mentioned  before  the  campaigns
against  Assyria,  and  as  these  latter  follow  continuously  after  781,  it  is  probable  that  the  former  must
be  placed  in  783-782,  which  would  give  783  or  784  for  the  year  of  his  accession.

'  The  Annals  of  Argistis  are  inscribed  on  the  face  of  the  rock  which  crowns  the  citadel  of  Van.
They  were  copied  by  Schulz,  and  published  after  his  death  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  3rd  ser.,  vol.  ix.,
where  they  figured  as  Nos.  ii.-viii. ;  the  copies  executed  by  Layard  in  1850  have  never  been  printed,  but
Sayce  used  them,  as  also  those  of  Eoberts  (£tude  philologique  sur  les  Inscriptions  cune'iforines  de
VArmenie,  1 876),  to  establish  the  text  of  the  passages  where  the  version  of  Schulz  was  incorrect.  The
translation  and  commentary  have  been  undertaken  by  Sayce  (op.  cit.,  pp.  571-623) ;  the  results  of
this  study  have  been  criticised  by  Guyard  {Notes  de  Lexicographie  Assyrienne,  pp.  113,  144),  by
Midler  (Die  Keilinschrift  von  Aschrut-Darga),  and  by  Sayce  himself  (op.  cit.,  vol.  xx.  pp.  13-19),  who
gave  a  second  English  translation,  The  Great  Inscription  of  Argistis  on  the  liocks  of  Van,  in  the
Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  114-133.  The  inscription  contains  (as  was  stated  above  in
note  3)  the  history  of  the  first  fom'teen  yearly  campaigns  of  Argistis ;  I  have  followed  in  my
arrangement  the  coincidences  established  between  these  wars  and  the  data  supplied  by  the  Assyrian
Eponym  canon  (Scheader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211),  by  D.  H.  Miiller,  and
after  him,  by  Hommel  (Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  630-642).


ARGISTIS  I.


107


Dayaini,  and  then  invaded  Etius,  systematically  devastating  it,  its  king,  Uduris,
being  powerless  to  prevent  his  ravages.  All  the  principal  towns  succumbed
one  after  another  before  the  vigour  of  his  assault,  and,  from  the  numbers
killed  and  taken  prisoners,  we  may  surmise  the  importance  of  his  victories
in  these  barbarous  districts,  to  which  belonged  the  names  of  Seriazis,  Silius,
Zabakhas,  Zirimutaras,  Babanis,  and  Urmias,^  though  we  cannot  definitely  locate
the  places  indicated.    On  a  single  occasion,  the  assault  on  Ureyus,  for  instance,


THE    GAEDENS   AND   HILL    OF   DHUSPAS   OK    VAN."


Argistis  took  prisoners  19,255  children,  10,140  men  fit  to  bear  arms,  23,280
women,  and  the  survivors  of  a  garrison  which  numbered  12,675  soldiers  at  the
opening  of  the  siege,  besides  1104  horses,  35,016  cattle,  and  more  than  10,000
sheep.^  Two  expeditions  into  the  heart  of  the  country,  conducted  between  784
and  782  B.C.,  had  greatly  advanced  the  work  of  conquest,'*  when  the  accession  of
a  new  sovereign  in  Assyria  made  Argistis  decide  to  risk  a  change  of  front  and  to


'  The  site  of  these  places  is  still  undetermined.  Seriazis  and  Silius  (or  Tarius)  lay  to  the  north-
east of  Dayaini  (Sayce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscripiions  of  Van,  in  the  /.  B.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xiv.  p.  579),  and
Urmias,  Urme,  recalls  the  modern  name  of  Lake  Urumiah,  but  was  probably  situated  on  the  left  bank
of  the  Araxes  (Satce,  op.  cit.,  p.  Oil).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Binder,  furnished  by  Father  Scheil.

'  Ammh  of  Argistis,  A,  11.  12-15;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  p.  574.

'  Annals  of  Argistis,  A,  11.  1-43  ;  B,  II.  1-3 ;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  572-582.  It  is  to  these  cam-
paigns that  the  inscriptions  of  Surk  Sahakseenito  refer  (Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  623-631,  Nos.  slv.,  slvi. ;
and  Monolith  Inscription  of  Argistis,  King  of  Van,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser ,  vol.  iv.  pp.
134-146).


108       THE  ASSTBIAN  REVIVAL   AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

concentrate  the  main  part  of  his  forces  ou  the  southern  boundary  of  his  empire.
Ramman-nirari,  after  his  last  contest  in  Khubushkia  in  784,  had  fought  two
consecutive  campaigns  against  the  Aramtean  tribes  of  Itua,  near  tlie  frontiers
of  Babylon,  and  he  was  still  in  conflict  with  them  when  he  died  in  782  B.c.^  His
son,  Shalmaneser  IV.,  may  have  wished  to  signalise  the  commencement  of  his
reign  by  delivering  from  the  power  of  Urartu  tlie  provinces  which  the  kings  of
that  country  had  wrested  from  his  ancestors ;  or,  perhaps,  Argistis  thought  that
a  change  of  ruler  offered  him  an  excellent  opportunity  for  renewing  the  struggle
at  the  point  where  Menuas  had  left  it,  and  for  conquering  yet  more  of  the  terri-
tory which  still  remained  to  his  rival.  Whatever  the  cause,  the  Assyrian  annals
show  us  the  two  adversaries  ranged  against  each  other,  in  a  struggle  which
lasted  from  781  to  778  B.C.  Argistis  had  certainly  the  upper  hand,  and  though
his  advance  was  not  rapid,  it  was  never  completely  checked.  The  first  engage-
ment took  place  at  Nirbu,  near  the  sources  of  the  Supnat  and  the  Tigris  :  Nirbu
capitulated,  and  the  enemy  pitilessly  ravaged  the  Hittite  states,  which  were
subject  to  Assyria,  penetrating  as  far  as  the  heart  of  Melitene  (781).^  The
next  year  the  armies  encountered  each  other  nearer  to  Nineveh,  in  the  basin  of
the  Bitlis-tchai,  at  Khakhias ;  ^  and,  in  779,  Argistis  expressly  thanks  his  gods,
the  Khaldises,  for  having  graciously  bestowed  upon  him  as  a  gift  the  armies  and
cities  of  Assur.^  The  scene  of  the  war  had  shifted,  and  the  contest  was  now
carried  on  in  the  countries  bordering  on  Lake  Urumiah,  Bustus  and  Parsua.^
The  natives  gained  nothing  by  the  change  of  invader,  and  were  as  hardly  used
by  the  King  of  Urartu  as  they  had  been  by  Shalmaneser  III.  or  by  Samsi-
ramman :  as  was  invariably  the  case,  their  towns  were  given  over  to  the  flames,
their  fields  ravaged,  their  cattle  and  their  families  carried  into  captivity.
Their  resistance,  however,  was  so  determined  that  a  second  campaign  was
required  to  complete  the  conquest :  and  this  time  the  Assyrians  suffered  a
serious  defeat  at  Surisidas  (778),"  and  a  year  at  least  was  needed  for  their  recovery
from  the  disaster.''     During  this  respite,  Argistis  hastened  to  complete  the

'  The  Epomjm  Canon,  in  Schradeb,  Keilinschriftliclte  Bihliotheli,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211.
•  '  Annals  of  Argistis,  B,  II.  4-24 ;  cf.  Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  the  J.  R.  As.
Soc,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  5S2-685.     For  Nirbu,  cf.  p.  20,  supra.

'  Annals  of  Argistis,  B,  11.  40-50;  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  586,  587.

*  Amwls  of  Argistis,  B,  11.  51-57,  and  C,  11.  1-22 ;  cf.  Satce,  op.  cit,  pp.  587,  588,  590-592.  This
passage  concerns  a  certain  Kharsitas,  in  whom  Sayce  thought  he  recognised  the  King  of  Assyria,
Assurdan  HI.,  successor  of  Shalmaneser  IV.  (op.  cit.,  pp.  406,  407,  588-590).  Tide  does  not  admit
this  identification,  which  is  indeed  somewhat  far-fetched  (Babijlonisch-asstjriche  Geschichle,  p.  216,
note  1);  Hommel  suggests  that  the  name  Kharsitas  represents  the  name  of  an  Assyrian  general,  or
perhaps  of  a  chief  in  alliance  with  the  Assyrians,  and  opposed  to  Argistis  {Geschichte  Bahyloniens
and  Asaijriens,  p.  641),  whicli  seems  a  more  reasonable  theory.

'  For  Parsua,  see  supra,  p.  88,  note  3.

"  Annals  of  Argistis,  C,  11.  23-48  ;  cf.  Satce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  598-596.

"  The  Eponym  Canon  notes  in  this  year,  777,  a  campaign  in  the  country  of  Itua  (Schkadeb,


THE    WARS    OF  SEALMANESER   IV.   AGAINST   URARTU.


109


pacification  of  Bustus,  Parsua,  and  the  small  portion  of  Man  which  had  not  been
reduced  to  subjection  by  Menuas.'  When  the  Assyrians  returned  to  the  conflict,
he  defeated  them  again  (776),^  and  while  they  withdrew  to  the  Amanus,  where
a  rebellion  had  broken  out  (775)  ^,  he  reduced  one  by  one  the  small  states  which
clustered  round  the  east-
ern and  southern  shores
of  Lake  Urumiah.^  He
was  conducting  a  cam-
paign in  Namri,  when
Shalmaneser  IV.  made  a
last  effort  to  check  his
advance ;  but  he  was
again  victorious  (774),'
and  from  henceforth  these
troubled  regions,  in  which
Nineveh  had  so  persis-
tently endeavoured  for
more  than  a  century  to
establish  her  own  supre-
macy, became  part  of  the
empire  of  Urartu.  Argis-
tis's  hold  of  them  proved,
however,  to  be  a  preca-
rious and  uncertain  one,
and  before  long  the  same
difiSculties  assailed  him
which  had  restricted  the
power  of  his  rivals.  He
was  forced  to  return  asain
and  again  to  these  districts,  destroying  fortresses  and  pursuing  the  inhabitants
over   plain   and   mountain  r  in  773  we  find  him  in  Urmes,  the    territory  of

Keilinscliri/Uiche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211);  these  expeditions  against  the  Aramtean  nomads
were  usually  mere  raids,  which  did  not  require  a  great  effort.

'  Annals  of  Anjistis,  C,  11.  4S-71,  D,  11.  1-20;  cf.  Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in
the  J.  li.  As.  Soc,  new  eer.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  596-598,  COO,  601.

'  Annals  of  Argistis,  D,  11.  21-45 ;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit,  pp.  602-604.

'  The  Ejjonym  Canon,  in  Schkader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothelc,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211,  notes  an
expedition  to  the  Country  of  Cedars  for  the  year  775.

*  Annals  of  Argistis,  D,  11.  50-69;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  604-606.

=  Annals  of  Argistis,  D,  11.  G9-81 ;  E,  11.  1-11 ;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit,  pp.  606-609.  The  Eponym
Canon  notes  for  this  year  an  expedition  to  Urartu  and  Nainri  (Scbrader,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211),
the  last-mentioned  in  these  regions  for  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  IV.

"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Xime'nes,  furnished  by  Fatlier  Scheil.


UKAKTIAN    STELE    ON    THE    ROCKS    OF    AK-EEUPRU."


110       THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE   STRUGGLE   FOR    SYRIA.

Bikhuras,  and  Bam,  in  the  very  heart  of  Namri;i  in  772,  in  Dhuaras,  and  Gurqus,
among  the  Mannai,  and  at  the  city  of  Uikhis,  in  Bustus.^  Meanwhile,  to  the  north
of  the  Araxes,  several  chiefs  had  taken  advantage  of  his  being  thus  engaged  in
warfare  in  distant  regions,  to  break  the  very  feeble  bond  which  held  them  vassals
to  Urartu.  Etius  was  the  fountain-head  and  main  support  of  the  rebellion  ;
the  rugged  mountain  range  in  its  rear  provided  its  chiefs  with  secure  retreats
among  its  woods  and  lakes  and  valleys,  througli  which  flowed  rapid  torrents.
Argistis  inflicted  a  final  defeat  on  the  Mannai  in  771,  and  then  turned  his  forces
against  Etius.  He  took  by  storm  the  citadel  of  Ardinis  which  defended  the
entrance  to  the  country,  ravaged  Ishqigulus,*  and  seized  Amegu,  the  cajjital  of
Uidharus  :  *  our  knowledge  of  his  wars  comes  to  an  end  in  the  following  year
with  an  expedition  into  the  land  of  Tarius.^  The  monuments  do  not  tell  us
what  he  accomplished  on  the  borders  of  Asia  Minor :  he  certainly  won  some
considerable  advantages  there,  and  the  influence  which  Assyria  had  exercised
over  states  scattered  to  the  north  of  the  Taurus,  such  as  Melitene,  and  possibly
Tabal  and  Kummukh,  which  had  formed  the  original  nucleus  of  the  Hittite
empire,  must  have  now  passed  into  his  hands.  The  form  of  Argistis  looms
before  us  as  that  of  a  great  conqueror,  worthy  to  bear  comparison  with  the
most  indefatigable  and  triumphant  of  the  Pharaohs  of  Egypt  or  the  lords  of
Chaldsea.  The  inscriptions  which  are  constantly  being  discovered  within  the
limits  of  his  kingdom  prove  that,  following  the  example  of  all  Oriental
sovereigns,  he  delighted  as  much  in  building  as  in  battle :  perhaps  we  shall
some  day  recover  a  sufficient  number  of  records  to  enable  us  to  restore  to  their
rightful  place  in  history  this  great  king,  and  the  peoj^le  whose  power  he
developed  more  than  any  other  sovereign.

Assyria  had  thus  lost  all  her  possessions  in  the  northern  and  eastern  parts
of  her  empire ;  turning  to  the  west,  how  much  still  remained  faithful  to  her  ?
After  the  expedition  of  775  b.c.  to  the  land  of  Cedars,''  two  consecutive
campaigns  are  mentioned  against  Damascus  (773)  and  Hadrach  (772) ;  it
was  during  this  latter  expedition,  or  immediately  after  it,  that  Shalmaneser  IV.
died.''  Northern  Syria  seems  to  have  been  disturbed  by  revolutions  which
seriously  altered  the  balance  of  power  within  her  borders.  The  ancient
states,  whose  growth  had  been  arrested  by  the  deadly  blows  inflicted  on  them

'  Annals  of  Argidis,  E,  11.  12-20;  F,  G,  11.  1-11;  cf.  Satoe,  The  Cuneiform  InecriptioHs  of  Van,
In  the  J.  R.  As.  Soc,  new  ser.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  609,  610,  612-614.

'  Annals  of  Argistis,  G,  11.  15-36;  cf.  Satoe,  op.  cit,  pp.  614-616.

'  Sayce  (oy.  cit.,  pp.  621,  631)  shows  that  Ishqigulus  was  the  district  of  Alexandropolis,  to  the
east  of  Ears ;  its  capital,  Irdauius,  is  very  probably  either  the  existing  walled  village  of  Ealinsha.
or  the  neighbouring  ruin  of  Ajuk-kaleh,  on  the  Arpa-tchai.

*  Annah  of  Argistis,  G,  11.  37-72;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  616-619.

'  Annals  of  Argistis,  G,  11.  77-Sl ;  cf.  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  619,  620.

°  Cf  supra,  p.  109,  note  3.

'  The  Eponym  Canon,  iu  Schradee,  KeilinschriftUche  Bihliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211.


RECOIL    OF  ASSYRIAN  POWER   IN  SYRIA.  11]

in  the  ninth  century  by  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.,  had  become
reduced  to  the  condition  of  second-rate  powers,  and  their  dominions  had  been
split  up.  The  Patina  was  divided  into  four  small  states — the  Patina  proper,
Unki,  laudi,  and  Samalla,  the  latter  falling  under  the  rule  of  an  Aramaean
family ;  ^  perhaps  the  accession  of  Qaral,  the  founder  of  this  dynasty,  had
been  accompanied  by  convulsions,  which  might  explain  the  presence  of  Shal-
maneser IV.  in  the  Amanos  in  775.^  All  these  principalities,  whether  of
ancient  or  recent  standing,  ranged  themselves  under  one  of  two  kingdoms —
either  Hadrach  or  Arpad,  whose  names  henceforth  during  the  following
half-century  appear  in  the  front  rank  whenever  a  coalition  is  formed  against
Assyria.  Carchemish,  whose  independence  was  still  respected  by  the  fortresses
erected  in  its  neighbourhood,  could  make  no  move  without  exposing  itself  to
an  immediate  catastrophe :  Arpad,  occupying  a  prominent  position  a  little  in
front  of  the  Afrin,  on  the  main  route  leading  to  the  Orontes,  had  assumed  the
role  which  Cai'chemish  was  no  longer  in  a  position  to  fill.  Agusi  became  the
principal  centre  of  resistance;  all  battles  were  fought  under  the  walls  of  its
fortresses,  and  its  fall  involved  the  submission  of  all  the  country  between  the
Euphrates  and  the  sea,  as  in  former  times  had  been  the  case  with  Kinalua  and
Khazazu.^  Similar  to  the  ascendency  of  Arpad  over  the  plateau  of  Aleppo
was  that  of  Hadrach  in  the  valley  of  the  Orontes.  This  city  had  taken  the
position  formerly  occupied  by  Hamath,  which  was  now  possibly  one  of  its
dependencies  ;  it  owed  no  allegiance  to  Damascus,  and  rallied  around  it  all
the  tribes  of  Ccele-Syria,  whose  assistance  Hadadezer,  but  a  short  while  before,
had  claimed  in  his  war  with  the  foreigner.^  Neither  Arpad,  Hadrach,  nor
Damascus  ever  neglected  to  send  the  customary  presents  to  any  sovereign  who
had  the  temerity  to  cross  the  Euphrates  and  advance  into  their  neighbour-
hood, but  the  necessity  for  this  act  of  homage  became  more  and  more  infrequent.
During  his  reign  of  eighteen  years  Assurdau  III.,  son  and  successor  of
Shalmaneser  IV.,  appeared  only  three  times  beneath  their  walls — -at  Hadrach
in  766  and  755,  at  Arpad  in  750,  a  few  months  only  before  his  death.^  Assyria
was  gradually  becoming  invx)lved  in  difficulties,  and  the  means  necessary  to

'  The  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-Pileser  III.  mention  Unku,  laudi,  Samalla,  and  the  Patina,  in  the
districts  where  the  tests  of  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.  only  know  of  the  Patina  (cf.  for  the
Patina,  supra,  p.  35).

-  For  the  founder  of  this  dynasty,  cf.  Sachau,  Inschrifl  des  Koiiigs  Panammu,  in  Lcschax,  Die
Ausgrabungen  in  SeiuUchirli,  vol.  i.  pp.  63-65.

'  Hommel  {Geschichle  Bahylonieu%  und  Assyriens,  p.  656)  thinks  that  Arpad  was  in  Unki.  That
Arpad  was  actually  in  Agusi  (cf.  for  Agusi,  supra,  p.  31,  note  4)  is  proved,  among  other  places,  by  the
inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  which  show  us  from  743  to  7-iI  the  king  at  war  with  Matilu  of
Agusi  and  Ijis  suzerain  Sharduria  III.  of  Urartu  (Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  59-73);  the  same
events  are  noted  in  the  Eponym  Canon  as  taking  place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arpad  (Schbadek  ,
Keilinschriftliche  BiUiotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213).

''  For  Hadrach,  cf  supra,  p.  100,  note  2.

'  The  Eponym  Canon,  in  Schradek,  op.  cit.,  pji.  210-213.


112       THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUQGLE  FOR   SYRIA.

the  preservation  of  its  empire  were  less  available  than  formerly.  Assurdan
liad  frankly  renounced  all  idea  of  attacking  Urartu,  but  he  had  at  least
endeavoured  to  defend  himself  against  his  enemies  on  the  southern  and
eastern  frontiers ;  he  had  led  his  armies  against  Gananate  (771,  767),  against
Itua  (769),  and  against  the  Medes  (766),  before  risking  an  attack  on  Hadrach
(765),  but  more  than  this  he  had  not  attempted.  On  two  occasions  in  eight  years
(768,  764)  he  had  preferred  to  abstain  from  offensive  action,  and  had  remained
inactive  in  his  own  country.^  Assyria  found  herself  in  one  of  those  crises  of
exhaustion  which  periodically  laid  her  low  after  each  outbreak  of  ambitious
enterprise ;  she  might  well  be  compared  to  a  man  worn  out  by  fatigue  and
loss  of  blood,  who  becomes  breathless  and  needs  repose  as  soon  as  he  attempts
the  least  exertion.  Before  long,  too,  the  scourges  of  disease  and  civil  strife
combined  with  exhaustion  in  hastening  her  ruin.  The  plague  had  broken  out
in  the  very  year  of  the  last  expedition  against  Hadrach  (765),  perhaps  under
the  walls  of  that  city.^  An  eclipse  of  the  sun  occurred  in  763,  in  the
month  of  Sivan,  and  this  harbinger  of  woe  was  the  signal  for  an  outbreak
of  revolt  in  the  city  of  Assur.^  From  Assur  the  movement  spread  to  Arrapkha,
and  wrought  havoc  there  from  761  to  760 ;  it  then  passed  on  to  Gozan,
where  it  was  not  finally  extinguished  till  758.  The  last  remains  of  Assyrian
authority  in  Syria  vanished  during  this  period :  Assurdan,  after  two  years'
respite,  endeavoured  to  re-establish  it,  and  attacked  successively  Hadrach
(755)  and  Arpad  (754).  This  was  his  last  exploit.  His  son  Assur-nirari  III.
spent  his  short  reign  of  eight  years  in  helpless  inaction ;  he  lost  Syria,  he
carried  on  hostilities  in  Namri  from  749  to  748 — whether  against  the  Aramaeans
or  Urartians  is  uncertain — then  relapsed  into  inactivity,  and  a  popular  sedition
drove  him  finally  from  Calah  in  746.  He  died  some  months  later,  without  having
repressed  the  revolt;  none  of  his  sons  succeeded  him,  and  the  dynasty,  having
fallen  into  disrepute  through  the  misfortunes  of  its  last  kings,  thus  came  to  an
end ;  for,  on  the  12th  of  lyyar,  745  B.C.,  a  usurj^er,  perhaps  the  leader  of  the
revolt  at  Calah,  proclaimed  himself  king  under  the  name  of  Tiglath-pileser.^

'   The  Eponym  Canon,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213.

-  According  to  the  reasonable  conjecture  put  forth  by  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und
Assyriens,  p.  643,  note  2.

'  The  text  of  The  Eponym  Canon  does  not  mention  it  (Schradek,  op.  cit,  pp.  212,  213),  but  tiie
ideas  which  Orientals  held  on  the  subject  of  comets  renders  the  connection  between  the  two
events  very  likely,  if  not  certain  (Hommel,  op.  cit,  pp.  643,  644;  Tiele,  Babylonisch-assyrische
Geschichte,  p.  208).

*  Many  historians  have  thought  that  Tiglath-pileser  III.  was  of  Babylonian  origin  (Hommel,
op.  cit.,  pp.  618,  649)  ;  most  of  them,  however,  rightly  consider  that  he  was  an  Assyrian  (Tiele,  op.  cit,
pp.  226,  227  ;  'Win'ckler,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  221, 222  ;  EosT,  Die  Keilschrifttexte,
Tiglat-pilesers  III,  vol.  i.  pp.  8,  9).  Tlie  identity  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  with  Pulu,  the  Biblical  Pul
(2  Kings  xv.  19),  still  contested  by  Oppert  (ia  non-identity  de  Phul  et  de  TCf/lathphalazar  prour€e
•par  des  textes  cungiformes,  in  the  Revue  d'Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  165-170),  was  first  suggested  by
H.  Eawlinson  {Athenieum,  1862,  No.  1869,  p.  224),  and  by  Lepsius  (Ueber  die  Assyrischen  Epony-
moslislen,  p.  56),  and  then  demonstrated  by  Schrader  {Die  Keilinschri/teu  und  das  Alte  Testament,


THE  END    OF   THE   SECOND   ASSYRIAN  EMPIRE.


118


The  second  Assyrian  empire  had  lasted  rather  less  than  a  century  and  a  half,
from  Tukulti-ninip  II.  to  Assur-nirari  III.^

In  the  manner  in  which  it  had  accomplished  its  work,  it  resembled  the
Egyptian  empire  of  eight  hundred  years  before.  The  Egyptians,  setting  forth
from  the  Nile  valley,  had  overrun  Syria  and  had  at  first  brought  it  under  their
suzerainty,  though  without  actually  subduing  it.  They  had  invaded  Amurru  and
Zahi,  Naharaim  and  Mitanni,  where  they  had  pillaged,  burnt,  and  massacred
at  will  for  years,  without  obtaining  from  these  countries,  which  were  too  remote
to  fall  naturally  within  their  sphere  of  influence,  more  than  a  temporary
and  apparent  submission ;  the  regions  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  isthmus
alone  had  been  regularly  administered  by  the  oflicers  of  Pharaoh,  and  when  the
country  between  Mount  Seir  and  Lebanon  seemed  on  the  point  of  being  organised
into  a  real  empire  the  invasion  of  the  Peoples  of  the  Sea  had  overthrown  and
brought  to  nought  the  work  of  three  centuries.  The  Assyrians,  under  the
leadership  of  ambitious  kings,  had  in  their  turn  carried  tlieir  arms  over  the
countries  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Mediterranean,  but,  like  those  of  the
Egyptians  before  them,  their  expeditions  resembled  rather  the  destructive  raids
of  a  horde  in  search  of  booty  than  the  gradual  and  orderly  advance  of  a  civilised
people  aiming  at  establishing  a  permanent  empire.  Their  campaigns  in  Ccele-
Syria  and  Palestine  had  enriched  their  own  cities  and  spread  the  terror  of  their
name  throughout  the  Eastern  world,  but  their  supremacy  had  only  taken  firm  root
in  the  plains  bordering  on  Mesopotamia,  and  just  when  they  were  preparing  to
extend  their  rule,  a  power  had  sprung  up  beside  them,  over  which  they  had
been  unable  to  triumph :  they  had  been  obliged  to  withdraw  behind  the
Euphrates,  and  they  might  reasonably  have  asked  themselves  whether,  by
weakening  the  peoples  of  Syria  at  the  price  of  the  best  blood  of  their  own

1st  edit.,  pp.  120-134,  and  Keilins.  uml  Geschichtsforschumj,  pp.  440-460),  has  been  conclusively  proved
by  the  discovery  of  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  (Pinches,  The  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  18S3-18S4,  vol.  vi.  pp.  198-202),  where  the  Babylonian  reigns
of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  liis  son  Shalmaneser  V.  are  inserted  where  the  dynastic  lists  give  Pulu
and  Ululai  (Schradee,  Keilins.  Bihliotheh,  vol.  ii.  p.  287),  the  Poros  and  ElulfBos  of  Ptolemy.

'  The  list  of  the  kings  of  Assyria  down  to  Assur-irba  is  given  in  Maspero,  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  p.  6G5,  note  3.  Here  is  the  concluding  portion  of  the  dynasty,  from  Irba-raminan  to
Assur-nirari  III. : —


Ikba-bammax ?

assdk-nadinakhe  i[ ?

TuKULTI-rAL-ESIIARRA  [TlGLATH-

pilesebII.] 950-935?

AssuR-DAN  II 935-911  ?

Ramm.an-sirari  II 911-890

TrKCLTi-NiNip  n 890-884


Assob-nazik-pal  III 884-859

Shaljiasc-sharid  [Sbalmaneseb  III.]  859-824

Samsi-bamman  IV 824-812

Ramiian-sieabi  IV 812-782

Shalmaneser  IV 782-772

AssuR-D.AN  III 772-754

AssrB-NiR.ARi 754-745


For  the  information  we  possess  bearing  on  the  first  kings  in  this  series,  and  the  order  in  which  they
succeeded  to  the  throne,  cf.  supra,  pp.  4,  5.

I


114        THE  ASSYRIAN  REVIVAL  AND    THE  STRUGGLE  FOR   STRIA.

nation,  they  had  not  merely  laboured  for  the  benefit  of  a  rival  power,  and
facilitated  the  rise  of  Urartu.  Egypt,  after  her  victory  over  the  Peoples  of  the
Sea,  had  seemed  likely,  for  the  moment,  to  make  a  fresh  start  on  a  career  of
conquest  under  the  energetic  influence  of  Eamses  III.,  but  her  forces  proved
unequal  to  the  task,  and  as  soon  as  the  master's  hand  ceased  to  urge  her  on,
she  shrank  back,  without  a  struggle,  within  her  ancient  limits,  and  ere  long
nothing  remained  to  her  of  the  Asiatic  empire  carved  out  by  the  warlike
Pharaohs  of  the  Theban  dynasties.  If  Tiglath-pileser  could  show  the  same
courage  and  capacity  as  Ramses  III.,  he  might  well  be  equally  successful,  and
raise  his  nation  again  to  power;  but  time  alone  could  prove  whether  Nineveh,
on  his  death,  would  be  able  to  maintain  a  continuous  effort,  or  whether  her
new  display  of  energy  would  prove  merely  ephemeral,  and  her  empire  be
doomed  to  sink  into  irremediable  weakness  under  the  successors  of  her
deliverer,  as  Egypt  had  done  under  the  later  Ramessides.


TIGLATH-PILESEE  III.  AND  THE  ORGANI-
SATION OE  THE  ASSYEIAN  EMPIEE  EEOM
745    TO    732    B.C.


KAILUEE    OF    UKARTL'    ASD     RE-CONQUEST    OF    SYKLV EGYFl'    Ali.US     UXITED     UXDEI!     KTIIIOPIAV

AUSPICES — PIOSKHI — THE   DOWNFALL    OF  DAMASCUS,    OF   BABYLOX,    AND    l)F   ISRAEL.

Assyria  and  its  neighbours  at  the  accession  of  Tiglath-pileser  III, :  progress  of  the  Aramaeans
in  the  basin  of  the  Middle  Tigris — Urartu  and  its  expansion  into  the  north  of  Syria — Damascus
and  Israel — Vengeance  of  Israel  on  Dama,scus — Jeroboam  II. — Civilisation  of  the  Hebrew
kingdoms,  their  commerce,  indxistries,  pricate  life,  awl  political  organisation — Dawn  of  Hebrew
literature:  the-two  historians  of  Israel — The  priesthood  and  the  prophets — The  prophecy  of
Amos  at  Bethel  ;  denunciation  of  Israel  by  Hosea.

Early  campaigns  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  in  Karduniash  and  in  Media — He  determines  to
attack.  Urartu  in  Syria:  defeat  of  Sharduris,  campaign  around  Arpad,  and  capture  of  that
city — Homage  paid  by  the  Syrian  princes,  byMenahemand  Rezinll. — Second  campaign  against
the  Medes — Invasion  of  Urartu  and  end  of  its  supremacy — Alliance  ifPekah  and  Rezin  against
Ahaz  :  the  war  in  Judiea  and  siege  of  Jerusalem.

Egypt  u-iuler  the  Icings  of  the  XXII"^  dynasty  —The  Theban  principality,  its  priests,  palla-
cides,  an,d  revolts ;  the  XXIII"'  Tanite  dynasty — Tafnahhti  and  the  rise  of  the  Saite  family—
Tlie  Egyptian  kingdom  of  Ethiopia :  theocratic  nature  of  its  dynasty,  annexation  of  the  Thebaid
hy  the  kingdom  of  Napatu — Pionkhi-Miamun ;  his  generals  in  Middle  Egypt;  submission  of
Klimmm,  of  Memphis,  and  of  Tafndkhti — Effect  produced  in  Asia  Inj  the  Ethiopian  conquest.


{      116     )

jT/tc  prophet  Isaiah,  his  rise  muler  Ahaz — Intervention  of  Tiglath-pihscr  III.  in  Hebrew
affairs;  the  campaign  of  733  b.c.  against  Israel — Capture  of  Rezin,  and  the  downfall  of
Damascus — Nahnnaztr ;  the  Kaldd  and  the  close  of  the  Babylonian  dyiuisty ;  iisinpaiioii  if
Vkinzir — Campaign  again.it  Wnnzir ;  capture  of  Shapia  and  of  Babylon — Tiglath-pile»er
ascends  the  throne  in  the  last-named  city  vndei-  the  name  of  Fnlu  (729  b.c.) — Death  of  Tiiilath-
pile.'^er  III.  (727  B.C.).

Reorganiisativn  of  the  A.'<.iyrian  empire  ;  provin^:es  and  feudatory  states — Karduniash,  Sijria
— Wholesale  deportation  of  conquered  races — Provincial  administrators,  their  military  and
Jiiiancial  arrangements — Buildings  erected  hy  Tiglath-pileser  at  Calah — Tlie  Bit-Khildni —
Foundation  of  fendal  lordships — Belharrdn-heluzur — S]ialmaneser  V.  and  Egypt:  rebellion  of
Hoshea,  the  siege  of  Samaria,  and  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah — Sargon-^Destrnction  of  tlie
kingdom  of  hrael.


CWIHAl'    IJEFORE    THE    WALLS    l>r    A     K"iiTI:L-~


CHAPTER    II.

TIGLATH-PILESER    III.    AND    THE   ORGANISATION   OF   THE   ASSYRIAN
EMPIRE    FROM    745    TO   722    B.C.

Failure  of  TJrartu  and  re-conquest  of  Syria — Egypt  again  united  under
Ethiopian  auspices— Pionkhi — Tbe  downfall  of  Damascus,  of  Baby-
lon, and  of  Israel.

T^VENTS  proved  that,  in  this  period,  at  any  rate,  the
decadence  of  Assyria  was  not  due  to  any  exhaustion
of  the  race  or  impoverishment  of  the  country,  but  was
mainly  owing  to  the  incapacity  of  its  kings  and  the  lack
of  energy  displayed  by  their  generals.  If  Menuas  and
Argistis  had  again  and  again  triumphed  over  the
Assyrians  during  half  a  century,  it  was  not  because
their  bands  of  raw  recruits  were  superior  to  the  tried
veterans  of  Eamman-niiari  in  either  discipline  or
courage.  The  Assyriau  troops  had  lost  none  of  their
former  valour,and  tlieir  muster-roll  showed
no  trace  of  diminution,  but  their  leaders
had  lost  the  power  of  handling  their  men
after  the  vigorous  fashion  of  their  predecessors,  and  showed  less  foresight  and
tenacity  in  conducting  tlieir  campaigns.  Although  decimated  and  driven  from
fortress  to  fortress,  and  from  province  to  province,  hampered  by  the  rebellions  it
was  called  upon  to  suppress,  and  distracted  by  civil  discord, the  Assyrian  army  still
remained  a  strong  and  efficient  force,  ever  ready  to  make  its  full  power  felt  the

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Layard,  Monuments  of  Nineceh,  vol.  i.  pi.  13.  The  initial,  also  by
Bouilier,  represents  a  bronze  statuette  of  Queen  Karomama,  now  in  the  Louvre  (Piekket,  Catalogue
de  la  Salle  historique,  No.  23,  p.  15;  Chassinat,  Une  Statu'tte  en  bronze  de  la  reine  Karomama,  in
Monuments  Plot,  vol.  iv.  pp.  15-25,  and  pi.  iii.).


118       TIOLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TBE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

moment  it  realised  that  it  was  being  led  by  a  sovereign  capable  of  employing
its  good  qualities  to  advantage.  Tiglath-pileser  bad,  doubtless,  held  a  military
command  before  ascending  the  throne,  and  had  succeeded  in  winning  the  confi-
dence of  his  men :  as  soon  as  he  had  assumed  the  leadership  they  regained  their
former  prestige,  and  restored  to  their  country  that  supremacy  which  its  last
three  rulers  had  failed  to  maintain.^

The  empire  still  included  the  original  patrimony  of  Assur  and  its  ancient
colonies  on  the  Upper  Tigris,  the  districts  of  Mesopotamia  won  from  the
Aramaeans  at  various  epochs,  the  cities  of  Khabur,  Khindanu,  Laqi,  and  Tel-
Abni,  and  that  portion  of  Bit-Adini  which  lay  to  the  left  of  the  Euphrates.  It
thus  formed  a  compact  mass  capable  of  successfully  resisting  the  fiercest  attacks ;
but  the  buffer  provinces  which  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.  had  grouped
round  their  own  immediate  domains  on  the  borders  of  Namri,  of  Nairi,  of
Melitene,  and  of  Syria  had  either  resumed  their  independence,  or  else  had
thrown  in  their  lot  with  the  states  against  which  they  had  been  intended  to
watch.     The  Aramaean  tribes  never  let  slip  an  opportunity  of  encroaching  on  ^

the  southern  frontier.     So  far,  the  migratory  instinct  which  had  brought  them  V

from  the  Arabian  desert  to  the  swamps  of  the  Persian  Gulf  had  met  with  no

'  The  official  documents  dealing  with  the  history  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  have  been  seriously
mutilated,  and  there  is  on  several  points  some  difference  of  opinion  among  historians  as  to  the  proper
order  in  -which  the  fragments  ought  to  be  placed,  and,  consequently,  as  to  the  true  sequence  of  the
various  campaigns  (G.  Smith,  The  Annals  of  Tiglath-Fileaer  II.,  in  the  ZeiUchrift,  1869,  pp.  9-17 ;
SCHKADEK,  Eeilinsehri/ten  und  Geschichtsforschung,  pp.  224-236,  Zur  Kritih  der  Inschri/ten  Tiglath-
Pileser's  II.,  des  Asarhaddon  und  des  Aschurhanipal,  p.  1,  et  seq.,  and  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das
Alia  Testament,  1883,  pp.  242-259;  Tiei.e,  Babylonisch-Assi/Tiche  Geschichte,  pp.  22i-236 ;  Hommel,
Oeschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  649,  et  seq. ;  EosT,  Die  KeiUcUri/ltexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  '

vol.  i.  pp.  i.-viii.).  The  principal  documents  are  as  follows :  (1)  The  Annals  in  the  Central  Hall
of  the  palace  of  Shalmaneser  III.  at  Nimroud,  partly  defaced  by  Esarhaddon,  and  carried  off  to
serve  as  materials  for  the  south-western  palace,  whence  they  were  rescued  by  Layard,  and
brought  in  fragments  to  the  British  Bluseum.  Most  of  the  legible  portions  have  been  published
by  Latard,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pis.  19,  24,  34  o-Ji,  45,  50  a-b,  65-68,
♦!9  I  a-b,  II  a-b,  71  a-b,  72,  73,  and  afterwards  by  Rost,  Die  Keilschrifltexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  HI,
vol.  ii.  pis.  i.-xxlv.,  who,  after  analysing  them  {De  Inscriptinne  Tiglat-Pileser  III,  regis  Assyrise,
quss  vacatur  Annalium,  1892),  transcribed  and  translated  into  German  all  that  remains  of  them
(Die  Eeihchrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  vol.  i.  pp.  2-41).  (2)  The  Tablets,  K.  3571  (H.  Eawlinson,
Gun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  67,  and  EosT,  Die  Keilschrifltexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  vol.  li.,  pie.  xxxv.,
xxxvi.-xxxviii.,  and  p.  15,  et  seq.),  and  D.  T.  3,  in  the  British  Museum  (Schrader,  Zur  Kritik  der
Inschriften  Tiglath-Pileser's  II,  p.  15,  et  seq.),  translated  into  French  by  Menant,  Ayinales  des  rois
dAssyrie,  pp.  140-144  ;  by  Eneberg,  Inscription  de  Tiglat-Piliser  II.,  in  the  Journal  Aeiatique,  1875,
vol.  vi.  pp.  441-472 ;  into  English  by  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  256-266 ;  and  by  Stroxg,
Tlie  Nimrid  Inscription  of  Tiglath-Pileser  III,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  v.  pp.  1 15-128  ;
into  German  by  Schrader,  Inschriften  Tiglath-Pileser's  III,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliotheli,  vol.
ii.  pp.  8-25,  afterwards  by  Rost,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  pp.  54-77.  (3)  The  Slabs
of  Nimrud,  discovered  by  Layard  and  G.  Smith,  published  by  Latard,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform
Character,  pis.  17,  18,  19  6;  afterwards  by  H.  Eawlkson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  10,  Nos.
2,  3;  partly  translated  into  English  by  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  271,  272;  into  German  by
Schrader,  Inschriften  Tiglath-Pileser's  HI,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2-9 ;  and
by  Eosr,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  vol.  i.  pp.  42-53.  The  Eponym  Canon  gives  an
outline  of  the  reign  with  an  official  list  of  the  campaigns  (Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,
vol.  i.  pp.  212-215),  and  P i:\CBes,  Babylonian  Chronicle,  adds  a  few  details,  classitied  in  chronological
order,  to  what  we  had  learnt  from  the  other  documents  (col.  i.  11.  1-26  ;  cf.  Winckler,  Babylonische
Kronili  B,  in  Schradeb's  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  274-277).


THE  FBOaHESS  OF  THE  ARAM^ANS  IN  THE  BASIN  OF  THE  TIGBIS.     119

check.'  Those  who  first  reached  its  shores  became  the  founders  of  that  nation
of  the  Kalda  which  had,  perhaps,  already  furnished  Babylon  with  one  of  its
dynasties  ;  others  had  soon  after  followed  in  their  footsteps,  and  passing  beyond
the  Kalda  settlement,  had  gradually  made  their  way  along  the  canals  which
connect  the  Euphrates  with  the  Tigris  till  they  had  penetrated  to  the  lowlands
of  the  Uknu.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century  B.C.  they  wedged
themselves  in  between  Elam  and  Karduniash,  forming  so  many  buffer  states  of
varying  size  and  influence.  They  extended  from  north  to  south  along  both
banks  of  the  Tigris,  their  different  tribes  being  known  as  the  Gambulu,  the
Puqudu,  the  Litau,  the  Damunu,  the  Ruua,  the  Khindaru,  the  Labdudu,
the  Harilu,  and  the  Eubuu ;  ■^  the  Itua,  who  formed  the  vanguard,  reached  the
valleys  of  the  Turnat  during  the  reign  of  Ramman-nirari  III.^  They  were
defeated  in  791  B.C.,  but  obstinately  renewed  hostilities  in  783,  782,  777,
and  7G9 ;  favoured  by  circumstances,  they  ended  by  forcing  the  cordon  of
Assyrian  outposts,  and  by  the  time  of  Assur-nirari  had  secured  a  footing  on
the  Lower  Zab.*  Close  by,  to  the  east  of  them,  lay  Namri  and  Media,  both  at
that  time  in  a  state  of  absolute  anarchy.  The  invasions  of  Menuas  and  of
Argistis  had  entirely  laid  waste  the  country,  and  Sharduris  III.,  the  king  who
succeeded  Argistis,  had  done  nothing  towards  permanently  incorporating  them
with  Urartu.^  Sharduris,  while  still  heir-apparent  to  the  throne,  had  been
appointed  by  his  father  governor  of  the  recently  annexed  territory  belonging
to  Etius  and  the  Mannai :  ^  he  made  Lununis  his  headquarters,'  and  set
himself  to  subdue  the  barbarians  who  had  settled  between  the  Kur  ^  and  the
Araxes.  When  he  succeeded  to  the  throne,  about  760  B.C.,  the  enjoyment  of
supreme  power  in  no  way  lessened  his  activity.     On  the  contrary,^  he  at  once

1  Cf.  what  has  already  been  said  on  this  point  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  669,  670,  and  on
pp.  4,  5  of  the  present  work.

-  The  list  of  Aramsean  tribes,  and  the  positions  occupied  by  them  towards  tlie  middle  of  the  eighth
century,  have  been  given  us  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  himself,  Slabs  of  Nimroud,  No.  2,  II.  4-11,  and  the
Nimroud  Inscrip.,  Rev.  11.  5-10  ;  cf  Eost,  Die  Kcilschrlftlexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  48,  49,
.54-57.     The  list  is  given  in  its  entirety  in  Fit.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  pp.  227-241.

^  The  position  occupied  by  the  Itua  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Tiglath-pileser  is  made  suf-
ficiently clear  by  a  passage  in  the  Annals,  11. 8-10,  by  Slab  No.  1, 11.  6,  7,  and  by  the  Inscriptions,  11. 10, 11
(cf  RoST,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  2,  3,  42,  43,  50,  57),  which  connect  them
with  Til-Khamri  or  Khumut,  not  far  from  the  Lesser  Zab  (Tiele,  Babylonisch-assijrische  Gescli.,  p.  227).

'  As  to  what  has  been  said  about  the  campaigns  against  the  Itua,  cf.  pp.  99,  112,  supra.

^  As  will  be  apparent  later  on  (cf.  p.  142,  infra),  Tiglath-pileser  did  not  encounter  any  Urartian
forces  in  these  regions,  as  would  almost  certainly  have  been  the  case  had  these  countries  remained
subject  to  Urartu  from  the  invasions  of  Menuas  and  Argistis  onwards.

'  Argistis  tells  us  in  the  Annals,  D,  11.  71-74,  that  he  had  made  his  son  satrap  over  the  provinces
won  from  the  Mannai  and  Etius  (Satce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  vol.  xiv.  p.  606) :  though
his  name  is  not  mentioned,  Sayce  believes  this  son  must  have  been  Sharduris.

'  As  to  the  identity  of  the  Luuunis  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  Van  with  the  modern,
Armavir,  cf  what  has  been  said  on  p.  1 04,  note  6,  supra.

'  Belok  and  Lehmann,  Ueber  weitere  Ergebnisse  ihrer  Studien,  in  the  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner
anthropologischeii  Gesellschaft,  1892,  p.  484.

'  Sayce  dates  his  accession  about  750  (_The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  vol.  xiv.  p.  405),  and  his


120      TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  OBQANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

lixed  upon  the  sort  of  wide  isthmus  which  separates  the  Araxes  I'rom  Lake
Urumiah,  as  the  goal  of  Ms  incursions,  and  overran  the  territory  of  the  Babilu ;  ^
there  he  carried  by  storm  three  royal  castles,  twenty-three  cities,  and  sixty
villages ;  he  then  fell  back  upon  Etius,  passing  through  Dakis,  Edias,  and
Urmes  on  liis  way,  and  brought  back  with  him  12,735  children,  46,600  women,
12,000  men  capable  of  bearing  arms,  23,335  oxen,  58,100  sheep,  and  2,500
horses ;  ^  these  figures  give  some  idea  of  the  importance  of  his  victories  and
the  wealth  of  the  conquered  territory.  So  far  as  we  can  learn,  he  does  not
seem  to  have  attacked  Khubushkia,^  nor  to  have  entered  into  open  rivalry  with
Assyria ;  even  under  the  rule  of  Assur-nirari  III.  Assyria  showed  a  bold
enough  front  to  deter  any  enemy  from  disturbing  her  except  when  forced  to
do  so.  Sharduris  merely  strove  to  recover  those  portions  of  his  inheritance  to
which  Assyria  attached  but  little  value,  and  his  inscriptions  tell  us  of  more  than
one  campaign  waged  by  him  with  this  object  against  the  mountaineers  of
Melitene,  about  the  year  758.  He  captured  most  of  their  citadels,  one  after
another:  Dhumeskis,  Zapsas,  fourteen  royal  castles,  and  a  hundred  towns,
including  Milid  itself,  where  King  Khitaruadas  held  his  court.*  At  this  point
two  courses  lay  open  before  him.  He  could  either  continue  his  march  west-
wards, and,  penetrating  into  Asia  Minor,  fall  upon  the  wealthy  and  industrious
races  who  led  a  prosperous  existence  between  the  Halys  and  the  San  garios,  such
as  the  Tabal,  the  Chalybes,  and  the  Phrygians,  or  he  could  turn  southwards.
Deterred,  apparently,  by  the  dreary  and  monotonous  aspect  of  the  Asianic
steppes,  he  chose  the  latter  course ;  he  crossed  Mount  Taurus,  descended  into
Northern  Syria  about  756,  and  forced  the  Khati  to  swear  allegiance  to  him.
Their  inveterate  hatred  of  the  Assyrians  led  the  Bit-Agusi  to  accept  without
much  reluctance  the  supremacy  of  the  only  power  which  had  shown  itself  capable
of  withstanding  their  triumphant  progress.     Arpad  became  for  several  years  an

view  has  been  endorsed  by  most  historians  (Tiele,  Babylonitch-assyrieche  Geichichte,  pp.  215,  216 ;
HoMMEL,  Geschichte  Bahijloniens  unci  Asiyn'ens,  p.  655).

'  The  name  Babilus,  wrongly  read  Babilunie',  was  identified  with  that  of  Babylon  by  Hincks
(0»i  the  Inscriplioni  of  Van,  in  the  /.  R.  At.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  p.  39S,  and  in  Latabd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,
pp.  342,  343,  345).  Fr.  Lenormant  (Lettres  Assyriolori iquee,  vol.  i.  pp.  156,  157)  admitted  the  probable
correctness  of  this  identification ;  Sayce  places  the  Babilu  to  the  north  of  Lake  Urumiah,  in  the  Khoi
district  QTlie  Cuneiform  Itneriptions  of  Van,  in  the  /.  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xiv.  p.  400).

-  Inscriplions  of  Van,  iu  Sayce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  635-642 ;  cf.
vol.  XX.  pp.  18,  19.  The  totals  of  the  number  of  prisoners  and  cattle  given  iu  the  inscriptions  do  not
correspond  exactly  with  the  figures  quoted  in  the  course  of  the  campaign ;  at  this  distance  of  time
it  is  impossible  to  determine  on  which  side  the  error  lies.

^  It  is  evident  from  the  account  of  the  campaigns  that  Tiglath-pileser  occupied  Khubusbkia  from
the  very  commencement  of  his  reign  ;  we  must  therefore  assume  that  the  invasions  of  Argistis  had
produced  only  transient  eiiects.     Cf.  the  narrative  of  the  campaign  given  on  p.  142,  infra.

'  Inscription  of  leoglu,  in  Sayce,  The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  the  J.  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xiv.
pp.  642-649;  cf.  vol.  xx.  p.  19.  These  campaigns  must  have  preceded  the  descent  into  Syria,  and  I
believe  this  latter  to  have  been  anterior  to  the  expedition  of  Assur-nirari  against  Arpad  in  754  B.C.
Assur-nirari  probably  tried  to  reconquer  the  tribes  who  had  ju»t  become  subject  to  Sharduris.  The
descent  of  this  latter  into  Syria  probably  took  place  about  756  or  755  B.C.,  and  his  wars  against
Melitene  about  758  or  757  B.C.


THE  EXPANSION   OF   TJSARTU  INTO   NOUTHERN  SYRIA.


121


unfailing  support  to  Urartu  and  the  basis  on  which  its  rule  in  Syria  rested.
Assur-nirari  had,  as  we  know,  at  first  sought  to  recover  it,  but  his  attempt  to
do  so  in  754  B.C.  was  unsuccessful,  and  merely  served  to  demonstrate  his  own
weakness :  ^  ten  years  later,  Carchemish,  Gurguni,  Kummukli,  Samalla,  Uiiki,
Kui — in  a  word,  all  the  Aramteans  and  the  Khati  between  the  Euphrates  and
the  sea  had  followed  in  the  steps  of  the  Agusi,  and  had  acknowledged  the
supremacy  of  Sharduris.^     This  prince  must  now  have  been  sorely  tempted  to


A    VISTA    OF    THE

ASIANIC   STEPPE.


adopt,  on  his  own  account,  the  policy  of  the  Ninevite  monarchs,  and  push  on  in
the  direction  of  Hamath,  Damascus,  and  the  Phoenician  seaboard,  towards  those
countries  of  Israel  and  Judah  which  were  nearly  coterminous  with  far-off  Egypt.
The  rapidity  of  the  victories  which  he  had  just  succeeded  in  winniug  at  the  foot
of  Mount  Taurus  and  Mount  Amanus  must  have  seemed  a  happy  omen  of  what
awaited  his  enterprise  in  the  valleys  of  the  Orontes  and  the  Jordan.  Although
the  races  of  southern  and  central  Syria  had  suffered  less  than  those  of  the  north
from  the  ambition  of  the  Ninevite  kings,  they  had,  none  the  less,  been  sorely
tried  during  the  previous  century ;  and  it  might  be  questioned  whether  tliey

'  Cf.  the  accouut  of  this  expedition  on  p.  112,  supra.

'  The  minimum  extent  of  the  dominions  of  Sliarduris  in  Syria  maybe  deduced  from  the  list  of  the
allies  assigned  to  liim  by  Tiglath-pileser  in  713  in  the  Annals,  11.  59-62  ;  cf.  Inscriptions,  Obv.,  11.  45,  40.
'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Alfred  Boissier.


122      TiaiATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

had  derived  courage  from  the  humiliation  of  Assyria,  or  still  remained  in  so
feeble  a  state  as  to  present  an  easy  prey  to  the  first  invader.

The  defeat  inflicted  on  Mari  by  Ramman-nirari  in  803  ^  had  done  but  little
harm  to  the  prestige  of  Damascus.  The  influence  exercised  by  this  state  from
the  sources  of  the  Litany  to  the  brook  of  Egypt  *  was  based  on  so  solid  a
foundation  that  no  temporary  reverse  had  power  to  weaken  it.  Had  the
Assyrian  monarch  thrown  himself  more  seriously  into  the  enterprise,  and
reappeared  before  the  ramparts  of  the  capital  in  the  following  year,  refusing  to
leave  it  till  he  had  annihilated  its  armies  and  rased  its  walls  to  the  ground,
then,  no  doubt,  Israel,  Judah,  the  Philistines,  Edom,  and  Ammou,  seeing  it  fully
occupied  in  its  own  defence,  might  have  forgotten  the  ruthless  severity  of  Hazael,
and  have  plucked  up  sufficient  courage  to  struggle  against  the  Damascene  yoke  ;
as  it  was,  Ramman-nirari  did  not  return,  and  the  princes  who  had,  perhaps,  for
the  moment,  regarded  him  as  a  possible  deliverer,  did  not  venture  on  any
concerted  action.  Joash,  King  of  Judah,  and  Jehoahaz,  King  of  Israel,  continued
to  pay  tribute  till  both  their  deaths,  within  a  year  of  each  other,  Jehoahaz  in
797  B.C.,  and  Joash  in  796,  the  first  in  liis  bed,  the  second  by  the  hand  of  an
assassin.^  Their  children,  Jehoash  in  Israel,  Amaziah  in  Judah,  were,  at  first,
like  their  parents,  merely  the  instruments  of  Damascus;  but  before  long,
the  conditions  being  favourable,  they  shook  off  their  apathy  and  initiated  a
more  vigorous  policy,  each  in  his  own  kingdom.  Mari  had  been  succeeded  by
a  certain  Ben-hadad,  also  a  son  of  Hazael,^  and  possibly  this  change  of  kings
was  accompanied  by  one  of  those  revolutions  which  had  done  so  much  to  weaken
Damascus :  Jehoash  rebelled  and  defeated  Ben-hadad  near  Aphek  and  in  three
subsequent  engagements,  but  he  failed  to  make  his  nation  completely  indepen-
dent, and  the  territory  beyond  Jordan  still  remained  in  the  hands  of  the
Syrians.*  We  are  told  that  before  embarking  on  this  venture  he  went  to
consult  the  aged  Elisha,  then  on  his  deathbed.  He  wept  to  see  him  in  this
extremity,  and  bending  over  him,  cried  out,  "  My  father,  my  father,  the
chariots  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof!"  The  prophet  bade  him  take
bow  and  arrows  and  shoot  from  the  window  toward  the  East.     The  king  did

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  on  p.  102,  supra.

*  [Not  the  Nile,  but  the  Wady  el  Arish,  the  frontier  between  Southern  Syria  and  Egyjit.  Cf.
Josli.  XV.  47  ;  2  Kings  xxiv.  7,  called  "  river  "  of  Egypt  in  the  A.V. — Tr.]

-  2  Kings  xii.  20,  21,  xiii.  9 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxiv.  22-26,  where  the  death  of  Joash  is  mentioned  as
one  of  the  consequences  of  the  Syrian  invasion  (cf.  p.  101,  supra),  and  as  a  punishment  for  his  crime
iu  killing  the  sons  of  Jehoiada.

'  2  Kings  xiii.  24,  25.  Winckler  is  of  opinion  (cf.  p.  102,  note  1,  supra)  that  Mari  and  Ben-hadad,
son  of  Hazael,  were  one  and  the  same  person.

'  2  Kings xni.  25.  The  term  "  saviour"  in  2  Kings  xiii.  5  is  geuerally  taken  as  referring  to  Joash  :
Winckler,  however,  prefers  to  apply  it  to  the  King  of  Assyria  (GeschicMe  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  154).  The
biblical  text  does  not  expressly  state  that  Joash  failed  to  win  back  the  districts  of  Gilead  from  the
Syrians,  but  affirms  that  he  took  from  them  the  cities  which  Hazael  "  had  taken  out  of  the  hand  of
Jehoahaz,  his  father."  Ramah  of  Gilead  and  the  cities  previously  annexed  by  Jehoahaz  must,  there-
fore, have  remained  in  the  hands  of  Ben-hadad  ;  cf.  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  570.


THE   VENGEANCE   OF  ISBAEL    ON  DAMASCUS — JEROBOAM  -11.      123

so,  aud  Elisha  said,  "  The  Lord's  arrow  of  victory  *  over  Syria ;  for  thou  shalt
smite  the  Syrians  in  Aphek  till  thou  have  consumed  them."  Then  he  went
on:  "Take  the  arrows,"  and  the  king  took  them ;  then  he  said,  "  Smite  upon
the  ground,"  and  the  king  smote  thrice  and  stayed.  And  the  man  of  God  was
wroth  with  him,  and  said,  "  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six  times ;
then  hadst  thou  smitten  Syria  till  thou  hadst  consumed  it,  whereas  now  thou
shalt  smite  Syria  but  thrice."  ^  Amaziah,  on  his  side,  had  routed  the  Edomites
in  the  Valley  of  Salt,  one  of  David's  former  battle-fields,  and  had  captured
their  capital,  Sela.^  Ehited  by  his  success,  he  believed  himself  strong  enough
to  break  the  tie  of  vassalage  which  bound  him  to  Israel,  and  sent  a  challenge
to  Jehoash  in  Samaria.  The  latter,  surprised  at  his  audacity,  replied  in  a
parable,  "The  thistle  that  was  in  Lebanon  sent  to  the  cedar  that  was  in
Lebanon,  saying.  Give  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife."  But  "  there  passed  by
a  wild  beast  that  was  in  Lebanon  and  trode  down  the  thistle.  Thou  hast
indeed  smitten  Edom,  and  thine  heart  hath  lifted  thee  up :  glory  thereof  and
abide  at  home ;  for  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to  thy  hurt  that  thou  shouldest
fall,  even  thou,  and  Judah  with  thee  ?  "  They  met  near  Beth-shemesh,  on  the
border  of  the  Philistine  lowlands.  Amaziah  was  worsted  in  the  engagement,
and  fell  into  the  power  of  his  rival.  Jehoash  entered  Jerusalem  and  dismantled
its  walls  for  a  space  of  four  hundred  cubits,  "  from  the  gate  of  Ephraim  unto
the  corner  gate ;  "  he  pillaged  the  Temple,  as  though  it  had  been  the  abode,  not
of  Jahveh,  but  of  some  pagan  deity,  insisted  on  receiving  hostages  before  he
would  release  his  prisoner,  and  returned  to  Samaria,  where  he  soon  after  died
(781  B.c.).^  Jeroboam  II.  completed  that  rehabilitation  of  Israel,  of  which  his
father  had  but  sketched  the  outline ;  he  maintained  his  suzerainty,  first  over
Amaziah,  and  when  the  latter  was  assassinated  at  Lachish  (764),*  over  his  son,
the  young  Azariah.'  After  the  defeat  of  Ben-hadad  near  Aphek,  Damascus
declined  still  further  in  power,  and  Hadrach,  suddenly  emerging  from  obscurity,
completely  barred  the  valley  of  the  Orontes  against  it.  An  expedition
under  Shalmaneser  IV.  in  773  seems  to  have  precipitated  it  to  a  lower  dejith
than  it  had  ever  reached  before :  ^  Jeroboam  was  able  to  wrest  from  it,  almost
without  a  struggle,  the  cities  which  it  had  usurped  in  the  days  of  Jehu,  and
Gilead  was  at  last  set  free  from  a  yoke  which  had  oppressed  it  for  more  than  a

*  [Heb.  "  salvation ;  "  A.V.  "  deliverance."— Tr.]

•  2  Kings  xiii.  14-19.

"  2  Kings  xiv.  7;  of.  2  Chron.  xsv.  11,  12.  Sela  was  rebuilt,  and  received  the  name  of  Joktlieel
from  Its  Hebrew  masters.  The  subjection  of  the  country  was  complete,  for,  later  on,  the  Hebrew
chronicler  tells  of  the  conquest  of  Elath  by  King  Azariah,  son  of  Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  22).

'  2  Kings  xiv.  S-16;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxv.  17-24.

«  2  Kings  xiv.  19,  20;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxv.  27,  28.

'  The  Hebrew  texts  make  no  mention  of  this  subjection  of  Judah  to  Jeroboam  II.;  that  it  actually
took  place  must,  however,  be  admitted,  at  any  rate  in  so  far  as  the  first  half  of  the  reign  of  Azariah
is  concerned,  as  a  necessary  outcome  of  the  events  of  the  preceding  reigns.

°  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  110,  111,  supra.


124       TIOLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.


century.  Tradition  goes  so  far  as  to  affirm  that  Israel  reconquered  the  Bekaa,
Hamath,  and  Damascus,  those  northern  territories  once  possessed  by  David,
and  it  is  quite  possible  that  its  rivals,  menaced  from  afar  by  Assyria  and  hard
pressed  at  their  own  doors  by  Hadrach,  may  have  resorted  to  one  of  those
propitiatory  overtures  which  eastern  monarchs  are  only  too  ready  to  recognise
as  acts  of  submission.  The  lesser  southern  states,  such  as  Ammon,  the  Bedawiu
tribes  of  Hauran,  and,  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the  kingdom,  the  Philis-
tines,^ who  had  bowed  themselves  before  Hazael  in  the  days  of  his  prosperity,
now  transferred  their  homage  to  Israel.  Moab  alone  offered  any  serious  resist-
_  ance.     It  had  preserved  its  independence  ever  since  the  reign  of

having  escaped  from  being  drawn  into  the  wars  whicii  had
vaste  the  rest  of  Syria.     It  was  now  suddenly  forced  to  pay  the

penalty  of  its  long  prosperity.  Jero-
boam made  a  furious  onslaught  upon
its  cities — Ar  of  Moab,  Kir  of  Moab,
Dibon,  Medeba,  Heshbon,  Elealeh —
and  destroyed  them  all  in  succession.
The  Moabite  forces  carried  a  part  of
the  population  with  them  in  their
flight,  and  all  escaped  together  across
the  deserts  which  enclose  the  southern
basin  of  the  Dead  Sea.  On  the
frontier  of  Edom  they  begged  for  sanctuary,  but  the  King  of  Judah,  to
whom  the  Edomite  valleys  belonged,  did  not  dare  to  shelter  the  vanquished
enemies  of  his  suzerain,  and  one  of  his  prophets,  forgetting  his  hatred
of  Israel  in  delight  at  being  able  to  gratify  his  grudge  against  Moab,
greeted  them  in  their  distress  with  a  hymn  of  joy — "  I  will  water  thee  with
my  tears,  0  Heshbon  and  Elealeh  :  for  upon  thy  summer  fruits  and  upon  thy
harvest  the  battle  shout  is  fallen.  And  gladness  is  taken  away  and  joy  out  of
the  fruitful  fields ;  and  in  the  vineyards  there  shall  be  no  singing,  neither
joyful  noise ;  no  treader  shall  tread  out  wine  in  the  presses ;  I  have  made  the
vintage  shout  to  cease.  Wherefore  my  bowels  sound  like  an  harp  for  Moab,
and  mine  inward  parts  for  Kir-Heres.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  Moab
presenteth  himself,  when  he  wearieth  himself  upon  the  high  place,  and  shall
come  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray,  he  shall  not  prevail  I "  ^  •         .

'  The  conquests  of  Jeroboam  II.  are  indicated  very  brieUy  in  2  Kings  xiv.  25-28 ;  cf.  Amos  vi.  14,
where  tlie  expressions  employed  by  the  prophet  imply  that  at  the  time  at  which  he  wrote  the  whole
of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  David,  Judah  included,  was  in  the  possession  of  Israel.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  sketches  by  Wahren,  Plans,  Elevations,  Sections,  pi.  xlv.

'  Isa.  XV.  1-9 ;  xvi.  1-12.  This  prophecy,  which  had  been  prouounced  against  Moab  "  in  the
old  days,"  and  which  is  appropriated  by  Isaiah  (xvi.  13,  14),  has  been  attributed  by  Hitzig  (Des
Propheten  Jona  Orakel  iiber  Moab,  1831)  to  Jonah,  son  of  Amittal,  of  Gath-Hepher,  who  actually  lived


SPECIMENS  OF   HEBREW   POTTERY."


INDUSTET  AXD    COMMEUCE   OF   TEE  HEBREW  KINGDOMS.        125


This  revival,  like  the  former  greatness  of  David  aud  Solomou,  was  due  not
so  much  to  any  inherent  energy  on  the  part  of  Israel,  as  to  the  weakness  of  the
nations  on  its  frontiers.  Egypt  was  not  in  the  habit  of  intervening  in  the
quarrels  of  Asia,  and  Assyria  was  suffering  from  a  temporary  eclipse.  Damas-
cus had  suddenly  collapsed,  and  Hadrach  or  Mansuati/  the  cities  which  sought
to  take  its  place,  found  themselves  fully  employed  in  repelling  the  intermittent
attacks  of  the  Assyrian ;  the  Hebrews,  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  therefore,  had
tlie  stage  to  themselves,  there  being  no  other  actors  to  dispute  their  possession


V':^M:'^-'^^^1^^  ^-.WtV:^^^-».«K>


,:Af


ISRAELITES    OF    THE    HIGHER    CLASS    IN


■  F    SUAL3IAXESER   in."


of  it.  During  the  three  hundred  years  of  their  existence  as  a  monarchy  they
had  adopted  nearly  all  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  races  over  whom  they
held  sway,  and  by  whom  they  were  completely  surroilnded.  The  bulk  of  the
people  devoted  themselves  to  the  pasturing  and  rearing  of  cattle,  and,  during
the  better  part  of  the  year,  preferred  to  live  in  tents,  unless  war  rendered  such
a  practice  impossible.'^  They  had  few  industries  save  those  of  the  potter  ^  and
the  smith,"  and  their  trade  was  almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  foreigners.    We

in  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  It  is  now  generally  recognised  as  the  production  of
an  anonymous  Judaan  prophet,  and  the  earliest  authentic  fragment  of  prophetic  literature  which
has  come  down  to  us  (Corxill,  Einleituin]  in  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  141,  142;  Driver,
Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  5th  edit.,  pp.  202,  203).

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  on  p.  100,  note  2,  and  p.  Ill,  supra.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin  from  one  of  tlie  bas-reliefs  of  the  Black  Obelisk ;  cf.  Layard,  T]ie
Monuynents  of  Xineveli,  vol.  i.  pi.  55.

'  Cf.  the  passage  in  2  Kings  xiii.  5,  "And  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  tents  as  before-
time."  Although  the  word  ohel  had  by  that  time  acquired  the  more  general  meaning  of  habitation,
the  context  here  seems  to  require  us  to  translate  it  by  its  original  meaning  tent.

*  Pottery  is  mentioned  in  2  Sam.  xvii.  28 ;  numerous  fragments  dating  from  the  monarchical
period  have  been  found  at  Jerusalem  and  at  Lachish.

*  The  story  of  Tubal-Cain  (Gen.  iv.  22)  shows  the  antiquity  of  the  ironworker's  art  among  the
Israelites;  the  smith  is  practically  the  only  artisan  to  be  found  amongst  nomadic  tribes.


126      TIOLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.


find,  however,  Hebrew  merchants  in  Egypt,i  at  Tyre,  and  in  Ccjele-Syria,  and
they  were  so  numerous  at  Damascus  that  they  requested  that  a  special  bazaar
might  be  allotted   to   them,  similar  to  that  occupied  by  the  merchants  of

The  Hebrew  mouarchs  had
done  their  best  to  encourage


Damascus  in  Samaria  from  time  immemorial.^


this  growing  desire  for
trade.  It  was  only  tiie  com-
plicated state  of  Syrian
politics  that  prevented  them
I'rom  following  the  example
of  Solomon,  and  opening
communications  by  sea  with
the  far-famed  countries  of
Ophir,  either  in  competition
with  the  Phoenicians  or  under
their  guidance.  Indeed,  as
we  have  seen,  Jehoshaphat,
encouraged  by  his  alliance
with  the  house  of  Omri,
tried  to  establish  a  seagoing
fleet,  but  found  that  pea-
sants could  not  be  turned
into  sailors  at  a  day's  notice,
and  the  vessel  built  by  him
at  Eziongeber  was  wrecked
before  it  left  the  harbour.^
In  appearance,  the  Hebrew  towns  closely  resembled  the  ancient  Canaanite  cities.
Egyptian  influences  still  predominated  in  their  architecture,  as  may  be  seen  from
what  is  still  left  of  the  walls  of  Lachish,^  and  they  were  fortified  in  such  a  waj'  as
to  be  able  to  defy  the  military  engines  of  besiegers.  This  applies  not  only  to
capitals,  like  Jerusalem,  Tirzah,  and  Samaria,  but  even  to  those  towns  which

'  The  accurate  ideas  on  the  subject  of  Egypt  possessed  by  the  earliest  compilers  of  the  traditions
contaiued  in  Genesis  and  Exodus,  prove  that  Hebrew  merchants  must  have  been  in  constant
communication  with  that  country  about  the  time  with  which  we  are  now  concerned.

-  1  Kings  xs.  31 ;  cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  point  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,
pp.  781,  786.

3  1  Kings  xxii.  49,  50  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  35-37  ;  cf.  p.  SO,  stipra.

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Latakd,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  23.  These  figures  are  taken
from  a  bas-relief  which  represents  Sennacherib  receiving  the  submission  of  Judah  before  Lachish.
The  whole  is  given  in  Chapter  III.  of  the  present  work.

=  Flinders  Peteie,  Tell  el  Hesy,  pp.  23-27 ;  cf.  the  vignette  reproduced  on  p.  747  of  the  Struggle
of  the  Nations.    As  to  tlie  appearance  and  defences  of  the  Canaanite  cities,  of  pp.  127-13),  ibid.


I


jnD.BA>r    FEASANTS.*


PIUVATE  LIFE  AND  POLITICAL  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  HEBREWS.    Vll


commanded  a  road  or  mountaia  pas=,  the  ford  of  a  river,  or  the  entrance  to
some  fertile  plain  ;  there  were  scores  of  these  on  the  frontiers  of  the  two  king-
doms, and  in  those  portions  of  their  territory  which  hiy  exposed  to  the  attacks
of  Damascus,  Moab,  Edom,  or  the  Philistines.^  The  daily  life  of  the  inhabi-
tants was,  to  all  intents,  the  same  as
at  Arpad,  Sidon,  or  Gaza;  and  the
dress,  dwellings,  and  customs  of  the
upper  and  middle  classes  cannot  have
differed  in  any  marked  degree  from
those  of  the  corresponding  grades  of
society  in  Syria.  The  men  wore  over
their  tunic  a  fringed  kaftan,  with  short
sleeves,  ojjeu  in  front,  a  low-crowned
hat,  and  sandals  or  shoes  of  pliant
leather  ;  -  they  curled  their  beards  and
hair,  painted  their  eyes  and  cheeks,
and  wore  many  jewels ;  while  their
wives  adopted  all  the  latest  refinements
in  vogue  in  the  harems  of  Damascus,
Tyre,  or  Nineveh.^  Descendants  of
ancient  families  paid  for  all  this  luxury
out  of  the  revenues  of  the  wide  domains
they  had  inherited ;  others  kept  it  up
by  less  honourable  means,  by  usury,
corruption,  and  by  the  exercise  of  a
ruthless  violence  towards  neighbours
who  were  unable  to  defend  themselves.
The  king  himself  set  them  an  evil
example,    and    did    not    hesitate    to

assassinate  one  of  his  subjects  in  order  that  he  might  seize  a  vineyard
which  he  coveted  ;  ^  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that  the  nobles
of  Ephraim   "  sold   the   righteous   for   silver,  and   the    needy  for   a   pair  of

'  2  Chron.  xi.  6-10,  where  we  find  a  list  of  the  towns  fortified  by  Eehoboam  :  Bethlehem,  Etam,
Beth-zur,  Soco,  Adullam,  Gath,  Mareshah,  Ziph,  Adoraim,  Laehisli,  Azekah,  Zorah,  Ajalou,
Hebron.

=  The  kaftao  met  with  in  these  parts  seems  to  correspond  to  the  »»ciZ  (R.V.  "  ephod")  of  the
biblical  tests  (1  Sam.  ii.  19 ;  xviii.  4,  etc.).

^  Isa.  iii.  16-24  describes  in  detail  the  whole  equipment  of  jewels,  paint,  and  garments
required  by  the  fashionable  women  of  Jerusalem  during  the  last  thirty  years  of  the  eighth
century  B.C.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  same  source  which  furnished  the  illustration  on  p.  126.

'  Cf  the  well-known  episode  of  Naboth  and  Ahab  in  1  Kings  sxi.


WOMEN    Ai"D    CUILDKEN"    OF  JUDJ:A.


128       TIQLATn-PlhESER  III.  AND  THE  OBGAXIf^ATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

shoes ; "  ^  that  they  demanded  gifts  of  wheat,  and  "  turned  the  needy  from
their  right "  when  they  sat  as  a  jury  "  at  the  gate."  -  From  top  to  bottom
of  the  social  ladder  the  stronger  and  wealthier  oppressed  those  who  were  weaker
or  poorer  than  themselves,  leaving  them  with  no  hope  of  redress  except  at
the  hands  of  the  king.'^  Unfortunately,  the  king,  when  he  did  not  himself
set  the  example  of  oppression,  seldom  possessed  the  resources  necessary  to
make  liis  decisions  effective.  True,  he  was  chief  of  the  most  influential
family  in  either  Judah  or  Israel,  a  chief  by  divine  appointment,  consecrated
by  the  priests  and  prophets  of  Jahveh,  a  priest  of  the  Lord,*  and  he  was
master  in  his  own  city  of  Jerusalem  or  Samaria,  but  his  authority  did  not
extend  far  beyond  the  walls.  It  was  not  the  old  tribal  organisation  that
embarrassed  him,  for  the  secondary  tribes  had  almost  entirely  given  up  their
claims  to  political  independence.  The  division  of  the  country  into  provinces,
a  consequence  of  the  establishment  of  financial  districts  by  Solomon,  had  broken
them  up,  and  they  gradually  gave  way  before  the  two  houses  of  Ephraim  and
Judah  ;  ■'  but  the  great  landed  proprietors,  especially  those  who  held  royal  fiefs,
enjoyed  almost  unlimited  power  within  their  own  domains.  They  were,
indeed,  called  on  to  render  military  service,  to  furnish  forced  labour,  and  to
pay  certain  trifling  dues  into  the  royal  treasury ;  "^  but,  otherwise,  they  were
absolute  masters  in  their  own  domains,  and  the  sovereign  was  obliged  to
employ  force  if  he  wished  to  extort  any  tax  or  act  of  homage  which  they  were
unwilling  to  render.  For  this  purpose  he  had  a  standing  army  distributed  in
strong  detachments  along  the  frontier,  but  the  flower  of  his  forces  was  concen-
trated round  the  royal  residence  to  serve  as  a  body-guard.  It  included  whole
companies  of  foreign  mercenaries,  like  those  Cretan  and  Carian  warriors  who,
since  the  time  of  David,  had  kept  guard  round  the  Kings  of  Judah  ; ''  these,  in
time  of  war,s  were  reinforced  by  militia,  drawn  entirely  from  among  the  landed
proprietors,  and  the  whole  force,  when  commanded  by  an  energetic  leader,
formed  a  host  capable  of  meeting  on  equal  terms  the  armies  of  Damascus,

'  Amos  ii.  6.  -  Amos  v.  11,  12.

'  2  Kings  vi.  2G-30 ;  viii.  3-S,  where,  iu  both  instances,  it  is  a  woman  who  appeals  to  the  king.
Cf.  for  the  period  of  David  and  Solomon,  2  Sam.  xlv.  1-20,  and  1  Kings  iii.  16-27.

*  Cf.  the  anointing  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  i.x.  IG ;  x.  1 ;  and  xv.  1),  of  David  (1  Sam.  xvi.  1-3,  12,  13),  of
Solomon  (1  Kings  i.  34,  39,  45),  of  .Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  1-10),  and  compare  it  with  the  unction
received  by  the  priests  on  their  admission  to  the  priesthood  (Exod.  xxix.  7 ;  xxx.  22,  23 ;  cf.
Lev.  viii.  12,  30  ;  x.  7).

'  As  to  Solomon's  districts,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  738,  739.

^  1  Kings  xv.  22  (cf.  2  Chron.  xvi.  6),  where  "  King  Asa  made  a  proclamation  unto  all  .Judah ;
none  was  exempted,"  the  object  in  tliis  case  being  the  destruction  of  Eamah,  the  building  of  whi(^li
had  been  begun  by  Baasha  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  779).

'  The  Cariaiis  or  Cretans  are  again  referred  to  in  the  history  of  Athaliah  (2  Kings  xi.  4).

*  Taking  the  tribute  paid  by  Menahem  to  Pul  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20)  as  a  basis,  it  has  been  esti-
mated that  the  owners  of  landed  estate  in  Israel,  who  were  in  that  capacity  liable  to  render  military
service,  numbered  00,000  in  the  time  of  that  king  (Ed.  BIeter,  Gesch.  des  Alterlhums,  vol.  i.  p.  449  :
cf.  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  57G,  note  4) ;  all  others  were  exempt  from  military  service.


DAWN  OF  HEBREW  LITERATURE.  1-29

Edom,  or  Moab,  or  even  the  veterans  of  Egypt  and  Assyria.  The  reigning
prince  was  hereditary  commander-in-chief,  but  the  sliar  zaha,  or  captain  of  the
troops,  often  took  his  place,  as  in  the  time  of  David,  and  thereby  became  the
most  important  person  in  the  kingdom.  More  than  one  of  these  ofScers  had
already  turned  against  their  sovereign  the  forces  which  he  had  entrusted  to
them,  and  these  revolts,  when  crowned  with  success,  had,  on  various  occasions,
in  Israel  at  any  rate,  led  to  a  change  of  dynasty :  Omri  had  been  shar  zaha  when
he  mutinied  against  Zimri,  the  assassin  of  Elah,  and  Jehu  occupied  the  same
position  when  Elisha  deputed  him  to  destroy  the  house  of  Omri.^

The  political  constitutions  of  Judah  and  Israel  were,  on  the  whole,  very
similar  to  those  of  the  numerous  states  which  shared  the  territory  of  Syria
between  thera,  and  their  domestic  history  gives  us  a  fairly  exact  idea  of  the
revolutions  which  agitated  Damascus,  Hamath,  Carchemish,  Arpad,  and  the
principalities  of  Amanos  and  Lebanon  about  the  same  period.  It  would  seem,
however,  that  none  of  these  other  nations  possessed  a  literary  or  religious  life
of  any  great  intensity.  They  had  their  archives,  it  is  true,  in  which  were
accumulated  documents  relating  to  their  past  history,  their  rituals  of  theology
and  religious  worshij:),  their  collections  of  hymns  and  national  songs ;  but  none
of  these  have  survived,  and  the  very  few  inscriptions  that  have  come  down  to
us  merely  show  that  they  had  nearly  all  of  them  adopted  the  alphabet  invented
by  the  Phoenicians.^  The  Israelites,  initiated  by  them  into  the  art  of  writing,
lost  no  time  in  setting  down,  in  their  turn,  all  they  could  recall  of  the  destinies
of  their  race  from  the  creation  of  the  world  down  to  the  time  in  which  they
lived.  From  the  beginning  of  the  monarchical  epoch  onwards,  their  scribes
collected  together  in  the  Book  of  the  Tfars  of  the  Lord,  the  Book  of  Jashar,
and  in  other  works  the  titles  of  which  have  not  survived,  lyrics  of  different
dates,  in  which  nameless  poets  had  sung  the  victories  and  glorious  deeds  of
their  national  heroes,  such  as  the  Song  of  the  Well,  the  Hymn  of  Moses,  the
triumjjhal  Ode  of  Deborah,  and  the  Blessing  of  Jacob.'^     They  were  able  to

'  Cf.  what,  has  been  said  about  tbe  rebellion  of  Omri  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  779,  and
about  that  of  Jehu  on  pp.  84,  85,  supTa.

'  Cf.,  in  addition  to  the  Mesha  inscription  quoted  on  p.  81,  supra,  the  Aramaean  iuscriptiona  at
Zinjirli  {Ausgrahungen  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pp.  55-Sl,  and  pl3.  Tii.,  viii.)  and  at  Nerab  (CLEiUiosT-
Ganneau,  Etudes  d'Archiblogie  Orientate,  vol.  ii.  pp.  182-223).

'  The  books  of  Jashar  and  of  the  Wars  of  the  Lord  appear  to  date  from  the  IX*  century  B.C.
(WiLDEBOER,  Die  Litteratur  des  Alten  Testaments,  p.  73);  as  the  latter  is  quoted  in  the  Elohist
narrative,  it  cannot  have  been  compiled  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  VIII"'  century  B.C.  (Cob^jiix,
Einleitung  in  das  AUe  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  69).  The  passage  in  Numb.  xxi.  lib,  15,  is  the  only  one
expressly  attributed  by  the  testimony  of  the  ancients  to  the  Book  of  the  Wars  of  the  Lord,  but
modern  writers  add  to  this  the  Song  of  the  Well  (Numb.  xxi.  176,  18),  and  the  Song  of  Victory  over
Moab  (Numb.  xxi.  276-30).  The  Song  of  the  Bow  (2  Sam.  i.  19-27)  admittedly  formed  part  of
the  Book  of  Jashar;  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  720,  721.  Joshua's  Song  of  Victory  over
the  Amorites  (Josh.  x.  13),  and  very  probably  the  couplet  recited  by  Solomon  at  the  dedication  of  the
Temple  (1  Kings  viii.  12,  13,  placed  by  the  LXX.  after  verse  53),  also  formed  part  of  it,  as  aleo  the
Song  of  Deborah  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  6S7,  688)  and  the  Blessing  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlix.  1-27).

K


130      TIOLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

draw  upon  traditions  which  preserved  the  memory  of  what  had  taken  place  in
the  time  of  the  Judges;^  and  when  that  patriarchal  form  of  government  was
succeeded  by  a  moniirchy,  they  had  narratives  of  the  ark  of  the  Lord  and  its
wanderings,  of  Samuel,  Saul,  David,  and  Solomon,'^  not  to  mention  the  official
records  which,  since  then,  had  been  continuously  produced  and  accumulated
by  the  court  historians.^     It  may  be  that  more  than  one  writer  had  already
endeavoured  to  evolve  from  these  materials  an  Epic  of  Jahveh  and  His  faithful
people,  but  in  the  second  half  of  the  IX"'  century  B.C.,  perhaps  in  the  time  of
Jelioshaphat,  a  member  of  the  tribe  of  Judali  undertook  to  put  forth  a  fresh
edition.*     He  related  how  God,  after  creating  the  universe  out  of  chaos,  had
chosen  His  own  people,  and  had  led  them,  after  trials  innumerable,  to  the
conquest  of  the  Promised  Land.     He  showed,  as  he  went  on,  the  origin  of  the
tribes  identified  with  the  children  of  Israel,  and  the  covenants  made  by  Jahveh
with  Moses  in  the  Arabian  desert ;  while  accepting  the  stories  connected  with
the   ancient   sanctuaries  of  the   north  and  east  at  Shechem,  Bethel,  Peniel,
Mahanaim,  and  Succoth,  it  was  at  Hebron  in  Judah  that  he  placed  the  principal
residence  of  Abraham  and  his  descendants.     His  style,  while  simple  and  direct,
is  at  the  same  time  singularly  graceful  and  vivacious;  the  incidents  he  gives  are
carefully  selected,  apt  and  characteristic,  while  his  narrative  passes  from  scene
to  scene  without  trace  of  flagging,  unburdened  by  useless  details,  and  his
dialogue,  always  natural  and  easy,  rises  without  effort  from  the  level  of  familiar
conversation  to  heights  of  impassioned  eloquence.     His  aim  was  not  merely  to
compile  the  history  of  his  people  :  he  desired  at  the  same  time  to  edify  them,
by  showing  how  sin  first  came  into  the  world  through  disobedience  to  the

'  Wellhausen  was  the  first  to  admit  the  existence  of  a  Book  of  Judges  prior  to  the  epoch  of
Deuteronomy  (Bleek  and  Wellhacsen,  Einleiiung  in  das  Alte  TeMamenU  4th  edit.,  §  92),  and  his  opinion
lias  been  adopted  by  Kuenen  {Hist.-Kritilc.  Ondersoek,  vol.  i.  §  19,  11),  by  Driver  (An  Introduction  to
the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  pp.  157,  158).  This  book  was  probably  drawn  upon  by  the  two
historians  of  the  IX"'  and  VIII"'  centuries  B.C.  of  whom  we  are  about  to  speak ;  some  of  the  narratives,
such  as  the  story  of  Abimelech,  and  possibly  that  of  Ehud,  may  have  been  taken  from  a  document
written  at  the  end  of  the  X"'  or  beginning  of  the  IX"'  centuries  B.C.

'  The  revolutions  which  occurred  in  the  family  of  David  (2  Sam.  ix.-xx. ;  cf.  Struggle  of  the
Nations,  pp.  734-736)  bear  so  evident  a  stamp  of  authenticity  tliat  they  have  been  attributed  to  a
contemporary  writer,  perhaps  Ahimaaz,  son  of  Zadok  (2  Sam.  xv.  27),  who  took  part  iu  the  events  in
question  (Klostermann,  Die  Biicher  Samuelis  und  Konige,  p.  xxxii.,  et  seq.).  But  apart  from  this,  the
existence  is  generally  admitted  of  two  or  three  books  which  were  drawn  up  shortly  after  the  separation
of  the  tribes,  containing  a  kind  of  epic  of  the  history  of  the  first  two  kings;  the  one  dealing  with  Saul,
for  instance,  was  probably  written  in  the  time  of  Jeroboam  I.  (Kittel,  Gescli.  der  Eehrder,  vol.  ii.  p.  H2).

'  The  two  lists  in  which  the  names  of  the  principal  personages  at  the  court  of  David  are  handed
down  to  us,  mention  a  certain  Jehoshaphat,  son  of  Ahilud,  who  was  mazkir,  or  recorder  (2  Sam.
viil.  16  and  xx.  24);  he  retained  his  post  under  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  3).  As  to  the  share  attribu-
table to  these  personages  in  the  history  of  the  two  kingdoms  that  has  come  down  to  us,  see  the  very
lucid  summary  in  Cobnill,  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  124,  125.

*  The  approximate  date  of  the  composition  and  source  of  tliis  first  Jehovisl  is  still  an  open
question.  Keuss  {Geschichte  des  Alten  Testaments,  2nd  edit.,  p.  249,  et  seq.)  and  Kuenen  (H.  C.
Onderzoek,  vol.  i.  §  13,  No.  9),  not  to  mention  others,  believe  the  Jehovist  writer  to  have  been  a  native
of  the  northern  kingdom;  I  have  adopted  the  opposite  view,  which  is  supported  by  DiUmann,  Stade,
Wellhausen,  Budde,  and  most  modern  critics.


TEE  TWO  HISTORIANS  OF  ISRAEL  IN  THE  EIGHTH  CENTURY  B.C.      131

commandments  of  the  J\Iost  High,  and  how  man,  prosperous  so  long  as  he  kept
to  tlie  laws  of  the  covenant,  fell  into  difficulties  as  soon  as  he  transgressed  or
failed  to  respect  them.  His  concept  of  Jahveh  is  in  the  highest  degree  a  con-
crete one :  he  regards  Him  as  a  Being  superior  to  other  beings,  but  made  like
unto  tiiem  and  moved  by  the  same  passions.  He  shows  anger  and  is  appeased,
displays  sorrow  and  repents  Him  of  the  evil.^  When  the  descendants  of  Noah
build  a  tower  and  a  city,  He  draws  nigh  to  examine  what  they  have  done,  and
having  taken  account  of  their  work,  confounds  their  language  and  thus  prevents
them  from  proceeding  farther.^  He  desires,  later  on,  to  confer  a  favour  on  His
servant  Abraham  :  He  appears  to  him  in  human  form,  and  eats  and  drinks  with
him.^  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  had  committed  abominable  iniquities,  the  cry
against  them  was  great  and  their  sin  very  grievous ;  but  before  punishing  them.
He  tells  Abraham  that  He  will  "  go  down  and  see  whether  they  have  done
according  to  the  cry  of  it  which  is  come  unto  Me ;  and  if  not,  I  will  know."  ■*
Elsewhere  He  wrestles  a  whole  night  long  with  Jacob ; ''  or  falls  upon  Moses,
seeking  to  kill  him,  until  appeased  by  Zipporah,  who  casts  the  blood-stained
foreskin  of  her  child  at  her  husband's  feet.**  This  book,  though  it  breathes  the
spirit  of  the  prophets  and  was  perhaps  written  in  one  of  their  schools,  did  not,
however,  include  all  the  current  narratives,  and  omitted  many  traditions  that  were
passing  from  lip  to  lip ;  moreover,  the  excessive  materialism  of  its  treatment  no
longer  harmonised  with  that  more  idealised  concept  of  the  Deity  which  had
already  begun  to  prevail.  Consequently,  within  less  than  a  century  of  its
appearance,  more  than  one  version  containing  changes  and  interpolations  in
the  narrative  came  to  be  circulated,''  till  a  scribe  of  Ephraim,  who  flourished  in
the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.,  took  up  the  subject  and  dealt  with  it  in  a  diiferent
fashion."     Putting  on  one  side  the  primitive  accounts  of  the  origin  of  the  human

'  Exod.  iv.  14  aud  xxxii.  10,  anger  of  Jahveh  against  Mosea  and  against  Israel;  Gen.  vi.  6,  7,
where  He  repents  and  is  sorry  for  liaviiig  created  man;  and  Exod.  xxxii.  14,  where  He  repents  Him
of  tlie  evil  He  had  intended  to  do  unto  Israel.  A  collection  of  these  and  otiier  similar  expressions  to
be  met  with  in  the  fragments  of  this  first  writer  will  be  found  in  Dillman,  Die  Genesis,  p.  46.

-  Gen.  xi.  5-8.  ^  Gen.  xviii.  (cf.  the  summary  given  on  p.  t!8  of  the  Struggle  of  the  Nalions).

*  Gen.  xviii.  aud  xix.      ^  Gen.  xxxii.  24,  25  (cf.  the  summary  on  p.  09  of  the  Struggle  of  the  Nationg).

"  Exod.  iv.  24-26.

"  Schrader  and  Wellhausen  have  drawn  attention  to  contradictions  in  the  primitive  history  of
humanity  as  presented  by  the  Jehovist  which  forbid  us  to  accept  it  as  the  work  of  a  single  writer.
Nor  can  these  inconsistencies  be  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Elohist,  since  the  latter  did  not  deal  with
this  period  in  his  book.  Budde  has  maintained  that  the  primitive  work  contained  no  account  of  the
Deluge,  and  traced  the  descent  of  all  the  nations,  Israel  included,  back  to  Cain,  and  he  declares  he
can  detect  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  Genesis  traces  of  a  first  Jehovist,  whom  he  calls  J'.  A  second
Jehovist,  J",  who  flourished  between  800  and  700  B.C.,  is  supposed  to  have  added  to  the  contribution
of  the  first,  certain  details  borrowed  from  the  Babylonian  tradition,  such  as  the  Deluge,  the  story  of
Noah,  of  Nimrod,  etc.  Finally,  a  third  Jehovist  is  said  to  have  thrown  the  versions  of  his  two
predecessors  into  oue,  taking  J-  as  the  basis  of  his  work.  Cf.  Budde,  Die  Biblisohe  Urgesohichte,
pp.  455-520,wheie  a  summary  of  the  author's  whole  theory  is  given  ;  in  an  Appendix  (pp.  521-531)
he  gives  a  hypothetical  text  of  J'.

'  The  date  and  origin  of  the  Elohist  have  given  rise  to  no  less  controversy  than  those  of  the


132      TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  OBQANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

race  which  his  predecessors  had  taken  pleasure  in  elaborating,  lie  confined  his
attention  solely  to  events  since  the  birth  of  Abraham;^  his  origin  is  betrayed
by  the  preference  he  displays  for  details  calculated  to  flatter  the  self-esteem  of  the
northern  tribes.     To  his  eyes,  Joseph  is  the  noblest  of  all  the  sons  of  Jacob,
before  whom  all  the  rest  must  bow  their  heads,  as  to  a  king ;  next  to  Joseph
comes  Keuben,  to  whom — rather  than  to  Judah- — he  gives  the  place  as  firstborn.
He  groups  his  characters  round  Bethel  and  Shechem,  the  sanctuaries  of  Israel ;
even  Abraham  is  represented  as  residing,  not  at  Hebron  in  Judasa,  but  at
Beersheba,  a  spot  held  in  deep  veneration  by  pilgrims  belonging  to  the  ten
tribes.^     It  is  in  his  concept  of  the  Supreme  Being,  however,  that  he  differs
most  widely  from  his  predecessors.     God  is,  according  to  him,  widely  removed
from  ordinary  humanity.     He  no  longer  reveals  Himself  at  all  times  and  in  all
places,  but  works  rather  by  night,  and  appears  to  men  in  their  dreams,  or,  when
circumstances  require  His  active  interference,  is  content  to  send  His  angels
rather  than  come  in  His  own  person."*     Indeed,  sucli  cases  of  active  interference
are  of  rare  occurrence,  and  He  prefers  to  accomplish  His  purpose  through  human
agents,  who  act  unconsciously,  or  even  in  direct  contravention  of  their  own
clearly  expressed  intentions.^   Moreover,  it  was  only  by  degrees  that  He  revealed
His  true  nature  and  title ;  the  patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac,  -Jacob,  and  Joseph,
had  called  Him  Elohim,  or  "the  gods,"  and  it  was  not  until  the  coming  of
Moses  that  He  disclosed  His  real  name  of  Jahveh  to  His  worshippers.^     In  a
word,  this  new  historian  shows  us  in  every  line  that  the  theological  instinct  has
superseded  popular  enthusiasm,  and  his  work  loses  unmistakably  in  literary
interest  by  the  change.    We  feel  that  he  is  wanting  in  feeling  and  inspiration ;
his  characters  no  longer  palpitate  with  life ;  his  narrative  drags,  its  interest
decreases,  and  his  language  is  often  deficient  in  force  and  colour.

But  while  writers,  trained  in  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  thus  sought  to
bring  home  to  the  people  the  benefits  which  their  God  had  showered  on  them,
the  people  themselves  showed  signs  of  disaffection  towards  Him,  or  were,  at  any
rate,  inclined  to  associate  with  Him  other  gods  borrowed  from  neighbouring
states,  and  to  overlay  the  worship  they  rendered  Him  with  ceremonies  and

Jehovist ;  the  view  most  generally  adopted  ia  that  he  was  a  native  of  the  northem  kingdom,  and
nourished  about  750  B.C.  (Stade,  Gesehichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  59).

'  Budde  seems  to  have  proved  conclusively  that  the  Elohist  did  not  write  any  part  of  the  primitive
history  of  mankind  {Biblische  UrgeschicUe,  p.  493,  et  seq.).

'  Gen.  xxsvii.  21,  22,  29,  30;  xlii.  22,  37;  whereas  in  Gen.  xliii.  3,  8-10,  where  the  narrative  is
from  the  pen  of  the  Jehovist,  it  is  Judah  that  plays  the  principal  part :  it  is  possible  that,  in  Gen.
xxsvii.  21,  Reuben  has  been  substituted  in  the  existing  text  for  Judah.

'  Gen.  xxi.  31,  33  ;  xxii.  19 ;  the  importance  of  Beersheba  as  a  holy  place  resorted  to  by  pilgrims
from  the  northern  kingdom  is  shown  in  1  Kings  xix.  3,  and  Amos  v.  5  ;  viii.  li.

*  Gen.  XX.  3-8;  xxviii.  11-15;  xxxi.  24;  Namb.  xxii.  8-12,  20.

'  Geti.  1.  20,  end  of  the  story  of  Joseph :  "  And  as  for  you,  ye  meant  evil  against  me ;  but  God
meant  it  for  good,  to  bring  it  to  pass  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  people  alive."

"  Exod.  iii.  13,  14;  verse  15  is  an  interpolation  of  much  later  date.


TEE  PRIESTEOOB    OF  JUDAE  AND   ISRAEL.  133

ideas  inconsistent  with  its  original  purity.  The  permanent  division  of  the
nation  into  two  independent  kingdoms  had  had  its  effect  on  their  religion  as
well  as  on  their  political  life,  and  had  separated  the  worshippers  into  two  hostile
camps.  The  inhabitants  of  Judah  still  continued  to  build  altars  on  their  high
places,  as  they  had  done  in  the  time  before  David ;  there,  the  devout  prostrated
themselves  before  the  sacred  stones  and  before  the  Asherah,  or  went  in  unto
the  kedcshoth  in  honour  of  Astarte,  and  in  Jahveh's  own  temple  at  Jerusalem
they  had  set  up  the  image  of  a  brazen  serpent  to  which  they  paid  homage.^
The  feeling,  however,  that  the  patron  deity  of  the  chosen  people  could  have
but  one  recognised  habitation — the  temple  built  for  Him  by  Solomon — and
that  the  priests  of  this  temple  were  alone  qualified  to  officiate  there  in  an
effective  manner,  came  to  prevail  more  and  more  strongly  in  Judaea.  The  king,
indeed,  continued  to  offer  sacrifices  and  prayer  there,^  but  the  common  people
could  no  longer  intercede  with  their  God  except  through  the  agency  of  the  priests.
The  latter,  in  their  turn,  tended  to  develop  into  a  close  corporation  of  families
consecrated  for  generations  past  to  the  priestly  office ;  they  came  in  time  to
form  a  tribe  by  themselves,  which  took  rank  among  the  other  tribes  of  Israel,
and  claimed  Levi,  one  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  as  its  ancestor.  Their  head,
chosen  from  amonjr  the  descendants  of  Zadok,  who  had  been  the  first  high
priest  in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  was  by  virtue  of  his  office  one  of  the  chief
ministers  of  the  crown,  and  we  know  what  an  important  part  was  played  by
Jehoiadah  in  the  revolution  which  led  to  the  deposition  of  Athaliah ;  ^  the
high  priest  was,  however,  no  less  subordinate  to  the  supreme  power  than  his
fellow-ministers,  and  the  sanctity  of  his  office  did  not  avail  to  protect  him  from
ill-treatment  or  death  if  he  incurred  the  displeasure  of  his  sovereign.*  He  had
control  over  a  treasury  continually  enriched  by  the  offerings  of  the  faithful,
and  did  not  always  turn  his  trust  to  the  best  uses ;  in  times  of  extreme  distress
the  king  used  to  borrow  from  him  as  a  last  resource,  in  order  to  bring  about
the  withdrawal  of  an  invader,  or  purchase  the  help  of  a  powerful  ally.'^     The

'  Cf.  what  we  are  told  of  idolatrous  practices  ia  Judah  under  Eehoboam  and  Abijam  (1  Kings
xiv.  22-24 ;  xv.  3),  and  of  the  tolerance  of  high  places  by  Asa  and  Jehosljaphat  (1  Kings  xv,  14  ;
xxii.  44) ;  even  at  the  period  now  under  consideration  neither  Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  4)  nor  Azariah
(2  Kings  xv.  4)  showed  any  disposition  to  prohibit  them.  The  brazen  serpent  was  still  in  existence
in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  at  the  close  of  the  VIH"'  century  b.o.  (2  Kings  xviii.  4).

^  2  Kings  xvi.  10-16,  where  Ahaz  is  described  as  offering  sacrifice  and  giving  instructions  to  the
high  priest  Urijah  as  to  the  reconstruction  and  service  of  the  altar;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16-21,  where
similar  conduct  on  the  part  of  Uzziah  is  recorded,  and  where  the  leprosy  by  which  he  was  attacked
is,  in  accordance  with  the  belief  of  later  times,  represented  as  a  punishment  of  the  sacrilege  com-
mitted by  him  in  attempting  to  perform  the  sacrifice  in  person.

"  Cf.  pp.  100,  101,  supra.

*  In  order  to  form  an  idea  of  the  relative  positions  occupied  by  the  king  and  the  high  priest,  we
must  read  what  is  told  of  Jehoiadah  and  Joash  (2  Kings  xii.  6-16),  or  Urijah  and  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xvi.
10-16);  the  story  runs  that  Zechariah  was  put  to  death  by  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  22).

'  Asa  did  so  in  order  to  secure  Ben-hadad's  help  against  Baasha  (I  Kings  xv.  IS,  19  ;  cf.  2  Chron.
xvi.  2,  3) :  as  to  the  revenues  by  which  the  treasury  of  the  temple  was  supported  and  the  special
dues  appropriated  to  it,  cf.  2  Kings  xii.  4,  5,  7-16,  and  xxii.  4-7,  9.


134      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TTIK  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

capital  of  Israel  was  of  too  recent  foundation  to  allow  of  its  chapel  royal
becoming  the  official  centre  of  national  worship ;  the  temple  and  priesthood  of
Samaria  never  succeeded  in  effacing  the  prestige  enjoyed  by  the  ancient  oracles,
though  in  the  reign  of  both  the  first  and  second  Jeroboam,  Dan,  Bethel,  Gilgal,
and  Mizpah  had  each  its  baud  of  chosen  worshippers.^  At  these  centres  adora-
tion was  rendered  to  the  animal  presentment  of  Jahveh,^  and  even  prophets
like  Elijah  and  Elisha  did  not  condemn  this  as  heretical ;  they  had  enough  to
do  in  hunting  down  the  followers  of  Baal  without  entering  into  open  conflict
with  the  worshippers  of  the  golden  calfJ^  The  priesthood  of  the  northern
kingdom  was  not  confined  to  members  of  the  family  of  Levi,  but  was  recruited
from  all  the  tribes ;  it  levied  a  tithe  on  the  harvest,  reserved  to  itself  the  pick

of  the  offerings  and  vic-
tims, and  jealously  for-
bade    a     plurality     of
'    y^n    . ^-—  ^      sanctuaries.^    The  Bouh


'^'Sr


EGYPTIAN   ALTAR   AT   DEIR-EL-BAHABI.°  r      ji  /i  ,  r.      ^

oj  the  Covenant"  has
handed  down  to  us  the  regulations  in  force  at  one  of  these  temples,  perhaps
that  of  Bethel,  one  of  the  wealthiest  of  them  all.  The  directions  in  regard  to
ritual  are  extremely  simple,  and  the  moral  code  is  based  throughout  on  the
inexorable  hw  talionis,  "  Life  for  life,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,
foot  for  foot,  burning  for  burning,  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for  stripe."  '  This
brief  code  must  have  been  almost  universally  applicable  to  every  conjuncture
of  civil  and  religious  life  in  Judah  no  less  than  in  Israel.  On  one  point  only
do  we  find  a  disagreement,  and  that  is  in  connection  with  the  one  and  only
Holy  of  Holies  to  the  possession  of  which  the  southern  kingdom  had  begun  to
lay  claim  :  in  a  passage  full  of  significance  Jahveh  declares,  "  An  altar  of  earth
thou  shalt  make  unto  Me,  and  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  burnt  offerings  and

'  lu  regard  to  the  foundations  of  Jeroboam  I.  at  Betliel  and  Dan,  of.  what  is  said  in  tJie  Struggle
of  the  Nations,  pp.  754,  755.  In  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.,  Bethel,  Gilgal,  and  Dan  are  mentioned  by
Amos  (iv.  4;  v.  5,  6;  viii.  14),  by  Hosea  (iv.  15;  ix.  15;  xii.  12).  Mizpah  is  mentioned  by  Hosea
(V.  1),  and  so  is  Tabor.   The  altar  of  Jahveh  on  Mount  Carmel  was  restored  Iiy  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  30).

'  The  golden  calves  at  Dan  and  Bethel  are  referred  to  by  Amos  (viii.  14)  and  Hoaea  (x.  5),  where
Bethel  is  called  Beth-aven ;  as  to  the  golden  calf  at  Samaria,  cf.  Amos  viii.  14  and  3os.  viii.  5,  tj.

'  KiTTEL,  Geschichte  der  Eebrder,  vol.  ii.  p.  2G1.  '  Amos  iv.  4,  5;  v.  21-23.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  restoration  by  Naville,  Deir-el-Bahari,  vol.  i.  pi.  viii.

'  This  is  the  title  given  in  Exod.  xxiv.  7  to  a  writing  in  which  Moses  is  said  to  have  entered
the  covenant  made  between  Jahveh  and  Israel ;  it  is  preserved,  with  certain  interpolations  and
alterations,  in  Exod.  xx.  23 — xxiii.  33.  It  was  inserted  in  its  entirety  in  the  Elohist  narrative,
there  taking  the  place  at  present  occupied  by  Deuteronomy  in  the  Peatateucb,  viz.  that  of  the
covenant  made  between  Jahveh  and  Israel  prior  to  the  crossing  of  the  Jordan  (Kcenen,  H.  C.
Onderzoek,  i.  §  13,  No.  32).  Beuss  tries  to  make  out  that  it  was  the  code  promulgated  on  the
occasion  of  Jelioshapliat's  legal  reforms  (^Geschichte  der  Heiligen  Schriften,  2nd  edit.,  §  200,  pp.
231-233),  which  is  only  referred  to  in  2  Chron.  xvii.  7-9 ;  cf.  xix.  5.  A  more  probable  theory  is  that
it  was  the  "  custom  "  of  one  of  tlie  great  sanctuaries  of  the  northern  kingdom  (probably  that  of
Bethel,  as  suggested  by  Ookt,  Oud-IsracVs  Rechtsioezen,  pp.  19,  23),  reduced  to  writing  at  the  end
of  the  X"'  or  during  the  IX"'  centurv  n.c.  '  E.cod.  xxi.  23-25.


MODIFICATION  IN   TEE  STATUS   OF   TEE  PROPHETS.  135

thy  peace  offerings,  thy  sheep  and  thine  oxen  :  in  every  place  where  I  record
My  name  I  will  come  unto  thee  and  I  will  bless  thee.  And  if  thou  make  Me
an  altar  of  stone,  thou  shalt  not  build  it  of  hewn  stones :  for  if  thou  lift  up  thy
tool  upon  it,  thou  hast  polluted  it.  Neither  shalt  thou  go  up  by  steps  unto
Mine  altar,  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  discovered  thereon." '  The  patriarchs
and  early  ancestors  of  the  race  had  performed  their  sacrifices  in  the  open  air,
on  rude  and  low  altars,  differing  widely  from  lofty  and  elaborately  ornamented
erections  like  those  at  Jerusalem,  which  seem  to  have  borne  a  resemblance  to
the  altars  of  the  Egyptians  :  the  author  of  the  Booh  of  the  Covenant  advises  the
faithful  to  follow  the  example  of  those  great  men  rather  than  that  of  the  Levites
of  Judah.  Nevertheless  this  multiplicity  of  high  places  was  not  without  its
dangers  ;  it  led  the  common  people  to  confuse  Jahveh  with  the  idols  of  Canaan,
and  encouraged  the  spread  of  foreign  superstitions.  The  misfortunes  whicli  had
come  thick  and  fast  upon  the  Israelites  ever  since  the  division  of  the  kingdom
had  made  them  only  too  ready  to  seek  elsewhere  that  support  and  consolation
which  they  could  no  longer  find  at  home.  The  gods  of  Damascus  and  Assur
who  had  caused  the  downfall  of  Gath,  of  Calneh,  and  of  Hamath,^  those  of  Tyre
and  Sidou  who  lavished  upon  the  Phoenicians  the  wealth  of  the  seas,  or  even  the
deities  of  Ammon,  Moab,  or  Edoni,  might  well  appear  more  desirable  than  a
Being  Who,  in  spite  of  His  former  promises,  seemed  powerless  to  protect  His
own  people.  A  number  of  the  Israelites  transferred  their  allegiance  to  these,
powerful  deities,  prostrated  themselves  before  the  celestial  host,  flocked  round
the  resting-places  of  Kevan,  the  star  of  El,  and  carried  the  tabernacles  of  the
King  of  heaven  ;  ^  nor  was  Judah  slow  to  follow  their  example.  The  prophets,
however,  did  not  view  their  persistent  ill-fortune  in  the  same  light  as  the
common  people ;  far  from  accepting  it  as  a  proof  of  the  power  of  other  divinities,
they  recognised  in  it  a  mark  of  Jahveh's  superiority.  In  their  eyes  Jahveh  was
the  one  God,  compared  with  Whom  the  pagan  deities  were  no  gods  at  all,  and
could  not  even  be  said  to  exist.  He  might,  had  He  so  willed  it,  have  bestowed
His  protection  on  any  one  of  the  numerous  races  whom  He  had  planted  on  the
earth;  but  as  a  special  favour,  which  He  was  under  no  obligation  to  confer,  He
had  chosen  Israel  to  be  His  own  people,  and  had  promised  them  that  they
should  occupy  Canaan  so  long  as  they  kept  free  from  sin.  But  Israel  had
sinned,  Israel  had  followed  after  idols ;  its  misfortunes  were,  therefore,  but  the
just  penalty  of  its  unfaithfulness.  Thus  conceived,  Jahveh  ceased  to  be  merely
the  god  of  a  nation — He  became  the  God  of  the  whole  world  ;  and  it  is  in  tlie
o-uise  of  a  universal  Deity  that  some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  prophets  begin  to
represent  Him  from  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.  onwards.*

'  Exod.  sx.  24-26.

-  Amos  vi.  2 ;  with  regard  to  the  destructiou  of  Gath  by  Hazael,  of.  p.  1 01,  supra.       '  Amos  v.  2i;,  27.

•  As  to  this  change  in  the  concept  of  the  Being  of  God  found  iu  the  prophets,  cf.  Wellhausen',


136      TIOLATS-I'ILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

This  change  of  view  in  regard  to  the  Being  of  Jahveh  coincided  with  a  no
less  marked  alteration  in  the  character  of  His  prophets.  At  first  they  had
taken  an  active  part  in  public  affairs ;  they  had  thrown  themselves  into  the
political  movements  of  the  time,  and  had  often  directed  their  course,^  by
persuasion  when  persuasion  sufficed,  by  violence  when  violence  was  the  only
means  that  was  left  to  them  of  enforcing  the  decrees  of  the  Most  High.  Not
long  before  this,  we  find  Elisha  secretly  conspiring  against  the  successors  of
Ahab,  and  taking  a  decisive  part  in  the  revolution  which  set  the  house  of  Jehu
on  the  throne  in  place  of  that  of  Omri ;  -  but  during  the  half-century  which  had
elapsed  since  his  death,  the  revival  in  the  fortunes  of  Israel  and  its  growing
prosperity  under  the  rule  of  an  energetic  king  had  furnished  the  prophets  with
but  few  pretexts  for  interfering  in  the  conduct  of  state  aifairs.  They  no  longer
occupied  themselves  in  resisting  the  king,  but  addressed  themselves  to  the  people,
pointed  out  the  heinousness  of  their  sins,  and  threatened  them  with  the  wrath
of  Jahveh  if  they  persisted  in  their  unfaithfulness :  they  came  to  be  spiritual
advisers  rather  than  political  partisans,  and  orators  rather  than  men  of  action
like  their  predecessors.  Their  discourses  were  carefully  prepared  beforehand,
and  were  written  down  either  by  themselves  or  by  some  of  their  disciples  for
the  benefit  of  posterity,  in  the  hope  that  future  generations  would  understand
the  dangers  or  witness  the  catastrophes  which  their  contemporaries  might  not
live  to  see.  About  760  B.C.,  Amos  of  Tek6a,3  a  native  of  Judtea,  suddenly  made
his  appearance  at  Bethel,  in  the  midst  of  the  festivals  which  pilgrims  had
flocked  to  celebrate  in  the  ancient  temple  erected  to  Jahveh  in  one  of  His
animal  forms.  His  opening  words  filled  the  listening  crowd  with  wonder:
"The   high   places   of    Isaac   shall    be   desolate,"   he   proclaimed,   "and   the

Abriss  der  Geschiclite  IsraeVs  und  Judo's,  in  Skizzen  und  Vorarheiten,  vol.  i.  p.  46,  et  seq.;  and  Kcenen,
Religion  nationale  et  Religion  universelle,  p.  86,  et  seq.

'  Cf.  the  part  taken  by  Nathan  in  the  cousiiiracy  which  raised  Solomon  to  the  throne  (1  Kings
i.  8,  et  seq.),  and  previous  to  this  in  the  story  of  David's  amour  with  Bathsheba  (2  Sam.  xii.  1-25).
Similarly,  we  find  prophets  such  as  Ahijah  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  I.  (1  Kings  si.  29-89 ;  cf.  xiv.
1-18;  XV.  29,  30),  and  Shemaiah  in  the  reign  of  Eehoboam  (1  Kings  xii.  22-24),  Jehu  son  of
Hananiah  under  Baasha  (1  Kings  xvi.  1-4,  7,  12,  13),  Micaiah  son  of  Imla,  and  Zedekiah  under
Ahab  (1  Kings  xxii.  5-28),  not  to  speak  of  those  mentioned  in  the  Chronicles,  e.g.  Azariah  son  of
Oded(2  Chron.  xv.  1-8),  and  Hanani  under  Asa  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7-10),  Jahaziel  (2  Chron.  xx.  14-19),
and  Eliezer,  son  of  Dodavahu  (2  Chron.  xx.  37),  in  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat.  No  trace  of  any  writings
■composed  by  these  prophets  is  found  until  a  very  late  date ;  but  in  Chronicles,  in  addition  to  a  letter
from  Elijah  to  Jehoram  of  Juda  (2  Chron.  xxi.  12-15),  we  find  a  reference  to  the  commentary  of  the
prophet  Iddo  in  the  time  of  Abijah  (2  Chron.  xiii.  22),  and  to  the  "  History  of  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani,
which  is  inserted  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel "  (2  Chron.  xx.  34),  in  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat.

■  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  84,  85,  supra.

'  The  title  of  the  Book  of  Amos  fixes  the  date  as  being  "  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah,
and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joasli  king  of  Isr.ael "  (i.  1),  and  the  state  of  atiairs  described
by  him  corresponds  pretty  closely  with  what  we  know  of  tliis  period.  Most  critics  fix  the  date
somewhere  between  760  and  750  B.o.,  but  nearer  760  than  750  (Cornill,  Einleitung  in  das  AUe
Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  177);  the  views  of  Zeydner  {TlieologiscU  Studien,  1894,  p.  94)  and  Valeton
{Amos  en  Hosea,  p.  10),  who  give  the  date  as  744  or  745,  i.e.  at  the  accession  of  Tiglath-pileser  HI.
and  the  beginning  of  the  Assyrian  revival,  have  up  to  the  present  time  lacked  general  support.


TEE  PEOPEECY  OF  AMOS  AT  BETEEL.  137

sanctuaries  of  Israel  shall  be  laid  waste ;  and  I  will  rise  against  the  house  of
Jeroboam  with  the  sword."  ^  Yet  Jeroboam  had  by  this  time  gained  all
his  victories,  and  never  before  had  the  King  of  Samaria  appeared  to  be  more
firmly  seated  on  the  throne  :  what,  then,  did  this  intruder  mean  by  introducing
himself  as  a  messenger  of  wrath  in  the  name  of  Jahveh,  at  the  very  moment
when  Jahveh  was  furnishing  His  worshippers  with  abundant  signs  of  His  favour  ?
Amaziah,  the  priest  of  Bethel,  interrupted  him  as  he  went  on  to  declare  that
"  Jeroboam  should  die  by  the  sword,  and  Israel  should  surely  be  led  away
captive  out  of  his  land."  The  king,  informed  of  what  was  going  on,  ordered
Amos  into  exile,  and  Amaziah  undertook  to  communicate  this  sentence  to  him :
"  0  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee  away  into  the  land  of  Judah,  and  there  eat  bread,
and  prophesy  there  :  but  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at  Bethel :  for  it  is  the
king's  sanctuary,  and  it  is  a  royal  house."  And  Amos  replied,  "  I  was  no
prophet,  neither  was  I  a  prophet's  son ;  but  I  was  a  herdman,  and  a  dresser  of
sycomore  trees  :  and  the  Lord  took  me  from  following  the  flock,  and  the  Lord
said  unto  me.  Go,  prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel.  Now  therefore  hear  thou
the  word  of  the  Lord :  Thou  sayest.  Prophesy  not  against  Israel,  and  drop  not
thy  word  against  the  house  of  Isaac :  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord :  Thy  wife
shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  city,  and  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall  fall  by  the
sword,  and  thy  land  shall  be  divided  by  line  ;  and  thou  thyself  shalt  die  in  a
land  that  is  unclean,  and  Israel  shall  surely  be  led  away  captive  out  of  his
land."  '^  This  prophecy,  first  expanded,  and  then  written  down  with  a  purity  of
diction  and  loftiness  of  thought  which  prove  Amos  to  have  been  a  master  of
literary  art,^  was  widely  circulated,  and  gradually  gained  authority  as  portents
indicative  of  the  divine  wrath  began  to  accumulate,  such  as  an  earthquake
which  occurred  two  years  after  the  incident  at  Bethel,*  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,
drought,  famine,  and  pestilence.^     It  foretold,  in  the  first  place,  the  downfall  of

'  There  has  been  much  controversy  as  to  whether  the  words  spoken  at  Bethel  are  contained  in
the  third  or  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Uoo?;  of  Amos  as  we  now  have  it.  Cornill  is  of  opinion  that
in  the  visions  described  in  chaps,  vii.-ix.  we  have  tlie  substance,  if  not  the  form,  of  this  first  prophecy
(JlXnleitumj  in  dasAlte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  176,  177).  The  verse  quoted  above  (^hws  vii.  9)  gives,
at  any  rate,  its  general  tenor,  and  fiada  a  pendant  in  the  reply  made  by  the  prophet  to  Amaziah  {Amos
vii.  16)  towards  the  end  of  the  scene.

'  Amos  vii.  9-17.

^  S.  Jerome  describes  Amos  as  "  rusticus "  and  "  imperitus  sermone,"  but  modern  writers  are
generally  agreed  that  in  putting  forward  this  view  he  was  influenced  by  the  statement  as  to  the
peasant  origin  of  the  prophet.  As  to  the  characteristics  of  his  style  and  method  of  composition,
of.,  amongst  others,  Driver,  An  Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  5th  edit.,  p.  29.
The  existing  text  has  been  modified  in  places,  and  some  critics  claim  to  have  detected  interpolations,
especially  in  the  verses  referring  to  Judah  (Wellhausen,  Skizzen  und  Vorarbeiten,  vol.  v.  p.  69,  et  seq.) ;
Cornill  (Eirdeitung,  pp.  177,  178)  objects  merely  to  the  passages  pointed  out  by  Duhm  {Die  Theologie
der  Propheten,  p.  119),  i.e.  the  passages  ii.  4,  5;  iv.  13;  v.  S,  9;  ix.  5,  6,  and  perhaps  a  part  of  vi.  1.

'  Amos  i.  1 ;  reference  is  made  to  it  by  the  unknown  prophet  whose  words  are  preserved  in
Zech.  xiv.  5.

°  The  famine  is  mentioned  in  Amos  iv.  6,  the  drought  in  Amos  iv.  7,  S,  the  pestilence  in  Amos
iv.  10;   the  pestilence  was   perhaps  one  of  those  mentioned  in  the  Eponym   Canon  for  76o  and


138      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  OBGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

all  the  surrounding  countries — Damascus,  Gaza,  Tyre,  Edom,  Ammon,  Moab,  and
Judah  ;  then,  denouncing  Israel  itself,  condemned  it  to  the  same  penalties  for  the
same  iniquities.  In  vain  did  the  latter  plead  its  privileges  as  the  chosen  people
of  Jahveh,  and  seek  to  atone  for  its  guilt  by  endless  sacrifices.  "  I  hate,  I  despise
your  feasts,"  declared  Jahveh,  "  and  I  will  take  no  delight  in  your  solemn
assemblies.  Yea,  though  ye  offer  Me  your  burnt  offerings  and  meat  offerings,  I
will  not  accept  them :  neither  will  I  regard  the  peace  offerings  of  your  fat  beasts.
Take  thou  away  from  Me  the  noise  of  thy  songs ;  for  I  will  not  hear  the  melody
of  thy  viols.  But  let  judgment  roll  down  as  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a
mighty  stream."  ^  The  unfaithfulness  of  Israel,  the  corruption  of  its  cities,  the
pride  of  its  nobles,  had  sealed  its  doom  ;  even  at  that  moment  the  avenger  was
at  hand  on  its  north-eastern  border,  the  Assyrian  appointed  to  carry  out  sentence
upon  it.^  Then  follow  visions,  each  one  of  which  tends  to  deepen  the  effect  of
the  seer's  words — a  cloud  of  locusts,^  a  devouring  iire,*  a  plumb-line  in  the  hands
of  the  Lord,^  a  basket  laden  with  summer  fruit " — till  at  last  the  whole  people  of
Israel  take  refuge  in  their  temple,  vainly  hoping  that  there  they  may  escape
from  the  vengeance  of  the  Eternal.  "  There  shall  not  one  of  them  flee  away,
and  there  shall  not  one  of  them  escape.  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence
shall  Mine  hand  take  them  ;  and  though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence  will
I  bring  them  down.  And  though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel,  I
will  search  and  take  them  out  thence ;  and  though  they  be  hid  from  My  sight
in  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  thence  will  I  command  the  serpent,  and  he  shall  bite
them.  And  though  they  go  into  captivity  before  their  enemies,  thence  will  I
command  the  sword,  and  it  shall  slay  them ;  and  I  will  set  Bline  eyes  upon
them  for  evil  and  not  for  good."'  For  the  first  time  in  history  a  prophet  fore-
told disaster  and  banishment  for  a  whole  people :  love  of  country  was  already
giving  place  in  the  heart  of  Amos  to  his  conviction  of  the  universal  jurisdiction
of  God,  and  this  conviction  led  him  to  regard  as  possible  and  probable  a  state  of
things  in  which  Israel  should  have  no  part.  Nevertheless,  its  decadence  was  to
be  merely  temporary ;  Jahveh,  though  prepared  to  chastise  the  posterity  of
Jacob  severely,  could  not  bring  Himself  to  destroy  it  utterly.  The  kingdom
of  David  was  soon  to  flourish  anew :  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,

759  (ScHKADEK,  Keilinsclirijtliche  BibUotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  210-213),  which  probably  extended  over  the
whole  of  TVestern  Asia.  So,  too,  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  (_Amos  viii.  9)  may  perh-.ipa  be  identical
with  that  which  occurred  in  763,  in  the  month  of  Sivan  (Schbader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothelc,
vol.  i.  pp.  210,  211).  '  Amos  v.  21-24.

-  Most  commentators  admit  that  the  nation  raised  up  by  Jahveh  to  oppress  Israel  "  from  the
entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  broolc  of  the  Arabah  "  (Amos  vi.  14)  was  no  other  than  Assyria.  At
the  very  period  in  which  Amos  flourished,  Assnrdan  made  two  campaigns  against  Hadrach,  in  765
and  755,  which  brought  his  armies  right  up  to  the  Israelite  frontier  (Schbader,  Keilinschriftliche
Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  210-213).  =  Amos  vii.  1-3.  '  Amos  vii.  4-G.

5  Amos  vii.  7-9.  It  is  here  that  the  speech  delivered  by  the  prophet  at  Bethel  is  supposed  to
occur  (vii.  9 ;  of.  pp.  136, 137,  supra) ;  the  narrative  of  what  afterwards  happened  follows  immediately
(.dmos  vii.  10-17).  "  ^mos  viii.  1-3.  '  .4«(os  is.  1-4.


DENUNCIATION  OF  ISRAEL   BY  EOSEA.  139

that  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and  the  treader  of  grapes  him  that
soweth  seed ;  and  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall
melt.  And  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  My  people  Israel,  and  they  shall
build  the  waste  cities,  and  inhabit  them ;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and
drink  the  wine  thereof ;  they  shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.
And  I  will  plant  them  upon  their  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  plucked  up
out  of  their  land  which  I  have  given  them,  saith  the  Lord  thy  God."  ^

The  voice  of  Amos  was  not  the  only  one  raised  in  warning.  From  the  midst
of  Ephraim,  another  seer,  this  time  a  priest,  Hosea,  son  of  Beeri,^  was  never
weary  of  reproaching  the  tribes  with  their  ingratitude,  and  persisted  in  his
foretelling  of  the  desolation  to  come.  The  halo  of  grandeur  and  renown  with
which  Jeroboam  had  surrounded  the  kingdom  could  not  hide  its  wretched  and
paltry  character  from  the  prophet's  eyes ;  "  for  yet  a  little  while,  and  I  will
avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  Jehu,  and  will  cause  the  kingdom
of  the  house  of  Israel  to  cease.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day  that  I
will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel."  ^  Like  his  predecessor,
he,  too,  inveighed  against  the  perversity  and  unfaithfulness  of  his  people-
The  abandoned  wickedness  of  Gomer,  his  wife,  had  brought  him  to  despair.
In  the  bitterness  of  his  heart,  he  demands  of  Jahveh  wliy  He  should  have
seen  fit  to  visit  such  humiliation  on  His  servant,  and  persuades  himself  that  the
faithlessness  of  which  he  is  a  victim  is  but  a  feeble  type  of  that  which  Jahveh
had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  His  people.  Israel  had  gone  a-whoring  after
strange  gods,  and  the  day  of  retribution  for  its  crimes  was  not  far  distant  :
"The  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  king  and  without
prince,  and  without  sacrifice  and  without  pillar,  and  without  ephod  or
teraphim:  afterward  shall  the  children  of  Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord
their  God,  and  David  their  king;  and  shall  come  with  fear  unto  the  Lord
and  to  His  goodness  in  the  latter  days."  *     Whether  the  decadence  of  the

'  Amos  is.  13-15.

-  Hoebea  (or  Hosea)  was  regarded  by  the  rabbis  as  the  oldest  of  the  lesser  prophets,  and  his
writings  were  placed  at  the  head  of  their  collected  works.  The  title  of  his  book  (flbs.  i.  1),  where
he  begins  by  stating  that  he  preached  "  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam,  the  sou  of  Joash  (Jehoash),  King  of
Israel,"  is  a  later  interpolation ;  the  additional  mention  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,
kings  of  Judah,  is  due  to  an  attempted  analogy  with  the  title  of  Isaiah  (Driver,  An  Introduction,  to
the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  5th  edit.,  pp.  282,  283).  Hosea  was  familiar  with  the  prophecies
of  Amos,  and  his  own  predictions  show  that  the  events  merely  foreseen  by  his  predecessor  were  now
in  course  of  fulfilment  in  his  day.  The  first  three  chapters  probably  date  from  the  end  of  the  reigu
of  Jeroboam,  about  750  B.C. ;  the  others  were  compiled  under  liis  successors,  and  before  734-733  B.C.
since  Gilead  is  there  mentioned  as  still  forming  part  of  Israel  (^Hos.  vi.  8  ;  xii.  12),  though  it  was  in
that  year  laid  waste  and  conquered  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (cf.  p.  187,  infra).  Duhm  (Die  Theologie
der  Propheten,  p.  130)  has  suggested  that  Hosea  must  have  been  a  priest  from  the  tone  of  his  writings,
and  this  hypothesis  is  generally  accepted  by  theologians  (Stade,  Geschichte  des  VoUces  Israel,  vol.  i.
pp.  577,  578 ;  Cobnill,  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  172).

'  Bos.  i.  4,  5  ;  cf.  p.  85,  sujtra.

*  Hos.  i.-iii.     Is  the  story  of  Hosea  and  liis  wife  an  allegory,  or  does  it  rest  on  a  basis  of  actual


14U      TIOLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Hebrews  was  or  was  not  due  to  the  purely  moral  and  religious  causes  indicated
by  the  prophets,  it  was  only  too  real,  and  even  the  least  observant  among
their  contemporaries  must  have  suspected  that  the  two  kingdoms  were
quite  unfitted,  as  to  their  numbers,  their  military  organisation,  and  monetary
reserves,  to  resist  successfully  any  determined  attack  that  might  be  made
upon  them  by  surrounding  nations.  An  armed  force  entering  Syria  by  way
of  the  Euphrates  could  hardly  fail  to  overcome  any  opposition  that  might
be  offered  to  it,  if  not  at  the  first  onset,  at  any  rate  after  a  very  brief  struggle ;
none  of  the  minor  states  to  be  met  upon  its  way,  such  as  Damascus  or  Israel,
much  less  those  of  Hamath  or  Hadrach,  were  any  longer  capable  of  barring
its  progress,  as  Ben-hadad  and  Hazael  had  arrested  that  of  the  Assyrians
in  the  time  of  Shalmaneser  III.  The  efforts  then  made  by  the  Syrian  kings
to  secure  their  independence  had  exhausted  their  resources  and  worn  out  the
spirit  of  their  peoples ;  civil  war  had  prevented  them  from  making  good  their
losses  during  the  breathing-space  afi"orded  by  the  decadence  of  Assyria,  and
now  that  Nature  herself  had  afflicted  them  with  the  crowning  misfortunes
of  famine  and  pestilence,  they  were  reduced  to  a  mere  shadow  of  what  they
had  been  during  the  previous  century.  If,  therefore,  Sharduris,  after  making
himself  master  of  the  countries  of  the  Taurus  and  Amanos,  had  turned  his
steps  towards  the  valley  of  the  Orontes,  he  might  have  secured  possession
of  it  without  much  difficulty,  and  after  that  there  would  have  been  nothing
to  prevent  his  soldiers  from  pressing  on,  if  need  be,  to  the  walls  of  Samaria
or  even  of  Jerusalem  itself.  Indeed,  he  seems  to  have  at  last  made  up  his
mind  to  embark  on  this  venture,  when  the  revival  of  Assyrian  power  put
a  stop  to  his  ambitious  schemes.  Tiglath-pileser,  hard  pressed  on  every  side
by  daring  and  restless  foes,  began  by  attacking  those  who  were  at  once  the
most  troublesome  and  most  vulnerable — the  Aramaean  tribes  on  the  banks
of  the  Tigris.  To  give  these  incorrigible  banditti,  who  boldly  planted  their
outposts  not  a  score  of  leagues  from  his  capital,  a  free  hand  on  his  rear,  and
brave  the  fortune  of  war  in  Armenia  or  Syria,  without  first  teaching  them
a  lesson  in  respect,  would  have  been  simply  to  court  serious  disaster;  an
Aramcean  raid  occurring  at  a  time  when  he  was  engaged  elsewhere  with  the
bulk  of  his  army,  might  have  made  it  necessary  to  break  off  a  successful
campaign  and  fall  back  in  haste  to  the  relief  of  Nineveh  or  Calah  (Kalakh),
just  as  he  was  on  the  eve  of  gaining  some  decisive  advantage.  Moreover,
the  suzerainty  of  Assyria  over  Karduniash  entailed  on  him  the  duty  of  safe-
guarding Babylon  from  that  other  horde  of  Aramaeans  which  harassed  it  on

fact?  Most  critics  now  seem  to  incline  to  the  view  that  the  prophet  has  here  set  down  an  authentic
episode  from  his  own  career,  and  uses  it  to  point  the  moral  of  his  work  (Bleek  and  Wellhacsen,
Einleitung,  4tli  edit.,  pp.  406—108 :  Robertson  Smith,  The  Prophets,  p.  179,  et  seq. ;  Coknill,  Einleitung
ill  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  172).


EAELY   CAMPAIGNS   IN  EARDUNIASH  AND   MEDIA.


141


the  east,  while  the  Kalda  were  already  threatening  its  southern  frontier.  It
is  not  quite  clear  whether  Nabunazir  who  then  occupied  the  throne  implored
his  help :  ^  at  any  rate,  he  took  the  field  as  soon  as  he  felt  that  his  own  crown
was  secure,  overthrew  the  Aramaeans  at  the  first  encounter,  and  drove  them
back  from  the  banks  of  the  Lower  Zab  to  those  of  the  Uknu :  all  the  countries
which  they  had  seized  to  the  east  of  the  Tigris  at  once  fell  again  into  the
hands  of  the  Assyrians.  This  first  point  gained,  Tiglath-pileser  crossed
the  river,  and  made  a
demonstration  in  force
before  the  Babylonian
fortresses.  He  visited,
one  after  another.  Sip-
par,  Nipur,  Babylon,
Borsijjpa,  Kuta,  Kishu,
Dilbat,and  Uruk,  "cities
without  peer,"  and  of-
fered in  all  of  them  sacri-
fices to  the  gods, — to
Bel,  to  Zirbanit,  to  Nebo,
to  Tashmit,  and  to  Nir-
gal.  Karduniash  bowed
down  before  him,  but  he
abstained  from  giving
any  provocation  to  the
Kalda,  and  satisfied  with  having  convinced  Nabunazir  that  Assyria  had  lost  none
of  her  former  vigour,  he  made  his  way  back  to  his  hereditary  kingdom.'-^  The
lightly-won  success  of  this  expedition  produced  the  looked-for  result.  Tiglath-
pileser  had  set  out  a  king  de  facto ;  but  now  that  the  gods  of  the  ancient
sanctuaries  had  declared  themselves  satisfied  with  his  homage,^  and  had  granted
him  that  religious  consecration  which  had  before  been  lacking,  he  returned  a
king  de  jure  as  well*  (745  B.C.).    His  next  campaign  completed  what  the  first  had

'  Nabunazir  is  the  Nabonassar  who  afterwards  gave  bis  name  to  the  era  employed  by  Ptolemy.

^  Most  historians  believe  that  Tiglath-pileser  entered  Karduniash  as  an  enemy;  that  he  captured
several  towns,  and  allowed  the  others  tu  ransom  themselves  on  payment  of  tribute  (Ed.  Meyer,
Gesehichte  des  AUerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  4iG,  417;  Tiele,  Bahyhnisch-assyrische  GescldcMe,  pp.  217,  218;
Delitzsch  and  Murdter,  GescTizV/ife  Bahijloniens  und  ^ssjri'en*,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  180, 181;  RosT.DieEeil-
schrifttexie  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  13, 14).  The  way  in  which  the  texts  known  to  us  refer  to  this
expedition  seems  to  me,  however,  to  prove  that  he  set  out  as  an  ally  and  protector  of  Nabonazir,
and  that  his  visit  to  the  Babylonian  sanctuaries  was  of  a  purely  pacific  nature — a  view  shared  by
liOMMEL,Gesch. Bab.  und  Ass.,  fp.  651,652;  and "Wincklek,  Gesch.Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  121-123,222,  223.

'  Nimroud  Inscrip.,  Obv.,11. 11  and  12  ;  cf.  Eost,  Keihchrifltexie  Tiijlat-Pileser's  III.,  pp.  56,  57.

*  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  HI,  11.  1-20 ;  Great  Inscription  of  Khorsahad,  No.  1,  11.  1-7,  13-16,  and
No.  2, 11. 1-11  ;  Nimroud  Insei-ip.,  Obv.,  11.  5-13 ;  cf.  EosT,  Eeilschrifltexte  Tiglat-Fileser's  III,  vol.  i.
pp.  2-5,  42-45, 48-51,  54-57.  I  follow  Tiele  (_Bab.-ass.  Gesehichte,  pp.  227,  228,  235, 236)  in  placing  the
submission  of  the  Pukudu  and  .\ramffian  settlers  on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf  in  the  year  731  B.C.


C  UIPAIGN'!

TIGLATH  PILE  SER  III

n   MEDIA

Scale


_2i=.


142      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

begun.  The  subjugation  of  the  plain  would  have  been  of  little  advantage  if  the
highlands  had  been  left  in  the  power  of  tribes  as  yet  unconquered,  and  allowed
to  pour  down  with  impunity  bands  of  rapacious  freebooters  on  the  newly  liberated
provinces:  security  between  the  Zab  and  the  Ukuu  could  only  be  attained  by
the  pacification  of  Namri,  and  it  was,  therefore,  to  Namri  that  the  seat  of  war
was  transferred  in  744  B.C.  All  the  Cossoean  and  Babylonian  races  intermingled
in  the  valleys  on  the  frontier  were  put  to  ransom  one  after  another.  These
included  the  Bit-Sangibuti,  the  Bit-Khamban,  the  Barrua,  the  Bit-Zualzash,  the
Bit-Matti,  the  Undiash,  the  Parsua,  the  Bit-Zatti,  the  Bit-Zabdadani,  the  Bit-
Ishtar,  the  city  of  Zakruti,  the  Nina,  the  Bustus,  the  Arakuttu,  by  which  the  con-
queror gradually  made  his  way  into  the  heart  of  Media,  reaching  districts  i  nto
which  none  of  his  predecessors  had  ever  penetrated.^  Those  least  remote  he
annexed  to  his  own  empire,  converting  them  into  a  province  under  the  rule  of
an  Assyrian  governor;  he  then  returned  to  Calah  with  a  convoy  of  60,500
prisoners,  and  countless  herds  of  oxen,  sheep,  mules,  and  dromedaries.  "Whilst
he  was  thus  employed,  Assur-dainani,  one  of  his  generals  to  whom  he  had
entrusted  the  pick  of  his  army,  pressed  on  still  further  to  the  north-east,
across  the  almost  waterless  deserts  of  Media.  The  mountainous  district  on
the  shores  of  the  Caspian  had  for  centuries  enjoyed  a  reputation  for  wealth  and
fertility  among  the  races  settled  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris.
It  was  from  thence  that  they  obtained  their  lapis-lazuli,  and  the  hills  from
which  it  was  extracted  were  popularly  supposed  to  consist  almost  entirely  of
one  compact  mass  of  this  precious  mineral.  Their  highest  peak,  now  known
as  the  Demavend,  was  then  called  Bikni,  a  name  which  had  come  to  be
applied  to  the  whole  district.  To  the  Assyrians  it  stood  as  the  utmost
boundary  mark  of  the  known  world,  beyond  which  their  imagination  pictured
little  more  than  a  confused  mist  of  almost  fabulous  regions  and  peoples.
Assur-dainani  caught  a  distant  glimpse  of  the  snow-capped  pyramid  of
Demavend,  but  approached  no  nearer  than  its  lower  slopes,  whence  he  retraced
his  steps  after  having  levied  tribute  from  their  inhabitants.  The  fame  of
this  exploit  spread  far  and  wide  in  a  marvellously  short  space  of  time,  and

'  The  presence  of  such  names  as  Zikruti,  Arakuttu,  Ariarma,  and  Nissa  in  the  list  of  conquered
nations  led  Norris  {Assyrian  Dictionary,  s.v.  Namri,  Zikruti,  Ariarva,  Arakuttu)  and  Fr.  Lenormant
{Sur  la  camparine  de  T^glathphalazar  II.  dans  VAriane,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1870,  pp.  48-56,  69-71)  to
believe  that  Tiglath-pileser  III.  bad  made  liis  way  into  Ariana  and  Arachosia,  and  as  far  as  the
valley  of  the  Indus.  This  lempting  hypothesis  was  overthrown  by  Patkauoff,  whose  paper,  being
written  in  Eussian,  has  remained  inaccessible  to  most  scholars ;  then  by  Delattre  (Estjuisse  de
Geographie  assyriemu;  pp.  40-19,  and  Le  Peuple  et  la  langue  des  M^des,  pp.  85-99).  More  recently
Rost  again  called  attention  to  the  subject,  and  adopted  on  his  own  account  several  of  the  identifica-
tiousformcrly  put  forward  by  Fr.  Lenormant(Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,vol.  i.  p.  xvi.  No.  2)

-  The  country  of  Bikni  is  probably  Ehagian  Media  (Delattbe,  Le  Peuple  et  V Empire  des  Me'des,
p.  101)  and  Mount  Bikni,  the  modern  Demavend  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  mid  Ass.,  p.  053,  note  5;
WiNCKLER,  Gesch.  Bah.  find  Ass.,  270;  KosT,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  vol,  i.  p.  xvii.).


TIGLATH-PILESER   ATTACKS    URARTU  IN  SYRIA.


143


chiefs  who  till  thea  had  vacillated  ia  their  decision  now  crowded  the  path
of  the  victor,  eager  to  pay  him  homage  on  his  return :  even  the  King  of
Illipi  thought  it  wise  to  avoid  the  risk  of  invasion,  and  hastened  of  his  own
accord  to  meet  the  conqueror.  Here,  again,  Tiglath-pileser  had  merely  to
show  himself  in  order  to  re-establish  the  supremacy  of  Assyria:  the  races  of
the  plain,  for  many  years  familiar  with  defeat,  made  no  pretence  of  serious
resistance,  but  bowed  their  necks  beneath  a  fresh  yoke  almost  without  protest.^
Having  thus  secured  his  rear  from  attack  for  some  years  at  any  rate,  Tiglath-
pileser  no  longer  hesitated  to  try
conclusions   with   Urartu.     The


T-*


7..^


-5v>^


s?***^::  >  Bv"!  i^


'SfK


.*";  ^^^


rnihCIlAL   lEAK    01     AIOCM    BIKNI

(demavexd).-


struggle  in  which  he  now  deliberately  engaged  could  not  fail  to  be  a  decisive
one;  for  Urartu,  buoyed  up  and  borne  on  the  wave  of  some  fifty  years  of
prosperity,  had  almost  succeeded  in  reaching  first  rank  among  the  Asiatic
powers :  one  more  victory  over  Nineveh,  and  it  would  become — for  how  long,
none  might  say — undisputed  mistress  of  the  whole  of  Asia.  Assyria,  on  the
other  hand,  had  reached  a  point  where  its  whole  future  hung  upon  a  single
issue  of  defeat  or  victory.  The  prestige  with  which  the  brilliant  campaigns
of  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.  had  invested  its  name,  if  somewhat
diminished,  had  still  survived  its  recent  reverses,  and  the  terror  inspired  by
its   arms  was    so    sreat   even   among   races  who  had  witnessed  them  from  a

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  26-58;  Great  Insc.  of  Khm-sabad,  :No.  1,  11.  17-20,  and  No.  2,
11. 18-29  ;  Nimroud  Inscr.,  Obv.,  11.  29-42 ;  cf.  Schrader,  hischr.  Tiglath-Pikser's  III,  in  the  Keil.  Bibl ,
vol.  ii.  pp.  6, 7, 1 6-19,  and  Rost,  Die  Keilschr.  TiyhU-Pileser's  III,  vol.  1.  pp.  6-11,  41,  45, 50, 51,  62-67.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Morgan  ;  of.  J.  de  Morgan,  Mission  Scientijlque
en  Perse,  vol.  i.  pi.  1.


144      TIOLATE-FILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

distance,  that  the  image  of  Assyria  rose  involuntarily  before  the  eyes  of  the
Hebrew  prophets  as  that  of  the  avenger  destined  to  punish  Israel  for  its
excesses.^  No  doubt,  during  the  last  few  reigns  its  prosperity  had  waned
and  its  authority  over  distant  provinces  had  gradually  become  relaxed ;
but  now  the  old  dynasty,  worn  out  by  its  owu  activity,  had  given  place  to
a  new  one,  and  with  this  change  of  rulers  the  tide  of  ill-fortune  was,  perhaps,
at  last  about  to  turn.  At  such  a  juncture,  a  successful  campaign  meant  full
compensation  for  all  past  disasters  and  the  attainment  of  a  tirmer  position  than
had  ever  yet  been  held  ;  whereas  another  reverse,  following  on  those  from
which  the  empire  had  already  suffered,  would  render  their  effect  tenfold  more
deadly,  and,  by  letting  loose  the  hatred  of  those  whom  fear  alone  still  held  in
check,  complete  its  overthrow.  It  was  essential,  therefore,  before  entering
on  the  struggle,  to  weigh  well  every  chance  of  victory,  and  to  take  every  pre-
caution by  which  adverse  contingencies  might  be,  as  far  as  possible,  eliminated.
The  army,  encouraged  by  its  success  in  the  two  preceding  campaigns,  was
in  excellent  fighting  order,  and  ready  to  march  in  any  direction  without
a  moment's  hesitation,  confident  in  its  ability  to  defeat  the  forces  of  Urartu
as  it  had  defeated  those  of  the  Medes  and  Aramaeans ;  but  the  precise  point
of  attack  needed  careful  consideration.  Tiglath-pileser  must  have  been  sorely
tempted  to  take  the  shortest  route,  challenge  the  enemy  at  his  most  vulnerable
point  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Van,  and  by  a  well-aimed  thrust  deal  him  a  blow
from  which  he  would  never,  or  only  by  slow  degrees,  recover.  But  this  vital
region  of  Urartu,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,^  presented  the  greatest
difficulties  of  access.  The  rampart  of  mountain  and  forest  by  which  it  was
protected  on  the  Assyrian  side  could  only  be  traversed  by  means  of  a  few
byways,  along  which  bands  of  guerrillas  could  slip  down  easily  enough  to  the
banks  of  the  Tigris,  but  which  were  quite  impassable  to  an  army  in  full
marching  order,  hampered  by  its  horses,  chariots,  and  baggage-train  :  com-
pelled to  thread  its  way,  with  columns  unduly  extended,  through  the  woods
and  passes  of  an  unknown  country,  which  daily  use  had  long  made  familiar
to  its  adversaries,  it  would  have  run  the  risk  of  being  cut  to  pieces  man  by
man  a  dozen  times  before  it  could  hope  to  range  its  disciplined  masses  on
the  field  of  battle.  Former  Assyrian  invasions  had,  as  a  general  rule,  taken
an  oblique  course  towards  some  of  the  spurs  of  this  formidable  chain,  and
had  endeavoured  to  neutralise  its  defences  by  outflanking  them,  either  by
proceeding  westwards  along  the  basins  of   the  Supnat  and  the  Arzania,  or

•  Cf.  the  passage  in  Amos  (vi.  4)  referred  to  on  pp.  137,  13S,  supra.

'  As  to  the  difficulties  of  an  attack  ou  Urartu  by  the  most  direct  route,  cf.,  in  addition  to  what
has  been  said  on  p.  54,  supra,  the  remarks  made  by  Belck  in  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ein  neuer  Herrscher
von  Clmldia,  in  the  Zeitscltrijt  fur  Aasyriologie,  vol.  is.  p.  350,  note  1.  Our  knowledge  of  the  country
is  as  yet  too  scanty  to  allow  us  to  regard  the  i^uestion  as  finally  decided.


THE  DEFEAT  OF  SEARDUEIS.


145


eastwards  through  the  countries  bordering  on  Lake  Urumiah ;  but  even  this
method  presented  too  many  difficulties  and  too  little  certainty  of  success  to
warrant  Tiglath-pileser  in  staking  the  reviving  fortunes  of  his  empire  on  its
adoption.  He  rightly  argued  that  Sharduris  would  be  most  easily  vulnerable
in  those  provinces  whose  allegiance  to  him  was  of  recent  date,  and  he  resolved
to  seek  out  liis  foe  in  the  heart  of  Northern  Syria.  There,  if  anywhere,  every
chance  was  in  his  favour  and  against  the  Armenian.  The  scene  of  operations,
while  it  had  long  been  familiar  to  his  own  generals  and  soldiers,  was,  on  the
other  hand,  entirely  new  ground  to  those  of  the  enemy ;  the  latter,  though


VIEW    OP    THE   MOUNTAINS    WHICH    GUARD    THE   SOUTHERN   BOKDEU   OF    UKAETU.'

unsurpassed  in  mountain  warfare,  lost  much  of  their  superiority  on  the
plains,  and  could  not,  with  all  their  courage,  make  up  for  their  lack  of
experience.  Moreover,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  a  victory  on  the  banks
of  the  Afrin  or  the  Orontes  would  have  more  important  results  than  a
success  gained  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lakes  or  of  Urartu.  Not  only
would  it  free  the  Assyrians  from  the  only  one  of  their  enemies  whom  they  had
any  cause  to  fear,  but  it  would  also  bring  back  the  Hittite  kings  to  their
allegiance,  and  restore  the  Assyrian  supremacy  over  the  wealthiest  regions
of  AVestern  Asia :  they  would  thus  disable  Urartu  and  reconquer  Syria  at  one
and  the  same  time.  Tiglath-pileser,  therefore,  crossed  the  Euphrates  in  the
spring  of  743  B.C.,  neither  Matilu  of  Agusi,  Kushtashpi  of  Kummukh,  nor  their
allies  daring  to  interfere  with  his  progress.     He  thus  advanced  as  far  as  Arpad,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Biuder,  furnished  by  Fatlier  Scheil ;  it  was  taken
at  Julamerli,  near  the  junction  of  the  mountain  tracks  leading  from  the  Zab  valley  to  the  south-
eastern corner  of  the  basiu  of  Lake  Van.


146      TIOLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

and,  in  the  first  moment  of  surprise,  the  town  threw  open  its  gates  before  him.^
There,  while  lie  was  making  ready  to  claim  the  homage  of  the  surrounding
countries,  he  learnt  that  Sharduris  was  hastening  up  to  the  rescue.  He  at  once
struck  his  camp  and  marched  out  to  meet  his  rival,  coming  up  with  him  in  the
centre  of  Kummukh,  not  far  from  the  Euphrates,  between  Kishtan  and  Khalpi.
Sharduris  was  at  the  bead  of  his  Syrian  contingents,  including  the  forces  of
Agusi,  Melitene,  Kummukh,  and  Gurgum — a  formidable  army,  probably
superior  in  point  of  numbers  to  that  of  the  Assyrians.  The  struggle  lasted
a  whole  day,  and  in  the  course  of  it  the  two  kings,  catching  sight  of  one
another  on  the  field  of  battle,  engaged  in  personal  combat :  at  last,  towards
evening,  the  chariots  and  cavalry  of  Urartu  gave  way  and  the  rout  began.
The  victors  made  their  way  into  the  camp  at  the  heels  of  their  flying
enemies.  Sharduris  abandoned  his  chariot,  and  could  find  nothing  but  a
mare  to  aid  him  in  his  flight;  he  threw  himself  upon  her  back,  careless  of  the
ridicule  at  that  time  attached  to  the  use  of  such  a  mount  in  Eastern  countries,^
fled  at  a  gallop  all  through  the  night,  hard  pressed  by  a  large  body  of
cavalry,  crossed  the  hills  of  Sibak,  and  with  much  difficulty  reached  the
bridge  over  the  Euphrates.  His  pursuers  drew  rein  on  the  river-bank,  and
Sharduris  re-entered  his  kingdom  in  safety.  He  had  lost  nearly  73,000  men,
killed  or  taken  prisoners,  in  addition  to  his  chariots,  and  nearly  the  whole
train  of  horses,  asses,  servants,  and  artisans  attached  to  his  army ;  he  left  his
tent  still  standing,  and  those  who  were  first  to  enter  it  laid  hands  on  his
furniture  and  effects,  his  royal  ornaments,  his  bed  and  portable  throne,  with
its  cushions  and  bearing-poles,  none  of  which  had  lie  found  time  to  take  with
him.  Tiglath-pileser  burnt  them  all  on  the  spot  as  a  thank-offering  to  the
gods  who  had  so  signally  favoured  him ;  the  bed  alone  he  retained,  in  order
that  he  might  dedicate  it  as  a  trophy  to  the  goddess  Ishtar  of  Nineveh.^

He   had   covered   himself  with   glory,  and  might  well   be  proud  of  his
achievement,  yet   the  victory  was  in  no  way  a  decisive  one.      The  damage

'  Different  writers  have  given  different  versions  of  this  campaign.  Some  think,  with  Hommel
{Gescli.  Bah.  und  Au.,  pp.  656,  657)  and  Eost  (Die  Keilschri/ttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.
xis.-sxi.),  that  Arpad  resisted,  and  that  Tiglath-pileser  was  laying  siege  to  it,  when  the  arrival  of
Sharduris  compelled  him  to  retire;  others  prefer  to  believe,  with  Tiele  {Bahylonisdii-assyrische
Geschiclde,  p.  219)  and  Belck  and  Lehmanu  (ChaMische  Forschungen,  in  the  Verlumdlungen  der  Berliner
antliropologischeii  Gesellschaft,  1S9G,  pp.  324-325),  that  Arpad  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians,
■and  that  Tiglath-pileser  used  it  as  his  base  of  operations.  The  formula  ina  Arpadda  in  the  Eponym
Canon  (Sohradek,  Keiliiischriflliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213)  proves  that  Tiglath-pileser  was
certainly  in  Arpad :  since  Arpad  belonged  to  the  Bit-Agusi  and  they  were  the  allies  or  vassals  of
Sharduris,  we  must  assume,  as  I  have  done  here,  that  in  the  absence  of  the  Urartians  they  did  not
dare  to  resist  the  Assyrians,  and  opened  their  gates  to  them.

-'  So,  too,  later  on,  in  the  time  of  Sargon  (Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  lOS,  109),  Eusas,  when  defeated,
gets  on  the  back  of  a  mare  and  rides  off ;  as  to  the  impression  of  distress  and  almost  ridicule  suggested
by  an  action  of  this  kind,  cf.  the  ingenious  comment  in  Belck  and  Lehmanx,  ChakUsclie  Forschungen,
in  the  Verlmndlungen  der  Berliner  anthropologischen  Gesellsdiaft,  189G,  p.  325.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  59-73 ;  Great  Inscription  of  Khorsahad,  No.  1, 11.  29-35  ;  Nimroud
Inscrip.,  Obv.,  11.  45-50 ;  cf.  Eost,  Die  Keihehrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  12-15, 50-53, 66-69.


CAMPAIGN  ABOUND   ARPAD.


147


PLAN    OF    THE    ANCIENT    CITY    OF    ZINJIRLI.^


•^H-


inflicted  on  the  allies,  considerable  though  it  was,  had  cost  him  dear:    the
forces  left  to  him  were  not  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  finish  the  campaign,

and  extort  oaths  of  allegiance  from  the  Syrian
princes  before  they  had  recovered  from  the
first  shock  of  defeat.  He  returned  to  Nineveh,
and  spent  the  whole  winter  in  reorganising  his
troops ;  while  his  enemies,  on  the  other  hand,
made  preparations  to  repel  the  attack  ener-
getically. Sharduris  could  not  yet  venture
outside  his  mountain  strongholds,  but  the
hope  of  being  reinforced  by  him,  as  soon  as  he
had  got  together  another  army,  encouraged
the  Syrian  kings  to  remain  faithful  to  him
in  spite  of  his  reverses.^  Matilu  of  Agusi,
unable  to  carry  the  day  against  the  Assyrians  in  the  open  field,  distributed
his  men  among  his  towns,  and  resisted  all  attacks  with  extraordinary
persistence,  confident  that  >

Sharduris  would  at  length
come  to  help  him,  and  with
this  hope  he  held  out  for
three  years  in  his  town  of
Arpad.  This  protracted
resistance  need  no  longer
astonish  us,  now  that  we
know,  from  observations
made  on  the  spot,  the  mar-
vellous skill  displayed  in
the  fortification  of  these
Asiatic  towns.  The  ruins  of
Arpad  have  yet  to  be  explored,  but  those  of  Samalla  have  been  excavated,  and
show  us  the  methods  adopted  for  the  defence  of  a  royal  residence  about  the
middle  of  the  century  with  which  we  are  now  concerned.*  The  practice  of
building  citadels  on  a  square  or  rectangular  plan,  which  prevailed  so  largely

'  The  part  played  by  SharduriB  in  tlie  events  of  the  years  which  followed,  passing  mention  of  which
was  made  by  Winckler  {Gesdi.  Bab.  uiul  Am.,  pp.  224,  225),  have  been  fully  dealt  with  by  Belck  and
Lehmann  (^Chaldische  Forsehungen,  in  Verhandl.  der  Berliner  anthropol.  Gesellscluift,  1895,  pp.  325-336.)

'  A  reproduction  by  Faucher-Gudin  of  the  iirst  plan  published  by  Luschan,  Ausgrabungen  in  Send-
schirli,  vol.  i.  p.  10.    A  second  and  more  complete  plan  ia  given  in  vol.  ii.  pi.  xxix.  of  the  same  work.

'  Repi-oduction  by  Faucher-Gudiu  of  the  sketch  published  by  Luschan,  Ausgrabungen  in  Send-
schirli,  vol.  ii.  p.  112.     This  interesting  restoration  is  the  work  of  Robert  Koldewey,  the  architect.

*  The  Tel  of  Zinjirli  was  excavated  by  a  German  expedition  in  1892-1807,  and  the  results  were
published,  under  the  superintendence  of  Dr.  von  Luschan,  in  a  fine  work  entitled  Ausgrabungen  in
Sendschirli,  two  volumes  of  which  appeared  in  1896  and  1897.


ONE    OP   THE    gates   OP    ZINJIELI    EESTOKED.^


148      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

under  the  Egyiitian  rule,  had  gradually  gone  out  of  fashion  ^  as  the  knowledge
of  engineering  advanced,  and  the  use  of  mines  and  military  engines  had  been
more  fully  developed  among  the  nations  of  Western  Asia.  It  was  found  that  the
heavily  fortified  angles  of  the  enclosing  wall  merely  presented  so  many  weak
points,  easy  to  attack  but  difScult  to  defend,  no  matter  how  carefully  they
might  be  protected  by  an  accumulation  of  obstacles.  In  the  case  of  fortresses
built  on  a  plain,  where  the  plan  was  not  modified  by  the  nature  of  the
site,  the  enclosing  wall  was  generally  round  or  oval  in  shape,  and  free
from  useless  angles  which  might  detract  from  its  strength.  The  walls  were
surmounted  by  battlements,  and  flanked  at  short  intervals  by  round  or  square
towers,  the  tops  of  which  rose  but  little,  if  indeed  at  all,  above  the  level
of  the  curtain.  In  front  of  this  main  wall  was  a  second  lower  one,  also
furnished  with  towers  and  battlements,  which  followed  the  outline  of  the
first  all  the  way  round  at  an  interval  of  some  yards,  thus  acting  as  a  sort  of
continuous  screen  to  it.  The  gates  were  little  less  than  miniature  citadels
built  into  each  line  of  ramparts ;  the  gate  of  the  outer  wall  was  often
surrounded  by  lower  outworks,  two  square  bastions  and  walls  enclosing  an
outer  quadrangle  which  had  to  be  crossed  before  the  real  gate  was  reached.
When  a  breach  had  been  made  in  this  double  enclosure,  though  the  town  itself
might  be  taken,  the  labours  of  the  attacking  force  were  not  yet  over.  In  the  very
centre  of  the  place,  on  a  sort  of  artificial  mound  or  knoll,  stood  tlie  royal  castle,
and  resistance  on  the  part  of  its  garrison  would  make  it  necessary  for  the
enemy  to  undertake  a  second  siege  no  less  deadly  and  protracted  than  the  first.
The  keep  of  Zinjirli  had  only  a  single  gate  approached  by  a  narrow  causeway.
Within,  it  was  divided  by  walls  into  five  compartments,  each  of  which  was
independent  of  the  rest,  and  had  to  be  attacked  separately.  Matiiu  knew  he
could  hope  for  no  mercy  at  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians ;  he  therefore
struggled  on  to  the  last,  and  when  at  length  obliged  to  surrender,  in  the  year
740  B.C.,  he  paid  for  his  obstinacy  by  the  loss  of  his  throne,  and  perhaps  also
of  his  life.'-^  The  inaction  of  Sharduris  clearly  showed  that  he  was  no  longer
in  a  position  to  protect  his  allies,  and  that  the  backbone  of  his  kingdom  was
broken ;  the  kings  who  had  put  faith  in  his  help  now  gave  him  up,  and
ambassadors  flocked  in  from  all  parts,  even  from  those  which  were  not  as  yet
directly  threatened.  Kushtashpi  of  Kummukh,  Tarkhulara  of  Gurgum,  Pisiris
of  Carchemish,  Uriaik  of  Kui,  came  to  Arpad  in  person  to  throw  themselves  at
the  conqueror's  feet,  ba'ingiug  with  them  offerings  of  gold  and  silver,  of  lead
and  iron,  of  ivory,  carved  and  in  the  tusk,  of  purple,  and  of  dyed  or  embroidered

'  Cf.  what  has  beeu  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  127-130  of  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations.

'  Our  knowledge  of  these  events  is  imperfect,  our  only  information  being  deri\ed  from  the  very
scanty  details  given  in  the  Eponym  Canon  (Schradee,  KeiliuschrifiUche  Bibliotheli,  vol.  i.  pp.  212, 213)  :
up  to  the  present  we  can  do  no  more  than  trace  the  general  course  of  events.


THE  SUBMISSION   OF  NORTHEBN  SYRIA.


149


stuffs,  and  were  coufirmed  in  the  possession  of  their  respective  territories ;
Hiram  II.  of  Tyre,  moreover,  and  Rezin  of  Damascus  sent  their  greetings  to
him.^  The  Patina,  who  in  days  gone  by  had  threatened  the  fortunes  of  Assur-
nazir-pal,  once  again  endeavoured  to  pose  as  the  rivals  of  Assyria,  and  Tutammu,
sovereign  of  Unki,  the  most  daring  of  the  minor  states  into  which  the  Patina
had  been  split  up,  declined  to  take  part  in  the  demonstrations  made  by  his


£  11-tK  \


/i'ac:^r^3'


\i


vr~-


bibd's-ete  view  op  the  royal  castle  of  zinjikli  as  restored.^

neighbours.  Tiglath-pileser  marched  on  Kinalua,  sacked  it,  built  a  fortress
there,  and  left  a  governor  and  garrison  behind  him :  Agusi  and  Unki  hence-
forth sank  to  the  level  of  mere  provinces,  administered  by  royal  officers  in  the
king's  name,  and  permanently  occupied  by  Assyrian  troops.^

Northern  Syria  was  thus  again  incorporated  with  the  empire,  but  Urartu,
although  deprived  of  the  resources  with  which  Syria  had  supplied  it,  continued
to  give  cause  for  apprehension  ;  in  739  B.C.,  however,  a  large  proportion  of  the
districts  of  Nairi,  to  which  it  still  clung,  was  wrested  from  it,  and  a  fortress  was
built  at  Ulluba,  with  a  view  to  providing  a  stable  base  of  operations  at  this

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  83-91  (cf.  Rost,  Die  Keilschrifltexte  Tiglai-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.
pp.  14-17),  where  the  statement  at  the  close  indicates  that  Tiglath-pileser  received  the  tributary
kings  of  Syria  "in  Arpad,"  after  he  had  captured  that  city.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  plan  published  in  Luscham,  Ausgrabungen  in  Sendscliirli,
vol.  ii.  pi.  XXX.  The  restoration,  as  in  the  case  of  the  preceding  woodcut,  is  the  work  of  Kobert
Koklewey,  the  architect.

"  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III,  11.  92-101 ;  cf.  Rost,  Eeilschr.  Tiglat-PilesersIII.,  vol.  i.  pp.  14-17.


150      TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

point  on  the  northern  frontier.*  A  rebellion,  instigated,  it  may  he,  by  his  own
agents,  recalled  Tiglath-pileser  to  the  Amanus  in  the  year  738.  The  petty
kings  who  shared  with  Assyria  the  possession  of  the  mountains  and  plains  of
the  Afrin  could  not  succeed  in  living  at  peace  with  one  another,  and  every
now  and  then  their  disputes  broke  out  into  open  warfare.  Samalla  was  at  that
time  subject  to  a  family  of  which  the  first  members  known  to  history,  Qaral
and  Panammu,  shared  Yaudi  equally  between  them.  Barzur,  son  of  Panammu  I.,
had  reigned  there  since  about  765  B.C.,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  he
must  have  passed  through  the  same  vicissitudes  as  his  neighbours :  faithful  to
Urartu  as  long  as  Sharduris  kept  the  upper  hand,  and  to  Assyria  as  soon  as
Tiglath-pileser  had  humiliated  Urartu,  he  had  been  killed  in  a  skirmish  by
some  rival.  His  son,  Panammu  II.,  came  to  the  throne  merely  as  a  nominee
of  his  suzerain,  and  seems  to  have  always  rendered  him  faithful  service ;  ^
unfortunately,  Yaudi  was  no  longer  subject  to  the  house  of  Panammu,  but
obeyed  the  rule  of  a  certain  Azriyahu,  who  chafed  at  the  presence  of  an  alien
power.^  Azriyahu  took  advantage  of  the  events  which  kept  Tiglath-pileser  fully
occupied  in  the  east,  to  form  a  coalition  in  favour  of  himself  among  the
states  on  the  banks  of  the  Orontes,  including  some  seventeen  provinces,
dependencies  of  Hamath,  and  certain  turbulent  cities  of  Northern  Phoenicia,
such  as  Byblos,  Arka,  Zimyra,  Usnu,  Siannu,  Coele-Syria,  and  even  Hadracli
itself.*     It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  Damascus  and  the  Hebrews  took  part  in

'  Eponym  Canon,  in  Schbadee,  Keil.  Bib.,  vol.  i.  pp.  212, 213,  and  Great  Inscr.  of  Khorsahad,  No.  1,
11.  25-29 ;  cf.  Rost,  Die  Keil.  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  46,  47.  This  campaign  is  regarded  as
having  formed  an  episode  in  the  wars  against  Urartu  by  Hommel  (Gesc/j.  Bab.  u.  Ass.,  pp.  657-659),  by
Winckler  {Gesch.  Bab.  u.  Ass.,  p.  225),  and  by  Eost  (Die  Keil.  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  ssii.,  xxiii.).

-  Our  knowledge  of  these  events  comes  from  the  inscriptions  on  the  statues  at  Zinjirli,  published
and  translated  by  Sachau  (Die  Ausgrabungen  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pis.  vii.,  viii.,  and  pp.  55-84),
subsequently  by  Hale'vy  (Les  Deux  Inscriptions  Hgtgennes  de  Zindjirli,  in  the  Revue  Simitique,  vol.  i.
pp.  138-167,  21S-25S,  319-336,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  25-60).  Apart  from  differences  in  translation,  the
historical  interpretatiozis  of  the  texts  furnished  by  these  two  writers  differ  a  good  deal.  I  have  for
the  most  part  followed  that  given  by  Sachau.

'  Azriyahu  of  Yaudi  was  identified  with  Azariah  of  Judah  by  G.  Smith  (Tfte  Annals  of  Tiglath-Pileser
11,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1869,  pp.  12,  13,  IG),  and  this  identification,  strenuously  supported  by  Schrader
(Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alle  Testament,  1st  edit.,  pp.  114-129,  and  2nd  edit.,  pp.  217-223),  was  for
a  long  time  accepted  without  question  by  most  Assyriologists  (Tiele,  Bahylonisch-asstjriche  Geschiclite,
pp.  530,  531 ;  Hoiimel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  662,  663;  AVls-ckler,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  225, 226 ;
Eost,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers  III,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxii.-sxiv.).  Oppert  rejected  it  from  the
first,  and  suggested  that  this  Azriyahu  was  the  son  of  Tabeel  opposed  by  Pekah  and  Eezin  to  Ahaz,
King  of  Judah  (La  Chronologie  Biblique  jix^e  par  les  Eclipses  des  Inscriptions  cuneiformes,  1869,  pp.
30-35,  and  Salomon  et  ses  successeurs,  1877,  pp.  60-70);  Wellhauaen,  without  adopting  Oppert's
view,  refused  to  be  convinced  by  the  arguments  of  Schrader  (Jahrbiicher  fiir  die  Deutsche  Theologie,
vol.  XX.  pp.  632-699),  cf.  Schrader's  reply  (in  the  Jahrbiicher  fiir  protestantische  Theologie,  1876,  pp.
373-384),  and  Gutschmidt  made  a  violent  attack  on  them  (Neue  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  des  Allen
Orients,  pp.  55-65),  which  called  forth  a  still  more  violent  reply  from  Schrader  (Keilinschriften  und
Geschichfsforschung,  pp.  395-421).  Wiuckler  has  shown  that  the  Yaudi  of  Tiglath-pileser  Ill.'s
inscriptions  ought  to  be  identified  with  the  Tadi  or  Yaudi  of  the  Zinjirli  inscriptions  (cf.  p.  34,  supra),
and  consequently  that  Azriyahu  was  not  king  of  Judah,  but  a  king  of  Northern  Syria  (Altorientalische
Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  1-23).  His  view  has  been  accepted  by  Scheil  (Notes  d'Fpigr.  et  d'Arch.  Assyri-
ennes,  in  t\ie Becueil  de  Travaux,  vul.  xvi.  p.  33),  and  appears  to  me  to  harmonise  so  well  with  what
remains  of  the  texts,  and  with  our  knowledge  of  the  events,  that  I  have  had  no  hesitation  in  adopting  it.

'  The  constitution  of  the  league  is  furnished  almost  in  its  entirety  by  the  list  of  towns  and


THE  HOMAGE   OF  MENAHEM  AND   REZIN  II.  151

this  movement.  Jeroboam  had  died  in  740,  after  a  prosperous  reign  of  forty-
one  years,  and  on  his  death  Israel  seems  to  have  fallen  under  a  cloud :  six
months  later,  his  son  Zechariah  was  assassinated  at  Ibleam  '  by  Shallum,  son  of
Jabesh,  and  the  prophecy  of  Amos,  in  which  he  declared  that  the  house  of
Jeroboam  should  fall  beneath  the  sword  of  Jahveh,-^  was  fulfilled.  Shallum
liimself  reigned  only  one  month  :  two  other  competitors  had  presented  themselves
immediately  after  his  crime  ;^  the  ablest  of  these,  Menahem,  son  of  Gadi,  had
come  from  Tirzah  to  Samaria,  and,  after  suppressing  his  rivals,  laid  hands  on
the  crowu.*  He  must  have  made  himself  master  of  the  kingdom  little  by  little,
the  success  of  his  usurpation  being  entirely  due  to  the  ruthless  energy  invariably
and  everywhere  displayed  by  him ;  as,  for  instance,  when  Tappuakh  (Tiphsah)
refused  to  open  its  gates  at  his  summons,  he  broke  into  the  town  and  slaughtered
its  inhabitants.''  All  the  defects  of  organisation,  all  the  sources  of  weakness,
which  for  the  last  half-century  had  been  obscured  by  the  glories  of  Jeroboam  II.,
now  came  to  the  surface,  and  defied  all  human  efforts  to  avert  their  consequences.
"  Then,"  as  Hosea  complains,  "  is  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  discovered,  and  the
wickedness  of  Samaria;  for  they  commit  falsehood  :  and  the  thief  entereth  in,
and  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth  without.  And  they  consider  not  in  their
hearts  that  I  (Jahveh)  remember  all  their  wickedness :  uow  have  their  own
doings  beset  them  about ;  they  are  before  My  face.  They  make  the  king  glad
with  their  wickedness  and  the  princes  with  their  lies.  They  are  all  adulterers ;
they  are  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker.  .  .  .  They  .  .  .  devour  their  judges  ;
all  their  kings  are  fallen ;  there  is  none  among  them  that  calleth  unto  Me."  '*
In  Judah,  Azariah  (Uzziah)  had  at  first  shown  some  signs  of  ability ;  he  had
completed  the  conquest  of  Idumasa  [Edom],  and  had  fortified  Elath,''  but  he
suddenly  found  himself  stricken  with  leprosy,  and  was  obliged  to  hand  over  the
reins  of  government  to  Jotham.^   His  long  life  had  been  passed  uneventfully,  and

countries  subdued  after  the  defeat  of  Azriyaliu  {Annah  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  124-132 ;  cf.  EosT,
Die  KeiUchrifttexte  Tiglat-Filesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  20-23).

'  The  name  Ibleam,  corrupted  in  the  received  text  (2  Kings  xv.  lU),  has  been  restored  by  Stade
QGescMchte  des  Voll:es  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  375,  note  2).  ^  Amos  vii.  i) ;  cf.  pp.  136,  137,  supra.

'  The  nameless  prophet,  whose  prediction  is  handed  down  to  ua  in  Zech.  ix.-xi.,  speaks  of
three  shepherds  cut  oil'  by  Jahveh  in  one  month  (xi.  8) ;  two  of  these  were  Zechariah  and  Shallum ;
the  third  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Kings.  Ewald  tried  to  identify  him  with  the  mysterious
Koboldin  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xv.  10  (Geschichte  des  Vulkes  Israel,  3rd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  344);  but
Stade  has  shown  that  this  is  not  the  name  of  a  man,  but  of  the  place  where  Zechariah  was  killed,
viz.  Ibleam.  On  the  other  hand,  Niebuhr  proposes  to  identify  this  anonymous  king  with  the  Lemuel
referred  to  iu  Prov.  xxxi.  1,  4  (Die  Chronologie  der  Geschichte  Israels,  lEgypteus,  Bahijlonieiis,  uiul
jlss(/rieyi8,  pp.  25-2S).  '  2  ifi'nys  xiv.  23-29 ;  xv.  S-15.

^  2  Kings  xv.  16.  The  Massoretic  text  gives  the  name  of  the  town  as  Tipsah,  but  the  LXX.  has
Taphot,  which  led  Thenius  to  suggest  Tappuakh  as  an  emendation  of  Tipsah  :  Stade  (_Gesch.  des  Volkes
Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  516)  prefers  the  emendation  Tirzah.  Tappuakh  was  a  town  situated  on  the  borders  of
Ephraim  and  Manasseh  {Josh.  xvi.  8;  xvii.  7,  8).  ''  Bos.  vii.  1-4,  7.

'  2  Kings  xiv.  22;  in  2  Citron,  xxvi.  0-15  he  is  credited  with  the  reorganisation  of  the  army  and
of  the  Judsean  fortresses,  in  addition  to  campaigns  against  the  Philistines  and  Arabs.

'  2  Kings  xv.  5  ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19-21.    Azariah  is  also  abbreviated  into  Uzziah.


152      TIGLATH-PILESER  HI.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.


without  any  disturbance,  under  the  protection  of  Jeroboam ;  but  the  very  same
defects  which  had  led  to  the  ruin  of  Israel  were  at  work  also  in  Judah,  and
Menahem,  in  spite  of  his  enfeebled  condition,  had  nothing  to  fear  in  this
direction.  The  danger  which  menaced  him  came  rather  from  the  east  and  the
north,  where  Damascus,  aroused  from  its  state  of  lethargy  by  Eezou  [Kezin]  II.,
had  again  begun  to  strive  after  the  hegemony  of  Syria.^     All  these  princes,  when

they  found  that  the  ambition  of  Tiglath-

pileser  threatened  to  interfere  with  their

own  intrigues,  were  naturally  tempted  to

ombiue   against    him,    and    were    willing


TlGLATU-riLEbJiU    UI.    IN    HIS    STATE    CHARIOT.-


to  postpone  to  a  more  convenient  season  the  settlement  of  tlieir  own  domestic
quarrels.  But  Tiglath-pileser  did  not  give  them  time  for  this;  he  routed
Azriyahu,  and  laid  waste  Kullani,^  the  chief  centre  of  revolt,  ravaged
the  valley  of  the  Orontes,  and  carried  off  the  inhabitants  of  several  towns,
replacing  them  with  prisoners  taken  the  year  before  during  his  campaign  in
Nairi.  After  this  feat  the  whole  of  Syria  surrendered.  Kezin  and  Menahem
were  among  the  first  to  tender  their  homage,*  and  the  latter  paid  a  thousand
talents  of  silver  for  the  firman  which  definitely  confirmed  his  tenure  of  the
throne ;  the  princes  of  Tyre,  Byblos,  Hamath,  Carchemish,  Milid,  Tabal,  and

'  The  name  of  this  king,  written  Eezin  in  the  Bible  (2  Kings  xv.  37 ;  xvi.  5,  G,  9),  is  given  as  Razunu
in  the  Assyrian  texts  (^Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  83, 150, 20a,  236);  he  was  therefore  Eezun  II.  (as
to  Kezon  I.,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  778).  A  passage  in  the  Annals,  1.  205,  seems  to  indicate  that
Kezin's  fatlier  was  prince  of  a  city  dependent  on  Damascus,  not  king  of  Damascus  itself;  unfortunately
the  text  is  too  much  mutilated  to  warrant  us  in  forming  any  definite  conclusion  on  this  point.

'  Drawu  by  i?aucher-Gudiu,  from  a  sketch  published  by  Latabd,  Nineveh  and  Balylon,  p.  527.

'  Kullani  is  the  Calno  or  Calueb  mentioned  by  Isaiah  (x.  9)  and  Amos  (vi.  2),  which  lay  some-
where between  Arpad  and  Hamatli ;  the  precise  spot  is  not  yet  known  (Tiele,  Eabijlonisch-assyrische
Geschichte,  p.  230 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  660  ;  Winckleb,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  225).

'  The  name  of  Menahem  was  pointed  out  by  Hinoks  in  the  Atlien-eum,  1852,  vol.  i.,  Jan.  3.


THE    WAR   IN   URARTU.


153


several  others  followed  their  example — even  a  certain  Zabibi,  queen  of  an  Arab
tribe,  feeling  compelled  to  send  her  gifts  to  the  conqueror.^

A  sudden  rising  among  the  Aramfean  tribes  on  the  borders  of  Elam
obliged  Tiglath-pileser  to  depart  before  he  had  time  to  take  full  advantage  of
his  opportunity.  The  governors  of  Lullumi  and  Nairi  promptly  suppressed
the  outbreak,  and,  collecting  the  most  prominent  of  the  rebels  together,  sent
them  to  the  king  in  order  that  he  might  distribute  them  throughout  the  cities
of  Syria :  a  colony  of  600  prisoners  from  the  town  of  Amlati  was  established  in


THE    IJOriK    AND    CITADEL   OF    VAN    AT    THE    PRESENT    DAY."

the  territory  of  Damaunu,  5400  from  Dur  were  sent  to  the  fortresses  of  Unki,
Kunalia,  Khuzarra,  Tai,  Tarmanazi,  Kulmadara,  Khatatirra,  and  Sagillu,  while
another  10,000  or  so  were  scattered  along  the  Phoenician  seaboard  and  among
the  adjacent  mountains.^  The  revolt  had  meanwhile  spread  to  the  nations
of  Media,  where  it  was,  perhaps,  fomented  by  the  agents  of  Urartu ;  and
for  the  second  time  within  seven  years  (737  B.C.)  Tiglath-pileser  trampled
underfoot  the  countries  over  which  he  had  ridden  in  triumph  at  the  begin-
ning of  his  career — the  Bit-Kapsi,  the  Bit-Sangibuti,  the  Bit-Tazzakki,  the
Bit-Zualzash,  the  Bit-Matti,  and  Umliash.  The  people  of  Upash,  among  the
Bit-Kapsi,  entrenched  themselves  on  the  slopes  of  Mount  Abirus ;  but  he
carried  their  entrenchments  by  storm.  Ushuru  of  Taddiruta  and  Burdadda
of  Nirutakta  were  seized  with  alarm,  and  hid  themselves  in  their  mountain
gorges ;  but  he  climbed  up  in  pursuit  of  them,  drove  them  out  of  their  hiding-
places,  seized  their  possessions,  and  made  them  prisoners.  Similar  treatment
was  meted  out  to  all  those  who  proved  refractory ;  some  he  despoiled,  others
he   led   captive,   and   "bursting  upon   the  remainder  like  the   downpour   of

'  AnnaU  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  103-133,  150-157;  cf.  Host,  Die  Eeihchrifttexte  Tiglat-Pilesers
III,  vol.  i.  pp.  18-23,  26,  27.  In  the  Eponijm  Canon  this  is  described  as  the  campaign  against
Kullani  (Schrader,  Keilinschri/tliche  BihUothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photogi-aph  by  M.  Binder,  furnished  by  Father  Scheil.

'  Annals,  11.  134-150;  cf.  RoST,  Die  KeiUchrifUexie  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  22-27.


154      TIQLATE-PJLESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Eamnian,"  permitted  none  of  them  to  escape.  He  raised  trophies  all  along  his
line  of  march  :  in  Bau,  a  dependency  of  Bit-Ishtar,  he  set  up  a  pointed  javelin
dedicated  to  Ninip,  on  which  he  had  engraved  a  panegyric  of  the  virtues
of  his  master  Assur;  near  Shilivhazi,  a  town  founded,  in  bygone  days,  by
the  Babylonians,  he  erected  a  statue  of  himself,  and  a  pillar  consecrated  to
Marduk  in  Til-ashshur.^  In  the  following  year  he  again  attacked  Urartu
and  occupied  the  mountain  province  of  Nal,  which  formed  one  of  its  out-
lying defences  (736).^  The  year  after  he  entered  on  the  final  struggle
with  Sharduris,  and  led  the  flower  of  his  forces  right  under  the  walls
of  Dhuspas,^  the  enemy's  capital.  Dhuspas  really  consisted  of  two  towns
joined  together.  One  of  these,  extending  over  the  plain  by  the  banks  of  the
Alais  and  in  the  direction  of  the  lake,  was  surrounded  by  fertile  gardens
and  villas,  in  which  the  inhabitants  spent  the  summer  at  their  ease.  It  was
protected  by  an  isolated  mass  of  white  and  red  nummulitic  chalk,  the
steep  sides  of  which  are  seamed  with  fissures  and  tunnelled  with  holes  and
caverns  from  top  to  bottom.  The  plateau  in  which  it  terminates,  and  which
rises  to  a  height  of  300  feet  at  its  loftiest  point,  is  divided  into  three
main  terraces,  each  completely  isolated  from  the  other  two,  and  forming,
should  occasion  arise,  an  independent  fortress.  Ishpuinis,  Menuas,  Argistis,
and  Sharduris  II.  had  laboured  from  generation  to  generation  to  make  this
stronghold  impregnable,  aud  they  had  succeeded  in  the  attempt.*  The  only
access  to  it  was  from  the  western  side,  by  a  narrow  bridle-path,  which  almost
overhung  the  precipice  as  it  gradually  mounted  to  the  summit.  This  path  had
been  partially  levelled,  and  flanked  with  walls  and  towers  which  commanded
the  ajjproach  throughout  its  whole  length ;  on  the  platforms  at  the  summit
a  citadel  had  been  constructed,  together  with  a  palace,  temples,  and  storehouses,
in  which  was  accumulated  a  sufficient  supply  of  arms  and  provisions  to  enable
the  garrison  to  tire  out  the  patience  of  any  ordinary  foe;  treason  or  an
unusually  prolonged  siege  could  alone  get  the  better  of  such  a  position.
Tiglath-pileser  invested  the  citadel  and  ravaged  its  outskirts  without  pity,
hoping,  no  doubt,  that  he  would  thus  provoke  the  enemy  into  capitulating.
Day  after  day,  Sharduris,  perched  in  his  lofty  eyrie,  saw  his  leafy  gardens
laid  bare  under  the  hatchet,  and  his  villages  and  the  palaces  of  his  nobles  light

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  111.,  11.  157-176;  ef.  EosT,  Hie  Keilschrifltexte  Tiglat-Pile$ers  III.,
vol.  i.  pp.  26-31.

^  Eponym  Canon,  iu  Sohradek,  Keilinschri/tlichc  Bihliothek,  vol.  1.  pp.  212,  213.  Very  probably
the  fragment  of  the  Annals  of  Tiglalh-pileser  III.,  11.  176-190,  refers  to  this  campaigu :  cf.  Tiele,
Bah.-ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  231,  232 ;  EosT,  Die  Keilschr.  Tiglat-Pilesers  111.,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxvi.,  xxvii.

2  The  name  is  written  Turuspas  in  the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileaer  III.  (Eost,  Die  Keilschrift-
texie  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  46,  47,  52,  53).  There  can  be  little  or  no  doubt,  however,  that  this
is  merely  a  variant  of  the  name  usually  written  as  Tuspas,  Tuspana,  Dhuspana,  the  Thospia  of  classical
times ;  properly  speaking,  it  was  tho  capital  of  Biainaa ;  for  this  country,  cf.  p.  55,  note  1,  supra.

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  these  buildings,  p.  106,  supra.


THE  AMBITION  OF   UBABTU  FINALLY  CHECKED.


155


up  the  country  round  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  :  he  did  not  flinch,  however,
and  when  all  had  been  laid  waste,  the  Assyrians  set  up  a  statue  of  their  king
before  the  principal  gate  of  the  fortress,  broke  up  their  camp,  and  leisurely
retired.  They  put  the  country  to  fire  and  sword,  destroyed  its  cities,  led
away  every  man  and  beast  they  could  find  into  captivity,  and  then  returned
to  Nineveh  laden  with  plunder.^  Urartu  was  still  undaunted,  and  Sharduris
remained  king  as  before ;  but  he  was  utterly  spent,  and  his  power  had  sustained


ENTRANCE   TO    THE    MODERN    CITADEL    OP   VAN    FROM    THE    WESTWARD.''

a  blow  from  which  it  never  recovered.  He  had  played  against  Assur  with  the
empire  of  the  whole  Asiatic  world  as  the  stake,  and  the  dice  had  gone
against  him :  compelled  to  renounce  his  great  ambitions  from  henceforth,  be
sought  merely  to  preserve  his  independence.  Since  then,  Armenia  has  more
than  once  challenged  fortune,  but  always  with  the  same  result ;  it  fared  no  better
under  Tigranes  in  the  Koman  epoch,  than  under  Sharduris  in  tlie  time  of  the
Assyrians  ;  it  has  been  within  an  ace  of  attaining  the  goal  of  its  ambitious,  then
at  the  last  moment  its  sti'ength  has  failed,  and  it  has  been  forced  to  retire
worsted  from  the  struggle.  Its  position  prevented  it  from  exercising  very
wide  influence ;  hidden  away  in  a  corner  of  Asia  at  the  meeting-point  of
three  or  four  great  mountain  ranges,  near  the  source  of  four  rivers,  all  flowing
in  different  directions,  it  has  lacked  that  physical  homogeneity  without  which  no

'  Eponym  Canon,  in  Sohradek,  Keiliiischriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213.  The  only
narrative  of  these  events  which  has  come  Jowu  to  us,  that  of  Slab  No.  1, 11.  23-25,  and  of  Slab  No.  2,
11.  35-40,  introduces  tho  siege  of  Turuspas  after  the  defeat  of  Sliarduria  in  Kummukh,  thus  making
it  appear  as  though  the  incidents  of  735  followed  in  close  succession  after  those  of  713.  The  true
order  was  re-established  by  Schrader,  whose  classification  has  been  with  good  reason  adopted  by  all
recent  historians  (Tiele,  Bab.-ass.  Gesch.,  pp.  231,  232  ;  Hojimel,  Gesch.  Bah.  unci  Ass.,  pp.  U57-059  ;
AViNOKLEK,  Gesch. Bah.  und  Ass., 227, 22S ;  Eost, Die  Keilschri/ltexie  Tighd-Pilesers  III,  vol.  i.  pp.  27, 28).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Binder,  furnished  by  Father  Scheil.


156      TTGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

people,  liowever  gifted,  can  hope  to  attain  supremacy ;  nature  has  doomed  it  to
remain,  like  Syria,^  split  up  into  compartments  of  unequal  size  and  strength,
which  give  shelter  to  half  a  score  of  independent  principalities,  each  one  of
them  perpetually  jealous  of  the  rest.  From  time  to  time  it  is  invested  with  a
semblance  of  unity,  but  for  the  most  part  it  drags  on  an  uneventful  exist-
ence, dismembered  into  as  many  fragments  as  there  happen  to  be  powerful
states  around  it,  its  only  chance  of  complete  reunion  lying  in  the  possibility
of  one  or  other  of  these  attaining  sufficient  predominance  to  seize  the  share  of
the  others  and  absorb  it.

The  subjection  of  Urartu  freed  Assyria  from  the  only  rival  which  could  at  this
moment  have  disputed  its  supremacy  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  the
Tigris.  The  other  nations  on  its  northern  and  eastern  frontiers  as  yet  possessed
no  stability ;  they  might,  in  the  course  of  a  passing  outburst,  cut  an  army
to  pieces  or  annex  part  of  a  province,  but  they  lacked  strength  to  follow
up  their  advantage,  and  even  their  most  successful  raids  were  sure,  in  the  long
run,  to  lead  to  terrible  reprisals,  in  which  their  gains  were  two  or  three  times
outweighed  by  their  losses  in  men  and  treasure.  For  nearly  a  hundred  years
Nineveh  found  its  hands  free,  and  its  rulers  were  able  to  concentrate  all  their
energy  on  two  main  points  of  the  frontier — to  the  south-west  on  Syria  and
Egypt,  to  the  south-east  on  Chald;ea  and  Elam.  Chaldasa  gave  little  trouble,
but  the  condition  of  Syria  presented  elements  of  danger.  The  loyalty  of  its
princes  was  more  apparent  than  real ;  they  had  bowed  their  necks  after  the
fall  of  Unki,  but  afterwards,  as  the  years  rolled  on  without  any  seeming  increase
in  the  power  of  Assyria,  they  again  took  courage  and  began  once  more  to
quarrel  among  themselves.  Menahem  had  died,  soon  after  he  had  paid  his
tribute  (737  b.c.)  ;  his  son  Pekahiah  had  been  assassinated  less  than  two  years
later  (736),^  and  his  murderer,  Pekah,son  of  Remaliah,  was  none  too  firmly  seated
on  the  throne.  Anarchy  was  triumphant  throughout  Israel ;  so  much  so  that
Judah  seized  the  opportunity  for  throwing  off  the  yoke  it  had  borne  for  well-
nigh  a  hundred  years.^  Pekah,  conscious  of  his  inability  to  suppress  the  re-
bellion, called  in  Eezin  to  help  him.*     The  latter  was  already  on  the  way  when

'  As  to  the  natural  divisions  of  Syria,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  3,  4,  14.

-  2  Kings  xv.  22-26.  The  chronology  of  the  events  which  took  place  between  the  death  of
Menahem  and  the  fall  of  Samaria,  as  presented  by  the  biblical  documents  in  the  state  in  which  they
have  been  transmitted  to  us,  is  radically  inaccurate :  following  the  example  of  most  recent  historians,
I  have  adhered  exclusively  to  the  data  furnished  by  the  Assyrian  texts,  merely  indicating  in  the
notes  the  reasons  which  have  led  me  to  adopt  certain  dates  in  preference  to  others.

'  Winckler,  in  one  place  (^Gesch.  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  167).  questions  whether  Judah  was  in  a  dependent
position  under  Jeroboam  II.,  and  elsewhere  (Id.,  p.  179)  admits  that  this  was  the  case  under  Menahem  ;
this  latter  view,  in  my  opinion,  alone  explains  the  concatenation  of  events  which  followed.  It  is  evident,
from  2  Kings  xv.  37,  38,  that  Jotham,  not  Ahaz,  was  the  originator  of  the  movement  against  Israel.

*  Winckler  declares  that  Pekah  was  merely  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  Eeziu,  and  in  proof  of  this
assertion  points  to  the  passage  in  2  Kings  xv.  25,  where  the  author  relates  how  the  usurper  killed
Pekahiah  with  the  help  of  fifty  Gileadites :  "he  was  helped  by  Gilead,  which  was  itself  under  the


TEE  ALLIANCE   OF  ISRAEL  AND   DAMASCUS  AGAINST  JUDAH.      157

Jotham  was  laid  with  his  fathers  (736  B.C.),  aud  it  was  Ahaz,  the  son  of  Jotham,
who  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  assault.  He  was  barely  twenty  years  old,  a
volatile,  presumptuous,  and  daring  youth,  who  was  not  much  dismayed  by
his  position.'  Jotiiam  had  repaired  the  fortifications  of  Jerusalem,  which  had
been  left  in  a  lamentable  state  ever  since  the  damage  done  to  them  in  the  reign
of  Amaziah  ;  ^  his  successor  now  set  to  work  to  provide  the  city  with  the  supply
of  water  indispensable  for  its  defence,^  and,  after  repairing  the  ancient  aqueducts,
conceived  the  idea  of  constructing  a  fresh  one  in  the  spur  of  Mount  Sion,
which  extends  southwards.    As  time  pressed,  the  work  was  begun  simultaneously


HEBREW    INSCBIPTIOX    ON    THE    SIL0A5I    AQUEDUCT.''

at  each  end ;  the  workmen  had  made  a  wide  detour  underground,  probably
in  order  to  avoid  the  caves  in  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  been  laid  to  rest
ever  since  the  time  of  David,^  and  they  were  beginning  to  despair  of  ever  uniting
the  two  sections  of  the  tunnel,  when  they  suddenly  heard  one  another  through

rule  of  Damascus."  But  Gilead  had  been  won  back  from  Damascus ;  it  belonged  to  Israel  in  the
time  of  Jeroboam  II.  and  of  his  successors,  as  Hosea  himself  tells  us  (vi.  8,  where  the  prophet  seems
to  refer  to  the  assassination  of  Pekahiah,  and  xii.  'J.).  Probably  the  rebellion  of  Judah  was  the  sole
cause  which  led  Pekah  to  seek  the  aid  of  Eezin.

'  2  Kings  xv.  3S,  xvi.  1,  2.  Ahaz  is  called  laukbazi,  i.e.  Jehoahaz,  in  the  Assyrian  texts  (Nimroud
Inscrip.,  Kev.,  1.  11),  and  this  would  seem  to  have  been  the  original  form  of  the  name  (Scueader,  Die
Keil.  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  263,  2G1 ;  Stade,  Gesch.  desVolhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  589,  note  2).

'■'  Of.  what  has  been  said  on  p.  123,  supra.  The  restoration  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  by  Jotham
is  only  mentioned  in  2  Ghron.  xxvii.  3.

^  We  may  deduce  this  from  the  words  of  Isaiah  (vii.  3),  where  he  represents  Ahaz  "  at  the  end  of
the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool,  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field."  Ahaz  had  gone  there  to  inspect
the  works  intended  for  the  defence  of  the  aqueduct.

*  A  direct  reproduction  from  a  plaster  cast  now  in  Puris.  The  inscription  discovered  by  Schick,
in  1880,  has  since  been  mutilated,  and  ouly  the  fragments  are  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Constanti-
nople. Some  writers  think  it  was  composed  in  the  time  of  Hezekiali ;  cf.,  among  the  most  recent,
Clebmoxt-Ganneau,  Les  Tomheaux  de  David  et  des  rois  de  Juda,  pp.  390,  397.  For  my  own  part,  I
agree  with  Stade  (fieschiehte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  590-593)  in  assigning  it  to  the  period  of  Ahaz.

=  This  is  the  highly  ingenious  hypothesis  put  forsvard  and  defended  with  much  learning  by
Clermont-Gauneau,  in  order  to  account  for  the  large  curve  described  by  the  tuunel  (Lea  Tombiauz  de
David  et  des  rois  de  Juda  et  VAqueduc  de  Silo£,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  I'Acad^niie  des  Inscriptions,
1897,  vol.  XXV.  pp.  383-427).


158      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.

the  wall  of  rock  which  diyided  them.     A  few  blows  with  the  pick-axe  opened  a
passage  between  them,  and  an  inscription  on  the  wall  adjoining  the
entrance  on  the  east  side,  the  earliest  Hebrew  inscription  we  possess,
set  forth  the  vicissitudes  of  the  work  for  the  benefit  of  future  genera-
tions. It  was  scarcely  completed  when  Rezin,  who  had  joined  forces  with
Pekah  at  Samaria,  came  up  and  laid  regular  siege  to  Jerusalem.'
The  allies  did  not  propose  to  content  themselves  with  exacting
tribute  from  the  young  king ;  they  meant  to  dethrone  him,
and  to  set  up  in  his  room  a  son  of  Tabeel,  whom  they  had
brought  with  them ;  ^  they  were  nevertheless  obliged  to
retire  without  effecting  a  breach  in  his  defences  and  leave  the  final
assault  till  the  following  campaign.    Eezin,  however,  had  done  as
much  injury  as  he  could  to  Judah  ;  he  had  laid  waste  both  moun-
tain and  plain,  had  taken  Elath  by  storm  and  restored  it  to  tlie
Edomites,^  and  had  given  a  free  hand  to  the  Philistines  (735).^
The  whole  position  seemed  so  hopeless,  that  a  section  of  the  people
began  to  pi'opose  surrendering  to  the  mercy  of  the  Syrians.^   Ahaz
looked  around  him  in  search  of  some  one  on  whom  he  might  call
for  help.     All  his  immediate  neighbours  were  hostile ;  but  be-
hind them,  in  the  background,  were  two  great  powers  who  might
I"  be  inclined  to  listen  to  his  appeal — Egypt  and  Assyria.     Ever
since  the  expedition  of  Sheshonq  into  Asia,^  Egypt  seemed  to
BRONZE  sTATrETTE  j^^^g  ^ost  all  iutercst  in  foreign  politics.     Osorkon  had  not  in-

OF   OSORKON  I.'  _

herited  the  warlike  propensities  of  his  father,  and  his  son,  Take-
loti  I.,  and  his  grandson,  Osorkon  II.,  followed  his  example.^     These  monarchs

'  2  Kings  xfi.  5;  ef.  2  Cliron.  xxviii.  5-8.  It  wa3  on  this  occasion  that  Isaiah  delivered  the
prophecies  which,  after  subsequent  revision,  furnished  the  bulk  of  chaps,  vi.  1 — x.  i.  Cf.  what  is
said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  184,  185,  infra.

'  Isa.  vii.  4-9.     The  identity  of  this  son  of  Tabeel  has  been,  and  still  remains,  the  subject  of
conjecture.     Oppert  sought  to  identify  him  with  the  Azriyahu  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Tiglath
pileser  III.  (cf.  p.  150,  note  3,  supra);  some  of  the  most  recent  writers  -have  come  back  to  the  view
that  the  son  of  Tabeel  was  Beziu  himself  (Renan,  Histoire  du  Peuple  d'Israel,  vol.  ii.  p.  508:
WI^•CKLER,  Alttestamentllche  Forschungen,  pp.  74-76,  and  Gescliiclde  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  154).

"  2  Kings  xvi.  6,  where  the  Massoretic  text  states  that  the  Syrians  retained  the  town,  while  the
LXX.  maintain  that  he  restored  it  to  the  Edomites.  Winckler  {Gescliiclite  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  139,
note  1,  and  p.  198)  suppresses  the  reference  to  Eezin,  and  tries  to  make  out  that  Elath  had  been  won
from  Ahaz  by  a  king  of  Edom.

*  2  Chron.  xxviii.  18,  where  a  list  is  given  of  the  towns  wrested  from  Judah  by  the  Pliilistines.
The  delight  felt  by  the  Philistines  at  the  sight  of  Judab's  abasement  seems  to  be  referred  to  in  the
short  prophecy  of  Isaiah  (siv.  29-32),  wrongly  ascribed  to  tlie  year  of  Ahaz's  death.

^  This  seems  to  be  an  obvious  inference  from  the  words  of  Isaiah  (viii.  6) :  "  Forasmuch  as  this
people  liath  refused  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  softly,  and  lose  courage  hecause  of  Bezin  and
Uemaliah's  son."     [Tlie  E.V.  reads  "  rejoice  in  "  Kezin,  etc. — Tr.]

'  As  to  the  expedition  of  Slieshonq  into  Syria,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  772-775.

■  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Lanzone's  statuette ;  cf.  Lanzone,  Descrizione  di  una  Statuetia
di  hronzo,  in  the  Atti  of  the  Turin  Academy,  1875,  vol.  xi.  p.  459,  et  seq.,  and  Miss  Gonnino,  Note  on
a  Statuette  of  Osorhon  I.,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Bibl.  Arch.,  1884-1885,  vol.  vi.  pp.  205,  206.

'  The  chronology  of  this  period  is  still  very  uncertain,  and  the  steloe  of  the  Serapieum,  which  enable
us  to  fix  tlie  order  of  the  various  reigns,  yield  no  information  as  to  their  length.     Sheshonq  I.  did


PROSPEBITT  OF  EG  TPT  UNDEIi  THE  FIRST  BUBASTITE  DYNASTY.     159


regarded  themselves  as  traditionary  suzerains  of  the  country  of  Kharii,  i.e.  of
Israel,  Judab,  Ammon,  and  Moab,  and  their  authority  may  perhaps  have  been
recognised  by  the  Philistines  in  the  main/  but  they  seldom  stirred  from  their


THE   GREAT   TEMPLE    OF

BUBASTIS    DURING    NAVILLe's

EXCAVATIONS. -


own  territory,  and  con-
tented themselves  with  pro-
tecting their  frontiers  against
the  customary  depredations  of
the  Libyan  and  Asiatic  nomads.^


Under  their  rule,  Egypt  enjoyed  fifty  years
of  profound  jjeace,  which  was  spent  in  works  of  public  utility,  especially  in

not  reign  much  longer  than  twenty-one  years,  which  is  his  latest  known  date  (Champollion,  Monuments
de  l'£gyple  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  cxxii.  bis;  Lepsius,  Denkm.  iii.  254  c),  and  we  may  take  the  reigu  of
twenty-one  years  attributed  to  liim  by  Manetho  as  being  substantially  correct.  The  latest  dates  we
possess  are  as  follows  :  0.5orkon  I.,  twelfth  year  (Legrain,  Textes  graves  sur  le  quai  de  Karnah,  in  the
Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxsiv.  p.  3,  No.  2),  and  Takeloti  I.,  sixth  year  (Id.,  p.  3,  No.  4)  or  seventh  year
(Daressy,  Inscriptions  in^dites  de  la  XXH'  Dijnastie,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  51,  52).
Lastly,  we  have  a  twenty-ninth  year  in  the  case  of  Osorkon  II.  (Id.,  p.  112,  No.  14),  with  a  reference
in  the  case  of  the  twenty-eighth  year  to  the  fifth  year  of  a  Takeloti  whose  first  cartouche  is  missing
(Id.,  p.  112,  No.  23),  and  who  perhaps  died  before  his  father  and  co-regent.  In  Manetho,  Osorkon  I.  is
credited  with  a  reign  of  fifteen  years,  and  his  three  next  successors  with  a  total  of  twenty-five  years
between  them,  which  is  manifestly  incorrect,  since  the  monuments  give  twenty-nine  years,  or  twenty-
three  at  the  very  least,  if  we  take  into  account  the  double  date  in  the  case  of  the  first  two  of  these
kings.  The  wisest  course  seems  to  be  to  allow  forty-five  years  to  Osorkon  and  bis  two  successors :  if
Sheshonq,  as  I  believe,  died  in  924,  the  fifty  years  allotted  to  the  next  three  Pharaohs  would  biing  us
down  to  880,  and  it  is  in  tliis  year  tliat  I  am,  for  the  present,  inclined  to  place  the  death  of  Osorkon  II.

'  Cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  774.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Naville,  Bubastis,  pi.  iii.

^  Repressive  measures  of  this  kind  are  evidently  referred  to  in  passages  similar  to  those  in  which
Osorkon  II.  boasts  of  having  "  overthrown  beneatli  his  feet  the  Upper  and  Lower  Lotanu  "  (Naville,
Bubastis,  i>.  51,  and  The  Festival  Hall  of  Osorkon  U.  in  the  Great  Temple  of  Bubastis,  pi.  vi.,  and  p.  4),
and  speaks  of  the  exjjloits  of  the  sons  of  Queen  Kalamalt  against  certain  tribes  whose  name,  though
mutilated,  seems  to  have  been  Libyan  in  character  (Daressy,  Inscriptions  inidites  de  la  XX'  Dynastie,
in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  49-51).


160      TIOLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

the  Delta,  where,  thanks  to  their  efforts,  Bubastis  came  to  be  one  of  the  most
splendid  among  the  cities  of  secondary  importance.^  Its  temple,  which  had
been  rebuilt  by  Kamses  II.  and  decorated  by  the  Eamessides,^  was  in  a  sorry
plight  when  the  XXIP''  dynasty  came  into  power.  Sheshonq  I.  did  little
or  nothing  to  it,  but  Osorkon  I.  entirely  remodelled  it,^  and  Osorkon  II.
added  several  new  halls,  including,  amongst  others,  one  in  which  he  cele-
brated, in  the  twenty-second  year  of  his  reign,  the  festival  of  his  deification.^
A  record  of  some  of  the  ceremonies  observed  has  come  down  to  us  in  the
mural  paintings.  There  we  see  the  king,  in  a  chapel,  consecrating  a  statue  of
himself  in  accordance  with  the  ritual  in  use  since  the  time  of  Amenothes  III.,^
and  offering  the  figure  devout  and  earnest  worship  ;  all  the  divinities  of  Egypt
have  assembled  to  witness  the  enthronement  of  this  new  member  of  their
confraternity,  and  take  part  in  the  sacrifices  accompanying  his  consecration.
This  gathering  of  the  gods  is  balanced  by  a  human  festival,  attended  by
Nubians  and  Kushites,  as  well  as  by  the  courtiers  and  populace.  The
proceedings  terminated,  apparently,  with  certain  funeral  rites,  the  object  being  to
make  the  identification  of  Osorkon  with  Osiris  complete.  The  Egyptian  deitie  s
served  in  a  double  capacity,  as  gods  of  the  dead  as  well  as  of  the  living,  and  no
exception  could  be  made  in  favour  of  the  deified  Osorkon  ;  while  yet  living
he  became  an  Osiris,  and  his  double  was  supposed  to  animate  those  prophetic
statues  in  which  he  appeared  as  a  mummy  no  less  than  those  which  represented
him  as  still  alive.  Another  temple  of  small  size,  also  dedicated  to  Bast  it  or
Pasht,  which  had  been  built  in  the  time  of  Eamses  II.,  was  enlarged  by  Osorkon  I.,
and  richly  endowed  with  workshops,  lands,  cattle,  slaves,  and  precious  metals  :
Tumu-Khopri  of  Heliopolis,  to  mention  but  one  of  the  deities  worshipped  there,
received  offerings  of  gold  in  value  by  weight  £120,000,  and  silver  ingots
worth  £12,000.''  A  country  which  coidd  afford  to  indulge  in  extravagances  of
this  nature  must  have  been  in  a  flourishing  condition,  and  everything  goes  to
prove  that  Egypt  prospered  under  the  rule  of  the  early  Bubastite  kings.

The  very  same  causes,  however,  which  had  ruined  the  Eamessides  and  the
Tanites  were  now  openly  compassing  the  downfall  of  the  Bubastite  dynasty.

'  AH  our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  temple  of  Bubastis  dates  from  Naville's  excavations,
Bubastis,  1891,  and  The  Festival  Hall  of  Osorkon  II.  in  the  Great  Temple  of  Bubastis,  1S92.

-  As  to  the  origin  of  the  temple  of  Bubastis,  cf.  what  has  beuu  said  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,
pp.  364,  371,  note  2,  422 ;  and  in  regard  to  the  successive  restoratious  thereof  prior  to  the  XXII'"'
dynasty,  cf  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  503,  504,  530,  and  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  59,  60,  423.

'  Naville,  Bubastis.  pp.  46-48.

*  Naville  has  described  this  and  explained  the  texts  referring  to  it  in  a  volume  entitled  Tlie
Festival  Hall  of  Osorkon  II.,  etc.  The  ceremony  is  that  known  as  the  Sit-kabu,  which  Brugsch  seeks  to
Identify  with  the  Triakontwterides  of  the  Ptolemaic  epoch,  i.e.  festivals  whicli  recurred  every  thirty
years  (cf  Die  .^gyptulugie,  pp.  365,  366) ;  my  opinion  of  Brugsch's  theory  and  of  the  nature  of  this
festival  has  been  briefly  indicated  iu  an  article  in  the  lievue  Critique,  1892,  vol.  ii.  pp.  386-398.

'  As  to  the  deification  of  Amenothes  III.,  cf  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  300-302.

°  i^AViL.LE,  Bubastis,  pis.  l.-lii.,  and  pp.  60-62 ;  this  is  the  small  temple  afterwards  described  by  Hero-
dotus as  being  dedicated  to  Hermes  (II.  csxxviii. ;  cf. Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zmeites  Buch,  pp.  498,  499).


DEVELOPMENT  OF  TEE  FEUDAL  SYSTEM  UNDER  THE  BUBASTITES.     161


The  military  feudalism  from  which  it  had  sprung,  suppressed  for  a  time  b}'
Sheshonq  I., developed  almost  unchecked  under  his  successors.  They  had  thought
to  break  it  up  and  turn  it  to  their  own  advantage,  bv  transferring  the  more
important  religious  func-
tions and  the  principal
fiefs  to  their  own  sons  or
nephews.  They  governed
Memphis  through  the
high  priests  of  PJitah ;  ^  a
prince  of  the  blood  repre-
sented them  at  Khmunu,"
another  at  Khninsu  ^  (He-
racleopolis),  and  others
in  various  cities  of  the
Delta,^each  of  them  being
at  the  head  of  several
thousand  Mashauasha,  or
Libyan  soldiers  on  whose
fidelity  they  could  en-
tirely rely.^  Thebes  alone
had  managed  to  exclude
these  representatives  of
the  ruling  dynasty,  and
its  princes,  guided  in  this
particular  by  the  popular
prejudice,  persistently  re-  ''^■^^  °^  ™''  festival  hall  at  bubastis."

fused  to  admit  into  their  bodyguard  any  but  the  long-tried  MazaiuJ    Moreover,
Thebes  lost  no  opportuuity  of  proving  itself  to  be  still  the  most  turbulent  of  the

'  Cf.,  on  this  point,  Stern,  Die  XSn  Manethonuclie  Dynaelie,  in  the  ZeiUchrift,  18S3,  pp.  IS,  19,
and  Dakessy,  Inscriptions  inidites  de  la  XXII'  dynadie,  iu  the  liecueil  de  Trai-aux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  46-49.

'  E.g.  Xamruti,  under  Pioutbi-Miamun,  whose  rights  were  such  that  he  adopted  the  protocol
of  the  Pharaohs  (E.  de  KorGE,  La  Stele  du  rot  ithiopien  Pidnhhi  Meriamen,  pp.  1,  19,  etc.).

^  Stele  1959  of  the  Serapseum  contains  the  names  of  five  successive  princes  of  this  city,  the  first
of  whom  was  Namroti,  sou  of  Osorkon  II.,  and  high  priest  of  Thebes,  who  is  dealt  with  later  on
(pp.  1G2-164,  infra);  a  member  of  the  same  family,  named  Pefzaabastit,  had  taken  cartouches  under
Osorkon  III.  of  the  XXIII''''  dynasty  (E.  de  EouGii,  La  Stele  du  roi  ethiopien  Pidnkhi  Meriamen,
pp.  1,  35,  etc.),  as  wUl  be  seen  later  ou,  pp.  167,  16S,  176,  infra.  .\s  to  the  principality  of  Khninsu,
cf.  Stekx,  Die  XXIS  Manethonigche  Dijnastie,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1SS3,  p.  23.

*  Cf.  the  list  of  princes  of  the  Delta  on  the  stele  of  Pioukhi-Miamun  (E.  de  Kouge,  La  Stele  du
roi  ^hiopien  Piuahhi  Meriamen,  pp.  67-70,  94).

'  As  to  the  Mashauasha  and  the  prominent  part  played  by  them  in  the  revolutions  of  Egypt  from
the  latter  part  of  the  XX"'  dynasty  onwards,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  765-768.

"  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  restoration  by  Natille  in  Tlie  Festival  Bail  of  Osorlcon  II.,
a  plate  which  serves  as  frontispiece  to  the  volume.

'  As  to  the  absence  of  the  Mashauasha  from  Thebes,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  767.

M


162      TiaLATE-PILESER  111.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.


SMALL   BKONZE   SPHIKX  OF   SIAMUN.'


baronies.  Its  territory  had  suifered  no  diminution  since  the  time  of  Hrihor,
and  half  of  Upper  Egypt,  from  Elephantine  to  Siut,  acknowledged  its  sway.^
Through  all  the  changes  of  dynasty  its  political  constitution  had  remained
unaltered ;  Amon  still  ruled  there  supreme  as  ever,  and  nothing  was  done  until  he
had  been  formally  consulted  in  accordance  with  ancient  usage.'-^  Auputi,  in  spite
of  his  being  a  son  of  Sheshonq,  was  compelled  to  adopt  the  title  of  high  priest
in  order  to  rule  in  peace,  and  had  married  some  daughter  or  niece  of  the  last  of
the  Painotmii.^     After  his  death,  good  care  was  taken  to  prevent  the  pontificate

from  passing  to  one  of  his
children, as  this  would  have
re-established  a  Theban
dynasty  which  might  have
soon  proved  hostile  to  that
of  Bubastis.  To  avoid  this,
Osorkon  I.  made  over  the
office  and  fief  to  his  own
son  Sheshonq.  The  latter,
after  a  time,  thought  he
was  sufficiently  powerful
to  follow  the  example  of  Painotmu  and  adopt  the  royal  cartouches;  but,
with  all  his  ambition,  he  too  failed  to  secure  the  succession  to  the  male
line  of  his  descendants,  for  Osorkon  II.  appointed  his  own  son  Namroti,
already  prince  of  Khninsu,  to  succeed  him.^  The  amalgamation  of  these  two
posts  invested  the  person  on  whom  they  were  conferred  with  almost  regal
power ;  Khninsu  was,  indeed,  as  we  know,^  the  natural  rampart  of  Memphis  and
Lower  Egypt  against  invasion  from  the  south,  and  its  possessor  was  in  a  position
to  control  the  fate  of  tlie  empire  almost  as  he  pleased.  Osorkon  must  have
had  weighty  reasons  for  taking  a  step  which  placed  him  practically  at  the
mercy  of  his  son,  and,  indeed,  events  proved  that  but  little  reliance  could  be
placed  on  the  loyalty  of  the  Thebans,  and  that  energetic  measures  were  imj^erative

•  It  is  evident  that  this  was  so  from  tlie  first  steps  talien  by  Pioiikhi-Miamuu's  generals :  they
meet  the  army  and  ileet  of  Tafnakhti  and  the  princes  of  the  north  right  under  the  walls  of
Hermopolis,  but  say  nothing  of  any  feudal  princes  of  the  south  (11.  2-9).  Their  silence  is  explained
if  we  assume  that  Thebes,  being  a  dependency  of  Ethiopia,  retained  at  that  date,  i.e.  in  the  time  of
the  XXIII"'  dynasty,  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  boundaries  which  it  had  won  for  itself  under  the
XXP'  (cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  point  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  561,  768,  709).

2  As  to  the  high  priest  Auputi,  son  of  Sheshonq  I.,  and  the  part  played  by  him  in  Thebes  at  the
beginning  of  the  XXII""  dynasty,  cf.  what  is  said  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  770,  771,  773.
^  Cf.,  in  regard  to  this  marriuge,  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  760,  761.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  now  in  the  Louvre;  cf.  Pierret,  Catalogue  des
Monuments  de  la  Salle  Sidorique,  No.  265,  p.  .')6.

'  Maspeko,  Les  Momies  royales  de  Deir  el-Bohart,  in  M^moires  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.  734-
738,  where  all  the  information  wo  at  present  possess  in  regard  to  NamtOti  is  collected  and  discussed.

«  As  to  the  military  and  political  influence  of  Khninsu  (Heracleopolis),  cf.  what  is  said  in  the
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  445-448.


THE   TEE  BAN  PIIINCIPALITT  AND   ITS  EIGB  PRIESTS.


16:;


to  keep  them  in  tlie  path  of  duty  or  lead  them  back  to  it.  The  decadence  of
the  ancient  capital  had  sadly  increased  since  the  downfall  of  the  descendants
of  Hrihor.  The  few  public  works  which  they  had  undertaken,  and  which
Sheshonq  I.  encouraged  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  had  been  suspended  owing
to  want  of  money,  and  the  craftsmen  who  had  depended  on  them  for  support


RUINS   OK    THE    TEMPLE    AT    KHNINSO    Al-'TEU    NAVILLU's    EXCAVATIONS.'

were  suffering  from  poverty :  the  makers  of  small  articles  of  a  religious  or
funerary  character,  carvers  of  wood  or  stone,  joiners,  painters  of  mummy-cases,
and  workers  in  bronze,  alone  managed  to  eke  out  a  bare  livelihood,  thanks  to
commissions  still  given  to  them  by  ofBcials  attached  to  the  temples.  Thebau
art,  which  in  its  best  period  had  excelled  in  planning  its  works  on  a  gigantic
scale,  now  gladly  devoted  itself  to  the  production  of  mere  knick-kuacks,  in
place  of  the  colossal  figures  of  earlier  days.  We  have  statuettes  some  twelve  or
fifteen  inches  high,  crudely,  coloured,  wooden  stelffi,  shapeless  ushabtl  redeemed
from  ugliness  by  a  coating  of  superb  blue  enamel,  and,  above  all,  those  miniature
sphinxes  representing  queens  or  kings,  which  present  with  two  human  arms
either  a  table  of  offerings  or  a  salver  decorated  with  cartouches.  The  starving
populace,  its  interests  and  vanity  alike  mortified  by  the  accession  of  a  northern
dynasty,  refused  to  accept  the  decay  of  its  fortunes  with  resignation,  and  this
spirit  of  discontent  was  secretly  fomented  by  the  priests  or  by  members  of  the
numerous  familieswhich  boasted  of  their  descent  from  the  Ramessides.  Although
hereditary  claims  to  the  throne  and  the  pontificate  had  died  out  or  lost  their

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  which  serves  as  a  frontispiece  to  Naville,  Almas el-Medineh .
The  illustration  shows  wljat  now  remains  of  thoirortiousof  the  temple  rebuilt  in  the  time  of  Ramses  TI.


1G4     TIOLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

force  in  the  male  line,  they  were  still  persistently  urged  by  the  women  :  conse-
crated from  their  birth  to  the  service  of  Amon,  and  originally  reserved  to  sing
his  praises  or  share  his  nuptial  couch,  those  of  them  who  married  transmitted
to  their  children,  and  more  especially  to  their  daughters,  the  divine  germ  which
qualified  them  for  the  throne.  They  and  their  followers  never  ceased  to  look
for  the  day  when  the  national  deity  should  shake  oft  his  apathy,  and,  becoming
the  champion  of  their  cause  against  the  Bubastite  or  Tanite  usurpers,  restore
their  city  to  the  rank  and  splendour  from  which  it  had  fallen.  Namroti  married
one  of  these  Theban  princesses,  and  thus  contrived  to  ward  oif  the  danger  of
revolt  during  his  lifetime ;  ^  but  on  his  death  or  disappearance  an  insurrection
broke  out.  Sheshonq  II.  had  succeeded  Osorkon  II.,  and  he,  in  his  turn,  was
followed  by  Takeloti  II.'-*  Takeloti  chose  Kalamait,  daughter  of  Namroti,  as
his  lawful  wife,  formally  recognised  her  as  queen,  and  set  up  numerous  statues
and  votive  monuments  in  her  honour.  But  all  in  vain  :  this  concession  failed
to  conciliate  the  rebellious,  and  the  whole  Thebaid  rose  against  him  to  a  man.
In  the  twelfth  year  of  his  reign  he  entrusted  the  task  of  putting  down  the
revolt  to  his  son  Osorkon,  at  the  same  time  conferring  upon  him  the  office
of  high  priest.  It  took  several  years  to  repress  the  rising;  defeated  in  the
eleventh  year,  the  rebels  still  held  the  field  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  king,
and  it  was  not  till  some  time  after,  between  the  fifteenth  and  twenty-
second  year  of  Takeloti  II.,  that  they  finally  laid  down  their  arms.^  At  the
end  of  this  struggle  the  king's  power  was  quite  exhausted,  while  that  of  the
i'eudal  magnates  had  proportionately  increased.  Before  long,  Egypt  was  split
up  into  a  number  of  petty  states,  some  of  them  containing  but  a  few  towns,
while  others,  following  the  example  of  Thebes,  boldly  annexed  several  adjacent
uomes.     A  last  remnant  of  respect  for  the  traditional  monarchy  kept  them

'  Maspeko,  Xes  Momies  royales  de  B^ir  el-Bahari,  pp.  738-740.

'  The  few  references  to  these  two  Bubastite  Pharaohs  that  have  come  down  to  us  have  beeu
nearly  all  collected  by  Wiedemann,  Mgyptische  Geschichte,  pp.  555-557,  and  Supplement,  i.  p.  64.

"  The  story  of  these  events  is  told  in  several  greatly  mutilated  inscriptions  to  be  found  at  Karnak
on  the  outer  surface  of  the  south  wall  of  the  Hall  of  Columns,  and  wliich  have  been  published  by
Lepsius,  Deiilim.,  iii.  256  a,  257  o;  cf.  Chasipollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  Za  A'u6ie,cclxsvii.  1,
cclxxix.  1,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  22.  One  of  them  contains  a  phrase  wliich  Brugsch  took  to  refer  to  an
eclipse  which  occurred  in  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  Choiak  in  the  tifteenth  year  of  Takeloti  II.  QHistoire
d'Egypte,  p.  233),  and  which  was  made  use  of  by  Hincks  to  fix  the  date  of  the  event  as  the  4tli  April,
945  B.C.,  assuming  that  it  was  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  (_The  Egyptian  Dynasties  of  Manetho,  i.  pp.  34-41),
but  afterwards,  finding  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  was  meant,  he  altered  the  date  to  the  1st  April,
927  (Id.,  ii.  p.  41).  The  accuracy  of  these  deductions  was  disputed  by  Chabas,  who  maintained  that
the  passage  in  question  was  purely  mythological,  and  had  no  bearing  on  astronomy  (Melanges
£gyptologiqnes,  2nd  series,  pp.  72-107).  Thereupon  a  controversy  ensued  between  Goodwin  (On  an
Inscription  of  Takclut  H.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S6S,  pp.  25-20),  Brugsch  (Eine  Mondfinsterniss,  in  the
Zeiischrift,  1S6S,  pp.  29-35),  and  Chabas  (Lettre  a  M.  le  Docteur  Lepsius  sur  V Inscription  de  Tahel-
lothis  n.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S6S,  pp.  49-52).  which  ended  in  each  of  the  disputants  adhering  to  his
own  view  while  maintaining  that  he  had  refuted  that  of  the  others.  Brugsch,  who  survived  both
Goodwin  and  Chabas  by  many  years,  persisted  to  the  last  in  his  opinion  that  the  passage  refers  to  an
eclipse  of  the  moon  (GeschiclUe  Mgyptens,  p.  670).


KING  PETUBASTIS


TEE  XXIIP"   TANITE  DYNASTY.

from  entirely  repudiating  the  authority  of  Pharaoh.
They  still  kept  up  an  outward  show  of  submission
to  his  rule  ;  they  paid  him  military  service  when
called  upon,  and  appealed  to  him  as  umpire  in  their
disputes,  without,  however,  always  accepting  his
rulings,  and  when  they  actually  came  to  blows
among  themselves,  were  content  to  exercise  their
right  of  private  warfare  under  his  direction.^  The
royal  domain  gradually  became  narrowed  down  to
the  Memphite  nome  and  the  private  appanages  of
the  reigning  house,  and  soon  it  no  longer  yielded
the  sums  necessary  for  the  due  performance  of  costly
religious  ceremonies,  such  as  the  enthronement  or
burial  of  an  Apis.  The  pomp  and  luxury  usually
displayed  on  such  occasions  grew  less  and  less  under
the  successors  of  Takeloti  II.,  Sheshonq  III.,  Pimi,
and  Sheshonq  IV.^  When  the  last  of  these  passed
away  after  an  inglorious  reign  of  at  least  thirty-
seven  years,  the  prestige  of  his  race  had  so  com-
pletely declined  that  the  country  would  have  no  more  of  it ;  the  sceptre  passed
into  the  hands  of  another  dynasty,  this  time  of  Tanite  origin.^     It  was  probably

'  It  is  evident  that  this  was  so,  from  a  romance  discovered  by  Kkall,  Eln  neuer  Eistorischer
Soman  in  Demotuclier  Schrift,  p.  14,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Maspero,  in  tlie  Journal  cles  Savants,  1897,  pp.  654-057.

2  One  need  only  go  to  the  Louvre  and  compare  the  Apis  stelae  erected  during  this  period  wit  h
those  engraved  in  the  time  of  the  XXVI'"  dynasty,  in  order  to  realise  the  low  ebb  to  which  the  later
kings  of  the  XXII'"'  dynasty  had  fallen ;  the  fact  that  the  chapel  and  monuments  were  built  under
their  direction  shows  that  they  were  still  masters  of  Memphis.  We  have  no  authentic  date  for
Sheshonq  II.,  and  the  twenty-ninth  year  is  the  latest  known  in  the  ease  of  Takeloti  IF.  (Cham-
POLLION,  Monuments  de  I'Egypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  22,  23 ;  Lepsius,  Denkni.,  iii.  258  a),  but  we
know  (Mauiette,  Le  Se'rapenm  de  Memphis,  pi.  28;  cf.  Map.iette,  Eettseignements  sur  les  soixitnte-
quatre  Apis,  in  the  Athgnxum  Fran^ais,  1855,  pp.  94-98,  and  Bkugsch,  Geschichte  ^Egyptens,  p.  673)
that  Sheshonq  III.  reigned  fifty-two  years,  and,  after  two  years  of  Pimi  (Makiette,  Le  SCrap^um,
pi.  31,  and  Renseiguements,  etc.,  in  the  Ath^nmum  Fran^ais,  1 8.'>5,  pp.  98-100),  we  find  a  reference  to  the
thirty-seventh  year  of  Sheshonq  IV.  If  we  allow  a  round  century  for  these  last  kings  weare  not  likely
to  be  far  out :  tliis  would  place  the  close  of  the  Bubastite  dynasty  somewhere  about  780  B.C.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gmlin,  from  a  small  door  now  in  the  Louvre ;  cf.  Piekret,  Catalogue  de  la
Salle  Ehtorique,  No.  649,  p.  160.

*  The  following  list  gives  the  names  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the  XXII'"'  dynasty  in  so  far  as  they
have  been  ascertained  up  to  the  present  :—

I.   ShASHANQU  I.   MaRIAHANC,   XjAZAKHPIRRi-SOTPUNIKt.
II.    UaSARKANU    I.    MaBIAMANU,    SAKUMAKHPIRRI-SOTPDNIRt.

III.  Takeloti  I.  si-IsIt  Mariamanu,  Usirmari-.sotpiniamanu.

IV.  Uasarkanu  IL  si-Bastit  Mariamanu,  UsiRM.iRi-soTPCNUMANC.
V.  Shashanqd  II.  Mariamanu,  SAKHMAKupiRRt-sOTPCNiAMANu.

VI.  Takeloti  II.  si-Isit  Mariamanu,  UAZAKtiPiRRi-soxpcNiRi.

VII.  Shashanqu  III.  si-Bastit  Mariamanu,  Usirm-Iri-sotpunirJ.
VIII.  PaimI  Mariamanu,  Usirmari-sotpuniamanu.

IX.  Shashanqu  IV.  Mariamanu,  Akhpirr!.

This  list  is  identical  with  that  drawn  up  hy  hepaius  {Ueber  die  XXII  iigyptisclien  KiiHigt-dt/nastie


16G     TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  OBQANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

a  younger  branch  of  the  Bubastite  family  allied  to  the  Eamessides  and  Thebau
Paliacides.  Petubastis,  the  first  of  the  line,  secured  recognition  in  Thebes,^  and
througliout  the  rest  of  Egypt  as  well,  but  his  influence  was  little  greater  than
that  of  his  predecessors ;  as  in  the  past,  the  real  power  was  in  the  hands  of  the  high
priests.  One  of  them,  Auiti  by  name,  even  went  so  far,  in  the  fourteenth  or
fifteenth  year,  as  to  declare  himself  king,  and  had  his  cartouches  inscribed  on  ofiicial
documents  side  by  side  with  those  of  the  Tanite  monarch.^  His  kingship  died
with  him,  just  as  that  of  Painotmu  had  done  in  similar  circumstances,  and  two
years  later  we  find  his  successor,  Harsiisit,  a  mere  high  priest  without  pretensions
to  royalty.^  Doubtless  his  was  not  an  isolated  case ;  all  the  grandees  who
happened  to  be  nearly  related  either  to  the  dethroned  or  to  the  reigning  bouses
acted  in  like  manner,  and  for  the  first  time  for  many  years  Egypt  acknowledged
the  simultaneous  sway  of  more  than  one  legitimate  Pharaoh.  Matters  became
still  worse  under  Osorkon  III. ;  although  he,  too,  introduced  a  daughter  of
Amon  into  his  harem,''  this  alliance  foiled  to  give  him  any  hold  over  Thebes,
and  even  the  Seven  Nomes  and  the  Delta  were  split  up  to  such  an  extent
that  at  one  time  they  included  something  like  a  score  of  independent  princi-
palities, three  of  which,  Hermopolis,  Heracleopolis,  and  Tentramu,  were  adminis-
tered by  kings  who  boasted  cartouches  similar  to  those  of  Tanis  and  Bubastis.^
About  740b.c.  there  appeared  in  the  midst  of  these  turbulent  and  extortionate
nobles  a  man  who,  by  sheer  force  of  energy  and  talent,  easily  outstripped  all
competitors."     Tafiiakhti  was  a  chief  of  obscure  origin,  whose  hereditary  rights

ii^et  einigen  Bemerkungen  zu  der  XXVI  und  aiidern  Dijnaslien  dea  Neuen  Beichs,  pi.  i.,  and  Konigs-
buch,p\s.  xliv.-xlvi.),  with  one  single  exception.  Stern  had  discovered  that  the  prenomen  attributed
by  Lepsius  to  Takeloti  I.  really  belonged  to  Takeloti  11.  (Die  XXH  Manethonische  DtjnasHe,  in  the
Zeitschrift,  1S82,  pp.  10,  17) ;  to  Daressy,  however,  belongs  the  credit  of  indicating  the  protocol  of
Takeloti  I.  in  his  Note  addilionnelle  addressed  to  Barsanti,  Sur  deuz  tteles  d'Ahijdos  au  nom  du
I'haraon  Tahellolhis  I"'  {Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  171,  175),  and  in  his  Inscriptions  in^diles
de  la  XXJI'  Dijnadie  {Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  51,  52).

'  This  fact,  disputed  by  Ee'villout  {Notice  des  Papyrus  archaiques,  pp.  217,  233),  lias  recently
been  placed  beyond  doubt  by  inscriptions  found  on  the  quay  at  Karuak  near  the  water-marks  of  the
Nile  (Legrain,  Textes  graves  sur  le  quai  de  Karuak,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114,  Nos.  26-20).

*  No.  26  of  Legrain's  inscriptions  (Textes  gravis,  etc.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114)  tells  us
the  height  of  tlie  Nile  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  Petubastit,  whicli  was  also  the  second  year  of  King  Auiti
(cf.  Legiiain,  Les  Crues  du  Nil,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  1 21).  Seeing  that  Aulti's  name  occurs  in
the  place  occupied  by  that  of  the  high  priest  of  Thebes  in  otlier  inscriptions  of  the  same  king,  I  con-
sider it  probable  that  he  was  reigning  in  Thebes  itself,  and  that  he  was  a  high  priest  who  had  become
king  in  the  same  way  as  Painotmu  under  the  XXI"'  dynasty  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  7G0).

■■  Cf.  Nos.  27,  28  of  Legrain's  inscriptions,  in  which  the  writer  refers  to  a  high  priest  of  Amon,
whose  name  is  mutilated,  but  should  be  read  Harsiisit  (Textes  gravis  sur  le  quai  de  Karnal;  in
the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114).

*  LiEELEiN,  Die  JEgyptisuhen  Denkmiiler  aus  Saiut-Petershurg,  Htlsiugfors,  Upsala  und  Kopen-
hagen,  pp.  0-11,  and  pi.  1,  2  ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Mnmies  royales  de  Diir  el-Bahari,  pp.  741-754.

'  E.  DE  EoUGE,  L' Inscription  historique  du  rot  Pianchi  Miriamoun,  p.  \S,  et  seq. ;  E.  de  Rouge'  was
the  first  to  identify  the  Osorkon,  King  of  Bubastis,  mentioned  on  au  Ethiopian  stele,  with  the  Osorkon
III.  of  the  monuments,  the  second  Pharaoh  of  the   XXIII"'  Tanite  dynasty.

"  All  our  knowledge  of  this  first  Ethiopian  campaign  comes  from  a  stele  of  King  Pioukhi-Miamun,
discovered  at  Gebel-Barkal  in  1802,  and  transported  to  Bulaq  (Mariette,  Letire  u  M.  le  Vicomte  de
Itougi  sur  une  stile  trouvie  au  Gehel-Barkal,  in  the  Bevue  Archiologique,  1863,  vol.  vii.  pp.  413-422)


THE  ETHIOPIANS   IN  EOT  FT.


167


extended  merely  over  the  village  of  Nutirit  and  the  outskirts  of  Sebennytos/
One  or  two  victories  gained  over  his  nearest  neighbours  encouraged  him  to
widen  the  sphere  of  his  operations.  He  first  of  all  laid  hands  on  those  nomes
of  the  Delta  which  extended  to  the  west  of  the  principal  arm  of  the  Nile,  the
Saite,  Athribite,  Libyan,  and  Memphite  nomes ;  these  he  administered  through
officers  under  his  own  immediate  control ;  then,  leaving  untouched  the  eastern
provinces,  over  which  Osorkon  III.  exercised  a  make-shift,  easy-going  rule,  he
made  his  way  up  the  river.     Maitumu  and  the  Fayum  accepted  him  as  tlieir


TLEW   OF    A    PART   OF   THE    RULS3    OF    NAPATA."


suzerain,  but  Khninsu  and  its  king,  Pefzaabastit,  faithful  to  their  allegiance,*
offered  strenuous  resistance.     He  tlieu  crossed  over  to  the  rierht  bank,  and

iiad  published  by  Mariette  {Monuments  divcrg,  pis.  1-6,  and  Texte,  pp.  1,  2),  interpreted  by  E.  de
Kouge'  (L'liitcrqAion  hislorique  du  roi  Pinnchi  Meriamoun,  in  the  Bevue  Archgblogique,  1863,  vol.  viii.
p.  94,  et  seq.,  and  La  stele  du  rui ethiopien  Pidiihhi  Meriamen,  in  the  Chre$tomathie  Hgyptienne,  vol.  iv.),
and,  after  him,  translated  into  (iermau  by  Lauth  (Din  Pianchi-Stele,  in  the  Sitzungsherichte  of  the
Munich  Academy,  lStJ9,  pp.  13-49,  and  in  the  Ahhandlujigea  of  the  same  institution,  1870),  then  by
BrugBch  {Die  Siegesinscliri/t  Konigii  I'ianchi  vun  Ethiopien,  in  the  NachricMeu  of  the  Giittingen
Institute  of  Sciences,  1876,  Xo.  19,  pp.  457-488,  and  Geschichte  JUgyptens,  pp.  676-707),  into  English
by  Cook  (Inscription  of  Pianchi  Meramon,  King  of  Egypt,  in  the  Eighth  Century  B.C.,  1S73,  reprinted
with  certain  corrections  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  ii.  pp.  79-104),  and  finally  by  GriiEtli
(Egyptian  Literature,  in  Specimen  Pages  of  a  Library  of  the  World's  Best  Literature,  pp.  5274-5295).

'  E.  DE  KouGi':,  L' Inscription,  historique  du  roi  Pianchi  Mi'riamoun,  pp.  21,  22.  The  city  of
Nutirit  was  first  of  all  identified  by  Brugsch  (Gengraphische  Inschriften,  vol.  i.  pp.  289,  290)  with
Manuti,  near  Canopus  ;  Brugsch  has  since  tlien  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  the  Isajum  of  the
Greco-Koman  geographers,  near  Behbeit  (Bbugsoh,  Dictionnaire  Gi'ographique,  pp.  3C6,  367).
Tafnakhti  is  the  Tnephakhtos,  father  of  Bocciiuris,  mentioned  by  Diodorus  Siculus  (i.  45),  whose
name  is  incorrectly  given  as  Tekhnatia  (E.  de  Eocge,  U Inscription  historique  du  roi  Pianchi
Meriamoun,  pp.  22,  23)  by  the  author  of  the  treatise  De  Isvle  (§  S,  p.  13,  Pabthey's  edit.).

-  Reproduced  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  lithograph  published  in  Cailliaud,  Voyage  i  M^ro^,
Atlas,  vol.  1.  pi.  Ixiii.

'  Pefzaabastit,  King  of  Heracleopolis,  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  Pharaoh  Pefzabastit  of  tho


KJS     TIGLATE-PJLESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

received  the  homage  of  Heliopolis  and  Pnebtepahe ;  ^  he  put  the  inhabitants
of  Uabu  to  ransom,  established  a  close  blockade  of  Khninsu,  and  persuaded
Namroti,  King  of  Khmunu,  to  take  an  oath  of  allegiance.^  At  length,  those
petty   kings   and   princes    of    the   Said   and   the   Delta   who   still    remained


GEBEL-BARKAL,    THE    SACRED   MOUNTAIN   OF   NAPATA.^

unoonquered  called  upon  Ethiopia,^  the  only  power  capable  of  holding  its
ground  against  him,  for  help.  The  "  vile  Kaushu  "  (Gush)  probably  rose  to  be
an  independent  state  about  the  time  when  Sheshonq  and  the  Bubastite  kings
came  into  power.^  Peopled  by  Theban  settlers,  and  governed  by  the  civil  and
religious  code  of  Thebes,  the  provinces  which  lay  between  the  cataract  of
Hannek  and  the  confluence  of  the  two  Niles  soon  became  a  second  Thebaid,
more  barren  and  less  wealthy  than  the  first,  but  no  less  tied  to  the
traditions  of  the  past."  Napata,  its  capital,  lay  in  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  a
sandstone  cliff,  which  rose  perpendicularly  to  a  height  of  nearly  two  hundred

Berlin  sarcophagus  (Lepsu's,  Devhm.,  iii.  2S4  a),  as  pointed  out  by  E.  de  Rouge'  (Tnscription  du  roi
Fianchi  Meriamoun,-p-p.  18, 19)  and  Deve'ria  (^Memvires  et  Fragments,  vol.  i.  pp.  376,  377;  cf.  Dabessy,
Notes  et  Remarques,  §  cxliii.,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xix.  pp.  20,  21).

'  Inscription  of  Pionhlii-Miamun,  11.  2-4  ;  cf.  Makiette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  i. ;  E.  de  Eouge,
La  Stele  du  rot  itiiiopien  Pianhhi  Meriamen,  pp.  3-5.

'  Inscription  of  Pionhhi-Miamun,  11.  i,  5;  cf.  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  i. ;  E.  de  Rouge,
La  Stele  du  roi  gthiopien  Pianhhi  Meriamen,  p.  6.

'  Reproduced  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  lithograph  in  Cailliavd,  Voyage  a  M^ro€,  Atlas,  vol.  i.  pi.  1.

*  Inscription  of  Pionhhi-Miamun,  11.  6-8 ;  cf.  Map.iette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  i. ;  E.  de  Rouge,
La  Stele  du  rot  ethiopien  Pianhhi  Meriamen,  pp.  7,  8.

=  Cf.  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  772.

"  Cf.  what  ia  said  in  regard  to  Ethiopia  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  299,  300.


TEEOORATIC   CHARACTER    OF   TEE  ETEIOPIAN  KINGS.


169


feet,  its  summit,  when  viewed  from  the  south-west,  presenting  an  accidental
resemblance  to  a  human  profile.^  This  was  the  Du-uahu,  or  Sacred  Mount,  in
the  heart  of  which  the  god  was  supposed  to  have  his  dwelling ;  the  ruins  of
several  temples  can  still  be
seen  near  the  western  ex-
tremity of  the  hill,  the  finest
of  them  being  dedicated  to  a
local  Amon-ra.  This  Amon
was  a  replica  of  the  Theban
Amon  on  a  smaller  scale,  and
was  associated  with  the  same
companions  as  his  prototype,
Maut,  his  consort,  and  Ehou-
su,  his  son.  He  owed  his
origin  to  the  same  religious
concepts,  and  was  the  central
figure  of  a  similar  myth,
the  only  difference  being  that
he  was  represented  in  com-
posite shape,  with  a  ram's
head  ;  perhaps  a  survival
from  some  earlier  indigenous
deity,  such  as  Didun,  for  in-
stance,^ who  had  been  pre-
viously worshipped  iu  those
parts ;  his  pi  iests  lived  in
accordance  with  the  rules  of
the  Theban  hierarchy.  We
can  readily  believe  that  when  Hrihor  extorted  the  title  of  "Eoyal  Son  of
Xaushu  "  from  the  weaklings  who  occupied  the  throne  at  the  close  of  the
Kamesside  dynasty,  he  took  care  to  install  one  of  the  members  of  his  family  as
high  priest  at  Napata,  and  from  henceforward  had  the  whole  country  at  his
bidding.     Subsequently,  when   Painotmu   II.    was   succeeded   by   Auputi   at

'  Cailliacd,  Voyage  a  Mfroi',  vol.  iii.  pp.  199,  200.  The  natives  believe  this  profile  to  have  been
cut  by  liumau  bauds — an  error  which  has  been  shared  by  more  tlian  one  modern  traveller.

-  Eeproduced  by  Fauolier-Gudin,  from  a  lithograph  published  by  Caillaud,  Voyage  a  M^rod',
Atlas,  vol.  i.  pi.  lis.

'  As  to  Didun  or  Dudun,  and  the  identification  of  this  ancient  Nubian  deity  with  Amon  and
Khmunu,  at  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  conquest,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  300.  Lepsius
believed  that  the  introduction  of  the  ram-lieaded  Amon  at  Napata  occurred  at  a  comparatively  recent
date,  and  attributLd  it  to  the  time  of  Taharqa  (^Ueberdie  widderhopfigen  Gotter  Ammon  und  Chnuphis,
in  Beziehung  auf  die  Ammom-Oase,  in  the  Zeilickrift,  1876,  pp.  14-16.


KUINS  OP  THE  TEMPLE  OP  AMON  AT  XAPATA."


PLAN  OB"  THE  TEMPLE  OF  AMOX  AT  yAPATA.


170     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Thebes,  it  seems  that   the  Ethiopian    priests   refused  to  ratify  his  election.

Whether  they  conferred  the  supreme  power  on  one   of  their  own   number,

or  whether  some  son  of  Painotmu,  flying  from  the  Bubastite  kings,  arrived

at   the    right   moment   to  provide   them   with  a  master,  is  not  quite   clear.

The   kings   of  Ethiopia,  priests   from   the   first,  never   lost   their   sacerdotal

character.     They  continued  to  be  men  of  God,  and  as  such  it  was  necessary

that  they  should  be  chosen  by  the  god  himself.     On  the  death  of  a  sovereign,

Araon  at  once  became  regent  in  the  person  of  liis  prophet,  and  continued  to  act

until  tlie  funeral  rites  were  celebrated.     As  soon  as  these  ceremonies  were

completed,  the  army  and  the  people  collected  at  the  foot  of  the  Sacred  Mount ;

__  the  delegates  of  the

lllLi^Baa^^^i^HB^^BH^^^^i^"^^^^"!    various    orders    of

-  *   J^^  ^B  ••••••••••  ^1  *  I   the  state  were  led

f^^^^^^J .,., ^  •  •  •  «      »  •  •  •  •  ■■  •  *  p

t— I  |J_.  _ g  .  .  .  ..».  ••••»•  •■   iiito  the  sanctuary,

'-T*^'^§,         |t*I ^\  • I  and  then,  in  their

presence,    all    the
males  of  the  royal

family — "  the  king's  brothers,"  as  they  were  called — were  paraded  before  the
statue  of  the  god ;  he  on  whom  the  god  laid  his  hand  as  he  passed  was  con-
sidered to  be  the  chosen  one  of  Amou,  and  consecrated  king  without  delay.^  As
may  be  readily  imagined,  the  new  monarch  thus  appointed  by  divine  dictation
was  completely  under  the  control  of  the  priests,  and  before  long,  if  he  failed  to
prove  sufficiently  tractable,^  they  claimed  the  right  to  dispense  with  him  alto-
t'ether;  they  sent  him  an  order  to  commit  suicide,  and  he  obeyed.  The  boundaries
of  this  theocratic  state  varied  at  different  epochs ;  originally  it  was  confined  to  the
reo-ion  between  the  First  Cataract  and  the  mouth  of  the  Blue  Nile.  The  bulk
of  the  population  consisted  of  settlers  of  Egyptian  extraction  and  Egyptianised
natives ;  but  isolated,  as  they  were,  from  Egypt  proper  by  the  rapture  of  the
political  ties  which  had  bound  them  to  the  metropolis,  they  ceased  to  receive
fresh  reinforcements  from  the  northern  part  of  the  valley  as  they  had  formerly
done,  and  daily  became  more  closely  identified  with  the  races  of  various  origin
which  roamed  through  the  deserts  of  Libya  or  Arabia.  This  constant  infil-
tration of  free  or  slavish  Bedawin  blood  and  the  large  number  of  black  women

'  Eeproduced  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  the  plan  drawn  up  and  published  by  Caillaud,  Voyage  a
M^rof,  Atlas,  vol.  i.  pi.  Ixiv. ;  cf.  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  i.  12S.

'  This  is  the  ritual  described  in  the  Stele  of  the  Enthronement  (Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  9  ;
cf.  Maspero,  Mdanges  de  Mythologie  et  d'Archdblogie  Egyptiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  135-151,  229-233).
Perhaps  it  was  already  in  use  at  Thebes  uuder  the  XXI"  and  IXXII'"'  dynasties,  at  the  election  of
the  high  priest,  whether  he  happened  to  be  a  king  or  not;  at Jany  rate,  a  story  of  the  Ptolemaic
period  told  by  Synesius  in  The  Egyptian  (Maspeko,  Melanges  de  Mythologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  86-89)  seems
to  point  to  this  conclusion.

3  DioDOKUS  SiccLus,  iii.  6.


ANNEXATION  OF  THE  THEBAID  BY  THE  KINGDOM  OF  ETHIOPIA.       171


A    NEARLY    IL  la,    ETUIOPIAN   TYPE.'


found  in  the  harems  of  the  rich,  and  even  in  the  huts  of  the  common  people,
quickly  impaired  the  purity  of  the  race,  even  among  the  upper  classes  of  the
nation,  and  the  type  came  to  resemble  that
of  the  negro  tribes  of  Equatorial  Africa.^  The
language  fared  no  better  in  the  face  of  this
invasion,  and  the  written  character  soon  be-
came as  corrupt  as  the  language ;  words
foreign  to  the  Egyptian  vocabulary,  incorrect
expressions,  and  barbarous  errors  in  syntax
were  multiplied  without  stint. '^  The  taste  for
art  decayed,  and  technical  ability  began  to
deteriorate,  the  moral  and  intellectual  stan-
dard declined,  and  the  mass  of  the  people
showed  signs  of  relapsing  into  barbarism  :  the
leaders  of  the  aristocracy  and  the  scribes
alone  preserved  almost  intact  their  inheri-
tance from  an  older  civilisation.  Egypt  still  attracted  them  :  they  looked
upon  it  as  their  rightful  possession,  torn  from  them  by  alien  usurpers  in  defiance
of  all  sense  of  right,  and  they  never  ceased
to  hope  that  some  day,  when  the  god  saw  fit.
they  would  win  back  their  heritage.  Were
not  their  kings  of  the  posterity  of  Sibu,  thr
true  representatives  of  the  Ramessides  and
the  solar  race,  compared  with  whom  the
northern  Pharaohs,  even  those  whose  mothers
ranked  as  "  worshippers  "  of  Amon,  were  but
mere  mushroom  kings  ?  Thebes  admitted
the  validity  of  their  claims :  it  looked  to
them  for  help,  and  the  revolts  by  which
it  had  been  torn  ever  since  the  reign
of  Osorkon  II.  were,  perhaps,  instigated  by
the   partisans   of    Ethiopia.^     Li    the   time   of  Petubastis   its    high    priests,

'  Taharqa  furnishes  us  with  a  striking  example  of  this  deguueratiou  of  the  Egyptiau  type.  His
face  shows  the  char.icteristic  features  of  the  black  race,  both  on  the  Egyptian  statue — the  head  of
which  is  reproduced  further  on  as  a  heading  to  the  summary  of  Chapter  IV.  of  this  volume— as  well
as  on  the  Assyrian  stele  of  Sinjirli  (Luschan,  Die  Amgrahungen  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pi.  i.).

=  Of.  the  phrases  and  grammatical  forms  in  the  Egyptian  dialect  of  Ethiopia  pointed  out  by
BIaspero,  Mglaiiyes  de  Mytlwlonie  el  d'Arche'ologie  Egyptieniies,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2G5-277,  279-284.

'  Drawn  by  Fuuoher-Gudin,  from  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  30o,  No.  95.  This  is  one  of  the  kings  who
flourished  about  the  Greco- Roman  period.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  303,  No.  'M.  Also  a  portrait  of  a  king  of
the  same  period.

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  the  subject  of  these  revolts  on  pp.  161-165,  s'ipra.


MIXED    NEGUO    AND    ETHIOPIAN    TYPE.'


172      TIGLATH-riLESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Harsiisit  and  Takeloti,  were  still  connected  with  the  Tanites ; '  after  that  it
placed  itself  under  the  immediate  orders  of  Ethiopia,  and  the  pontificate  dis-
appeared.   The  accession  of  a  sovereign  who  was  himself  invested  by  hereditary

right  with  the  functions  and  title
of  high  priest  of  Amon  henceforth
rendered  the  existence  of  such  an
oiEce  superfluous  at  Thebes :  it
would  almost  have  meant  an  im-
perium  in  imperio.  The  adminis-
tration of  religious,  and  perhaps
also  of  political,  affairs  was,  there-
fore, handed  over  to  the  deputy
prophet,  and  this  change  still
further  enhanced  the  importance
of  the  "  female  worshippers  of  the
god."  In  the  absence  of  the  king,
who  bad  his  capital  at  Napata,  they
remained  the  sole  representatives
of  legitimate  authority  in  the  The-
baid:  the  chief  among  them  soon
came  to  be  regarded  as  a  veritable
Lady  of  Thebes,  and,  subject  to  the
god,  mistress  of  the  city  and  its
territory.^

It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  it
was  Pionkhi  Miamun  or  one  of  his
immediate  predecessors  who  took
possession  of  the  city.  The  nomes
dependent  on  Amon  followed  the
example  of  the  capital,  and  the  whole  Thebau  territory  as  far  as  Slut  had
been  occupied  by  Ethiopian  troops,  when  in  the  twenty-first  year  of  the  king's
reign  the  princes  of  the  Delta  and  Middle  Egypt  appealed  to  the  court  of
Napata  for  help.  Even  had  they  not  begged  it  to  do  so,  it  would  have  been
compelled  before  long  to  intervene,  for  Tafnakhti  was  already  on  his  way  to
attack  it ;  Pionkhi  charged  Luamarsakni  and  Puarama,  the  generals  he  had
already  stationed  in  the  Thebaid,  to  hold  Tafnakhti  in  check,  till  he  was
able  to  get  together  the  remainder  of  his  army  and  descend  the  Kile  to  support

'  Legbain,  Textes  graves  mr  le  quai  de  Earnak,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114,  Nos.  27-29;
this  disappearance  nf  the  office  of  high  priest  was  first  pointed  out  by  Maspero,  Les  Momies  lioyales
de  Deir  el-Bahari,  pp.  745-748.

'  Maspero,  Les  Momies  BoyaJes  de  Bgir  el-Bahari,  p.  747,  et  seq.


PIONKHI'S   GENERALS  IN  MIDDLE  EGYPT.


173


them.  Their  instructions  were  to  spare  none  of  the  rebellious  towns,  but  to
"  capture  their  men  and  their  beasts,  and  their  ships  on  the  river ;  to  allow
none  of  the  fellaheen  to  go  out  into  the  fields,  nor  any  labourer  to  his  labour,
but  to  attack  Hermopolis  and  harass  it  daily."  They  followed  out  these
orders,  though,  it  would  seem,  without  result,  until  the  reinforcements  from
Nubia  came  up :  their  movements  then  became  more  actively  oifensive,  and
falling  on  Tafnakhti's  ships,  which  were  making  for  Thebes  heavily  laden  with
men  and  stores,  they  sunk
several  of  them.  Anxious
to  profit  by  this  first  suc-
cess, they  made  straight  for
Heracleopolis  with  a  view  to
relieving  it.  Tafnakhti,  ac-
companied by  the  two  kings
Namroti  and  Auputi,  was
directing  the  siege  in  person;
he  had  under  his  command,
in  addition   to  contingents


BUINS  OP  OXTRRHTSCHOS  AND  THE  MODERN  TOWN  OF  BAHNESA.'

from  Busiris,  ]\Iendes,  Thoth,  and  Pharbgethos,  all  the  vassals  of  Osorkon  III.,
the  successor  of  Petubastis  and  titular  Pharaoh  of  the  whole  country.  The
Ethiopian  fleet  engaged  the  Egyptian  ships  at  the  end  of  the  island  of
Heracleopolis,  near  the  mouth  of  the  canal  leading  from  the  Nile  to  the  Bahr-
Yusuf.-  Tafnakhti  was  defeated,  and  the  remnants  of  his  squadron  took  refuge
in  Pipuga  under  cover  of  his  land  forces.^  At  dawn,  the  next  day,  the  Ethiopians
disembarked  and  gave  battle.  The  strusrgle  was  long  and  fierce,  but  inde-
cisive.  Luamarsakni  and  Puarama  claimed  the  victory,  but  were  obliged  to
effect  a  retreat  on  the  day  following  their  so-called  success,  and  when  they

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  an  engraving  in  Vivant  Denon,  Voyage  dans  le  Haute  Egypte,  pi.  31, 2.

2  The  ancient  geographers  looked  upon  the  nome  of  Heracleopolis  as  a  large  island  (Stuabo,  XVII.
i.  §  35,  p.  S09;  Ptolemy,  Geogr.,  vol.  i.  bk.  iv.  p.  120),  its  southern  boundary  being,  probably,  the
canal  of  Harabshent  (Jomakt,  Description  de  V Heptanomide,  in  the  Description  de  V Egypte,  vol.  iii.
pp.  400-402) :  the  end  of  the  island,  which  the  Egyptians  called  "  the  forepart  of  Khninsu  "
{Inscription  of  Pionlchi,  1.  20),  was  probably  Harabshent  and  its  environs  (Maspero,  Notes  an  jour  le
jour,  §  31,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  1898,  vol.  sx.  pp.  124,  125).

'  Pi-puga,  formerly  identified  by  Lauth  (Die  Pianchi-Stele,  1870,  p.  38)  with  Pushin,  the  modern
Bush,  and  by  Brugsch  {Dictionnaire  G^ographique,  p.  228)  with  El-Beka,  is  probably  El-Foka,  on
the  Nile,  to  the  north  of  Harabshent  (Maspero,  Notes  ««  jour  lejour,  §  3],  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  1898,  vol.  xx.  p.  125).


174      TIGLATII-PILESER  HI.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.


m


dropped  anchor  iu  the  harbour  of  Hermopolis,  they  found  that  Namroti  had
made  his  way  back  to  the  city  bj'  laud  and  forestalled  them.  Powerless  to
hold  tlie  field  without  support,  he  collected  all  the  men  and  cattle  he  could  lay
hands  on,  and  awaited  the  progress  of  events  behind  his  ramparts.  The
Ethiopians  invested  the  town,  and  wrote  to  inform  Pionkhi  of  what  they  had

done — not,  however,  without  some  misgiving
as  to  the  reception  which  awaited  their  de-
spatches. And  sure  enough,  "  His  Majesty
became  enraged  thereat,  even  as  a  panther :
•  If  tlipy  ]i:ivi^  allowed  a  remnant  of  the  war-
riors of  the  north  to  re-


main, if  they  have  let  one
of  them  escape  to  tell  of
the  fight,  if  they  make
him  not  to  die  in  their
slaughter,  then  by  my
life,  by  the  love  of  Ea,  by
the  praise  of  Amon  for
me,  I  will  myself  go  down
and  overthrow  that  which


KIXG    NAJIROTI    LEADING    A    HORSE    TO  PIUXKHI.'


Tafnakhti  hath  done,'  I  will  compel  him  to  give  up  war  for  ever !  There-
fore, after  celebrating  the  festivals  of  the  New  Year,  when  I  shall  have  sacri-
ficed to  Amon  of  [Napata],  my  father,  in  his  excellent  festival  wherein  he
appears  in  his  procession  of  the  New  Tear,  when  he  shall  have  sent  me  in  peace
to  look  upon  the  [Theban]  Amon  in  his  festivals  at  Thebes,  and  when  I  shall
have  carried  his  image  iu  procession  to  Luxor,  in  the  festival  celebrated  iu  bis
honour  among  the  festivals  of  Thebes,  on  the  night  of  the  feast  appointed  in
the  Thebaid,  established  by  Ea  at  the  creation,  when  I  have  led  him  in  the
procession  and  brought  him  unto  his  throne,  on  the  day  for  introducing  the
god,  even  the  second  of  Athyr,  then  will  I  make  the  enemy  taste  the  savour  of
my  claws.' "  The  generals  did  their  very  utmost  to  appease  their  master's
wrath  before  he  appeared  on  the  scene.  They  told  off  a  force  to  keep  watch
over  Hermopolis  while  they  themselves  marched  against  the  nome  of  Uabu ;
they  took  Oxyrrhynchos  by  storm,  \\  ith  "  the  fury  of  a  water-spout, "  and  in-
formed the  king  of  this  achievement ;  but  "  his  heart  was  not  softened  thereby."
They  crossed  over  to  the  right  bank ;  they  crushed  the  people  of  the  north

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudirijfrom  an  impression  of  the  stele  in  the  Gizeh  Museum;  cf.  Mariette.
Motiumejits  divers,  pi.  1.

=  The  king  does  not  mention  his  adversary  by  name  iu  the  text ;  be  is  content  to  indicate  him  by
a  pronoun  iu  the  third  person—"  that  which  he  hath  done  .  .  .   then  will  I  make  him  taste,"  etc.


TEE   SUBMISSION   OF  KEMVNU.


175


under  the  walls  of  Tatehni,^  they  forced  the  walls  of  the  town  with  the  battering-
ram,  and  killed  many  of  the  inhabitants,  amongst  others  a  son  of  Tafnakhti,
whose  body  they  sent  to  the  king ;  but  "  his  heart  was  not  softened  thereby."
They  then  pushed  on  as  far  as  Hait  Bonu  ^  and  sacked  it,  but  still  failed  to  regain
favour.     On  the  9th  of  Thoth,  Pionkhi  came  down  to  Thebes,  and  after  hasty


RUINS   OF   THE   TEMPLE    OF    THOTH,    AT    HEG3I0P0L1S    THE   GKEAT.''

attendance  at  the  services  to  Amon,  went  to  rejoin  the  vanguard  of  his  army
under  the  walls  of  Hermopolis.  "  No  sooner  had  his  Majesty  quitted  the  cabin
of  his  ship,  than  the  horses  were  harnessed  and  the  charioteers  in  their  places;
the  fear  of  his  Majesty  spread  even  to  the  Nomads  of  Asia,  and  all  hearts
trembled  before  him."  Pionkhi  drove  back  the  enemy  behind  their  walls,
pitched  his  tent  to  the  south-west  of  the  city,  threw  up  earth-works,  and  built
terraces  so  as  to  place  his  bowmen  and  slingers  on  a  level  with  the  battlements
of  its  towers.  At  the  end  of  three  days,  Namroti,  finding  himself  hard  pressed
on  every  side,  resolved  to  surrender.  He  sent  envoys  to  Pionkhi  laden  with
rich  presents,  and  despatched  Queen  Nsitentmahit  after  them  to  beg  for  mercy
from  the  women  who  had  accompanied  the  Ethiopian,  his  wives,  concubines,
daughters,  or  royal  sisters.  Their  entreaties  were  graciously  received,  and
Namroti  ventured  to  come  in  person,  leading  a  horse  with  his  right  hand  and
shaking  in  his  left  a  sistrum  of  gold  and  lapis-lazuli ;  he  knelt  down  and
presented  with  his  salutations  the  long  train  of  gifts  which  had  gone  before

'  The  modem  Tthueh,  on  the  right  b;iiik  of  the  Nile,  a  little  below  Miuieli  (Maspeeo,  NoUs  sur
quelques  points  de  Grammaire  et  d'Histoire,  in  the  Melanges  d' Arclii'ulogie  Egypiicnne  et  Assi/rienne,
vol.  i.  pp.  291,  292,  aud  SManges  de  Mylholorjie  et  d' ArcMulogie  Eijypliennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  278,  '279;
cf.  Brcgsch,  Dictionnaire  Gfygrapliiqiie,  p.  957,  and  DtjiiciiEV,  Geschichte  JEgyplens,  p.  196).

'  Hait-Bonu,  or  Habonu,  is  the  Hipponon  of  the  Greco-Roman  geographers  (J.  de  Eouge,  Textes
Ge'ograpliiques  du  temple  d'Edfou,  in  the  Itevue  ArcMoloyique,  1872,  vol.  sxiii.  p.  72,  note  3,  and  p.  76),
which  Diimichen  places  at  el-Hibeh,  almost  opposite  Fe.shn  {Gesehichte  JSgyptens,  pp.  196,  197.
[Not  to  be  confounded  witli  Hibonu,  opposite  Miuieh. — Tr.]

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  an  eng;raviug  in  Vivant  Denon,  Voyage  dans  la  Haute  Hgyptc,  pi.  33, 1  ;
cf.  Descripliun  de  VEgypte,  Antiq.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  f).  Tlie  portico  was  destroyed  about  1820  1-iy  the  engineers
who  constructed  the  sugar  refinery  at  Rodah,  and  now  only  a  few  shapeless  fragments  of  it  remain.


176      TIQLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

him.  Pionkhi  visited  the  temple  of  Thoth,  and  there,  amidst  the  acclamations
of  soldiers  and  priests,  oifered  up  the  customary  sacrifices.  He  then  made  his
way  to  the  palace  and  inspected  its  courts,  chambers,  treasury,  and  storehouses,
and  reviewed  the  whole  household,  including  even  Namroti's  own  wives  and
daughters,  though  "  he  turned  not  his  face  towards  any  one  of  them."  He
next  went  on  to  tlie  stud-farms,  and  was  indignant  to  find  that  the  horses  had
suffered  from  hunger  during  the  siege.  Thoroughbreds  were  probably  some-
what scarce  at  Napata,  and  he  had,  no  doubt,  reckoned  on  obtaining  new  blood
and  a  complete  relay  of  chargers  from  the  Egyptian  stables ;  his  chances  of
doing  so  seemed  likely  to  vanish  if  brood  mares  and  stallions  had  everywhere
been  debilitated  by  the  hardships  of  war.  He  reserved  a  part  of  the  booty  for
himself,  handed  over  the  balance  to  the  priests  of  Amon  at  Karnak,  and  also,
before  he  left,  received  tribute  from  Heracleopolis.  Pefzaabastit  brouglit  him
horses,  the  pick  of  his  stables,  slaves  laden  with  gold  and  silver  and  precious
stones;  then  burying  his  face  in  the  dust,  he  offered  worship  to  his  liberator:
"  Hell  had  swallowed  me  up,  I  was  plunged  into  darkness,  and  lo,  now  a  light
has  been  given  me.  Since  I  have  found  no  man  to  love  me  in  the  day  of
adversity,  or  to  stand  by  me  in  the  day  of  battle,  save  only  thee,  0  victorious
king,  who  hast  torn  away  the  night  from  above  me,  I  will  be  thy  servant,  I  and
all  my  house,  and  Kbninsu  shall  pay  tribute  into  thy  treasury.  For,  as  to  thee,
thou  art  Harmakbis,  chief  of  the  imperishable  stars,  thou  art  king,  even  as  he
is  king,  and  even  as  lie  doth  not  destroy  himself,  neither  shalt  thou  destroy
thyself!"!

The  downfall  of  Khmunu  led  all  who  might  still  have  shown  resistance  in
Middle  Egypt  to  lay  down  their  arms  also.  The  fortress  of  Pisakhmakhpirri  ^
dominated  the  gorges  of  Lahunit,  and  thus  commanded  the  entrance  to  the
Fayum ;  but  the  son  of  Tafnakhti  agreed  to  surrender  it,  provided  he  were
allowed  to  march  out  with  the  honours  of  war.  Shortly  after,  Maitumu  threw
open  its  gates,  and  its  example  was  followed  by  Titaui ;  at  Maitumu  there  was
rioting  among  the  Egyptians  in  the  streets,  one  party  wishing  to  hold  out,  the
other  to  surrender,  but  in  the  end  the  latter  had  their  way.^    Pionkhi  discharged

'  Inscription  of  Piunhlii-Miamun,  11.  S-76 ;  Mariette,  Monumenls  dicers,  pis.  i.-iii. ;  E.  de  Kouge,
La  Stele  du  roi  ^Ihiopien  Piankhi  Meriamen,  pp.  S-37.

-  This  fortress,  which  bears  a  name  compounded  witli  that  of  Osorkou  1.  (Becgsch,  Didionnaire
O^ographique,  pp.  434,  435),  must  have  been  rebuilt  by  that  monarch  oa  the  site  of  an  earlier  fort ;
the  new  name  remained  in  use  under  the  XXII'"'  and  XXIII"'  dynasties,  after  which  the  old  one
reappears.  It  is  IlLihun,  where  Petrie  discovered  the  remains  of  a  flourishing  town  of  the  Bubastite
epoch  (Illahuii,  Kahun  and  Guroh,  p.  24,  et  seq.).

^  Maritumu,  or  Maitumu,  i8  the  modern  Meidum  (Lauth,  Die  Pianahi-Stele,  p.  34 ;  Beugsoh,
Dictiomiaire  Gibgraphiquc,  p.  S'-t),  associated  in  the  inscription  with  the  cliaracteristic  epithet,
Pisolcari-Nihu-Suazu,  or  "  temple  of  Sokari,  master.of  tlie  transfiguration."  Tilaui  lay  exactly  on  the
frontier  between  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt — lieuce  its  name,  which  signifios  "commanding  the  two
regions"  (E.  de  Rouge,  La  Stele  du  roi  e'thiopien  Piunkld  Meriamen,  p.  42,  note  4);  it  was  in  the
Memphite  nome,  and  Brugsch  identifies  it  with  the  Greek  city  of  Acanthos,  near  Dahshur  (^Diction-


PIONKHI  CAPTURES   MEMPHIS.  177

his  priestly  duties  wherever  he  went,  and  received  the  local  taxes,  always  being
careful  to  reserve  a  tenth  for  the  treasury  of  Amon-Ea ;  the  fact  that  his  army
was  kept  under  rigid  control,  and  that  he  showed  great  clemency  to  the
vanquished,  helped  largely  to  conciliate  those  who  were  not  bound  by  close
ties  of  interest  to  the  cause  of  Tafnakhti.  On  reaching  Memphis,  Pionkhi  at
once  had  recourse  to  the  persuasive  methods  which  had  hitherto  served  him
so  well,  and  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  garrison.  "  Shut  not  yourselves
up  in  forts,  and  fight  not  against  the  Upper  Country,^  for  Shu  the  god  of
creation,  when  I  enter,  he  entereth,  and  when  I  go  out,  he  goeth  out,  and  none
may  repel  my  attacks.  I  will  present  offerings  to  Phtah  and  to  the  divinities
of  the  White  Wall,  I  will  honour  Sokari  in  his  mysterious  coffer,  I  will
contemplate  Eisanbuf,^  then  I  will  return  from  thence  in  peace.  If  ye  will
trust  in  me,  Memphis  shall  be  prosperous  and  healthy,  even  the  children
shall  not  cry  therein.  Behold  the  nomes  of  the  South ;  not  a  soul  has  been
massacred  there,  saving  only  the  impious  who  blasphemed  God,  and  these
rebels  have  been  executed."  This  eloquence,  however,  was  of  no  avail.  A
detachment  of  archers,  sailors,  and  engineers  sent  to  make  a  reconnaissance  of
the  harbour  was  taken  by  surprise  and  routed  with  loss,  and  on  the  following
night  Tafuakhti  suddenly  made  his  appearance  on  the  spot.  He  had  the
8000  men  who  were  defending  it  paraded  before  him,  and  made  them  a
speech,  in  which  he  pointed  out  the  great  natural  strengtli  of  the  position,  the
stoutness  of  the  walls  and  the  abundance  of  provisions  ;  he  then  mounted  his
horse,  and  making  his  way  a  second  time  through  the  enemy's  outposts,  headed
straight  for  the  Delta  in  order  to  levy  reinforcements  there.  The  next  day,
Pionkhi  went  in  person  to  examine  the  approaches  of  the  city  in  whicli  his
ancestors  had  once  been  throned.  There  was  a  full  Nile,  and  the  river  came  right
up  to  the  walls.  He  sailed  close  in  along  the  whole  of  the  eastern  front,  and
landed  on  the  north,  much  vexed  and  discomfited  at  finding  it  so  strongly
fortified.  Even  the  common  soldiers  were  astonished,  and  began  to  discuss
among  themselves  the  difficulties  of  the  undertaking  with  a  certain  feeling  of
discouragement.  It  would  be  necessary,  they  declared,  to  open  a  regular  siege,
"  to  make  an  inclined  plane  leading  to  the  city,  throw  up  earthworks  against
its  walls,  bind  ladders,  set  up  masts  and  erect  spars  all  around  it."  Pionkhi
burst  into  a  rage  when  these  remarks  were  repeated  to  him  :  a  siege  in  set  form

naire  G&>graphique,  pp.  983-985),  but  this  position  appears  to  me  to  be  too  close  to  Mempliis  and  too
i'av  from  the  boumlary  of  the  nome ;  I  should  prefer  to  place  Titaui  at  Kaf'r  el-Ayat  or  thereabouts.
Cf.,  as  to  this  place,  what  is  said  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  -164,  note  7.

'  I.e.  against  Pionkhi,  who  was  master  of  the  Upper  Country,  that  is,  of  Thebes  and  Ethiopia,
and  the  forces  from  the  whole  of  the  valley  to  the  south  of  Memphis  who  accompauitd  him.

'  Lit.,  "He  who  is  on  the^South  of  his  Wall,"  a  name  given  to  one  of  the  quarters  of  Jlemphis,
and  afterwards  applied  to  the  god  Phtah,  who  was  worshipped  in  that  quarter  (Bkugsch,  Dicliunnaire
Qgographique,  pp.  57,  58).

X


178      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

would  have  been  a  most  serious  enterprise,  and  would  liave  allowed  the
allied  princes  time  to  get  together  fresh  troops.  He  drove  his  ships  full  speed
against  the  line  of  boats  anchored  in  the  harbour,  and  broke  through  it  at  the
first  onset ;  his  sailors  then  scaled  the  bank  and  occupied  the  houses  which
overlooked  it.  Reinforcements  concentrated  on  this  point  gradually  penetrated
into  the  heart  of  the  city,  and  after  two  days'  fighting  the  garrison  threw  down
their  arms.  The  victor  at  once  occupied  the  temples  to  save  them  from  pillage ;
he  then  purified  Memphis  with  water  and  natron,  ascended  in  triumph  to  the
temple  of  Phtah,  and  celebrated  there  those  rites  which  the  king  alone  was
entitled  to  perform.  The  other  fortresses  in  the  neighbourhood  surrendered
without  further  hesitation.  King  Auputi  of  Tentramu,^  prince  Akaneshu,^
and  prince  Petisis  tendered  the  homage  of  their  subjects  in  person,  and  the
other  sovereigns  of  the  Delta  merely  waited  for  a  demonstration  in  force  on
the  part  of  the  Ethiopians  befoi'e  following  their  example.  Pionkhi  crossed
the  Nile  and  marched  in  state  to  Heliopolis,  there  to  receive  the  royal
investiture.  He  offered  up  prayers  at  the  various  holy  places  along  the
route,  such  as  the  sanctuary  of  Tumu  at  Khriahu  and  the  temple  of  the
Ennead  who  dwelt  in  the  cavern  from  which  the  Northern  Nile  was  supposed
to  spring ;  he  then  crossed  over  Mount  Ahu,  bathed  his  face  in  the  reputed
source  of  the  river,  and  at  length  penetrated  into  the  dwelling-place  of  Ea.
He  ascended  the  steps  leading  to  the  great  chapel  in  order  that  he  might
there  "see  Ea  in  Hait-Banbonu  even  himself.  All  unattended,  he  drew
the  bolt,  threw  open  the  doors,  contemplated  his  father  Ea  in  Hait-Banbonu,
adjusted  Ea's  boat  Madit  and  the  Saktit  of  Shu,^  then  closed  the  doors  again,
aiSxed  a  seal  of  clay,  and  impressed  it  with  the  royal  signet."  He  had  thus
submitted  his  conduct  for  the  approval  of  the  god  in  wliom  all  attributes  of
royalty  were  vested,  and  the  god  had  legitimatised  his  claims  to  universal  rule :
he  was  henceforth  the  master,  not  merely  de  jure  but  de  facto  as  well,  and  the
kings  who  had  hitherto  declined  to  recognise  him  were  now  obliged  to  bow
reverently  before  his  authority.*

'  Probably  the  original  of  the  statue  discovered  by  Xaville  at  Tel-el-Yahudiyeh  (TVie  Mound  of  the
Jews  and  the  City  of  Onias,  pp.  10,  11,  and  pL  1,  and  Leg  Fouilles  du  Delta  pendant  Vhiver  de  1SS7,  in
the  Eecueil  de  Traraux,  vol.  X.  p.  53).  Tentramu  and  Taanu,  the  cities  of  Auputi,  are,  perhaps,  as
Brugsch  suggests,  identical  with  the  biblical  Elim  {Ezod.  xvi.  1)  and  the  Daneon  Portus  of  Pliny
{Hiit.  Nat.,  VI.  xxxiii.)  on  the  Bed  Sea  (Diet.  Giogr.,  pp.  124,  125,  453-455),  but  Naville  prefers  to
identify  Daneon  with  the  Tonu  of  the  Berlin  Papyrus,  Xo.  1  (The  Store-City  ofPithom,  pp.  22,  23).  I
believe  that  we  ought  to  look  for  the  kingdom  of  Auputi  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Meuziileh,  nearTanis.

'  Akaneshu  ruled  over  Sebennytos  and  in  theXVII""  nome  (Inscription  of  Pionkhi  Miamun,  1.  115).
Naville  discovered  at  Samannud  the  statue  of  one  of  his  descendants,  a  king  of  the  same  name,  perhaps
his  grandson,  who  was  prince  of  Sebennytos  in  the  time  of  Psammetichus  I.  (Les  Fouilles  du  Delta  peti-
dant  I'hiver  de  1SS7,  in  Pecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  x.  p.  57,  and  The  Mound  of  the  Jews,  pp.  24,  25,  pi.  v.).

'  As  to  these  two  barques  of  the  Sun,  cf.  what  is  said  in  the  Daicn  of  Civilization,  p.  90,  notes  4,  5 ;
Mddit  is  a  later  form  of  Mdnzit  or  Mdzit,  a  name  frequently  met  with  in  the  ancient  texts.

'  Inscription  of  Pionkhi  Miamun,  11.  76-lOt! ;  cf.  'MlARIEtte,  Monuments  divers,  pis.  3-5;  E.  de
EouGE,  La  Stele  du  roi  ethiopien  Pidnkhi  Meriamen,  pp.  37-61.


SUBMISSION   OF   TAFNAKHTI  TO    THE  ETHIOPIANS.  179

Osorkon  was  the  first  to  submit,  and  did  so  before  the  close  of  Pionkhi's
stay  at  Heliopolis  ;  when  the  latter  pitched  his  camp  near  Kahani '  in
the  Athribite  nome,  the  nobles  of  the  Eastern  Delta,  both  small  and  great,
came  one  after  another  with  their  followers ;  among  them  Patinifi  of
Pisapti,  Paimau  of  Busiris,  Pabisa  of  Khriiihu  and  of  Pihapi,-^  besides  a
dozen  others.  He  extended  his  favour  to  all  alike,  merely  stipulating  that
they  should  give  him  the  best  of  their  horses,  and  undertake  to  keep  careful
watch  over  the  prosperity  of  their  stud  farms.  But  Tafnakhti  still  held  out,
and  seemed  determined  to  defy  him  to  the  end ;  he  had  set  fire  to  his  palace
and  taken  refuge  in  the  islands  on  the  river,  and  had  provided  a  hiding-place
for  himself  at  Masudit  among  the  marshes  on  the  coast  ^  in  case  of  final  defeat.
A  victory  gained  over  him  by  the  Ethiopian  generals  suddenly  induced  him  to
sue  for  peace.  He  offered  to  disband  his  men  and  pay  tribute,  provided  he
was  guaranteed  undisturbed  possession  of  Sais  and  of  the  western  districts  of
the  Delta ;  he  refused,  however,  to  sue  for  pardon  in  person,  and  asked  that  an
envoy  should  be  sent  to  receive  his  oath  of  allegiance  in  the  temple  of  Nit.
Though  deserted  by  his  brother  princes  and  allies,  he  still  retained  sufficient
power  to  be  a  thorn  in  his  conqueror's  side  ;  his  ultimate  overthrow  was  certain,
but  it  would  have  entailed  many  a  bloody  struggle,  while  a  defeat  might  easily
have  shaken  the  fidelity  of  the  other  feudatory  kings,  and  endangered  the
stability  of  the  new  dynasty.  Pionkhi,  therefore,  accepted  the  terms  offered
him  without  modification,  and  asked  for  no  guarantee  beyond  the  oath  taken
in  the  presence  of  the  gods.  News  was  brought  him  about  this  time  that
Cynopolis  and  Aphroditopolis  had  at  last  thrown  open  their  gates,  and  accord-
ingly he  summoned  liis  vassals  for  the  last  time  to  his  camp  near  Athribis.
With  the  exception  of  Tafnakhti,  they  all  obeyed  the  call,  including  two
minor  kings  of  Upper  and  two  of  Lower  Egypt,  together  with  barons
of  lesser  rank ;  but  of  these,  Namroti  alone  was  admitted  to  the  royal
apartments,  because  he  alone  was  circumcised  and  ate  no  fish ;  after  this
the  camp  was  broken  up,  and -the  Ethiopians  set  out  on  their  return  journey
southwards.*      Pionkhi    may   well   have   been    proud   of  the    result   of    this

'  Kahnni  is,  perhaps,  the  modern  Kaha,  some  distance  to  the  north  of  Qaliub.

-  Piaapti  stood  on  the  present  site  of  Saft-el-Hineh  (Brugsch,  Die  Gutter  des  Nomas  Arabia,  iu
the  Zeitschrift,  18S1,  pp.  16,  17,  and  Naville,  Goshen  and  the  Shrine  of  SaJt-el-Henneh,  pp.  14,  15).
Khriahu,  as  we  know,  formed  part  of  the  Heliopolitan  nome,  and  is,  very  possibly,  to  be  identiiied
withBabylonof  Egypt,  the  Fostat  of  the  Arabs  (Bkcgsoh,Z);c^  G^ogr.,pp.  G25-G27);  Pihapi  was  a  place
not  far  from  the  supposed  source  of  the  Southern  Nile  (BRrGSCH,  Diet.  Gi'ogr.,  pp.  484,  4S5).

^  The  passage  referring  to  these  events,  given  iu  a  mutilated  form  by  Marietta  (^Monuments  divers,
pi.  6,  11.  120-123;  E.  de  Rouse,  La  Stele  du  roi  ^thiopien  Pidnkhi-Meriamen,  pp.  70,  71),  has  been
restored  from  the  original  by  Brugsch  {Dictionnaire  G^ographiquc,  pp.  1135-1137),  who  proposes,
with  some  hesitation,  to  identify  Masudit  with  the  Coptic  Te-msioti,  the  modern  Pamsis.

*  Inscription  of  Piunkhi-Miamun.  11.  IOG-15'J  ;  cf.  Makiette,  Monuments  divers,  pis.  5,  G,  and  E.
DE  Rouge,  La  Stele  du  roi  ethiopien  Pidnkhi-Meriamen,  pp.  61-SO.


180     TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

campaign,  both  for  himself  and  for  his  country.  The  empire  of  the  Pharaohs,
which  had  for  the  last  hundred  and  fifty  years  been  divided,  was  now  re-
established from  the  confluence  of  the  Niles  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,
but  it  was  no  longer  Egypt  that  benefited  by  the  change.  It  was  now,  after
many  years  of  slavery,  the  turn  of  Etliiopia  to  rule,  and  the  seat  of  power  was
transferred  from  Thebes  or  Memphis  to  Napafa.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
fundamental  constitution  of  the  kingdom  underwent  no  great  modification  ;  it
had  merely  one  king  the  more  to  rule  over  it^not  a  stranger,  as  we  are  often
tempted  to  conclude,  when  we  come  to  measure  these  old-world  revolutions
by  our  modern  standards  of  patriotism,  but  a  native  of  the  south,  who  took  the
place  of  tliose  natives  of  the  north  who  had  succeeded  one  another  on  tlie  throne
since  the  days  of  Smendes.  In  fact,  this  newly  crowned  son  of  Ka  lived
a  very  long  way  off;  he  had  no  troops  of  his  own  further  north  than  Siut,  and
he  had  imposed  his  suzerainty  on  the  rival  claimants  and  reigning  princes
without  thereby  introducing  any  change  in  the  constitution  of  the  state.  In
tendering  their  submission  to  him,  the  heads  of  the  different  nomes  had  not
the  slightest  intention  of  parting  with  their  liberty  ;  they  still  retained  it,  even
though  nominally  dependent,  and  continued,  as  in  tlie  past,  to  abuse  it  with-
out scruple.  Namioti  was  king  at  Khmunu,  Pefzaabastit  at  Khninsu,  Auputi  at
Teutramu,  and  Osorkon  III.  at  Bubastis ;  the  prestige  investing  the  Tanite  race
persisted  so  effectively  that  the  annalists  give  to  the  last-named  precedence
over  the  usurpers  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  ;  the  Tanites  continued  to  be  the
incarnate  representatives  of  legitimate  power,  and  when  Osorkon  III.  died,
in  732,  it  was  his  son  Psamutis  who  was  regarded  as  the  Lord  of  Egypt.
Tafnakhti  had,  in  his  defeat,  gained  formal  recognition  of  his  royalty.  He  was
no  longer  a  mere  successful  adventurer,  a  hero  of  the  hour,  whose  victories
were  his  only  title-deeds,  whose  rights  rested  solely  on  the  argument  of  main
force.  Pionkhi,  in  granting  him  amnesty,  had  conferred  official  investiture  on
him  and  on  his  descendants.  Henceforth  his  rule  at  Sais  was  every  whit  as
legitimate  as  that  of  Osorkon  at  Bubastis,  and  he  was  not  slow  in  furnishing
material  proof  of  this,  for  he  granted  himself  cartouches,  the  urseus,  and  all
the  other  insignia  of  royalty.^  These  changes  must  have  been  quickly  noised
abroad  throughout  Asia.  Commercial  intercourse  between  Syria  and  Egypt
was   maintained   as   actively    as  ever,  and  the  merchant  caravans  and  fleets

'  Of.  the  stele  in  the  Museum  at  Athens,  discovered  and  published  by  Mallet  {Quelques  Monuments
Egnpliens  du  Muse'e  d'Athenes,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travanx,  vol.  xvili.  pp.  1-G)  ;  cf.  Natille,  Additions
et  Corrections  aux  trois  Inscrijilions  de  la  reiue  Hatasou,  ihid.,  vol.  xix.  p.  214,  where  the  reading  of  the
cartouche  preuomen  is  correctly  given.  The  protocol  of  the  sovereign  is  Shopsisuri  TafimJMi,  and  the
date  is  in  the  eighth  year  of  the  reign.  M.  Be'villout  tries  to  make  out  that  this  usurpation  was  prior
to  the  intervention  of  Pionkhi  (Jsotice  des  Papyrus  d^inotiques  archaiques,  p.  213,  note  a);  I  believe,
with  Mallet,  that  it  took  place  after  the  invasion.  If  Tafnakhti  had  possessed  royal  titles,  Pionkhi
would  have  allowed  him  to  retain  them  as  he  did  in  the  case  of  the  other  local  Pharaohs ;  one  more
king  among  his  vassals  would  not  have  caused  him  additional  trouble.


EFFECT  PRODUCED   IN  ASIA    BY   THE  ETHIOPIAN  CONQUEST.       181


exported  with  regularity  the  news  of  events  as  well  as  the  natural  products
of  the  soil  or  of  industry.  The  tidings  of  an  Ethiopian  conquest  and  of  the
re-establishment  of  an  undivided  empire  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  coming  as
they  did  at  the  very  moment  when  the  first  effects  of  the  Assyrian  revival
began  to  be  so  keenly  felt,  could  not  fail  to  attract  the  attention  and  arouse
the  hopes  of  Syrian  statesmen.  The  Philistines,  who  had  never  entirely
released  themselves  from  the  ties  which  bound  them  to  the  Pharaohs  of  the


r'^^cc^jC^V-^fv.'^^


'=s?rj»


i  s\


''vj^


\


^


i  <    i


/v.    '


'"H  /^u  I


'S.J\.^


KING    TAPSAKHTI    PEESENTS  A    FIELD    TO    TUMU    AND   TO   BASTIT.'

Delta,  felt  no  repugnance  at  asking  for  a  renewal  of  their  former  protection.
As  for  the  Phoenicians,  the  Hebrews,  Edom,  Jloab,  Ammou,  and  Damascus,  they
began  to  consider  whether  they  had  not  here,  in  Africa,  among  the  members
of  a  race  favourably  disposed  towards  them  by  the  memories  of  the  past  and
by  its  ambition,  hereditary  allies  against  Nineveh.  The  fact  that  Egypt  was
torn  by  domestic  dissensions  and  divided  into  a  score  of  rival  principalities  in
no  way  diminished  their  traditional  admiration  for  its  wealth  or  their  confidence
in  its  power;  Assyria  itself  was  merely  an  agglomeration  of  turbulent  provinces,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Mallet's  pbotograpli  of  the  stele  in  the  Museum  at  Athens.


182     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORQAKISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

vassal  cities,  and  minor  kingdoms,  artificially  grouped  round  the  ancient
domain  of  Assur,  and  yet  the  conyulsions  by  which  it  was  periodically  shaken
had  not  prevented  it  from  developing  into  the  most  formidable  engine  of  war
that  had  ever  threatened  the  peace  of  Asia.  The  African  hosts,  whether  led
by  ordinary  generals  or  by  a  king  of  secondary  rank,  formed  none  the  less  a
compact  army  well  fitted  by  numbers  and  organisation  to  hold  its  own  against
any  forces  which  Tiglath-pileser  might  put  into  the  field ;  and  even  should  the
supreme  Pharaoh  be  unwilling  to  throw  the  full  weight  of  his  authority  into
the  balance,  yet  an  alliance  with  one  of  the  lesser  kings,  such  as  the  lord  of
Sais  or  of  Bubastis,  would  be  of  inestimable  assistance  to  any  one  fortunate
enough  to  secure  it.  It  is  true  that,  in  so  far  as  the  ultimate  issue  was
concerned,  there  was  little  to  be  gained  by  thus  pitting  the  two  great  powers
together  and  persuading  one  to  fight  against  the  other ;  the  victor  must,  in  the
long  run,  remain  master  alike  of  those  who  had  appealed  for  help  and  of  those
who  had  fought  against  him,  and  if  Egypt  emerged  triumphant,  there  would
be  nothing  for  it  but  to  accept  her  supremacy.  In  either  event,  there  could
be  no  question  of  independence ;  it  was  a  choice  between  the  hegemony  of
Egypt  or  that  of  Assyria.

From  the  moment  that  Tiglath-pileser  had  made  his  appearance  on  the
northern  horizon,  the  nations  of  Southern  Syria  had  instinctively  looked  to
Pharaoh  for  aid.  There  seems  to  have  been  an  Egyptian  faction  in  Samaria,
even  during  the  disorders  which  broke  out  after  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.,
and  perhaps  it  was  a  hope  of  overcoming  it  easily  which  led  Menahem  of  his
own  accord  to  invoke  the  still  remote  suzerainty  of  Nineveh,  after  the  fall  of
Unki  in  738 ;  ^  later  on,  when  Pekah  had  assassinated  Pekahiah  and  entered
into  alliance  with  Eezin,  he  adopted  the  view  of  those  who  saw  no  hope  of
safety  save  from  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  his  only  reason  for  doing  so  being,
apparently,  because  the  kings  of  the  fallen  dynasty  had  received  support  from
the  valley  of  the  Tigris.  Hosea  continually  reproached  his  countrymen  with
this  vacillating  policy,  and  pointed  out  the  folly  of  it :  "  Ephraim  is  like  a  silly
dove  without  understanding ;  they  call  unto  Egypt,  they  go  unto  Assyria ;

'  As  to  the  homage  offered  by  Menahem,  of.  p.  152,  supra.  The  existence  of  an  Egyptian  faction
at  this  period  has  been  admitted  by  Kittel,  Geschichte.  der  Hehrxer,  Tol.  ii.  p.  282.  Winckler,  in  a
series  of  remarkable  researches  inserted  in  iiis  AUtestamentliche  Untersiichungen,  pp.  168-174,  and
afterwards  in  his  Altorientalkche  Forschuugen,  vol.  i.  pp.  2-1-41,  289,  290,  337,  etc.,  which  he  com-
pleted by  two  articles  on  Musri,  Meluhha,  Ma'in,  i.,  ii.,  in  the  Mitt,  der  Vorderas.  Gee.,  vols.  i.  and  ii.,  has
traced  to  the  Arabian  or  Idumsean  Muzri  everything  previously  referred  to  Egypt.  His  arguments
seem  to  me  to  be,  in  many  cases,  convincing,  as  I  shall  point  out  where  necessary,  but  I  think  he
carries  his  theory  too  far  when  he  systematically  excludes  Egypt  and  puts  Muzri  in  its  place.  Egypt,
even  in  its  decadent  state,  was  a  far  more  important  power  than  the  Arabian  Muzri,  and  it  seems
unreasonable  to  credit  it  with  such  a  limited  share  in  the  politics  of  the  time.  I  cannot  believe  that
any  other  power  is  intended  in  most  of  those  passages  in  the  Hebrew  writings  and  Assyrian  inscrii>
lone  in  which  the  words  Mizraim  and  Muzri  occur.


THE  SISK    OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH   VNDER   AHAZ.  183

when  they  shall  go  I  ^vill  spread  My  net  upon  them,"  said  the  Eternal.^  They
were  to  be  given  up  to  Assyria  and  dispersed,  and  while  some  were  to  go  into
Assur  and  eat  unclean  food,  Ephraim  was  to  return  into  Egypt ;  "  for,  lo,  they
are  gone  away  from  destruction,  yet  Egypt  shall  gather  them  up,  Memphis  shall
bury  them."-  Nevertheless,  they  persisted  in  negotiating  with  Egypt,  and
thougli  there  was  as  yet  no  formal  alliance  between  Samaria  and  Sais  or  Tanis,
their  relations  were  so  close  that  no  enemy  of  Israel  could  look  for  protection
from  Psamuti  or  his  vassals.  Ahaz  had,  therefore,  nothing  to  hope  from  this
quarter,  and  was  compelled  by  the  force  of  circumstances  to  throw  himself  into
the  arms  of  Assyria,  if  he  decided  to  call  in  outside  aid  at  all.  His  prophets,
like  those  of  Pekah,  strenuously  forbade  him  to  do  so,  and  among  them  was
one  who  was  beginning  to  exert  a  marvellous  influence  over  all  classes  of
society — Isaiah,  the  son  of  Amoz.  He  had  begun  his  career  in  the  year
that  Uzziah  died,'  and  had  continued  to  prophesy  without  interruption  during
the  brief  reign  of  Jotham.^  When  Jahveh  first  appeared  to  him,  in  the  smoke
of  the  altar,  seated  on  a  throne  and  surrounded  by  seraphim,  a  sense  of  his  own
unworthiness  filled  him  with  fear,  but  an  angel  purified  his  lips  with  a  live  coal,
and  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  saying,  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will
go  for  us  ?  "  and  he  replied,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me,"  whereupon  Jahveh  gave
him  this  message :  "  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand  not ;  and  see  ye  indeed,
but  perceive  not.  Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears
heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes ;  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes  and  hear  with  their
ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  turn  again  and  be  healed."  Then
the  prophet  asked,  "  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  And  Jahveh  answered,  "  Until  cities
be  waste  without  inhabitant  and  houses  without  man,  and  the  land  become
utterly  waste,  and  Jahveh  have  removed  men  far  away,  and  the  forsaken  places
be  many  in  the  midst  of  the  land.  And  if  there  be  yet  a  tenth  in  it,  it  shall
be  eaten  up  ;  as  a  terebinth,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  stock  remaineth  when  they
are  felled,  so  the  holy  seed  is  the  stock  thereof."  ^  Judah,  though  less  powerful,
was  quite  as  corrupt  as  his  brethren  of  Israel,  and  the  divine  wrath  threatened
him  no  less  than  them ;  it  rested  with  himself,  however,  to  appease  it  by
repentance,  and  to  enter  again  into  divine  favour  after  suffering  his  punish-
ment ;  the  Eternal  would  then  gather  together  on  Mount  Sion  those  of  His
faithful  people  who  had  survived  the  crisis,  and  would  assure  them  a  long
period  of  prosperity  under  His  law.     The  prophet,  convinced  that  men  could

*  Eog.  vii.  11,  12.  "-  Eos.  ix.  3-6.  '  Isu.  \i.  1.

*  The  fragments  which  can  be  assigned  to  this  period  now  occur  as  follows :  chap.  ii.  2-5  (verses
2-4  are  also  found  in  Micah  iv.  1-3,  and  were,  perhaps,  borrowed  from  some  third  prophet),  ii.  6-22
iii.,  iv.,  V.  1-24  (the  Parable  of  the  Vineyard),  and  luatly,  chap,  vi.,  in  so  far  as  the  substance  is
concerned ;  it  seems  to  have  been  put  into  its  present  form  long  after  the  events.

=  Im.  vi.  9-13.


184     TIGLATII-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

iu  110  wise  alter  the  decrees  of  the  Highest,  save  by  repentance  alone,  was
astonished  that  the  heads  of  the  state  should  strive  to  impede  the  progress  of
events  that  were  happening  under  their  very  eyes,  by  the  elaborately  useless
combinations  of  their  worldly  diplomacy.  To  his  mind,  the  invasion  of  Pekah
and  Eezin  was  a  direct  manifestation  of  the  divine  anger,  and  it  filled  him  with
indignation  that  the  king  should  hope  to  escape  from  it  by  begging  for  an
alliance  against  them  with  one  of  the  great  powers :  when  Jahveh  should
decide  that  the  punishment  was  suiScient  for  the  crime,  He  would  know  how
to  shatter  His  instruments  without  any  earthly  help.  Indeed,  Isaiah  had
already  told  his  master,  some  days  before  the  allied  kings  appeared,  while  the
latter  was  busy  superintending  the  works  intended  to  supply  Jerusalem  with
water,  to  "  Take  heed,  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither  let  thy  heart  be  faint,
because  of  these  two  tails  of  smoking  firebrands.^  .  .  .  Because  Syria  hath
counselled  evil  against  thee,  Ephraim  also,  and  the  son  of  Kemaliah,  saying,
Let  us  go  up  against  Judah,  hem  it  in,  carry  it  by  storm,  and  set  up  the  son
of  Tabeel  as  king :  '^  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  It  shall  not  stand,  neither
shall  it  come  to  pass."  ^  If,  however,  the  course  of  the  divine  justice  was  to  be
disturbed  by  the  intervention  of  a  purely  human  agency,  the  city  would
doubtless  be  thereby  saved,  but  the  matter  would  not  be  allowed  to  rest  there,
and  the  people  would  suffer  even  more  at  the  hands  of  their  allies  than  they
had  formerly  endured  from  their  enemies.  "  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive
and  bear  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel — God  with  us.  .  .  .  For
before  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good,  the  land
whose  two  kings  thou  abhorrest  shall  be  forsaken,"  and  yet  "  Jahveh  shall  bring
upon  thee,  and  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  father's  house,  days  that  have
not  come,  from  the  day  that  Ephraim  departed  from  Judah."  *  And  then,
employing  one  of  those  daring  apologues,  common  enough  in  his  time,  the
prophet  took  a  large  tablet  and  wrote  upon  it  in  large  letters  two  symbolical
names — Spoil-speedeth,  Prey-hasteth — and  set  it  up  in  a  prominent  place,  and
with  the  knowledge  of  credible  witnesses  went  in  unto  the  prophetess  his  wife.
When  the  child  was  born  in  due  course,  Jahveh  bade  him  call  it  Spoil-speedeth,
Prey-liastetli,  "for  before  he  shall  have  knowledge  to  cry.  My  father,  and.  My
mother,  the  riches  of  Damascus  and  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  carried  away
before  the  King  of  Assyria."  But  the  Eternal  added,  "  Forasmuch  as  this
people  hath  refused  the  waters  of  Shiloali  that  go  softly,  and  rejoice  in  Rezin
and  Eemaliah's  son  ;  now  therefore,  behold,  the  Lord  bringeth  up  upon  them

'  Au  explanatory  gloss,  "  the  fierce  anger  of  Eezin  aud  Sj'ria  and  of  the  son  of  Remaliah,"  which
formed  no  part  of  the  original  propliecy,  is  here  inserted  in  the  text.

-  As  to  the  enigmatic  personage  thus  designated  by  the  prophet,  cf.  p.  15S,  note  2,  supra.
=   Tsa.  vii.  1-9.  '  Isa.  vii.  10-17.


TEE   CAMPAIGN  OF  733   AGAINST  ISRAEL.


185


the  waters  of  the  river
[the  Euphrates],
strong  and  many  : '
and  he  shall  come  up
over  all  his  channels,
and  go  over  all  his
banks :  and  he  shall
sweep  onward  into
Judah  ;  he  shall  over-
flow and  pass  through;
he  shall  reach  even
to  the  neck,  and  the
stretching  of  his  wings
shall  fill  the  breadth  of
thy  land,  0  Immanuel
[God-with-usJ ! "  ^

Finding  that
Egypt  was  in  favour
of  his  adversaries,
Ahaz,  in  spite  of  the
prophet's  warnings,
turned  to  Assyria.^
At  one  time  he  had
found  himself  so  hard
pressed  that  he  in-
voked the  aid  of  the
Syrian  gods,  and  made
his  eldest  son  pass
through    the    fire    in


'  A  marginal  gloss  has
liere  been  inserted  in  tlie
text,  indicating  that  it  was
"  the  King  of  Assyria  and
all  his  glory  "  tliat  the  pro-
phet referred  to.

-  Isa.  viii.  1-8.

'  The  following  portions
of  Isaiah  are  accepted  as
belonging  to  the  period  of
this  Syrian  war :  in  addition
to  chap,  vii.,  chaps,  viii.-ix.
G;  xi.  1-0;  xxii.  1-11  ;  i.
4:-9,  18-32;  to  these  Kue-
nen  adds  chap,  xxiii.  1-li.


-■■"J-J"      I  j;      „f,   ti  u    t    -      1


0      fh  thAmmon.


RH  ■ihbm


V...


^  \r\  oiC*

■^  NO


"  Re/wbotko


\^


;^    "hrMo-li


HormaJl^        \f.       <,i  '      '"  '' .13^


^r(^


I   I  >  I

M  S  ir


4


'  >^  J.,


yl  ^  {^  ^  Ulf^      '^  "      THE  KINGDOM

'  <!    ?jyExIrMer      ''  OF   DAMASCUS.


Tglath


Scale


-T^oK


L    nuillier.  del'


186     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

order  to  propitiate  them  ;  ^  he  collected  together  all  the  silver  and  gold  he  could
find  in  his  own  treasury  or  in  that  of  the  temple  and  sent  it  to  Tiglath-pileser,  with
this  message  :  "  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son :  come  up  and  save  me  out  of  the
hand  of  the  King  of  Syria,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Israel,  which  rise  up
ao-ainst  me."  -  Tiglath-pileser  came  in  iiaste,  and  Eezin  and  Pekah,  at  the  mere
tidings  of  his  approach,  desisted  from  their  attack  on  Jerusalem,  separated,  and
retired  each  to  his  own  kingdom.  The  Assyrian  king  did  not  immediately  follow
them  up.  He  took  the  road  leading  along  the  coast,  after  leaving  the  plains  of
the  middle  Orontes,  and  levied  tribute  from  the  Phceuician  cities  as  he  passed  ;
he  then  began  by  attacking  the  western  frontier  of  Israel,  and  sent  a  body  of  troops
against  the  Philistines,  who  were  ceaselessly  harassing  Judah.  Hannon,  King  of
Gaza,  did  not  await  the  attack,  but  fled  to  Egypt  for  safety,  and  Ahaz  breathed
freely,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  since  his  accession.^  This,  however,  was  only
a  beginning ;  the  real  struggle  took  place  in  the  following  year,  and  was  hotly
contested.  In  spite  of  the  sorry  pass  to  which  its  former  defeats  and  present
discords  had  brought  it,  Damascus  still  possessed  immense  wealth,  and  its
army,  when  reinforced  by  the  Arabian  and  Israelite  contingents,  was  capable
of  holding  its  own  for  a  long  time  against  the  battalions  of  Assyria,  even  if  it
could  not  hope  to  conquer  them.  Unfortunately  for  its  chances,  Eezin  had
failed  to  inherit  the  military  capacity  of  his  great  predecessors,  Ben-hadad  and
Hazael;  he  allowed  Tiglath-pileser  to  crush  the  Hebrews  without  rendering
them  any  effective  assistance.  Pekah  fought  his  best,  but  he  lost,  one  after
another,  the  strongholds  which  guarded  his  northern  frontier — Ijon,  Abel-beth-
maacah,  Janoah,  Kedesh,  and  Hazor ;  he  saw  the  whole  of  Naphtali  and  Gilead
laid  waste,  and  their  inhabitants  carried  off  into  Assyria  without  his  being  able
to  prevent  it ;  he  himself  being  obliged  to  evacuate  Samaria  and  take  refuge
in  the  mountains  almost  unattended.*     Judah  followed,  with  mingled  exultation

'  2  Kings  xvi.  3  (cf.  2  Citron,  xxviii.  3).  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  the  date,  but  most  historians
place  the  event  at  the  beginning  of  the  Syrian  war,  a  httle  before  or  during  the  siege  (Stade,
Gescliichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  590;  Kittel,  Geschichte  der  Hebraier,  vol.  ii.  p.  291,  note  2).

'  2  Eingsxvi.  7,  8;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  16,  20.  21.

'  Slab  Inscription,  published  by  H.  IiAvrLiNSON,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  Ass.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  10,  No.  3,  11.  1-11.
The  chronology  of  these  events  is  still  doubtful.  The  Eponym  Canon  (Scheader,  Keilinschrift-
liche  Bihliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  212,  213)  shows  that  the  operations  lasted  three  years,  and  it  records
one  expedition  against  the  Philiatiucs  (734),  and  two  against  Damascus  (733-732).  I  have  followed
Eost  {Die  Keihehrifttexie  Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  pp.  xxviii. -xxxii.)  in  my  classification  of  the  mutilated
lines  which  precede  the  reference  to  Gaza  in  the  campaign  against  the  Philistines.

*  2  Kitigs  XV.  29.  Schrader  {Die  Keilinschri/len  und  das  Alte  Testament,  1883,  pp.  254-259)  thought
himself  justified  in  adding  to  the  mutilated  names  in  the  inscription  published  by  H.  Rawlinson,
Cun.  Ins.  W.  Ass.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  10,  those  of  Gilead  and  Abel-betb-maaeah,  to  which  Hommel  added
later  on  that  of  Naphtali  the  Great  (Ges.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  665,  note  1).  A  careful  collation  of  the
mutilated  texts  has  proved  that  in  all  probability  the  correct  reading  is  Galza  and  Abilakka,  which
would  preclude  all  possibility  of  identifying  the  biblical  names  with  those  whicli  appear  in  the
Assyrian  text  (Eost,  Die  Keilschrifttextc  Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  78,  79).  The  campaign  beyond
the  Jordan  is  mentioned  in  1  Cliron.  v.  26,  where  the  Hebrew  writer  has  two  distinct  kings  of  Assyria,
Pul  and  Tilgath-pilueser,  in  place  of  the  one  king  known  to  modern  historians.


THE  FALL    OF  TEE  KINGDOM  OF  DAMASCUS.


187


and  disquietude,  the  vicissitudes  of  the  tragic  drama  which  was  thus  enacted
before  its  eyes,  and  Isaiah  foretold  the  speedy  ruin  of  the  two  peoples  who  had
but  yesterday  threatened  to  enslave  it.  He  could  already  see  the  following
picture  in  his  mind's  eye  :  "  Damascus  is  taken  away  from  being  a  city,  and  it
shall  be  a  ruinous  heap.  The  cities  of  Aroer  are  forsaken  :  they  shall  be  for
flocks,  which  shall  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid.^  The  fortress
also  shall  cease  from  Ephraim,  and  the  kingdom   from  Damascus,  and  the


MOUNT  HERMON.^

remnant  of  Syria :  they  shall  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children  of  Israel,  saith
the  Lord  of  hosts !  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  glory  of
Jacob  shall  be  made  thin,  and  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  wax  lean.  And  it  shall
be  as  when  the  harvestman  gathereth  the  standing  corn,  and  his  arm  reapetli
the  ears ;  yea,  it  shall  be  as  when  one  gleaneth  ears  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim.
Yet  there  shall  be  left  thej-ein  gleanings,  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree,  two  or
three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uppermost  bough,  four  or  five  in  the  outmost
branches  of  a  fruitful  tree,  saith  Jahveh,  the  God  of  Israel !  ...  In  that  day
shall  his  strong  cities  be  as  the  forsaken  places  in  the  wood,  and  on  the  mountain
top,  which  were  forsaken  from  before  the  children  of  Israel :  ^  and  it  shall  be  as

'  Both  of  these  Aroers  lay  beyouil  Jordan — one  in  Renbeu,  afterwards  Moab  (Jadg.  xi.  20;  Jer.
xlviii.  19);  the  other  in  Ammon,  afterwards  Gad  (Josh.  xiii.  25;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  5):  here  they  stand
for  the  countries  beyond  Jordan  which  Tiglath-pileser  had  just  hud  waste.  The  tradition  preserved
in  1  Chrnn.  v.  2(j  stated  that  these  inhabitants  of  Gad  and  Reuben  were  led  into  captivity  by
Pul,  i.e.  Tiglath-pileser.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  brought  back  by  Lortet ;  cf.  Lortet,  La  Syria,  p.  563.

'  This  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  warlike  exploits  performed  during  Rezin  and  Pekah's  invasion
of  Juda;a,  a  year  or  two  previously;  ef.  p.  180,  supra.


188     TiaLATE-PILESEi:  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.


a  desolation.  For  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of  thy  salvation."  '  Samaria
was  doomed  to  helplessness  for  many  a  day  to  come,  if  not  for  ever,  but  it  had
taken  a  whole  year  to  lay  it  low  (733) ;  Tiglath-pileser  returned  in  732,  and
devoted  yet  another  year  to  the  war  against  Damascus.  Eezin  had  not  been
dismayed  by  the  evil  fortune  of  his  friends,  and  had  made  good  his  losses  by
means  of  fresh  alliances.  He  had  jiersuaded  first  Jlutton  II.  of  Tyre,  then
Mitinti  of  Askalon,  and  with  the  latter  a  section  of  the  Philistines,  to  throw  in
their  lot  with  him ;  he  had  even  won  over  Shamshieh,  queen  of  the  Arabs,  and
with  her  a  number  of  the  most  warlike  of  the  desert  tribes  ;  for  himself,  he  had

taken  up  a  position  on  the  further  side  of  Anti-
Lebanon,  and  kept  strict  watch  from  Mount  Her-
mon  on  the  roads  leading  from  the  valley  of  the
Jordan  to  the  plains  of  the  Abana,  in  order  to  pre-
vent the  enemy  from  outflanking  him  and  taking
him  in  the  rear.  But  all  to  no  purpose  ;  Tiglath-
pileser  bore  directly  down  upon  him,  overwhelmed
him  in  a  pitched  battle,  obliged  him  to  take  refuge
behind  the  walls  of  Damascus,  and  there  besieged

A-\    A..AI;.-

him.     The  city  was  well  fortified,  amply  supplied

with  provisions,  and  strongly  garrisoned ;  the  siege  was,  therefore,  a  long  one,  and

the  Assyrians  filled  up  the  time  by  laying  waste  the  fertile  country  at  the  foot

of  Anti-Lebanon.     At  last  Eezin  yielded,  gave  himself  up  unconditionally,  and

was  forthwith  executed  :  eight  thousand  of  his  followers  were  carried  off  to  Kir,

on  the  confines  of  Elam,^  his  kingdom  was  abolished,  and  a  Ninevite  governor

was  installed  in  his  palace,  by  whom  the  former  domain  of  Damascus  and  the

territory  lately  wrested  from  Israel  were  henceforth  to  be  administered.     The

coalition  he  had  formed  did  not  long  survive  its  leader.^    Mutton  hastily  came

'  Isa.  xvii.  1-6,  9, 10.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  ol.
'  2  Kings  xvi.  9.  Kir  is  generally  located  in  Armenia,  Sledia,  or  Babylonia  (cf.  Scbkader,  in
EiEHM,  HaudicSrterhuch,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  815) ;  a  passage  in  Isaiah  (xxii.  tj),  however,  seems  to  point
to  its  having  been  somewhere  in  the  direction  of  Elam,  and  associated  with  the  Aramaeans  on  the  banks
of  the  Tigris  (Halett,  Secherches  lSibliques,Tpj>.  57,58;  Winceler,  Alttestameniliche  Untersuchungen,
pp.  177-179).  The  Assyrian  monuments  have  not,  as  yet,  yielded  confirmation  of  the  details  given
by  the  Booh  of  the  Kings  in  regard  to  the  captivity  of  the  inhabitants  of  Damascus.  A  fragmentary
tablet,  giving  an  account  of  the  death  of  Kezin,  was  discovered  by  H.  Kawlinson  (Assyrian  Discovery.
in  the  Athenasum,  1862,  vol.  ii.  p.  246),  but  it  was  left  in  Assyria  (G.  Smith,  The  Annals  of  Tiglath-
Pileser  H.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1869,  p.  14),  and  no  one  knows  what  has  since  become  of  it.

'  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  kings  of  Damascus  from  the  time  of  David,  as  far  as  is  known  U]i
to  the  present  time : —

Kezin  I.  Hazael.

Khezion?  Ben-hadad  III.

TaeruiiiuX.  Mari.

Bex-hadad  I.

Adadidri  (Ben-hadad  II.).  Kezis  II.

As  to  the  possible  omission  of  Khezion,  cf.  Struggle  of  ilie  Nations,  p.  778,  note  3.  As  to  the
name  Adadidri,  called  Ben-hadad  [or  Hadadezer]  by  the  Hebrew  writers,  cf.  p.  785,  note  4,  ibid.


THE  KALDI  ASD    THE  END    OF   THE  BABTLOXJAN  DYNASTY.       189

to  an  understanding  with  the  conqueror  ;  Mitinti,  like  Hannon,  fled  into  Egypt,
and  his  place  was  taken  by  Rukibtu,  a  partisan  of  Assyria.  Hoshea,  son  of
Elah,  rebelled  against  Pekah,  assassinated  him,  and  purchased  the  right  to  reign
over  what  was  left  of  Israel  for  ten  talents  of  gold.^  Shamshieh  alone  held  out.
She  imagined  herself  to  be  safe  among  the  sands  of  the  desert,  and  it  never
occurred  to  her  that  the  heavy  masses  of  the  Assyrian  army  would  dream  of
venturing  into  these  solitudes.  Detachments  of  light  cavalry  were  sent  in
pursuit  of  her,  and  at  first  met  with  some  difficulties ;  they  were,  however,
eventually  successful;  the  Armenian  and  Cappadociau  steeds  of  the  Ninevite

horsemen  easily  rode  down    ^

the  queen's  meharis.     Their


success  made  a  great  impres-    '[  V/     "^ i' '  "- ' '^  .'  /-^

sion  on  the  Arab  tribes,  au<l  ~        '  "    "-'-'""-        .  --

induced  the  Mashai,  Timai
Sabaeans,  Khaiap8eans,Bada-

naeans,  and    Khattiteans   to     ,,  ,^_—-         .,  ^  ,^/-       ,  ^v.

bend  the  knee  before  As-
syria. They  all  sent  envoys
bearing  presents  of  gold  and

,        ,         ,  ,  ARAB    3IEHARIS   RIDDEN   DOWX   BY    THE    ASSYRIAN    CAVALRY.'

Silver,  camels,  both  male  and

female,  and  spices  :  ^  even  the  Muzri,  whose  territory  lay  to  the  south  of  the  Dead
Sea,  followed  their  example,  and  a  certain  Idibiel  was  appointed  as  their  chief.*
While  his  lieutenants  were  settling  outstanding  issues  in  this  fashion,  Tiglath-
pileser  held  open  court  at  Damascus,  where  he  received  the  visits  and  homage
of  the  Syrians.  They  came  to  assure  themselves  by  the  evidence  of  their  own
eyes  of  the  downfall  of  the  power  which  had  for  more  than  one  hundred  years
checked  the  progress  of  Assyria.  Those  who,  like  Uassarmi  of  Tabal,  showed
any  sign  of  disaffection  were  removed,  the  remainder  were  confirmed  in  their
dignities,  subject  to  payment  of  the  usual  tribute,  and  Mutton  of  Tyre  was
obliged  to  give  one  hundred  talents  of  gold  to  ransom  his  city.  Ahaz  came  to
salute   his  preserver,  and  to  obtain  a  nearer  view  of  the  soldiers  to  whom  he

'  2  Kings  sv.  30.  The  inscription  published  by  H.  Rawlutson,  Cuh.  Ins.  W.  Ass.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  10,
No.  2,  merely  states  that  '•  they  overthrew  Pekah,  tlieir  king,  and  I  promoted  Auzi  [to  the  kingship]
over  them.  I  received  [from  him]  X  talents  of  gold  and  .  .  .  talents  of  silver  .  .  .  (11.  17-19;  cf.
KosT,  Die  Keilschri/ttexte  Tiglat-Pilescr's  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  SO,  SI).  Cf.  in  Wixcklek,  AlttestamentUcJte
Forschungen,  p.  24,  an  attempted  restoration  of  the  two  earlier  narratives  on  which  the  present
Hebrew  text  is  based.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gndin,  from  the  bas-relief  reproduced  by  LaYard,  Mon.  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  57.

'  Delitzsch  (  Wo  lag  das  Paradies '?  pp.  301-301)  has  identified  the  names  of  several  of  these  races
with  names  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  such  as  the  Ti;mah,  Massah,  Ephah,  Sheba ;  cf.  Delattiie,
L'Afie  Occidentale  dtuis  Inscriptions  assijriennas.  pp.  140-liG.

*  The  name  Muzri,  as  Wiiickler  has  shown,  here  refers,  not  to  Egypt,  but  to  a  canton  near  Edom,
the  Nabatsea  of  the  Greeo-Roman  geographers  (Allorieal.  Forsclt.,  vol.  i.  pp.  21-41,  2S9,  290,  337,338).


19(»     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

owed  continued  jiossession  of  Jerusalem  ; '  the  kings  of  Ammon,  Moab,  Edom,
and  Askalon,  the  Philistines  and  the  nomads  of  the  Arabian  desert,  carried
away  by  the  general  example,  followed  the  lead  of  Judah,  until  there  was  not  a
single  prince  or  lord  of  a  city  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  river  of  Egypt  who
had  not  acknowledged  himself  the  humble  vassal  of  Nineveh.-'

With  the  downfall  of  Eezin,  Syria's  last  hope  of  recovery  had  vanished ;
the  few  states  which  still  enjoyed  some  show  of  independence  were  obliged,  if
they  wished  to  retain  it,  to  make  a  parade  of  unalterable  devotion  to  their
Ninevite  master,  or — if  they  found  his  suzerainty  intolerable — had  to  risk
everything  by  appealing  to  Egypt  for  help.  Much  as  they  may  have  wished
from  the  very  first  to  do  so,  it  was  too  early  to  make  the  attempt  so  soon  after
the  conference  at  Damascus ;  Tiglath-pileser  had,  therefore,  no  cause  to  fear  a
rebellion  among  them,  at  any  rate  for  some  years  to  come,  and  it  was  just  as
well  that  this  was  so,  for  at  the  moment  of  his  triumph  on  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean  his  interests  in  Chaldsea  were  threatened  by  a  serious  danger.
Nabonazir,  King  of  Karduniash,  had  never  swerved  from  the  fidelity  which  he
had  sworn  to  his  mighty  ally  after  the  events  of  745,  but  the  tranquillity  of  his
reign  had  been  more  than  once  disturbed  by  revolt.  Borsijjpa  itself  had  risen
on  one  occasion,  and  endeavoured  to  establish  itself  as  an  independent  city  side
by  side  with  Babylon.^  When  Nabonazir  died,  in  734,  he  was  succeeded  by  his
son  Nabunadinziri,  but  at  the  end  of  a  couple  of  years  the  latter  was  assassinated
during  a  popular  outbreak,*  and  Nabushumukin,  one  of  his  sons,  who  had  been
implicated  in  the  rising,  usurped  the  crown  (732).  He  wore  it  for  two  months  and
twelve  days,  and  then  abdicated  in  favour  of  a  certain  Ukinzir.^    The  latter  was

'  2  Kings  xvi.  10-12.  The  Nimroud  Incrip.,  Kev.,  1.  11,  merely  mentions  his  tribute  among
that  of  the  Syrian  kings  (RosT,  Die  Keihchrift.  Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  72,  73).

=  Aiinah  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  195-240 ;  Nimroud  Inscrip.,  Kev.,  U.  2-lG ;  Inscription  published
by  H.  Eawlinson,  Cua.  Ins.  W.  Ass.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  10,  No.  2,  11.  12-28 ;  cf.  EosT,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte
Tiglat-Pileser'i  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  34-41,  70-73,  S0-S3.  As  to  the  various  interpretations  of  the  facts,  cf.
TiELE,  Bah.-ass.  Ges.,  pp.  220,  221,  232-235 ;  Hommel,  Ges.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  664-070 ;  Winokler,
Ges.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  228-231.

=  Pinches'  Bahijlonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  11.  6, 7 ;  cf.  Winckleb,  Babylonische  Chronih  B,  in  Sohrader,
Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothelc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  274,  275.  This  document  was  first  discovered  and  analysed
by  Pinches,  The  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Bibl.
Arch.,  1883-1884,  vol.  vi.  pp.  198-202,  it  was  afterwards  published  and  translated  iuto  English  by
him,  in  the  J.  B.  As.  Soc,  1887,  vol.  six.  p.  655;  translated  into  Latin  by  Winokler,  Chronicon
Bahylonicum  editum  ct  Commentario  instructuni,  in  tlie  Zeitschrifl  filr  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  148-168,
299-307,  and  into  French  by  Oppert,  Chroniqiie  hahylonienne  du  Mus^e  Britannigue,  in  the  Comptes
rendus  de  V Academic  des  Inscriptions,  1887,  pp.  263-209.  The  fragmeuts  of  two  duplicates  were  dis-
covered by  Bezold,  On  Two  Duplicates  of  the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  in  the  Proceedings,  1888-1889,
vol.  xi.  pp.  131-138;  the  whole  has  been  published  in  Abel  and  Winckler,  KeilschrifUexte,  pp.  47,
48,  and  translated  iuto  German  by  Winokler,  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  in  Schradek,  Keilinschrift-
liche Bibliolheli,  vol.  ii.  pp.  274-2S5.

■•  Pinches'  Babylonian  Clironicle,  col.  i.  11.  11-15;  cf.  Winckler,  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  pp.
274-277,  where  the  full  name  of  the  king,  furnished  by  Pinches'  Canon  (SohuadiSR,  Die  Grosse
Babylonische  Konigsliste,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  p.  2S7),  is  abbreviated  into
Nadinu,  aud  has  passed  thence  into  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy  under  the  form  of  Nadios.

^  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  11.  16-18;  cf.  AVinckler,  Die  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  pp.


TEE   TWO    CAMPAIGNS  AGAINST   UKINZIE.


191


chief  of  the  Bit-Amukkani,  one  of  the  most  important  among  the  Chaldsean
communities ;  ^  the  descendants  of  the  Aramaean  nomads  were  thus  once  more
placed  upon  the  throne,  and  their  accession  put  an  end  to  the  relations  which
had  existed  for  several  centuries  between  Assyria  and  Karduuiash.  These
marauders,  who  had  always  shown  themselves  impatient  of  any  settled  authority,
and  had  never  proffered  more  than  a  doubtful  submission  to  even  the  most
triumphant  invader,  were  not  likely  to  accept  the  subordinate  position  wliich
members  of  the  presiding  dynasty  had  been,  for  the  most  part,  content  to
occupy.  It  was  more  probable  that  they  would,  from  the
very  first,  endeavour  to  throw  off  the  suzerainty  of  Nine-
veh. Tiglath-pileser  gave  the  new  dynasty  no  time  to
settle  itself  firmly  on  the  throne  :  the  year  after  his  return
from  Syria  he  got  together  an  army  and  marched  against
it.  He  first  cleared  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris,
where  the  Pukudu  (Pekod)  offered  but  a  feeble  resist-
ance ;  he  annexed  their  territory  to  the  ancient  province
of  Arrapkha,  then  crossed  the  river  and  attacked  the  Kaldi
scattered  among  the  plains  and  marshes  of  the  Shaft  el-

Hai.  The  Bit-Shilani  were  the  first  to  succumb  ;  their  king  Nabushabshi  was
impaled  before  one  of  the  gates  of  his  capital,  Sarrabanu,  the  town  itself  was  taken
by  storm,  plundered  and  dismantled,  and  55,000  of  its  inhabitants  were  led
captive  into  Assyria.  After  the  Bit-Shilani,  came  the  turn  of  the  Bit-Shaalli.
Dur-IUatai,  their  capital,  was  razed  to  the  ground,  and  its  population,  numbering

276,  277,  in  which  the  mime  is  shortened  into  Shumukiu.  The  chronicle  stati's  that  Nabushumukin
was  governor  of  a  province,  whereas  the  Koyal  Canon  (Sohbader,  Vie  Grosse  BahyhnUche  KSnigsUste,
in  the  KeilinschriftUche  Bibliolhek,  vol.  ii.  p.  2S7)  affirms  that  lie  was  the  son  of  his  predecessor;  it  is
probable  that  both  statements  are  correct.  Winckler  (Ges.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  123,  note  1)  and  Eost
(Die  Keils.  Tifjiat-Fileser's  HI.,  vol.  i.  p.  xxxvii..  note  1)  regard  the  entry  iu  the  Canon  as  a  clerical
error.  The  following  is  as  complete  a  list  as  can  at  present  be  compiled  of  this  Babylonian  dynasty,
the  eighth  of  those  registered  in  Pinches'  Canons  (c{.  KosT,  Untersuch.  zur  altorient.  GescJi.,  p.  27)  : —

Nabu-kIsabal  ?


SHAMASH-JirDAMMIQ.

Nabc-shumishkun  I.

Naec-abal-iddin'a.

Marduk-n.\dis-shuiic.

Mardck-bal.^tscikbi.


Bau-akhiddin  ;


Nabu-shujushkun  II.
NABU-x.tziK  (Nabonassar).
Nabu-nadis-zJbi.

NABC-SHrMUKlN.


It  included  twenty-two  kings,  and  lasted  for  about  three  hundred  and  fifty  years.

'  The  chronicle  is  silent  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  Ukinzir,  but  Tighith-pilcser,  who  declines  to
give  bim  the  title  of"  King  of  Babylon,"  says  that  he  wnsmar  Amul;l!nni  =  son  of  Amukkani  (A^imroucJ
Inscriy.,  Obv.,  1.  23:  cf.  RosT,  Die  KeiUchrijWile  Tiijlat-Pilcser's  HI.,  vol.  i.  pp.  GO,  Gl).  Pinches'
Canon  indicates  that  Uktnzir  belonged  to  a  dynasty  the  name  of  which  may  be  read  either  Shashi  or
bhapi  (ScHRADER,  Keilinschri/tUche  Bihlioiheh,  vol.  ii.  p.  287).  The  reading  Shapi  at  once  recalls  the
name  of  Shapia,  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  Bit-Amukkani  (as  to  this  town,  cf.  p.  192,  infra);  it
would  thus  confirm  the  evidence  of  the  Nimroud  Inscription.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  woodcut  published  by  Twiki.ns,  Ahraham  and  hia  Times,  pi.  iv.


192     TIOLATE-PJLESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

50,400  men  and  women,  was  deported.  Their  chief,  Lakiru,  wlio  had  shown
great  bravery  in  the  struggle,  escaped  impalement,  but  was  sent  into  captivity
with  his  people,  a  Ninevite  governor  being  appointed  in  his  place.  Ukiuzir,
who  was,  as  we  know,  hereditary  prince  of  the  Bit-Amukkani,  came  up  in
haste  to  defend  his  appanage,  and  threw  himself  into  his  fortress  at  Shapia :
Tiglath-pileser  cut  down  the  gardens  and  groves  of  palms  which  lent  it  beauty,
burnt  the  surrounding  farms  and  villages,  and  tried,  without  success,  to  make  a
breach  in  the  walls ;  he  still,  however,  maintained  the  siege,  but  when  winter
came  on  and  the  place  still  held  out,  he  broke  up  his  camp  and  retreated  in
good  order,  leaving  the  districts  which  he  had  laid  waste  occupied  by  an
Assyrian  force.  Before  his  departure,  he  received  homage  and  tribute  from
most  of  the  Aramaean  chiefs,  including  those  of  Balasu  and  the  Bit-Dakkuri,  of
Nadinu,  and  even  of  the  Bit-Yakin  and  Merodach-baladan,  whose  ancestors  had
never  before  "  kissed  the  foot  "  of  an  Assyrian  conqueror.^  In  this  campaign  he
had  acquired  nearly  three-fourths  of  the  whole  Babylonian  kingdom  ;  but  Baby-
lon itself  still  refused  to  yield,  and  it  was  no  easy  task  to  compel  it  to  do  so.
Tiglath-pileser  spent  the  whole  of  the  year  730  in  preparing  for  another
attack,^  and  in  729  he  again  appeared  in  front  of  Shapia,  this  time  with
greater  success ;  Ukinzir  fell  into  his  hands,  Babylon  opened  its  gates,  and  he
caused  himself  to  be  proclaimed  King  of  Sumir  and  Akkad  within  its  walls.^
Many  centuries  had  passed  since  the  two  empires  had  been  united  under  the
rule  of  a  single  master,  or  an  Assyrian  king  had  "  taken  the  hands  of  Bel."  ^
Tiglath-pileser  accepted  the  condition  attached  to  this  solemn  investiture,  which
obliged  him  to  divide  his  time  between  Calah  and  Babylon,  and  to  repeat  at
every  festival  of  the  New  Year  the  mystic  ceremony  by  which  the  god  of  the
city  confirmed  him  in  his  office.^  His  Babylonian  subjects  seem  to  liave  taken
a  liking  to  him,  and  perhaps  in  order  to  hide  from  themselves  their  dependent

'  Nimroud  Slab,  No.  1.  11.  8-15,  No.  2,  11.  11-17,  and  Nimroud  Inscrip.,  Obv.,  11.  1G-2S;  cf.  RosT,
Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Fileser's  III.,  vol.  i.  pp.  42-45,  48-51,  56-63.  In  all  these  texts,  the
expedition  of  731  is  mentioned  immediately  after  that  of  745,  and  modern  historians  at  iirst  failed  to
separate  the  two.  A  comparison  with  the  text  of  the  Annals,  however,  enables  us  to  assign  to  the
campaign  of  731  all  the  facts  described  after  the  defeat  of  the  Pukudu  (Tiele,  Bab.-ass.  Gesch.,  pp.
235,  236;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bah.und  Ass.,  pp.  652,  653;  Wincklek,  Gesch.  Sab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  123,124,
231,  232  ;  Eost,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Tiglat-Fileser's  III.,  toI.  i.  pp.  xxxvii.,  xsxviii.).  It  is  this
expedition  which  the  Eponym  Canon  refers  to  as  having  been  directed  against  Sliapia  (Schrader,
KeilinschriftUche  Bihliotheli.  vol.  i.  pp.  214,  215).

-  The  Eponym  Canon  refers  to  this  year  as  having  been  spent  "  in  the  country  "  (Schrader,
KeilinschriftUche  Bibliotlielc,  vol.  i.  pp.  214,  215).

3  Contemporary  documents  do  not  furnish  us  with  any  information  as  to  these  events.  The  Eponym
Canon  tells  us  that  "■the  ling  tool;  the  hands  of  Bel"  (Schradeb,  KeilinschriftUche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.
pp.  214,  215).  Pinches'  Chronicle  adds  that  ''in  the  third  year  of  Ukinzir,  Tiglath-pileser  marched
against  Alvkad,  laid  waste  the  Bit-Amukkani,  and  took  Ukinzir  prisoner ;  Ukiuzir  had  reigned  three
years  in  Babylon.     Tiglath-pileser  followed  him  upon  the  throne  of  Babylon  "  (col.  i.  11.  19-23).

*  Not  since  Tukulti-ninip  I. ;  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  606-610.

»  The  Eponym  Canon  proves  that  in  728  B.C.,  the  year  of  his  death,  he  once  more  took  the  hands
of  Bel  (Schrader,  KeilinschriftUche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  214,  215).


CREATION   OF  NEW  PROVINCES.  193

condition,  tliey  shortened  his  purely  Assyrian  name  of  Tukulti-abal-esharra
iato  the  familiar  sobriquet  of  Puru  or  Pulu,  under  which  appellation  the  native
chroniclers  later  on  inscribed  him  in  the  official  list  of  kings  :  ^  he  did  not  long
survive  his  triumph,  but  died  in  the  mouth  of  Tebeth,72S  B.c.,after  having  reigned
eighteen  years  over  Assyria,  and  less  than  two  years  over  Babylon  and  ChaldEea.''
The  formulae  employed  by  the  scribes  in  recording  historical  events  vary  so
little  from  one  reign  to  another,  that  it  is,  in  most  cases,  a  difficult  matter  to
make  out,  under  the  mask  of  uniformity  by  which  they  are  all  concealed,  the
true   character  and   disposition   of    each   successive   sovereign.      One   thing,
however,  is  certain — the  monarch  who  now  came  upon  the  scene  after  half  a
century  of  reverses,  and  in  a  brief  space  restored  to  his  armies  the  skill  necessary
to  defeat  such  formidable  foes  as  the  Armenians  or  the  Syrians  of  Damascus,
must  have  been  an  able  general  and  a  born  leader  of  men.     Yet  Nineveh  had
never  suffered  long  from  a  lack  of  capable  generals,  and  there  would  be  little  to
distinguish  Tiglath-pileser  from  any  of  his  predecessors,  if  we  could  place
nothing  more  than  a  few  successful  campaigns  to  his  credit.     His  claim  to  a
pre-eminent  place  amongst  them  rests  on  the  fact  that  he  combined  the  talents
of  the  soldier  with  the  higher  qualities  of  the  administrator,  and  organised  his
kingdom  in  a  manner  at  once  so  simple  and  so  effective,  that  must  of  the
Oriental  powers  down  to  the  time  of  the  Grecian  conquest  were  content  to
accept  it  as  a  model.     As  soon  as  the  ambition  of  the  Assyrian  kings  began  to
extend  beyond  the  region  confined  between  the  Khabur  and  the  Greater  Zab,
they  found  it  necessary  to  parcel  out  their  territory  into  provinces  under  the
authority  of  prefects  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  order  among  the  vanquished
peoples,  and  at  tlie  same  time  of  protecting  them  from  the  attacks  of  adjacent
tribes ;  these  representatives  of  the  central  power  were  supported  by  garrisons,
•and  were  thus  enabled  to  put  dowu  such  minor  insurrections  as  broke  out  from
time  to  time.    Some  of  these  provinces  were  already  in  existence  in  the  reigns  of
Shalmaneser  or  Tiglath-pileser  I.  ;^  after  the  reverses  in  the  time  of  Assurirba,
their  number  decreased,  but  it  grew  rapidly  again  as  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shal-
maneser III.  gradually  extended  the  field    of  their  operations  and  of  their
victories.     From  this  epoch  onwards,  the  monuments  meution  over  a  score  of
them,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  list  thus  furnished  is  not  a  complete  one ;  the
provinces  of  which  we  know  most  are  those  whose  rulers  were  successively

'  Even  the  Eoyal  Canon  has  the  name  Pulu  (Schbader,  Keilinschri/tUcke  Eibliothel;  vol.  ii.  p.  2S7),
which  appears  under  the  form  of  Poros  in  Ptolemy.  Cf.  what  ia  said  on  this  point  on  p.  112,  note  4,  supra.

^  Finches'  Chronicle,  col.  1,  11.  21-20;  cf.  'Wi'SCKhEVi,  Die  Bahijloniiche  Eronik  .B,  in  Schkader,
Keilinschri/iliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277.

'  Cf.  what  ia  said  as  to  this  in  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  60S,  657.  Eawlinson  (^Athenaium,
1867,  Nos.  2055,  20S0)  diacovered  the  true  character  and  rauk  of  these  personages,  whom  he  had
previously  taken  to  be  high  priests  {Athemeum,  18G2,  No.  1812,  p.  724,  et  seq.).

O


194      TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.

appointed  to  act  as  limmi,  each  of  them  giving  their  name  to  a  year  of  a  reign.^
Assyria  proper  contained  at  least  four,  viz.  Assur  (called  the  country,  as  distin-
guished from  all  others),  Calah,  Nineveh,  and  Arbela.  The  basin  of  the  Lesser
Zab  was  divided  into  the  provinces  of  Kakzi,  Arrapkha,  and  Akhizukhina  ;  '^  that
of  the  Upper  Tigris  into  those  of  Aniidi,  Tushkhan,  and  Gozan.  Kirruri  was
bounded  by  Mazamua,  and  Mazamua  by  Arrapkha  and  Lake  Urumiah.^  We
hear  of  the  three  spheres  of  Nazibina  (Nisibis),  Tela,  and  Eazappa  in  Meso-
potamia,* the  two  former  on  the  southern  watersheds  of  the  Masios,  on  the
highways  leading  into  Syria ;  the  latter  to  the  south  of  the  Euphrates,  in  the
former  kingdom  of  the  Laqi.  Most  of  them  included — in  addition  to  the
territory  under  the  immediate  control  of  the  governor — a  number  of  vassal
states,  kingdoms,  cities,  and  tribes,  which  enjoyed  a  certain  measure  of  in-
dependence, but  were  liable  to  pay  tribute  and  render  military  service.  Each
new  country  was  annexed,  as  soon  as  conquered,  to  the  nearest  province,  or,  if
necessary,  was  converted  into  a  distinct  province  by  itself;  thus  we  find  that
Assur-nazir-pal,  after  laying  hands  on  the  upper  valleys  of  the  Kadanu  and  the
Turnat,  rebuilt  the  ruined  city  of  Atlila,  re-named  it  Dur-Assur,  placed  a
commandant,  cavalry,  and  eunuchs  there,  and  established  within  it  storehouses
for  the  receipt  of  contributions  from  the  neighbouring  barbarians.'  He
followed  the  same  course  on  each  occasion  when  the  fortune  of  war  brought
him  fresh  subjects;''  and  his  successors,  Shalmaneser  III.,  Samsi-ramman  IV.,
and  Kamman-nirari  did  the  same  thing  in  Media,  in  Asia  Minor,  and  in  Northern
Syria ; '  Tiglath-pileser  III.  had  only  to  follow  their  example  and  extend  the
application  of  their  system  to  the  countries  which  he  gradually  forced  to
submit  to  his  rule.*     In  his  case,  however,  certain  elements  came  into  play

'  As  to  the  fimctiiins  of  the  Limmi,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  620,  621.

2  Akhizukhina  is  pvobahly  identical  with  Arzukliina  =  "  the  City  of  Zukhina  "  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo
lag  das  Paradies '.'  p.  IS7),  which  ia  referreil  ti>  in  the  Synch.  Eist.  as  being  situated  in  tlie  basin  of  the
Lesser  Zah  (col.  ii.  B,  11.  14-16).    As  to  the  position  of  Kakzi,  cf.  what  has  been  said  on  p.  22,  n.  3,  supra.

^  As  to  Gozan  and  Tushkhan,  cf.  p.  14,  note  3,  and  p.  20,  note  3,  sujna ;  in  regard  to  Kirruri  and
Mazamua,  cf.  p.  14,  note  2,  and  p.  22,  note  1,  svpra.

*  Eazappa  is  the  biblical  Eezeph  (2  Kings  xix.  12;  Isa.  xxsvii.  12)  and  the  Eesapha  of  Ptolemy
(V.  XV.  24),  now  Er-Easafa,  to  the  south  of  the  Euphrates,  on  one  of  the  routes  leading  to  Palmyra.

°  Annals  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  col.  ii.  II.  84-86 ;  cf.  pp.  25,  26,  supra.

'  We  read  of  the  appointment  of  a  governor  in  Hit-Klmlupi  (Annals  of  Assur-7iazir-pal,  col.  i.
1.  89),  at  Tushkhan,  iu  Niiiri  (col.  ii.  11.  2-15),  and  in  the  country  of  the  Patina  (col.  iii.  11.  81-83):
cf.  the  summary  of  the  reign  (col.  iii.  11.  125,  126,  ibid.).

'  Tlie  territory  of  the  Bit-Adini  was  converted  into  a  province  by  Shalmaneser  III.  (Monolith,  col.
ii.  11.  33-38 ;  cf.  p.  68,  supi-a).

'  We  find  the  formation  of  an  Aramfean  province,  with  Kar- Assur  as  its  capital,  mentioned  in  the
Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  8-11  ;  this  took  place  after  the  events  related  on  pp.  140, 141,  supra.
The  prisoners  taken  were  distributed  over  diftereut  provinces.  Provinces  were  also  established  iu
Media  (11.  36,  37,  49-51 ;  cf.  p.  112,  supra),  in  Unki  (col.  100,  101  ;  cf.  p.  149,  supra),  in  the  basin  of
the  Orontes,  and  in  Lebanon,  from  nineteen  districts  formerly  belonging  to  Hamath  (col.  125-130 ;  cf.
pp.  150, 152,  supra),  six  maritime  provinces  in  Nortliern  Phoenicia  and  in  Coele-Syria  (Slab  No.  3. 11.  1-5),
in  Galilee  (Slab  No.  3, 11.  6-8),  at  Gaza  (Slab  No.  3,  11.  8-1 1 ;  cf.  p.  186,  supra,  for  an  account  of  the
events  which  led  to  the  establishment  of  this  last  province).


196      TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

which  forced  liim  to  modify  several  of  their  methods,  and  to  have  recourse  to
others  which  they  had  seldom  or  never  employed.  The  majority  of  the
countries  hitherto  incorporated  had  been  near  enough  to  the  capital — whether
it  were  Assur,  Calah,  or  Nineveh — to  permit  of  strict  watch  being  kept  for  any
sign  of  disaffection,  and  they  could  be  promptly  recalled  to  order  if  they
attempted  to  throw  off  tiie  yoke.  These  proviuces  were,  moreover,  of  moderate
area  and  sparsely  populated :  once  drawn  within  the  orbit  of  Assyria's  attraction,
they  were  unable  to  escape  from  its  influence  by  their  own  unaided  efforts ;
on  the  contrary,  they  gradually  lost  their  individuality,  and  ended  by  becoming
merged  in  the  body  of  the  nation.  The  Aramaean  tribes  of  the  Khabur  and
the  Balikh,  the  Cossseans  of  the  Turnat,  the  marauding  shepherds  of  the
Gordyrean  hills  and  the  slopes  of  the  Masios,  gradually  became  assimilated  to
their  conquerors  after  a  more  or  less  protracted  resistance,  till  at  length — in
spite  of  differences  of  origin,  creed,  and  speech — they  became  the  best  of  Assy-
rians, every  whit  as  devoted  to  the  person  of  their  king  and  as  jealous  of  his  honour
as  the  aboriginal  Assyrians  themselves.  A  similar  result  could  not  be  looked
for  in  the  case  of  the  cities  recently  subdued.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that
Babylon  and  Damascus — to  name  but  two  of  the  most  important — would  allow
themselves  to  be  influenced  and  to  become  reconciled  to  their  lot  by  artifices  which
had  been  successful  enough  with  the  Medes  and  in  the  country  of  Tul-Abni.

To  take  the  case  of  Babylon  first.  It  was  no  mere  conglomeration  of  tribes,
nor  a  state  of  minor  importance,  but  an  actual  empire,  nearly  as  large  as  that
of  Assyria  itself,  and  almost  as  solidly  welded  together.  It  extended  from  the
Turnat  and  the  mountains  of  Elam  to  the  Arabian  desert  and  the  Nar-Marratiim,
and  even  though  the  Cossseans,  Elamites,  Kalda,  Sumerians,  Akkadians,  and
other  remnants  of  ancient  peoples  who  formed  its  somewhat  motley  population,
had  dwelt  there  for  centuries  in  a  state  of  chronic  discord,  they  all  agreed —
in  theory,  at  any  rate — in  recognising  the  common  suzerainty  of  Babylon.
Babylon  was,  moreover,  by  general  acknowledgment,  the  ancient  metropolis
to  which  Assyria  owed  its  whole  civilisation ;  it  was  the  holy  city  whose  gods
and  whose  laws  bad  served  as  a  prototype  for  the  gods  and  laws  of  Assyria  ;
from  its  temples  and  its  archives  the  Assyrian  scribes  had  drawn  sucli
knowledge  as  they  had  of  the  history  of  the  ancient  world,  their  religious
doctrines  and  ceremonies,  their  methods  of  interpreting  the  omens  and  of
forecasting  the  future — in  short,  their  whole  literature,  both  sacred  and  profane.
The  King  of  Nineveh  might  conquer  Babylon,  might  even  enter  within  its
gates  in  the  hour  of  triumph,  and,  when  once  he  had  it  at  his  mercy,  might
throw  down  its  walls,  demolish  its  palaces,  destroy  its  ziggurdt,  burn  its  houses,
exterminate  or  carrv  off  its  inhabitants,  and  blot  out  its  name  from  the  list


TEE   VASSAL   STATES — BABYLON.  197

of  nations;  but,  so  long  as  he  recoiled  from  the  sacrilege  involved  in  such
irreparable  destruction,  he  was  not  merely  powerless  to  reduce  it  to  the  level
of  an  ordinary  leading  provincial  town,  such  as  Tela  or  Tushkhan,  but  he  could
not  even  deprive  it  in  any  way  of  its  rank  as  a  capital,  or  hope  to  make  it
anything  less  than  the  second  city  of  his  empire.     As  long  as  it  remained  in
existence,   it  necessarily  took  precedence  of  all  others,  thanks  to  its  exten-
sive area,  the  beauty  and  antiquity  of  its  buildings,  and  the  number  of  its
inhabitants.     The  pride  of  its  nobles  and  priests,  subdued  for  a  moment  by
defeat,  would  almost  instantly  have  reasserted  itself,  had  the  victor  sought  to
lower  the  dignity  of  their  city  ;  Babylon  only  consented  to  accept  an  alien
master  provided  ho  bowed  himself  respectfully  before  its  superiority,  and  was
willing  to  forget  that  he  was  a  stranger  within  its  gates,  and  was  ready  to
comply  with  its  laws  and  masquerade  as  a  Babylonian.     Tiglatli-pileser  III.
never  dreamt,  therefore,  of  treating  the  Babylonians  as  slaves,  or  of  subordinating
them  to  their  Assyrian  descendants,  but  left  their  liberties  and  territory  alike
unimpaired.     He  did  not  attempt  to  fuse  into  a  single  empire  the  two  kingdoms
which  his  ability  had  won  for  him  ;  he  kept  them  separate,  and  was  content  to
be  monarch  of  both  on  similar  terms.     He  divided  himself,  as  it  were,  into  two
persons,  one  of  whom  reigned  in  Calali,  while  the  other  reigned  in  Karduniash,
and  his  Chaldsean  subjects  took  care  to  invest  this  dual  role — based  on  a  fiction
so  soothing  to  their  pride — with  every  appearance  of  reality ;  he  received  from
them,   together    with    all   the    titles    of  the   Babylonian    kings,    that   name
of  Pulu,   which   later   on   found    its   way   into   their    chronicles,   and   which
was  so  long  a  puzzle  to  historians,  both  ancient  and  modern.^     Experience
amply    proved    that  this   was    the    only   means  by   which  it  was  possible   to
yoke  temporarily  together  the  two  great  powers  of  the  Euphrates  and  the
Tigris.     Among  the  successors  of  Tiglath-pileser,  the  only  sovereigns  to  rule
over  Babylon  without  considerable   difficulty    were  those  who   followed   the
precedent  set  by  him  and  were  satisfied  to  divide  their  functions  and  reign  as
dual  kings  over  a  dual  kingdom.'^    This  combination,  while  gratifying  to  the
ambition  of  its  rulers,  was,  perhaps,  more  a  source  of  loss  than  of  gain  to
Assyria  itself.     It  is  true  that  the  power  of  Karduniash  had  decreased  under
the  previous  dynasty,  but  it  had   still  been  strong  enough  to  hold  back  the
Aramaeans  of  the  Persian  Gulf  on  one  side,  and  the  Elamite  hordes  on  the
other.     It  lay  like  a  broad  barrier  between  these  barbarians  and  the  cities  of
•  the  Middle  Tigris  ;  when  an  unusually  vigorous  attack  compelled  it  to  give  way

'  Cf.  p.  112,  note  4,  supra.

■  As  we  shall  see  later  on,  this  was  so  in  the  case  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.'b  immediate  successor,
Shalmaneser  V.,  of  Esarhaddon,  and  of  Assur-bani-pal ;  Shalmaneser  was  known  at  Babylon  by  the
name  of  IJlulai  (cf.  p.  209,  note  2),  Assur-bani-pal  by  that  of  Kandalanu.


198     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  OBOANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

at  some  point,  it  appealed  to  Nineveh  for  help,  and  an  Assyrian  army,  entering
the  country  at  the  fords  of  the  Zab,  hastened  to  drive  back  the  aggressors  to
the  place  from  which  they  had  set  out.  When,  however,  the  kings  of  Assyria
had  become  kings  of  Babylon  as  well,  the  situation  was  altered.  Several
branches  of  the  Kalda  had  hitherto  held  possession  of  the  city,  and  still
possessed  representatives  and  allies  among  the  other  tribes,  especially  among
the  Bit-Yakin,^  who  believed  themselves  entitled  to  reassert  their  supremacy
within  it.  The  Elamite  princes,  on  their  part,  accustomed  to  descend  at  will
into  the  plains  that  lay  between  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  and  to  enrich
themselves  by  frequent  raids,^  could  not  make  up  their  minds  to  change  the
habits  of  centuries,  until  they  had  at  least  crossed  swords  with  the  new  despot,
and  put  his  mettle  to  the  test.  The  Ninevite  King  of  Babylon  was  thus  in  duty
bound  to  protect  his  subjects  against  the  same  enemies  that  had  ceaselessly
harassed  his  native-born  predecessors,  and  as  the  unaided  resources  of  Karduniash
no  longer  enabled  him  to  do  so  effectively,  he  was,  naturally,  obliged  to  fall
back  on  the  forces  at  his  disposal  as  King  of  Assyria.  Henceforward  it  was  no
longer  the  Babylonian  army  that  protected  Nineveh,  but  rather  that  of  Nineveh
which  had  to  protect  Babylon,  and  to  encounter,  almost  every  year,  foes  whom
in  former  days  it  had  met  only  at  rare  intervals,  and  then  merely  when  it  chose
to  intervene  in  their  affairs.  Where  the  Assyrian  sovereigns  had  gained  a
kingdom  for  themselves  and  their  posterity,  Assyria  itself  found  little  else  but
fresh  battle-fields  and  formidable  adversaries,  in  the  effort  to  overcome  whom
its  energies  were  all  but  exhausted.

In  Syria  and  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  Tiglath-pileser  had
nations  of  less  stubborn  vitality  to  deal  with,  nor  was  he  bound  by  the
traditions  of  a  common  past  to  show  equal  respect  to  their  prejudices.  Arpad,
Unki,  the  Bekaa,  Damascus,  and  Gilead  were  all  consecutively  swallowed  up
by  Assyria,  but,  the  work  of  absorption  once  completed,  difficulties  were
encountered  which  now  had  to  be  met  for  the  first  time.  The  subordinate
to  whom  he  entrusted  the  task  of  governing  these  districts  ^  had  one  or  two
Assyrian  regiments  assigned  him  as  his  body-guard,*  and  these  exercised  the

^  As  to  the  Bit-Yakia  and  the  territory  occupied  by  them,  cf.  Fk.  Delitzsoh,  Wo  lag  das  Paradiesi
p.  203.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  them  more  fully  at  the  beginDing  of  Chapter  III.  of  the
present  volume.

2  Cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  .i92, 596,  609, 610,  613-616,  and  the  first  few  pages  of  Chapter  III.
of  the  present  volume.

'  The  governor  was  called  S/iatn«  =  "he  whom  the  king  has  established  in  his  place,"  and
pehhu  =  "  the  pilot,"  "  the  manager,"  whence  pikhatu  =  '•  a  district,"  and  hel-pihhati  =  "  the  master  of
a  district."  It  seems  that  the  shaknu  was  of  higher  rank  than  the  bel-pil;hati,  and  often  had  the
latter  under  his  command.  As  to  the  duties  and  authority  of  those  personages,  cf.  Tiele,  Bab.-ass.
Gesch.,  pp.  497-499,  and  Wincklek,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  210,  211.

■•  Thus  Assur-nazir-pal  selected  the  horsemen  and  other  soldiers  who  were  to  form  the  body-guard
of  the  governor  of  Parzindu  (^Annals,  col.  ii.  11.  70,  71 ;  cf.  p.  25,  supra).


WHOLESALE  DEPORTATION   OF   CONQUERED   RACES.  199

same  ascendency  over  the  natives  as  the  Egyptian  archers  had  done  in  days
gone  by  :  ^  it  was  felt  that  they  had  the  whole  might  of  Assyria  behind  them,
and  the  mere  fact  of  their  presence  in  the  midst  of  the  conquered  country  was,
as  a  rule,  sufficient  to  guarantee  the  safety  of  the  Assyrian  governor  and  ensure
obedience  to  his  commands.  This  body-guard  was  never  a  very  numerous  one,
for  the  army  would  have  melted  away  in  the  course  of  a  campaign  or  two,  had
it  been  necessary,  after  each  fresh  conquest,  to  detach  from  it  a  sufficient
force  to  guard  against  rebellion.  It  was  strengthened,  it  is  true,  by  auxiliaries
enlisted  on  the  spot,  and  the  tributary  chiefs  included  in  the  provincial  district
were  expected  to  furnish  a  reasonable  quota  of  men  in  case  of  need ;  '^  but  the
loyalty  of  all  these  people  was,  at  the  best,  somewhat  doubtful,  and  in  the  event
of  their  proving  untrustworthy  at  a  critical  moment,  the  little  band  of  Assyrian
horse  and  foot  would  be  left  to  deal  with  the  revolt  unaided  until  such  time  as
the  kins;  could  come  and  relieve  them.  The  distance  between  the  banks  of  the
Jordan  or  Abana  and  those  of  the  Tigris  was  a  long  one,  and  in  nearly  every
instance  it  would  have  been  a  question  of  months  before  help  could  arrive.
Meanwhile,  Egypt  was  at  hand,  jealous  of  her  rival,  who  was  thus  encroaching
on  territory  which  had  till  lately  been  regarded  as  her  exclusive  sphere  of
influence,  and  vaguely  apprehensive  of  the  fate  which  might  be  in  store  for
her  if  some  Assyrian  army,  spurred  by  the  lust  of  conquest,  were  to  cross  the
desert  and  bear  down  upon  the  eastern  frontiers  of  the  Delta.  Distrustful  of
her  own  powers,  and  unwilling  to  assume  a  directly  offensive  attitude,  she  did  all
she  could  to  foment  continual  disturbances  among  the  Hebrews  and  Phcenicians,
as  well  as  in  Philistia  and  Aram ;  she  carried  on  secret  intrigues  with  the  inde-
pendent princes,  and  held  out  tempting  hopes  of  speedy  intervention  before  the
eyes  of  their  peoples  ;  her  influence  could  readily  be  traced  in  every  seditious
movement.  The  handful  of  men  assigned  to  the  governors  of  the  earlier  pro-
vinces close  to  the  capital  would  have  been  of  little  avail  against  perils  of  this
kind.  Though  Tiglath-pileser  added  colony  to  colony  in  the  distant  regions
annexed  by  him,  he  organised  them  on  a  different  plan  from  that  which  had  pre-
vailed before  his  time.  His  predecessors  had  usually  sent  Assyrians  to  these
colonies,  and  filled  the  villages  vacated  by  them  with  families  taken  from  the
conquered  region :  ■'  a  transfer  of  inhabitants  was  made,  for  instance,  from  Nairi

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  these  archers  in  the  StrufjrjU  of  the  Nations,  pp.  274,  275.

'^  In  a  despatch  from  Bclibni  to  Assur-bani-pal  {K,  10)  we  find  Aramaeans  from  the  Persian  Gulf
submitting  to  the  authority  of  an  Assyrian  officer,  and  fighting  in  Ehim  side  by  side  with  Ins  troops
(Obv.,  11.  19-21;  Kev.,  11.  1-14;  cf.  C.  Johnston,  The  Epistolary  Literature  of  the  Assyrians  and
Babylonians,  p.  143).  Again,  under  Assur-bani-pal,  an  army  sent  to  repress  a  revolt  on  the  part  of
Kedar  and  the  Nabatteans  included  contingents  from  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Edoni,  together  with  the
Assyrian  garrisons  of  the  Hauran  and  Zobah  (G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  258, 259,  288,  289).

'  Cf.,  in  regard  to  these  colonies  and  the  exchange  of  populations  to  which  they  gave  rise.  Struggle
of  the  Nations,  ^p.  GOS,  609,  666-668,  639,  G40,  659,  665,  and  pp.  15,  18-21,  26,  27,  30,  40,  etc.,  of  tlie
present  volume.


200     TIGLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

or  from  Media  into  Assyria,  and  vice  versa.  By  following  this  system,  Tiglath-
pileser  would  soon  have  scattered  his  v\'hole  people  over  the  dependencies  of  his
empire,  and  have  found  his  hereditary  states  peopled  by  a  motley  and  incoherent
collection  of  aliens  ;  he  therefore  left  his  Assyrians  for  the  most  part  at  home,  and
only  effected  exchanges  between  captives.  In  his  earlier  campaigns  ho  brought
back  with  him,  on  one  occasion,  65,000  prisoners  from  the  table-land  of  Iran,
in  order  to  distribute  them  over  a  province  which  he  was  organising  on  the
banks  of  the  Turnat  and  the  Zab  : '  he  levied  contributions  of  this  kind  without
mercy  from  all  the  states  that  he  conquered  from  year  to  year,  and  dispersed
the  captives  thus  obtained  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  his  empire ;  he
transplanted  the  Aramaeans  of  the  Mesopotamian  deserts,  and  the  Kalda  to
the  slopes  of  Mount  Amanus  or  the  banks  of  the  Orontes,^  the  Patinians  and
Hamathreans  to  Ulluba,^  the  inhabitants  of  Damascus  to  Kir  or  to  the  borders
of  Elam,''  and  the  Israelites  to  some  place  in  Assyria.^  He  allowed  them  to
take  with  them  their  wives  and  their  children,  their  herds,  their  chattels,  their
gods,  and  even  their  money.  Drafted  into  the  towns  and  country  districts  in
batches  sufficiently  numerous  to  be  self-supporting,  but  yet  not  large  enough
to  allow  of  their  at  once  re-establishing  themselves  as  a  distinct  nation  in  their
new  home,  they  seem  to  have  formed,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  most  turbulent
provinces,  settlements  of  colonists  who  lived  unaffected  by  any  native  influence  or
resentment.  The  aborigines  hated  them  because  of  their  religion,  their  customs,
their  clothing,  and  their  language ;  in  their  eyes  they  were  mere  interlopers,
who  occupied  the  property  of  relations  or  fellow-countrymen  who  had  fallen  in
battle  or  had  been  spirited  away  to  the  other  end  of  the  world.  And  even
when,  after  many  years,  the  native  owners  of  the  soil  had  become  familiarised
with  them,  this  mutual  antipathy  had  struck  such  deep  root  in  their  minds  that
any  understanding  between  the  natives  and  the  descendants  of  the  immigrants
was  quite  out  of  the  question :  what  had  been  formerly  a  vast  kingdom,  occupied
by  a  single  homogeneous  race,  actuated  by  a  common  patriotic  spirit,  became
for  many  a  year  a  region  capriciously  subdivided  and  torn  by  the  dissensions  of
a  number  of  paltry  antagonistic  communities.  The  colonists,  exposed  to  the
same  hatreds  as  the  original  Assyrian  conquerors,  soon  forgot  to  look  u^^on  the
latter  as  the  oppressors  of  all,  and,  allowing  their  present  grudge  to  eflace
the  memory  of  past  injuries,  did  not  hesitate  to  make  common  cause  with
them.  In  time  of  peace,  the  governor  did  his  best  to  protect  them  against
molestation  on  the  part  of  the  natives,  and  in  return  for  this  they  rallied  round

'  Nimroud  Inscription,  Obv.,  1.  33 ;  cf.  p.  112,  supra.
'  Annals  of  Tiijlath-pileser  III.,  11.  135-148 ;  cf.  p.  142,  supra.

'  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,l\.  132,  133;  Nimroud  Inscription,  Obv.,  11.  15-21.     As  to  the
events  which  rendered  this  colonisation  ueceBsarj",  cf.  pp.  149,  150,  sujira.

*  2  Kings  xvi.  9 ;  cf.  p.  183,  supra.  '  2  Kings  xv.  29 ;  cf.  p.  18G,  supra.


PROVINCIAL   ADMINISTBATOBS.  201

him  whenever  the  latter  threatened  to  get  out  of  hand,  and  helped  him  to  stifle
the  revolt  or  hold  it  in  check  until  the  arrival  of  reinforcements.  Thanks  to
their  help,  the  empire  was  consolidated  and  maintained  without  too  many-
violent  outbreaks  in  regions  far  removed  from  the  capital  and  beyond  the
immediate  reach  of  the  sovereign. ^

We  possess  very  few  details  with  regard  to  the  administration  of  these
prefects.^  The  various  functionaries,  governors  of  towns,  tax-collectors,  heads
of  stations,  and  oiBcers  whose  duty  it  was  to  patrol  the  roads  and  look  after  the
safety  of  merchants,  were,  for  the  most  part,  selected  from  among  natives  who
had  thrown  in  their  lot  with  Assyria,  and  probably  few  Assyrians  were  to  be
found  outside  the  more  turbulent  cities  and  important  fortresses.  The  kings
and  chiefs  whose  territory  was  attached  to  a  given  province,  either  took  their
instructions  direct  from  Nineveh,  or  were  sometimes  placed  under  the  control
of  a  resident,  or  Jcijni,  with  some  sort  of  escort  at  his  back,  who  kept  watch  over
their  movements  and  reported  them  to  the  suzerain,  and  saw  that  the  tribute
was  paid  regularly,  and  that  the  military  service  provided  for  in  the  treaties
was  duly  rendered.^  Governors  and  residents  alike  kept  up  a  constant  corre-
spondence with  the  court,  and  such  of  their  letters  as  have  chanced  to  come
down  to  us  show  what  a  minute  account  of  even  the  most  trifling  occurrences
was  required  of  them  by  the  central  authorities.^  They  were  not  only  obliged
to  report   any  fluctuation    in  the  temper  or  attitude  of  their  subordinates,^

'  This  was  the  history  of  the  only  one  of  those  colonies  whose  fate  is  tnown  to  ua — that  founded
at  Samaria  by  Sargon  and  his  successors  (Annals  of  Sargon,  Winckler's  edit.,  11.  11-17,  Ezra  iv. ;
of.  WiNCKLER,  Alttestamentliclie  Untersuchungen,  pp.  97-107).

-  The  texts  contain  a  certain  number  of  names  of  offices,  the  precise  nature  of  which  it  is  not  easy
to  ascertain,  e.g.  the  Khazanu  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Assijrische  Studien,  p.  182;  cf.  Assyrisches  Handicortir-
bucli,  p.  272),  the  Labuttu  (Fk.  Delitzsch,  .488.  Eandicort.,  p.  37.3),  and  others.  One  of  them,  read  Shu-
nt shah  by  the  Germans,  seems  as  thougli  it  ought  to  be  Slmparshak,  and  identical  with  one  of  tlie  titles
mentioned  in  Ezra  (v.  6,  vi.  6)  as  being  in  existence  during  the  Persian  epoch  (Winckler,  Altorientalische
Forschungen,  vol.  1.  p.  476,  note  1).  Cf,  as  to  the  provincial  administration,  Tiele,  Bab.-ass.  Gesch.
pp.  497-499,  where  the  title  shalat  discussed  by  the  author  is  merely  a  variant  of  shahnu,  and  ought
tu  be  omitted  from  the  nomenclature  of  offices.

^  The  part  played  by  the  hipu  has  been  defined  by  Winoklee,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  229,  note  1,
and  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  24,.  Idibiel  was  appointed  hipu  over  the  Arabian  country  of  Sluzri,
on  the  borders  of  Egypt  (_Slab  Xo.  3, 11.  29-33,  Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  1.  226);  as  to  the  events
wliich  led  to  liis  appointment,  cf.  p.  189,  supra.

'  G.  Smith  was  the  first  to  make  use  of  these  despatclies  in  his  Eistonj  of  Aasurhanipal,  pp.
181-190,  196-199,  201-204,  296-298,  323,  324;  four  of  them  were  subsequently  published  and  trans-
lated by  Pinches  {Notes  upoji,  the  Assyrian  Report  Tablets,  in  the  Transactions  of  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,
vol.  vi.  pp.  209-243).  No  serious  study  was  made  of  them  till  1887,  when  it  was  undertaken  by  S.  A.
Smith  (hie  Keilschri/ttexte  Asurbanipals,  vols,  ii.,  iii.,  and  Assyrian  Letters,  in  the  Proceedings,
1886-1887,  vol.  ix.  pp.  240-256,  and  1887-1888,  vol.  x.  pp.  60-72,  155-177,  205-215),  and  by  Pr.
Delitzsch  (Zur  assyrisch-habylonische  Briejliteratur,  in  the  Bcitriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  185-248,
613-030 ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  19-62) ;  a  very  large  part  of  those  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  have  been
reproduced  by  Harper  {Assyrian  and  Babylonian  Letters  of  the  Koyundjih  Collection,  vols,  i.-iv.,
1892-1897).  A  translation  and  notes  on  several  of  them  will  be  found  in  an  article  by  C.  Johkston,
The  Epistolary  Literature  of  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental
Society,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  125-175,  and  vol.  xix.,  2nd  pt.,  pp.  42-96.

'  Cf.  the  report  of  Xabu-ushabshi,  governor  of  Uruk,  with  regard  to  the  intrigues  of  a  certain


202     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.

or  any  intrigues  that   were   being   entered    into   across   the  frontier;^    they

had  also  to  record  the  transfer  of  troops,-  the  return  of  fugitires,  the  pursuit

of  deserters,  any  chance  scuffle  between  soldiers  and  natives,  as  well  as  the

punishment  inflicted  on  the  rebellious,^  the  appearance  of  a  portent  in  the

heavens,  or   omens  noticed  by  the  augurs.^      There  were  plenty  of  envious

or  officious  tongues  among  their  followers  to  report  to  headquarters  the  slightest

failure  of  duty,  and  to  draw  attention  to  their  negligence.     Moreover,  it  seems

certain  that  the  object  of  thus  compelling  them  to  refer  to  the  king  at  every

turn,  was  not  merely  in  order  to  keep  him  informed  of  all  that  took  place  in

his  dependencies,  but  also   to    lay  bare  the  daily  life  of  his  prefects  before

his  eyes.     The  latter  were  entrusted  with  the  command  of  seasoned  troops ;

they  had  considerable  sums  of  money  passing  through  their  hands,  and  were

often  obliged  to  take  prompt  decisions  and  enter  into  diplomatic  or  military

transactions  on  their  own  responsibility ;  in  short,  those  of  them,  at  any  rate,

who  were  stationed  at  the  furthest  confines  of  the  empire  were  really  kings  in

all  but  title,  insignia,  and  birth.     There  was  always  the  danger  lest  some  among

them  should  be  tempted  to  reassert,  in  their  own  interest,  the  independence  of

the  countries  under  their  rule,  and  seek  to  found  a  dynasty  in  their  midst.

The  strict  supervision  maintained  over  these  governors  generally  nipped  any

ambition  of  this  kind  in  the  bud ;  in  some  cases,  however,  it  created  the  very

danger  it  was  intended  to  prevent.     If  a  governor  who  had  been  recalled  to

Nineveh    or   Calah   in  order  to   explain  his  conduct  failed  to  clear  himself

completely,  he  at  once  fell  into  disgrace  ;  and  disgrace  in  Assyria,  as  in  other

countries  of  the  East,  meant,  nine  times  out  of  ten,  confiscation  of  property,

mutilation  and  lifelong  imprisonment,  or  death  in  its  most  hideous  form.     He

would,  therefore,  think  twice  before  quitting  his  post,  and  if  he  had  any  reason

to  suppose  himself  suspected,  or  viewed  with  disfavour  in  high  quarters,  he

Piribel  (Pinches,  Notes  upon  the  Assyrian  Report  Tablets,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.
Arch.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  217,  218,  233-239 ;  and  Johxstox,  Tlie  Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  146-148.

'  Cf.,  in  the  time  of  Asaur-bani-pal,  Belibni's  reports  on  what  was  going  on  on  the  Elamite
frontier  and  in  Elam,  K  13  (G.  Smith.  History  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  197-200;  Johnston,  The
Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  138-142),  K  524  (S.  A.  Smith,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte  AsurhanipaU,
vol.  ii.  pp.  54-58,  77,  78,  87,  88 ;  Johnston,  The  Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  134-138),  K  577,
599  (G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  196,  197),  K  1250(Wincklek,  Sammlung  von  Keilschri/t-
texten,  vol.  ii.  p.  59),  K  1374  (Wincklee,  ibid.,  pp.  20,  21).

^  Cf.  a  letter  written  by  Nabu-nshabshi  under  Assur-bani-pal,  in  regard  to  an  expedition  against
the  Gambulu  (Pinches,  Notes  upon  the  Assyrian  Record  Tablets,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Soo.  of  Bibl.
Arch.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  217,  228-232 ;  Johnston,  The  Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  144-146).

^  Report  of  Sha-assurdubbu,  governor  of  Tushkhau,  in  the  time  of  Sargon  (Johnston,  The
Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  151-153),  and  report  of  Assurdurpani,  under  Assur-bani-pal
(S.  A.  Smith,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte  AsurhanipaU,  vol.  iii.  pp.  30-30,  95,  90,  and  Fr.  Delitzsch,
Beitrdge  zur  Erklarung  der  Bahylonisch-assyrischen  Briefliteratur,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,
vol.  ii.  pp.  55-62).

*  Cf.,  under  Esarhaddon,  the  reports  of  Arad-ea  (Harper,  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  Letters,  Nos.
27-29)  and  of  Balasi  (7d.,  Nos.  74-79).


TEE  MILITIA — PROVINCIAL   FINANCES.


203


would  be  in  no  hurry  to  obey  a  summons  to  the  capital.  A  revolt  was  almost
certain  to  be  crushed  without  fail,  and  offered  merely  a  very  precarious  chance
of  escape,  but  the  governor  was  seldom  likely  to  hesitate  between  almost  certain
condemnation  and  the  vague  possibility  of  a  successful  rising ;  in  such  a  case,
therefore,  he  staked  everything  on  a  single  throw.^  The  system  was  a  defective
one,  in  that  it  exposed  to  strong  temptation  the  very  functionaries  whose  loyalty
was  most  essential  to  the
proper  working  of  the  admini-  /S^  '1*^  'Ji)  hj
stration,  but  its  dangers  were  ''"  ^i^-iJ-  v,-*  &
outweighed  by  such  impor-
tant advantages  that  we  can-
not but  regard  it  as  a  very
real  improvement  on  the  hap-
hazard methods  of  the  past.
Tn  the  first  place,  it  opened
up  a  larger  recruiting-ground
for  the  army,  and,  in  a  mea-
sure, guaranteed  it  against
that  premature  exhaustion
which  had  already  led  more
than  once  to  an  eclipse  of  the
Assyrian  power.^  It  may  be
that  the  pick  of  these  provincial  troops  were,  preferably,  told  off  for  police
duties,  or  for  the  defence  of  the  districts  in  which  they  were  levied,  and  that
they  seldom  left  it  except  to  do  battle  in  the  adjacent  territory ;  ^  but,  even
with  these  limitations  they  were  none  the  less  of  inestimable  value,  since  they
relieved  the  main  army  of  Assyria  from  garrison  duties  in  a  hundred  scattered
localities,  and  allowed  the  king  to  concentrate  it  almost  in  its  entirety  about  his
own  person,  and  to  direct  it  en  masse  upon  those  points  where  he  wished  to  strike
a  decisive  blow.  On  the  other  hand,  the  finances  of  the  kingdom  were  put  on  a
more  stable  and  systematic  basis.  For  nearly  the  whole  of  the  two  previous
centuries,  during  which  Assyria  had  resumed  its  victorious  career,  the  treasury
had  been  filled  to  some  extent  by  taxes  in  kind  or  in  money,  and  by  various
dues  claimed  from  the  hereditary  kingdom  and  its  few  immediate  dependencies,

'  WiNCKiER,  GeschiclUe  Bahyloniens  und  Afsyriens,  pp.  210,  211.

"  Cf.,  in  regard  to  these  stages  of  periodical  exhaustion  suiTered  by  Assyria,  the  Struggle  of  the
Natione,  pp.  666,  667,  and  pp.  113,  114,  116-118,  supra.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Mansell.

*  Thus,  in  the  reign  of  Assur-bani-pal,  we  find  the  militia  of  the  governor  of  Uruk  marching
to  battle  against  the  Gambulu  (Tablet  K  528;  Johnston,  Tlie  Epistolary  Literature,  vol.  xviii.
pp.  144-146).


TIGLATH-PII.ESER    III.    BESIEGING    A    RKCELLIOCS    CITY.'


204     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

but  mainly  by  booty  and  by  tribute  levied  after  each  campaign  from  the  peoples
who  had  been  conquered  or  had  voluntarily  submitted  to  Assyrian  rule.  Tlie
result  was  a  budget  which  fluctuated  greatly,  since  all  forays  were  not
equally  lucrative,  and  the  new  dependencies  proved  so  refractory  at  the  idea  of
perpetual  tribute,  that  frequent  expeditions  were  necessary  in  order  to  persuade
them  to  pay  their  dues.  We  do  not  know  how  Tiglath-pileser  III.  organised
the  finances   of  his  provinces,  but  certain  facts  recorded  here  and  there  in


A  HERD  OP  HORSES  BROUGHT  IN  AS  TRIBUTE.'

the  texts  show  that  he  must  have  drawn  very  considerable  amounts  from  them.-
We  notice  that  twenty  or  thirty  years  after  his  time,  Carchemish  was  assessed
at  a  hundred  talents,  Arpad  and  Kui  at  thirty  each,  Megiddo  and  Manzuatu
at  fifteen,  though  the  purposes  to  which  these  sums  were  applied  is  not
specified.^  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  the  precise  object  to  which  the  contri-
butions of  several  other  cities  were  assigned  ;  as,  for  instance,  so  much  for  the
maintenance  of  the  throne  in  the  palace,  or  for  the  divans  of  the  ladies  of  the
harem ;  so  much  for  linen  garments,  for  dresses,  and  for  veils ;  twenty  talents
from  Nineveh  for  the  armaments  of  the  fleet,  and  ten  from  the  same  city  for
firewood.*  Certain  provinces  were  expected  to  maintain  the  stud-farms,  and
their  contributions  of  horses  were  specially  valuable,  now  that  cavalry  jolayed

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bronze  bas-reliefs  on  the  gates  of  Balawat.  The  breed
here  represented  seems  to  have  been  common  in  Urartu,  as  well  as  in  Cappadocia  and  Northern  Syria.

-  Some  fragments  of  tablets  which  contain  documents  referring  to  the  collection  or  employment  of
taxes  have  been  mentioned  by  H.  Eawlinson,  Aseyrtaii  Discovery,  in  the  Athcnaium,  1863,  vol.  ii.  p.
2-lG,  note  26,  and  published  in  his  Gun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  53,  Nos.  2— i.  They  have  been  trans-
lated by  Sayoe,  The  Assyrian  Tribute-Lists,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  series  1,  vol.  xi.  pp.  139-H4,
and  in  Assyria,  its  Princes,  Priests  and  People,  pp.  139-143.

*  Bawllnson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  53,  No.  3, 11.  53-61.

■*  Sayce,  The  Assyrian  Tribute-Lists,  iu  the  Records  of  the  Past,  series  1,  vol.  xi.  pp.  141,  142 ;  cf.
Assyria,  its  Princes,  Priests  and  People,  pp.  140,  145.


BUILDINGS   OF  TIOLATH-PILESEE   III.


205


almost  as  important  a  part  as  infantry  in  military  operations.  The  most
liiglily  prized  animals  came,  perhaps,  from  Asia  Minor ;  the  nations  of  Mount
Taurns,  who  had  supplied  chargers  to  Israel  and  Egypt  five  centuries  earlier,'
now  furnished  war-horses  to  the  squadrons  of  Nineveh.  The  breed  was  small,
but  robust,  inured  to  fatigue  and  hard  usage,  and  in  every  way  similar  to  that


TXtlCAL   CAPPADOCIAN  HOnSE."


raised  in  these  countries  at  the  present  day.  In  war,  horses  formed  a  very  con-
siderable proportion  of  the  booty  taken  ;  in  time  of  peace,  they  were  used  as  part
of  the  payment  of  the  yearly  tribute,  and  a  brisk  trade  in  them  was  carried
on  with  Mesopotamia.  After  the  king  had  deducted  from  his  receipts  enough
to  provide  amply  for  the  wants  of  his  family  and  court,  the  salaries  of  the
various  functionaries  and  officials,  the  pay  and  equipment  of  his  army,  the
maintenance  and  construction  of  palaces  and  fortresses,  he  liad  still  sufficient
left  over  to  form  an  enormous  reserve  fund  on  which  he  and  his  successors
might  draw  in  the  event  of  their  ordinary  sources  of  income  being  depleted  by  a
series  of  repeated  reverses.

Tiglath-pileser  thus  impressed  upon  Assyria  the  character  by  which  it  was
known  during  the  most  splendid  century  of  its  history,  and  the  organisation
which  he  devised  for  it  was  so  admirably  adapted  to  the  Oriental  genius  that
it  survived  the  fall  of  Nineveh,  and  served  as  a  model  for  every  empire-maker

'  As  to  tlie  horses  obtained  from  Kui  and  the  Hittite  country,  and  afterwards  sold  by  Solomon  in
Kgypt,  cf.  t^tniggh  of  the  Nations,  pp.  739,  740.

"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  Alfred  Boissier.


206      TiaLATH-PILESEB  III.  AND  TEE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.


down  to  the  close  of  the  Macedonian  era  and  even  beyond  it.    The  wealth  of  the
country  grew  rapidly,  owing  to  the  influx  of  capital  and  of  foreign  population  ;

in  the  intervals  between  their  campaigns
its  rulers  set  to  work  to  remove  all  traces
of  the  ruins  which  had  been  allowed  to
accumulate  during  tlie  last  forty  years.
The  king  had  built  himself  a  splendid
palace  at  Calah,  close  to  the  monuments
A  SYRIAN  bIt-khilXni.'  ^j  Assur-uazir-pal  and   Shalmaneser  III.,

and  its  terraces  and  walls  overhung  the  waters  of  the  Tigris.  The  main  entrance
consisted  of  a  Bit-Miildni,  one  of  those  porticoes,  flanked  by  towers  and  sup-


V-  .  ■

'V^^iH**

S/N^

y^'-.---    s.-

I

— 1

—

j

i

IH   ^B  ^^ll

GME

lli:il>"'it«[

prni

amniainB

.A


the  foundations  of  a  bit-
khilXni  at  zinjikli.-


ported  by  columns  or  pillars,  often  found  in  Syrian  towns,  the  fashion  for  which
was  now  beginning  to  spread  to  Western  Asia.^     Those  discovered  at  Zinjirli

'  Reproduced  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  restoration  published  by  Luschan,  Ausgrabungen  in
SendscTiirli,  vol.  ii.  No.  67,  p.  168.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  published  by  Lusoham,  Ausgrahungeii  in  Sejidschirli.  vol.  i.  p.  1 1 .

'  The  precise  nature  of  the  edifices  referred  to  in  the  inscriptions  under  the  name  of  Bit-khilani
(RoST,  Die  Keihchriftlexle  Tiglat-Pilesers  III.,  pp.  72.  73,  1.  18)  is  still  a  matter  of  controversy.
Friedrich  is  of  opinion  that  it  was  the  name  of  the  pillared  hall,  or  audience-chamber,  such  as  we
find  in  Sargon's  palace  at  Khorsabad  (_Die  Hohieldontk  Vorderasiens  in  Alterthum  und  der  Hehal  Mat
Satli,  pp.  10-16).  Puchstein  identifies  it  with  edifices  or  portions  of  edifices  which  varied  according
to  the  period,  but  which  were  ornamented  with  columns  (Die  Saiile  in  der  Assijrischen  Architektur.  in
the  Jakrbucli  dcs  Deutschen  Arckseologischen  Instituts,  1892,  vol.  viii.  pp.  1-24).  It  seems  clear,
however,  from  the  passages  quoted  by  Meissner  and  Rest  (_Noch  einmal  das  Bil-hillani  und  die
Assyriche  Saiile,  1891),  that  it  was  used  of  the  whole  series  of  chambers  and  buildings  wliich  formed
the  monumental  gates  of  Assyrian  palaces,  something  analogous  to  the  Migdol  of  Ramses  III.  at
Medinet-Habu  (cf  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  128-130),  and  more  especially  to  the  gates  at  Zinjirli,
as  described  and  restored  by  Koldewey,  in  Luschan,  Ausgrahtmgen  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  ii.  p.  136,  et  seq.


THE  BIT-KEILANI  IN  ASSYRIA.


207


afford  fine  examples  of  the  arrangements  adopted  in  buildings  of  this  kind ;
the  lower  part  of  the  walls  was  covered  with  bas-reliefs,  figures  of  gods  and
men,  soldiers  mounted  or  on  foot,  victims,  and  fantastic  animal  shapes ;  the
columns,  where  there  were  any,  rested  on  the  back  of  a  sphinx  or  on  a  pair  of
griifins  of  a  type  which  shows  a  curious  mixture  of  Egyptian  and   Semitic
influences.     The  wood-work  of  the  Ninevite  Bit-lchildni  was  of  cedar  from
Mount  Amanus,  the  door-frames  and  fittings  were  of  various  rare  woods,  inlaid
with   ivory  and   metal.     The  entrance  was   guarded   by  the   usual   colossal
figures,   and    the    walls   of  the    state    reception-rooms    were    covered    with
slabs       of       alabaster  ;
on  these,  in   accordance
with  the  usual  custom,'^
were  carved  scenes  from
the  royal  wars,  with  ex-
planatory     inscriptions.
The    palace  was   subse-
quently  dismantled,   its
pictures  defaced  and  its
inscriptions  obliterated,'-
to  mark  the  hatred  felt
by  later  generations  to-
wards the  hero  whom  they  were  pleased  to  regard  as  a  usurper ;  we  can  only
partially  succeed  in  deciphering  his  annals  by  the  help  of  the  fragmentary  sen-
tences which  have  escaped  the  fury  of  the  destroyer.     The  cities  and  fortresses
which  he  raised  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  Assyria  proper  and  its
more  recently  acquired  provinces  have  similarly  disappeared;*  we  can  only
conjecture  that  the  nobles  of  his  court,  fired  by  his  example,  must  have  built
and  richly  endowed  more  than  one  city  on  their  hereditary  estates,  or  in  the
territories  under  their  rule.    Bel-harrau-beluzur,  the  marshal  of  the  palace,  who
twice  gave  his  name  to  years  of  the  king's  reign,  viz.  in  741  and  727  ^.c.,^

'  The  building  of  Tiglatli-pileser's  palace  is  described  in  the  Nimroud  Inscription,  lev.,  11.  17-3(j.
It  stood  near  the  centre  of  the  platform  of  Nimroud  (Layakd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  52ti).

''  The  materials  were  utilised  (Layard,  A^eue/i  and  its  Bemains,  yoh  i.  pp.  34,  35,  39,  et  seq.,  etc.)
by  EsarhaddoD,  but  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  palace  was  dismautled  by  that  moaaroh  :
this  was  probably  done  by  Sargon  or  by  Sennacherib.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  published  by  Lcsohan,  Ausgrahungen  in  Send-
schirli,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xxxiii.

•"  Cf.  the  foundation  of  Kar-assur,  between  the  Zab  and  the  Radanu  {Annals  of  Tiijlath-pileser  III.,
11.  8-11),  and  of  Dur-Tiglath-pikser  (Annals,  11.  21-24,  where  the  name  has  been  dcBtrnyed,  but  has
been  restored  to  all  appearance  correctly  from  a  passage  in  the  Nimroud  Inscrip.,  Obv.,  1.  40,  where  it  is
shown  that  this  town  was  founded  before  the  second  campaign) ;  cf.  also  the  rebuilding  of  Nikur  on
the  Median  frontier  (Annals,  11.  36,  37),  of  Kunulua  in  Unki  (Annals,  11.  100,  101),  and  the  foundatiou
of  Assur-ikisha  in  Ulluba  (Ulah  No.  J,  11.  2S,  29,  and  Slab  No.  3,  11.  43-45).

'  Eponym  Canon,  in  Souradeh,  Keilimehriflliche  Bibliothel;  vol.  i.  pp.  212-215.


BASE    OF    A    COLUMN    AT
ZINJIRLI.'


208     TIGLATE-PILESEB  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  TEE  EMPIRE.


possessed,  it  would  seem,  an  important  fief  a  little  to  the  north  of  Assur,  near
the  banks  of  the  Tharthar,  on  the  site  of  the  present  Tel-Abta.^  The  district
was  badly  cultivated,  and  little  better  than  a  wilderness;  by  express  order  of
the  celestial  deities — Marduk,  Nabu,  Shamash,  Sin,  and  the  two  Islitars — he  dug

the  foundations  of  a  city  which


he  called  Dur-Bel-harran-beln-
zur.  The  description  he  gives
of  it  affords  conclusive  evidence
of  the  power  of  the  great
nobles,  and  shows  how  nearly
\  they  approached,  by  their
>  wealth  and  hereditary  privi-
I  leges,  to  the  kingly  rank.  He
erected,  we  are  told,  a  ziggurdi
on  a  raised  terrace,  in  which  he
placed  his  gods  in  true  royal
fashion;  he  assigned  slaves,
landed  j^roperty,  and  a  yearly
income  to  their  priests,  in  order
that  worship  might  be  paid  to
them  in  perpetuity;  he  granted
sanctuary  to  all  freemen  who
settled  within  the  walls  or  in  the
environs,  exemj^tion  from  forced
labour,  and  the  right  to  tap  a
water-course  and  construct  a
canal.  A  decree  of  foundation
was  set  up  in  the  temple  in
memory  of  Bel-harran-beluzur,  precisely  as  if  he  were  a  crowned  king.  It  is  a
stele  of  common  grey  stone  with  a  circular  top.  The  dedicator  stands  erect  against
the  background  of  the  carving,  bare-foot  and  bare-headed,  his  face  clean-
shaven, dressed  in  a  long  robe  embroidered  in  a  chess-board  pattern,  and  with  a
tunic  pleated  in  horizontal  rows ;  his  right  elbow  is  supported  by  the  left  hand,
■while  the  right  is  raised  to  a  level  with  his  eyes,  his  fist  is  clenched,  and  the
thumb  inserted  between  the  first  and  second  fingers  in  the  customary  gesture
of  adoration.     What  the  provost  of  the   palace  had  done   on  his  land,  the

'  ScHEiL,  Stele  de  Bel-Rarrdn-bel-utsur,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvi.  p.  176.  All  the  details
which  follow  have  been  taken  from  the  monument  published  and  commented  on  in  that  article.

=  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograph  published  by  Father  Scheil,  in  his  article  in  the  Recueil
de  Travaux,  vol.  xvi.


STELE  OF  BEL-HAREAN-BELLZUR.'


BEL-HABRAN'BELUZUR.  209

other  barons  in  all  probability  did  on  theirs ;  most  of  the  departments  which
had  fallen  away  and  languislied  during  the  disturbances  at  the  close  of  the
previous  dynasty,  took  a  new  lease  of  life  under  their  protection.  Private
documents — which  increase  in  number  as  the  century  draws  to  an  end —
contracts,  official  reports,  and  letters  of  scribes,  all  give  us  the  impression
of  a  wealthy  and  industrious  country,  stirred  by  the  most  intense  activity,
and  in  the  enjoyment  of  unexampled  prosperity.  The  excellent  administration
of  Tiglath-pileser  and  his  nobles  had  paved  the  way  for  this  sudden  improve-
ment, and  had  helped  to  develop  it,  and  when  Shalmaneser  V.  succeeded  his
father  on  the  throne  it  continued  unchecked. ^  The  new-comer  made  no
changes  in  the  system  of  government  which  had  been  so  ably  inaugurated.
He  still  kept  Assyria  separate  from  Karduniash ;  his  Babylonian  subjects,
faithful  to  ancient  custom,  soon  devised  a  nickname  for  him,  that  of  Ululai,
as  though  seeking  to  persuade  themselves  that  they  had  a  kiug  who  belonged
to  them  alone ;  and  it  is  under  this  name  that  their  annalists  have  inscribed
him  next  to  Pulu  in  the  list  of  their  dynasties.^  His  reign  was,  on  the  whole,
a  calm  and  peaceful  one;  the  Kalda,  the  Medes,  Urartu,  and  the  races  of
Mount  Taurus  remained  quiet,  or,  at  any  rate,  such  disorders  as  may  have
arisen  among  them  were  of  too  trifling  a  nature  to  be  deemed  worthy  of  notice
in  the  records  of  the  time.  Syria  alone  was  disturbed,  and  several  of  its
independent  states  took  advantage  of  the  change  of  rulers  to  endeavour  to
shake  off  the  authority  of  Assyria.

Egypt  continued  to  give  them  secret  encouragement  in  these  tactics,
though  its  own  internal  dissensions  prevented  it  from  offering  any  effective
aid.  The  Tanite  dynasty  was  in  its  death-throes.  Psamuti,  the  last  of  its
kings,  exercised  a  dubious  sovereignty  over  but  a  few  of  the  nomes  on  the

'  It  was,  for  a  long  time,  an  open  question  with  the  earlier  Assyriologlata  whether  or  not
Shalmaneser  and  Sargon  were  difi'erent  names  for  one  and  the  same  monarch.  As  for  monuments,
wo  possess  only  one  attributed  to  Shalmaneser,  a  weight  in  the  form  of  a  lion,  discovered  by  Layard
at  Ximroud  {Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  vol.  i.  p.  128;  cf.  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  510,  511),  in  the
north-west  palace  (Sohbadek,  Inschri/t  Salmamtssar's  IV.,  in  the  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.
pp.  32,  33).  The  length  of  his  reign,.and  the  scanty  details  we  possess  concerning  it,  have  been  learnt
from  the  Eponym  Canon  (Schrader,  Keilinschriflliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  i.  pp.  205, 21i,  215)  and  Pinches'
Babylonian  Chronicle  (col.  i.  11.  27-30 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  in  SoaEADES,  Keilin-
schri/tliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277),  and  also  from  the  Hebrew  tests  (2  Kings  xvii.  3-6;  xviii.
9-12).

'  The  identity  of  Ululai  and  Shalmaneser  V.,  though  still  questioned  by  Oppert  (La  Non-identite'
de  Phul  et  de  Ti'glath-phalasar,  in  the  Revue  d'Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  166-16S),  has  been  proved  by
the  comparison  of  Babylonian  records,  in  some  of  which  the  names  Pulu  and  Ululai  occur  in  positions
exactly  corresponding  with  those  occupied,  in  others,  by  Tiglath-pileser  and  Shalmaneser  (Pixches,
The  Babylonian  Kings  of  the  Second  Period,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.,  1883-4,  vol.
vi.  pp.  197,  198;  cf.  Schkadeb,  Keilinschri/tiiche  Bibliothek,  \ol.  il.  pp.  287.  290,  291).  The  name
Ululai  was  given  to  the  king  because  ho  was  born  in  the  month  of  Ulul  (Pitches,  Tlte  Babylonian
Kings,  p.  197,  note  G;  Oppebx,  La  Non-identite  de  Phul  et  de  Teglath-phalasar,  p.  167);  in  Pinches'
list  we  find  a  gloss,  -'Dynasty  of  Tiuu,"  which  probably  indicates  the  Assyrian  town  in  which
Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  his  son  were  born.

P


CONE  BEARING  THE    NAME   OF

KASHTA  AND  OF  HIS  DAUGHTER

AMENEETAS.'


•210     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Arabian  frontier.^  His  neighbours  the  Saites  were  gradually  gaining  the
upper  hand  in  the  Delta  and  in  the  fiefs  of  middle  Egypt,  at  first  under
Tafnakhti,  and  then,  after  his  death,  under  his  son  Bukunirinif,  the  Bocchoris
of  the  Greek  historians.^  They  held  supremacy  over  several  personages  who,
like  themselves,  claimed  the  title  and  rank  of  Pharaoh ;  amongst  others,  over
a  certain  Eudamanu  Miamun,  son  of  Osorkon  ;  ^  their  power  did  not,  however,
extend  beyond  Siut.  near  the  former  frontier  of  the  Theban  kingdom.     The

withdrawal  of  Pionkhi-BIiamun,  and  his  subsequent
death,  had  not  disturbed  the  Ethiopian  rule  in  the
soutiiern  half  of  Egypt,  though  it  somewhat  altered
its  character.  While  an  unknown  Ethiopian  king
filled  the  place  of  the  conqueror  at  Napata,  another
Ethiopian,  named  Kashta,  made  his  way  to  the  throne
in  Thebes.^  It  is  possible  that  he  was  a  son  of  Pionkhi,
and  may  have  been  placed  in  supreme  j^ower  by  his
father  when  the  latter  reinstated  the  city  in  its  place
as  capital.  With  all  their  partiality  for  real  or  sup-
posed descendants  of  the  Eamesside  dynasty,  the  Thebans  were,  before  all  things,
proud  of  their  former  greatness,  and  eagerly  hoped  to  regain  it  without  delay.
When,  therefore,  they  accepted  this  Kushite  king  who,  to  their  eyes,  represented
the  only  family  possessed  of  a  legitimate  claim  to  the  throne,  it  was  mainly
because  they  counted  on  him  to  restore  them  to  their  former  place  among  the
cities  of  Egypt.  They  must  have  been  cruelly  disappointed  when  he  left  them
for  the  Sacred  Mountain.  His  invasion,  far  from  reviving  their  prosperity,
merely  served  to  ratify  tlie  suppression  of  that  pontificate  of  Amon-Ra  whicli
was  the  last  remaining  evidence  of  their  past  splendour.     All  hope  of  re-estab-

'  He  is  the  Psammous  mentioned  by  Manetho.  The  cartouches  attributed  to  him  by  Lepsius
{Konigsbucli,  pi.  xlvi.  Xo.  614)  really  belong  to  the  Psammuthis  of  the  XXIX""  dynasty  (Wiedemann,
Gesclt.  .iEgypt.  von  Psammetich  I.  bi»  auf  Alexander  den  Grossen,  p.  274,  and  yUgypt.  Geseh.,  pp.  577,
696-699  ;  BIaspeko,  De'couverte  d'un  petit  temple  a  Karnak,  in  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  20).  It  is
possible  that  one  of  the  marks  found  at  Karnak  indicating  the  level  of  tlie  Nile  (Legrain,  Tcxtes  gravis
sur  le  quai  de  Karnak,  in  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114,  No.  24)  belong  to  the  reign  of  this  monarch.

-  As  to  Tafnakhti,  King  at  Sais,  cf.  pp.  180,  ISl,  supra.

'  For  the  genealogy  of  this  king,  cf.  Deveria,  Mimoires  et  fragments,  vol.  i.  pp.  376,  377,  and
Daressy,  Nutes  et  Remarques,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xix.  pp.  20,  21.

'  As  is  frequently  the  case  with  the  secondary  kings  of  this  period,  no  cartouche  prenomen  of  Kashta
has  come  down  to  us.  His  name,  erroneously  read  at  first  as  Katohet  (Wilkinson,  Materia  Hieroglyphica,
part  ii.  pi.  iii. ;  Eosellini.  Mon.  Storici,  vol.  ii.  p.  109,  and  pi.  viii.  141  e  ;  Leemans,  Lettre  a  M.  Salvo-
lini,  p.  132,  and  pi.  sxvi.  Xo.  259 ;  E.  de  Kouge,  Notice  de  quelques  textes  hieroghjphiques,  p.  48),  then
as  Kashen  (Lepsius,  Ueber  die  XXII  a:gyptisclie  Konigsdy na^tie,  pp.  300,  302,  and  pi.  ii.),  was
supposed  to  be  that  of  a  son  of  Amenertas;  his  true  relationship  to  this  queen  was  divined  by  I'risse
d' Avenues  (^Notice  sur  le  Musgedu  CaiVe,  pp.  13,  14),  and  the  correct  reading  of  liis  name  was  indicated
by  Lepsius,  at  first  doubtfully  {Veber  die  XXII  ivgyptische  Kiiiiigsdynastie,  p.  302),  afterwards  with-
out hesitation  (^KSnigshuch,  pi.  xlvi.  Nos.  616,  617).  This  king  has  been  identified  by  Lauth  (jD/e
Pianchi-Stele,  pp.  59,  00,  and  Aas  JSgyptens  Vorzeit,  pp.  393, 426, 427)  with  the  Xet  or  Zet  of  Manetho.
Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  Pkisse  d'Avennes,  Monuments  egyptiens,  pi.  xxvii.


THE   STATE    OF  EGYPT  IN   THE   TIME    OF  SEALMANESER    V.      211

lishiDg  it  had  now  to  be  abandoned,  since  the  sovereign  who  had  come  to  them
from  Napata  was  himself  by  birth  and  hereditary  privilege  the  sole  priest  of
Amon :  in  his  absence  the  actual  head  of  the  Thebau  religion  could  lay  claim
only  to  an  inferior  office,  and  indeed,  even  then,  the  only  reason  for  accepting
a  second  prophet  was  that  he  might  direct  the  worship  of  the  temple  at
Karnak.  The  force  of  circumstances  compelled  the  Ethiopians  to  countenance
in  the  Thebaid  what  their  Tanite  or  Bubastite  predecessors  had  been  obliged
to  tolerate  at  Hermopolis,  Heracleopolis,  Sais,  and  in  many  another  lesser  city ;  ^
they  turned  it  into  a  feudatory  kingdom,  and  gave  it  a  ruler  who,  like  Auiti,
half  a  century  earlier,  had  the  right  to  use  the  cartouches.^  Once  installed,
Kashta  employed  the  usual  methods  to  secure  his  seat  on  the  throne,  one  of
the  first  being  a  marriage  alliance.  The  disappearance  of  the  high  priests  had
naturally  increased  the  importance  of  the  princesses  consecrated  to  the  service
of  Amon.  From  henceforward  they  were  the  sole  visible  intermediaries  between
the  god  and  his  people,  the  privileged  guardians  of  his  body  and  his  double,  and
competent  to  perpetuate  the  line  of  the  solar  kings.  The  Theban  appanage  con-
stituted their  dowry,  and  even  if  their  sex  prevented  them  from  discharging
all  those  civil,  military,  and  religious  duties  i-equired  by  their  position,  no  one
else  had  the  right  to  do  so  on  their  behalf,  unless  he  was  expressly  chosen  by
them  for  the  purpose.  When  once  married  they  deputed  their  husbands  to  act
for  them ;  so  long  as  they  remained  either  single  or  widows,  some  exalted
personage,  the  prophet  of  Amon  or  Montu,  the  ruler  of  Thebes,  or  the
administrator  of  the  Said,  managed  their  houses  and  fiefs  for  them  with  such
show  of  authority  that  strangers  were  at  times  deceived,  and  took  him  for  the
reigning  monarch  of  the  country.-'  The  Pharaohs  had,  therefore,  a  stronger
incentive  than  ever  to  secure  exclusive  possession  of  these  women,  and  if  they
could  not  get  all  of  them  safely  housed  in  their  harems,  they  endeavoured,
at  any  rate,  to  reserve  for  themselves  the  chief  among  them,  who  by  purity  of
descent  or  seniority  in  age  had  attained  the  grade  of  Divine  Worshipper.
Kashta  married  a  certain  Sliapenuapit,  daughter  of  Osorkon  III.  and  a  Theban
pallacide;^  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  eventually  became  king  over  Ethiopia

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  concerning  the  secondary  Pharaohs  on  pp.  166-lSO,  supra.

'  Legrain,  Textes  grav€s  aur  le  quai  de  KarnaJi,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  114,  Xo.  26;  also
cf.  what  is  said  of  this  Pharaoh  Auiti  on  p.  16ij,  supra.

'  Tlius  Harua,  in  the  time  of  Amenertas,  was  prince  and  chief  over  tlie  servants  of  the  '-Divine
Worshipper  "  (Ebkrs,  Die  Naophore  Statue  dvs  Hanial,  in  the  Zeit.  d.  D.  Murgenl.  Ges.,  vol.  xxvi.  pp.
139.  140.  143  ;  Piehl,  Dne  Inscriptior.  de  I'^poque  Saite,  pp.  o,  4,  9, 10,  13).  Mautumih.ait,  in  the  time
of  Taharqa  and  of  Tanuatamanu,  was  ruler  of  Thebes,  and  fourth  prophet  of  Amon  (E.  deEouge,  Etude
tur' quelques monuments  du  reijnede  Tahralca,  in  the  Me'langes  d' Arcliiulogie,  vol.  i.  pp.  17-20),  and  it  is
hewho  is  described  i.i  the  Assyrian  inouiiments  as  King  of  Tiiehoa(.4ftn(i?e«  d^ Assurhanahal,  col.  i.  1. 109).

*  LiEBLEiN,  Die  JEgyjilischen  Denkmiiler  in  8t.-Petersbur(j,  Uelsingfors,  Upsala  mid  Copjenhagen,  pp.
6-11 ;  cf.  Maspeko,  Les  Mamies  royales  de  iJeir-el-Bahari,  in  M^m.  de  la  Mission  du  Caire,  vol.  i.  pp.
752,  753.  It  may  be  that,  in  accordance  with  a  custom  whicli  obtained  during  the  generations  that
followed,  and  which  possibly  originated  about  tliis  period,  this  daughter  of  Osorkou  III.  was  only  the
adoptive  mother  of  Amenertiis  (Ekjiax,  Zn  dm  Legrain'sclun  Tnschr.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxv.  p.  29).


212     TIGLATH-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

and  the  Sudan  or  not.  So  far,  we  have  no  proof  that  he  did,  hut  it  seems
quite  possible  when  we  remember  that  one  of  his  children,  Shabaku  (Sabaco),
subsequently  occupied  the  throne  of  Napata  in  addition  to  that  of  Thebes.^
Kashta  does  not  appear  to  have  possessed  sufiScient  energy  to  prevent  the
Delta  and  its  nomes  from  repudiating  the  Ethiopian  supremacy.  The  Saites,
under  Tafuakhti  or  Bocchoris,  soon  got  the  upper  hand,  and  it  was  to  them
that  the  Syrian  vassals  of  Nineveh  looked  for  aid,  when  death  removed  the
conqueror  who  had  trampled  them  so  ruthlessly  underfoot.  Ever  since  the
fall  of  Arpad,  Hadrach,  and  Damascus,  Shabarain,  a  town  situated  somewhere
in  the  valley  of  the  Orontes  or  of  the  Upper  Litany,^  and  hitherto  but  little
known,  had  served  as  a  rallying-point  for  the  disaffected  Aramaean  tribes :  on  the
accession  ofShalmaneserV.it  ventured  to  rebel,  probably  in  727  B.C.,  but  was  over-
thrown and  destroyed,  its  inhabitants  being  led  away  captive.  This  achievement
proved,  beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  that  in  spite  of  their  change  of  rulers  the
vengeance  of  the  Assyrians  was  as  keen  and  sharp  as  ever.  Not  one  of  the  Syrian
towns  dared  to  stir,  and  the  Phoenician  seaports,  though  their  loyalty  had  seemed,
for  a  moment,  doubtful,  took  care  to  avoid  any  action  which  might  expose  them  to
the  terrors  of  a  like  severity.^  The  Israelites  and  Philistines,  alone  of  the  western
peoples,  could  not  resign  themselves  to  a  prudent  policy  ;  after  a  short  period
of  hesitation  they  drew  the  sword  from  its  scabbard,  and  in  725  war  broke  out.*

'  The  relationship  between  Kashta  and  Shabaku,  first  suggested  by  E.  de  Eouge'  {£tudes  sur
quelques  monuments  du  regne  de  Taliraha,  in  the  Melanges  d'Archeologic,  vol.  i.  pp.  87,  88),  was  proved
by  the  inscription  on  a  statuette  afterwards  discovered  and  published  by  Lieblein  (^Die  Mgyptisclie
Denkiniiler  /)!  St.-Petenliurg,  Hehingforg,  Upsala  und  Copenhagen,  ^ip.  (J-11).

-  Shabarain  was  originally  confounded  with  Samaria  by  the  e;irly  commentators  on  the  Babylonian
Chronicle.  Hale'vy,  very  happily,  referred  it  to  the  biblical  Sepharvaim,  a  place  always  mentioned  in
connection  with  Hamath  and  Arpad  (2  Kings  svii.  24,  31 ;  xviii.  31 ;  xix.  13 :  cf.  Isa.  xsxvi.  19 ;  xxxvii.
13),  and  to  the  Sibraim  of  Ezekiel  (xlvii.  16),  called  in  the  Septuagint  Samareim  (Melanges  de  Critique
et  d'Histoire,  p.  162;  Notes  Assyriologiques.  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  401,  402;
Commumcations,  §  i.,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1889,  vol.  xi.  pp.  280-282).  Its  ideutiflcation  with
Samaria  has,  since  then,  been  generally  rejected,  and  its  connection  with  Sibraim  admitted
(WixOKLER,  Nachtrag,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  350-352,  and  Noch  einmal
Samaria,  ibid.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  108-111;  Alttestamentliche  Vntersuchungen,  p.  101,  note  1;  Schfader,
Sepharvaim,  in  Eiehji,  Handu-orterhuch,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  480).  Sibraim  (or  Sepharvaim,  or
Samareim)  has  been  located  at  Shomeriyeh.  to  the  east  of  the  Bahr-Kades,  and  south  of  Hamath.

"  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  1.  28  ;  cf.  Winckleb,  Babylonisclie  Chronik  B,  in  Sohradee,
Keilinschriftliche  BibliotheJi,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277.  The  siege  of  Tyre,  which  the  historian  Menander,
in  a  passage  quoted  by  Josephus,  places  ia  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  (for  the  diflerent  forms  of  this
name  whicli  appear  here,  cf.  Schradeb,  2e\d/i\f/as  —  Salmanassar,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  i.  pp.  126,  127),  ought  really  to  be  referred  to  the  reign  of  Sennacherib  (G.  Smith,  History  of
Sennacherib,  pp.  69,  70;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  435,  467;  Hojihel,
Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  676 ;  Stade,  Geschichte  des  VoUces  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  599,  note  2, 619 ;  Fe.  Jeremias,
Tyrus  bis  zurZeit  Nebukadnezar's,  pp.  29-33),  or  the  fragment  of  Menander  must  be  divided  into  three
parts  dealing  with  three  different  Assyrian  campaigns  against  Tyre,  under  Tiglath-pileser,  Senna-
cherib, and  Esarhaddon  respectively  (Landau,  Beitriige  zur  Alterthumskunde  des  Orients,  pp.  5-16).

*  The  war  cannot  have  begun  earlier,  for  the  Eponym  Canon,  in  dealing  witli  726,  has  the
words  '■  in  the  country,"  thus  proving  that  no  expedition  took  place  in  that  year  ;  in  the  case  of  the
year  725,  on  the  other  hand,  it  refers  to  a  campaign  against  some  country  whose  name  has  dis-
appeared (Scheadee,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  214,  215)  ;  it  w;is  probably  Palestine
(WiNCKLEE,  Alttestamentliche  Vntersuchungen,  p.  17).   The  passages  in  the  Boohs  of  Kings  (2  Ki7igs  xvii.


EOSHEA   AND    TEE  REVOLT   OF  SAMARIA.  213

Hosbea,  who  had  ascended  the  throne  with  the  consent  of  Tiglath-pileser,
was  unable  to  keep  them  quiet.  The  whole  of  Galilee  and  Gilead  was  now
an  Assyrian  proyince,  subject  to  the  governor  of  Damascus;  Jerusalem,  Moab,
Ammon,  and  the  Bedawin  had  transferred  their  allegiance  to  Nineveh ;  and
Israel,  with  merely  the  central  tribes  of  Ephraim,  Manasseh,  and  Benjamin
left,  was  now  barely  equal  in  area  and  population  to  Judah.  Their  tribute
weighed  heavily  on  the  Israelites ;  passing  armies  had  laid  waste  their  fields,
and  townsmen,  merchants,  and  nobles  alike,  deprived  of  their  customary
resources,  fretted  with  impatience  under  the  burdens  and  humiliations  imposed
on  them  by  their  defeat ;  convinced  of  their  helplessness,  they  again  looked
beyond  their  own  borders  for  some  nation  or  individual  who  should  restore  to
them  their  lost  prosperity.  Amid  the  tottering  fortunes  of  their  neighbours,
Egypt  alone  stood  erect,  and  it  was,  therefore,  to  Egypt  that  they  turned  their
eyes.  Negotiations  were  opened,  not  with  Pharaoh  himself,  but  with  Shabi,
one  of  the  petty  kings  on  the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Delta,  whose  position
made  him  better  qualified  than  any  other  to  deal  with  Syrian  affairs.^  Hannon
of  Gaza  had  by  this  time  returned  from  exile,  and  it  was,  doubtless,  owing  to
Shabi's  support  that  he  had  been  able  to  drive  out  the  Assyrian  generals  and
recover  his  crown.^     The  Israelite  aristocracy  was  led  away  by  his  example,

1-6,  and  xviii.  9-12)  which  deal  with  the  close  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  have  been  interpreted  in
such  a  way  as  to  give  us  two  campaigns  by  Shalmaneser  against  Hoshea :  (1)  Hosliea  having  failed  to
pay  the  tribute  imposed  upon  litm  by  Tiglath-pileser,  Shalmaneser  made  war  upon  him  and  conipelled
him  to  resume  its  payment  (2  Kings  xvii.  1-3) ;  (2)  Hoshea  having  intrigued  with  Egypt,  and  declined
to  pay  tribute,  Shalmaneser  again  took  the  field  against  him,  made  him  prisoner,  and  besieged
Samaria  for  three  years  (2  Kings  xvii.  4-6 ;  xviii.  9-12).  The  first  expedition  must,  in  this  case,  have
taken  place  in  727,  while  the  second  must  have  lasted  from  72o-722  (Tiele,  Bahijlonisch-assyrische
Geschichte,  pp.  237,  238).  Most  modern  historians  believe  that  the  Hebrew  writer  has  ascribed  to
Shalmaneser  the  subjection  of  Hoshea  which  was  really  the  act  of  Tiglath-pileser,  as  well  as  tlie  final
war  against  Israel  (8tadk,  Geschiclde  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  600,  note  1 ;  Hommel,  Geschichte
Bahijhniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  671-67G ;  Kittel,  Geschichte  der  Hehraer,  vol.  ii.  pp.  295,  296)  :
according  to  Winckk-r,  the  two  portions  of  the  narrative  must  have  been  borrowed  from  two  different
versions  of  the  final  war,  which  the  final  editor  inserted  one  after  the  other,  heedless  of  the  contra-
dictions contained  in  them  (^AUtestamentliche  Untersuchungen,  pp.  15-25).

'  This  individual  is  called  Sua,  Seveh,  and  So  in  the  Hebrew  text  (2  Kings  xvii.  4),  and  the
LXX.  gives  the  traujliteration  Sebek  side  by  side  with  Segos.  He  is  found  again  under  tlie  forms
Shibahi,  Shabi,  Shabe',  in  Sargon's  inscriptions  (^Annals,  11.  27.  29 ;  Great  Inscription  of  Kliorsabad,
11.  26,  27,  Wiiickler's  edit.,  pp.  7, 101)  :  Oppert  was  the  first  to  identify  him  with  Shabaku  of  the  XXV"
dynasty,  and  read  the  title  which  accompanies  the  name  of  Shabi  iu  Assyrian  as  shiltaim  =  sultan
(Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  assyriennes  des  Sargmtides,  p.  22 ;  Grande  Inscription  dii  Palais  de  Khorsahad.
pp.  74.  75,  and  Memoire  sur  les  rapports  de  V Egypte  et  de  VAssyrie,  pp.  12-14),  while  Hiucks  followed
Eawlinson  iu  rendering  it  lurtanu,  the  title  applied  to  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Assyrian  armies,
though  he  aceeptid  Oi'pert's  identification  (Assyrian  Discovery,  in  the  Athenieum,  18G3,  vol.  ii.  p.  524).
Eawlinson  at  first  refused  to  recognise  as  a  king  of  Egypt  a  person  bearing  the  title  tartan,  and
though  obliged  to  admit  the  identification  with  Sabaco,  he  suggested  that  the  reference  in  Sargon's
text  must  have  been  nuuio  to  Sabaco  before  ho  came  to  the  throne,  while  he  was  still  merely  a  general
in  the  Egyptian  army  (Assyrian  Discovery,  in  the  Athemeum,  1S63,  vol.  ii.  p.  247,  note  IS);  later  on,
Stade  absolutely  deelimd  to  ailmit  any  identity  between  Sabaco  and  Sua,  maintaining  that  the  latter
was  merely  one  of  the  petty  kings  of  the  Delta  (De  Isaix  Vaticiniis  JEthiopicis,  pp.  39,  40,  54-56),
but  his  opinion  did  not  gain  acceptance  until  Winckler  took  it  up  afresh  and  completed  the  evidence
in  its  favour  (Uidersnch'ingen  lur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  pp.  92-94,  106-lOS).

'  This  seems  to  be  the  inference  from  Sargon's  inscriijtion,  in  which  he  is  referred  to  as  relying  on  the
army  of  Shabi,  tlie  tartan  of  Egypt  (Annals  of  liarrjon,  11.  27-29  ;  Great  Inscr.  of  Kliorsahad,  11.  26,  27).


214      TIGLATn-PILESER  HI.  AND  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

but  Shalmaneser  hastened  to  tiie  spot  before  the  Egyptian  bowmen  had  time
to  cross  the  isthmus.  Hoshea  begged  for  mercy,  and  was  deported  into  Assyria
and  condemned  to  lifelong  imprisonment.'  Though  deserted  by  her  king,
Samaria  did  not  despair ;  she  refused  to  open  her  gates,  and,  being  strongly
fortified,  compelled  the  Assyrians  to  lay  regular  siege  to  the  city.  It  would
seem  that  at  one  moment,  at  the  beginning  of  operations,  when  it  wasrumoui-ed
on  all  sides  that  Pharaoh  would  speedily  intervene,  Ahaz  began  to  fear  for  his
own  personal  safety,  and  seriously  considered  whether  it  would  not  be  wiser  to
join  forces  with  Israel  or  with  Egypt.^  The  rapid  sequence  of  events,  however,
backed  by  the  counsel  of  Isaiah,  speedily  recalled  him  to  a  more  reasonable
view  of  the  situation.  The  prophet  showed  him  Samaria  spread  out  before
him  like  one  of  those  wreaths  of  flowers  which  the  guests  at  a  banquet  bind
round  their  brows,  and  which  gradually  fade  as  their  wearers  drink  deeper  and
deeper.  "  Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride  of  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim,  and  to  the
fading  flower  of  his  glorious  beauty,  which  is  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valley  of
them  that  are  overcome  with  wine.  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and  strong
one ;  as  a  tempest  of  hail,  a  destroying  storm,  as  a  tempest  of  mighty  waters
overflowing,  shall  he  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  violence.  The  crown  of  the
pride  of  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim  shall  be  trodden  underfoot,  and  the  fading
flower  of  his  glorious  beauty,  which  is  on  the  head  of  the  fat  valley,  shall  be  as
the  first  ripe  fig  before  the  summer ;  which  when  he  that  looketh  upon  it  seeth,
while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand  he  eateth  it  up."  While  the  cruel  fate  of  the  per-
verse city  was  being  thus  accomplished,  Jahveh  Sabaoth  was  to  be  a  crown  of
glory  to  those  of  His  children  who  remained  faithful  to  Him ;  but  Judah,  far
from  submitting  itself  to  His  laws,  betrayed  Him  even  as  Israel  had  done.
Its  prophets  and  priests  were  likewise  distraught  with  drunkenness ;  they
staggered  under  the  effects  of  their  potations,  and  turned  to  scorn  the  true
prophet  sent  to  proclaim  to  them  the  will  of  Jehovah.  "  Whom,"  they
stammered  between  their  hiccups — "whom  will  He  teach  knowledge?  and
whom  will  He  make  to  understand  the  message  ?  them  that  are  weaned  from
the  milk  and  drawn  from  the  breasts  ?     For  it  is  precept  upon  precept,  precept

'  2  Kings  xvii.  4.

'  The  Second  Book  of  Kings  (xviii.  9,  10;  cf.  xvii.  C)  place  the  beginning  of  the  siege  of  Samaria
in  the  seventh  year  of  Hoshea  (=  fourth  year  of  Hezekiah),  and  the  capture  of  the  town  in  the  ninth
year  of  Hoshea  (=  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah);  further  on  it  adds  that  Sennacherib's  campaign  against
Hezekiah  took  place  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  the  latter's  reign  (2  Kings  xviii.  13 ;  cf  Isa.  xxxvi.  1).
Now,  Sennacherib's  campaign  against  Hezekiah  took  place  (as  will  be  shown  later  on,  in  Chapter  III.
of  the  present  work)  in  702  B.C.,  and  Samaria  was  captured  in  722  (cf.  p.  216,  infra).  The  synchronisms
in  the  Hebrew  narrative  are  therefore  fictitious,  and  rest  on  no  real  historical  basis — at  any  rate,  in  so
far  as  the  king  who  occupied  the  throne  of  Judah  at  the  time  of  the  fall  of  Samaria  is  concerned ;
Ahaz  was  still  alive  at  that  date,  and  continued  to  reign  till  716  or  715  (Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des
Altertlmms,  vol.  i.  p.  433;  St.\de,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  605),  or  perhaps  only  till  720
(WiNCKLEB,  AUtestamentliche  Untersuckungen,  pp.  7S-80,  135-142,  and  Geschichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.
ISO,  ISl ;  C.  NiEBOHR,  Die  Chronologie  der  Geschichte  Israels,  pp.  22,  23).


TEE  SIEGE    OF  SAMAEIA   AND    THE  PROPHECY  OF  ISAIAH.      215

upon  precept,  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line,  here  ii  little  and  there  a  little  ! "
And  sure  enough  it  was  by  the  mouth  of  a  stammering  people,  by  the  lips  of
the  Assyrians,  that  Jahveh  was  to  speak  to  them.  In  vain  did  the  jjrophet
implore  them :  "  This  is  the  rest,  give  ye  rest  to  him  that  is  weary  ; "  they
did  not  listen  to  him,  and  now  Jahveh  turns  their  own  gibes  against  them  :
"Precept  iipon  precept,  precept  upon  precept,  line  upou  line,  line  upon  line,
here  a  little  and  there  a  little," — "  that  they  may  go  and  fall  backward,  and
be  broken  and  snared  and  taken."  There  was  to  be  no  hope  of  safety  for
Jerusalem  unless  it  gave  up  all  dependence  on  human  counsels,  and  trusted
solely  to  God  for  protection.^  Samaria  was  doomed ;  this  was  the  general
belief,  and  men  went  about  repeating  it  after  Isaiah,  each  in  his  own  words  ;
every  one  feared  lest  the  disaster  should  spread  to  Judah  also,  and  that  Jahveh,
having  once  determined  to  have  done  with  the  northern  kingdom,  would  turn
His  wrath  against  that  of  the  south  as  well.  Micah  the  Morashtite,  a  prophet
born  among  the  ranks  of  the  middle  class,  went  up  and  down  the  land
proclaiming  misery  to  be  the  common  lot  of  the  two  sister  nations  sprung
from  the  loins  of  Jacob,  as  a  punishment  for  their  common  errors  and  weaknesses.
"The  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  His  place,  and  will  come  and  tread  upon  the
high  places  of  the  earth.  And  the  mountains  shall  be  molten  under  Him,  and
the  valleys  shall  be  cleft,  as  wax  before  the  fire,  as  waters  that  are  poured  down
a  steep  place.  For  the  transgression  of  Jacob  is  all  this,  and  for  the  sins  of  the
house  of  Israel.  What  is  the  transgression  of  Jacob  ?  is  it  not  Samaria  ?  and
what  are  the  high  places  of  Jndali  ?  are  they  not  Jerusalem  ?  "  The  doom
pronounced  against  Samaria  was  already  being  carried  out,  and  soon  the
hapless  city  was  to  be  no  more  than  "  an  lieap  of  the  field,  and  as  the  plantings
of  a  vineyard  ;  and  I  will  pour  down  the  stones  thereof  into  the  valley,"  saith
the  Lord,  "  and  I  will  discover  the  foundations  thereof.  And  all  her  graven
images  shall  be  beaten  to  pieces,  and  all  her  hires  shall  be  burned  with  fire>
and  all  her  idols  will  I  lay  desolate  :  for  of  the  hire  of  an  harlot  hath  she
gathered  them,  and  unto  tlie  hire  of  an  harlot  shall  they  return."  Yet,  even
while  mourning  over  Samaria,  the  prophet  cannot  refrain  from  thinking  of  his
own  people,  for  the  terrible  blow  which  had  fallen  on  Israel  "  is  come  even  unto
Judah  ;  it  reacheth  unto  the  gate  of  my  people,  even  to  Jerusalem."  ^  Doubtless
the  Assyrian  generals  kept  a  watchful  eye  upon  Ahaz  during  the  whole  time  of
the  siege,  from  724  to  722,  and  when  once  the  first  heat  of  enthusiasm  had  cooled,

'  Isa.  xxviii.  Giesebrecht  has  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  only  verses  1-G,  23-29  of  the  prophecy
were  delivered  at  this  epoch :  the  remainder  he  believes  to  have  been  written  during  Sennacherib's
campaign  against  Judah,  and  suggests  that  the  propliet  adiled  on  his  previous  oracle  to  them,  thus
diverting  it  from  its  original  application  (Beilrage  zur  IfrnjakTitih,  pp.  53-72).  Others,  such  as  Stade
and  "Wellhausen,  regard  the  opening  verses  as  embodying  a  mere  rhetorical  figure.  Jerusalem,  they
say,  appeared  to  the  prophet  as  though  changed  into  Samaria,  and  it  is  this  transformed  city  whicli
he  calls  '•  the  crown  of  pride  of  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim."  ^  Micah  i.  3-9.


21(j      TIOLATE-PILESER  III.  AND  THE  0ROANI8ATI0N  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

the  presence  of  so  formidable  an  army  within  striking  distance  must  have
greatly  helped  the  king  to  restrain  the  ill-advised  tendencies  of  some  of  his
subjects.  Samaria  still  held  out  when  Shalmaneser  died  at  Babylon  in  the
month  of  Tebeth,  722.  Whether  he  had  no  son  of  fit  age  to  succeed  him,  or
whether  a  revolution,  similar  to  that  which  had  helped  to  place  Tiglath-pileser
on  the  throne,  broke  out  as  soon  as  he  had  drawn  his  last  breath,  is  not  quite
clear.  At  any  rate,  Sargon,  an  officer  who  had  served  under  him,  was
proclaimed  king  on  the  22nd  day  of  Tebeth,  and  his  election  was  approved
by  the  whole  of  Assyria.  After  some  days  of  hesitation,  Babylon  declined  to
recognise  him,  and  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  a  Kaldu  named  Marduk-
abalidinna,!  or  Merodach-baladan.  While  these  events  were  taking  place  in  the
heart  of  the  empire,  Samaria  succumbed;  perhaps  to  famine,  but  more  probably  to
force.  It  was  sacked  and  dismantled,  and  the  bulk  of  its  population,  amounting
to  27,280  souls,  were  carried  away  into  Mesopotamia  and  distributed  along  the
Balikh,  the  Khabur,  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Gozan,  and  among  the  towns  of
the  Median  frontier.^  Sargon  made  the  whole  territory  into  a  province ;  an
Assyrian  governor  was  installed  in  the  palace  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  and  soon
the  altars  of  the  strange  gods  smoked  triumphantly  by  the  side  of  the  altars
of  Jahveh  (722  b.c.).^

Thus  fell  Samaria,  and  with  Samaria  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  with
Israel  the  last  of  the  states  which  had  aspired,  with  some  prospect  of  success,
to  rule  over  Syria.     They  had  risen  one  after  another  during  the  four  centuries

'  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  II.  29-33;  "Wincklek,  Die  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  in
SCHBADER,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277.

'  Ammls  of  Sargon,  11. 10-17 ;  Gredt  Inscription  of  Khorsabad,  11.  23-25 ;  Winckler's  edit.,  pp.  4,  5-
100, 101.  Sargon  does  not  mention  where  he  deported  the  Israelites  to,  liut  we  learn  this  from  the  Second
Book  of  Kings  (xvii.  G ;  xviii.  11);  as  to  the  emendation  Balikh  for  Calah,  of.  Winckler,  Alttesiamentliche
Uniersuchungen,  pp.  108-110.  There  has  been  much  controversy  as  to  whether  Samaria  was  taken
by  Shalmaneser,  as  the  Hebrew  chronicler  seems  to  believe  (2  Kings  xvii.  3-6;  xviii.  9.  10),  or  by
Saigon,  as  the  Assyrian  scribes  assure  us.  At  first,  several  scholars  suggested  a  solution  of  the
difficulty  by  arguing  that  Shalmaneser  and  Sargon  were  one  and  the  same  person  (Eawlinson,  in  the
/.  M.  As.  Soc.  vol.  xii.  p.  419 ;  Haigh,  Sardanapallus,  his  Place  in  Ridory,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1870,  p.
88,  note  ;  Sayce,  Deber  den  ZerstSrer  Samaria's,  and  Der  Belagerer  Samaria's,  in  Studien  und  Kritihen.
1871,  pp.  318-322;  1872,  pp.  722-734);  afterwards  the  theorytookshapt-that  Samaria  was  really  captured
in  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser,  but  by  Sargon,  who  was  in  command  of  the  besieging  army  at  the  time,
and  who  transferred  this  achievement,  of  which  he  was  naturally  proud,  to  the  beginning  of  his  own
reign  (Vigocboux,  La  Bible  et  les  Dgcouvertes  modernes,  6th  edit.,  pp.  555-558).  The  simplest  course
seems  to  be  to  accept  for  the  present  the  testimony  of  contemporary  documents,  and  place  the  fall  of
Samaria  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Sargon,  being  the  time  indicated  by  Sargon  in  his  inscriptions.

'  2  Kings  xvii.  24-41,  a  passage  to  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  farther  on  in  the  present
volume.     The  following  is  a  list  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  after  the  division  of  the  tribes : —

I.  Jeroboam  I.  VI,  Omei.  !         XI.  Jehoahaz.  XVI.  Menahem.

I  I  '  I  I

II.  Nadab.  VII.  Ahab.  XII.  Jehoash.  XVII.  Pekahiab.


I

III.  Baasha.  VIII.  iAhaziah.


I


I


IV.   ELAS.  I  IX.  JORAM.

V.  ZiMRi.  X.  Jehu.


I

XIII.  Jeroboam  II.  XVIII.  Pekah.

XIV.  ZeCBARIAB.  XIX.   HOSHEA.

XV.  Sballum.  I


[In  this  table  father  and  son  are  shown  by  a  perpendicular  line.     The  king's  name  in  italics  signifies
that  he  died  a  violent  death. — Te.]


SAROON  AND  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  ISRAEL.      217


in  which  the  absence  of  the  stranger  had  left  them  masters  of  their  own  fate —
the  Hittites  in  the  North,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Philistines  in  the  South,  and
the  Aramseans  and  Damascus  in  the  centre ;  each  one  of  these  races  had
enjoyed  its  years  of  glory  and  ambition  in  the  course  of  which  it  had  seemed
to  prevail  over  its  rivals.  Then  those  whose  territory  lay  at  the  extremities
began  to  feel  the  disadvantages  of  their  isolated  position,  and  after  one  or  two
victories  gave  up  all  hope  of  ever  establishing  a  supremacy  over  the  whole
country.  The  Hittite  sphere  of  influence  never  at  any  time  extended  much
further  southwards  than  the  sources  of  the  Orontes,  while  that  of
the  Hebrews  in  their  palmiest
days  cannot  have  gone  beyond
the  vicinity  of  Hamath.  And
even  progress  thus  far  had  cost
both  Hebrews  and  Hittites  a
struggle  so  exhausting  that  they
could  not  long  maintain  it.  No
sooner  did  they  relax  theirefforts,
than  those  portions  of  Coele-
Syria  which  they  had  annexed
to  their  original  territory,  being
too  remote  from  the  seat  of
power  to  feel  its  full  attraction,
gradually  detached  themselves
and  resumed  their  independence,
their  temporary  suzerains  being
too  much  exhausted  by  the  in-
tensity of  their  own  exertions  to  '
retain  hold  over  them.  Damas-
cus, which  lay  almost  in  the
centre,  at  an  equal  distance  from
the  Euphrates  and  the  "  river  of  Egypt,"  could  have  desired  no  better  position  for
grouping  the  rest  of  Syria  round  her.  If  any  city  had  a  chance  of  establishing  a
single  kingdom,  it  was  Damascus,  and  Damascus  alone.  But  lulled  to  blissful
slumbers  in  her  shady  gardens,  she  did  not  awake  to  political  life  and  to  the  desire
of  conquest  until  after  all  the  rest,  and  at  the  very  moment  when  Nineveh  was  be-
ginning to  recover  from  her  early  reverses.  Both  Ben-hadads  had  had  a  free  hand
given  tljem  during  the  half-century  which  followed, and  they  had  taken  advantage
of  this  respite  to  reduce  Ccele-Syria,  the  Lebanon,  Arvadian  Phcenicia,  Hamath,
and  the  Hebrews — in  fact,  two-thirds  of  the  whole  country — to  subjection,  and
'  Drawn  by  Fancher-GuJiu,  from  a  sketch  by  Flandin  in  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,  vol.  i.  pi.  1 2.


SAKGON    OF    ASSYRIA    AND    HIS   VIZIER.'


218      TIG  LATE- PI  LEBER  IIL  A\D  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

to  organise  that  league  of  the  twelve  kings  which  reckoned  Ahab  of  Israel  among
its  leaders.  This  rudimentary  kingdom  had  scarcely  come  into  existence,  and
its  members  had  not  yet  properly  combined,  when  Shalmaneser  III.  arose  and
launched  his  bands  of  veterans  against  them  ;  it  however  successfully  withstood
the  shock,  and  its  stubborn  resistance  at  the  beginning  of  the  struggle  shows  us
what  it  might  have  done,  had  its  founders  been  allowed  time  in  which  to  weld
together  the  various  elements  at  their  disjjosal.  As  it  was,  it  was  doomed  to
succumb — not  so  much  to  the  superiority  of  the  enemy  as  to  the  insub-
ordination of  its  vassals  and  its  own  internal  discords.  The  league  of  the
twelve  kings  did  not  survive  Ben-hadad  II.;  Hazael  and  his  successors  wore
themselves  out  in  repelling  the  attacks  of  the  Assyrians  and  in  repressing  the
revolts  of  Israel ;  when  Tiglath-pileser  III.  arrived  on  the  scene,  both  princes
and  people,  alike  at  Damascus  and  Samaria,  were  so  spent  that  even  their
final  alliance  could  not  save  them  from  defeat.  Its  lack  of  geographical  unity
and  political  combination  had  once  more  doomed  Syria  to  the  servitude  of
alien  rule ;  the  Assyrians,  with  methodical  procedure,  first  conquered  and
then  made  vassals  of  all  those  states  against  w'hich  they  might  have  hurled
their  battalions  in  vain,  had  not  fortune  kept  them  divided  instead  of  uniting
them  in  a  compact  mass  under  the  sway  of  a  single  ruler.  From  Carchemish
to  Arpad,  from  Hamath  to  Damascus  and  Samaria,  their  irresistible  advance
had  led  the  Assyrians  on  towards  Egypt,  the  only  other  power  which  still
rivalled  their  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  ;  and  now,  at  Gaza,  on  the  fron-
tier between  Africa  and  Asia,  as  in  days  gone  by  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates
or  the  Balikh,  these  two  powers  waited  face  to  face,  hand  on  hilt,  each  ready  to
stake  the  empire  of  the  Asiatic  world  on  a  single  throw  of  the  dice.


SARGON    OF    ASSYRIA   AND    SENNACHERIB

(733-681  B.C.).


SARIiON    AS    A   WAKEIOR    AND   AS    A    BUILDER — THE    STRUGGLE    OF    SENXAcHEKIl;    WITH    .lUH.EA
AXD    EGYPT — DESTRUCTION"    OP   BABTLOX.

The  origin  of  Sargon  II. :  the  revolt  of  Babijlojt,  Merodach-baladaii  unJ  Elam — The
kingdom  of  Elam  from  the  time  of  the  first  Babylonian  emyire ;  the  conquests  of  Shutruk-
nakhunta  I.;  the  princes  of  Malamir — Hie  first  enco^inter  of  Assyria  and  Elam,  the  battle  of
Durilu  (721  B.C.) — Revolt  of  Syria,  laubidi  of  Hiimath  and  Hannon  of  Gaza — Bocclioris  and
the  XXIV"'  Egyptian  dynasty ;  the  first  encounter  of  Assyria  iriih  Egijiit,  tlie  Unttle
of  Raphia  (720  B.C.).

Urartu-  and  the  coalition  of  the  peoples  of  the  north-east  and  north-west — Defeat  of
Zikariu  (719  e.c),  of  the  Tabal  (718),  of  the  Khdti  (717),  of  the  Mannai,  of  the  Medes  and
Ellipi  (716),  and  of  the  Medes  (715) — Commencement  of  XXV""  Ethiopian  dynasty :
Sabaco  (716) — The  fall  of  Urzana  aiid  Snsas  (714)  and  the  formation  of  an  Assyrian
province  in  Cappadocia  (713-710) — The  revolt  and  fall  of  Ashdoil.

The  defeat  of  Merodach-baludan  and  of  ShutruJc-tuikhnnta  II.  :  Sargon  conquers
Babylon,  (710-709  B.C.) — Success  of  the  Assyrians  at  Mushki:  homage  of  the  Greeks  of
Cyprus  (710) — The  buildings  of  Sargon  :  Dur-sharrxikin — The  gates  and  lualls  of  Dur-.fhar-
riikin  ;  the  city  and  its  population — The  royal  palace,  its  courts,  theziggurat,  the  harem — Revolt
of  Kunimukh  (709  B.C.)  and  of  Ellipi  (708  B.C.) — Inauguration  of  Dnr-slutrrnkia  JOti  B.C.)
— Murder  of  Sargon  (705  B.C.)  ;  his  eharaeler.


(      220     )

27ie  iipli-eaval  of  the  entire  Eastern  world  on  the  ncrcmon  of  Sennacherib — Revolt  of
Babylon:  return  of  Merodach-haladan  and  his  efforts  to  form  a  coalition  against  Assyria;
the  battle  of  Kish (703  B.C.) — Belihni,  King  of  Babylon  (702-{i99  B.C.)— Sftftaco,  Kiny  of  Egypt,
Amenertas  and  Pionkhi,  Shabt-toku — Tyre  and  its  kings  after  Ethhaal  II.  :  Phcenician
colonisation  in  Libya  and  the  foundation  of  Carthage — The  kingdom  of  Tyre  in  the  time  of
Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  Sargon :  Elnlai — Judah  and  the  reforms  of  Hezekiah  :  alliance  of
Jmlah  and  Tyre  with  Egypt,  the  doivnfall  of  the  Tyrian  kingdom  (702  b.c.) — Tlie  battle
of  Altakn  and  the  siege  of  Jerusalem :  Sennacherib  encamped  before  Lachish,  his  Egyptian
expedition,  the  disaster  at  Pelusiiim.

Renewed  revolt  of  Babylon  and  the  Tubal  ((i!»i)  B.C.)  :  flight  of  the  people  of  Bit-YaMn  into
Etamite  territory;  Sennacherib's  fleet  and  descent  on  Nagitv,  (697-690  B.C.) — Khalludush
invades  Karduniash  (695  b.c)  ;  Nirgal-mhezib  and  MMshesib-mardnh  at  Babylon  (693-689
B.C.) — Sennacherib  invades  Elam  (693  B.C.);  battle  of  Klialulc  (692  B.C.),  siege  and  destruction
of  Babylon  (689  b.c.) — Buildings  of  Sennacherib  at  Nineveli :  his  palace  at  Kouyunjik  ;  Its
decoration  with  battle,  hunting,  and  building  scenes.


THE   MOUND   OF   KHOKSABAr,    BEFORE    BOTTA'S   EXCAVATIONS.'


CHAPTEE    III.

SARGON     OF     ASSYRIA     AND     SENNACHERIB    (722-681     B.C.).

Sargon  as  a  warrior  and  as  a  builder — The  struggle  of  Sennacherib  with  Judfea  and  Egypt —

Destruction  of  Babylon.

TTTHETHER  Sargon  was  even  remotely  connected
'  '  with  the  royal  line,  is  a  question  which  for  the
present  must  remain  unanswered.  He  mentions  in  one
of  his  inscrij)tions  the  three  hundred  princes  who  had
preceded  him  in  the  government  of  Assyria,  and  three
lines  further  on  he  refers  to  the  kings  his  ancestors,
but  he  never  mentions  his  own  father  by  name,  and
this  omission  seems  to  prove  that  he  was  not  a  direct  de-
scendant of  Shalmaneser  V.,  nor  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,
nor  indeed  of  any  of  their  immediate  predecessors.^
It  is,  however,  probable,  if  not  certain,  that  he  could
claim  some  sort  of  kinship  with  them,  though  more
or  less  remote.  It  was  customary  for  the  sovereigns
of  Nineveh  to  give  their  daughters  in  marriage  to  im-
portant ofHcials  or  lords  of  their  court,  and  owing  to  the  constant  contraction
of  such  alliances  through  several  centuries,  there  was  hardly  a  noble  family
but  had  some  royal  blood  in  its  veins ;  and  that  of  Sargon  was  probably  no
exception  to  the  rule.     His  genealogy  was  traced  by  the  chroniclers,  through

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  after  Flandin  (Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,  pi.  5).  The  vignette  is  copied
by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  drawing  in  the  same  work,  pi.  3S.

-  Cylinder  Imcriptions,  11.  45-4S,  and  Bull  Inscription,  11.  43-19  (ed.  LvoN,  pp.  34,  35,  42,  43).
Oppert  conjectured,  at  first,  that  Shar-kin  meant  actual  king,  established  sovereign,  true  liing,  and  that


222  SA1{60N  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

several  hundred  generations  of  princes,  to  the  semi-mythical  heroes  who  had
founded  the  city  of  Assur;  but  as  Assur-nazir-pal  and  his  descendants  had
claimed  Bel-kapkapi  and  Sulili  as  the  founders  of  their  race,  the  Sargonids
chose  a  different  tradition,  and  drew  their  descent  from  Belbani,  son  of  Adasi.^
The  cause  and  incidents  of  the  revolution  which  raised  Sargon  to  the  throne
are  unknown,  but  we  may  surmise  that  the  policy  adopted  with  regard  to
Karduniash  was  a  factor  in  the  case.  Tiglath-pileser  had  hardly  entered
Babylon  before  the  fascination  of  the  city,  the  charm  of  its  associations,  and  the
sacred  character  of  the  legends  which  hallowed  it,  seized  upon  his  imagination  ;
he  returned  to  it  twice  in  the  space  of  two  years  to  "  take  the  hands  of  Bel,"  and
Shalmaneser  V.  much  preferred  it  to  Calah  or  Nineveh  as  a  place  of  residence.'-^
The  Assyrians  doubtless  soon  became  jealous  of  tlie  favour  shown  by  their
princes  to  their  ancient  enemy,  and  their  discontent  must  have  doubtless
conduced  to  their  decision  to  raise  a  new  monarch  to  the  throne.^  The
Babylonians,  on  the  other  hand,  seem  to  have  realised  that  the  change  in  the
dynasty  presaged  a  disadvantageous  alteration  of  government ;  for  as  soon  as
the  news  reached  them  a  movement  was  set  on  foot  and  search  made  for  a
rival  claimant  to  set  up  in  opposition  to  Sargon.^     Of  all  tlie  nations  who  had

it  was  a  surname  of  the  usurpei-;  he  thought  the  origiual  name  of  the  king  appeared  iu  those
of  the  eponym  Bel-patis-assur,  and  of  Enemessar  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Tobit  {Les  Inscriptions
assyriennes  des  Sargonides  et  les  Pastes  de  Ninive,  p.  SO;  Grande  Inscription  du  Palais  de  Khorsahad,
pp.  34-36).  Sayce  subsequently  conjectured  that  Sargon  was  the  Jareb,  King  of  Assyria,  twice
mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Hosea  (v.  13  and  s.  6).  and  that  the  primitive  form  of  the  name  was  either
Yaiibu  or  Eribu-Aribu  ( IFas  Jareh  the  Original  Name  of  Sargon?  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental
Record,  vol.  ii.  pp.  18-22;  cf,  in  support  of  this  hypothesis,  Neubauer,  Sargon  Yareh,  in  the  Zeit-
scltrlft  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  p.  103,  and  against  it,  Lyon,  The  Mea7)ing  of  Jareh  in  Hosea,  in  the
Record,  vol.  ii.  pp.  127,  128),  or,  as  Hommel  prefers  to  read  it,  Irba,  Iriba  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  680).
A  simpler  explanation  still  is  to  admit  that  Sargon  is  the  name  the  usurper  received  in  infancy,  which
he  retained  when  he  ascended  the  throne  (Tiele,  Bahylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  255,  256) ;  his
subjects,  both  Babylonian  and  Assyrian,  sometimes  give  him  the  epithet  arliu,  the  later  Sargon
(G.  SiMiTH,  Assyrian  History,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1869,  p.  93).  The  spelling  varies  in  such  a  way  as  to
allow  of  diiferent  readings ;  sometimes  Sharru-kinu,  the  legitimate  king,  sometimes  Sliarru-ukin,  the
god  has  instituted  him  king  (Schkader,  Die  Assyrisch-hahylonischen  Keilinsehriften,  pp.  157-163,  Die
Sargonstele  des  Berliner  Museums,  p.  2S,  et  seq.,  and  Die  Keilinsehriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  1883,
p.  392 ;  cf.  Lyon,  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  pp.  ix.,  x.,  and  Wixckler,  Die  Keihchrifllexte  Sargons,
vol.  i.  pp.  xiv.,  XV.).

'  Liscription  of  Kegouh,  attributed  to  Sennacherib  (Ed.  Metek,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.
p.  220),  but  really  belonging  to  Esarhaddon  (G.  Smith,  Assyrian  History,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1869,  pp.
93,  94).  and  published  by  Latard,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pi.  35;  the  truth  of  this
theory  is  confirmed  by  the  texts  of  Esarhaddon  and  Shamash-shumukin  brought  together  in  Winckler.
Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  13,  note  1.  For  Adasi  and  Bel-bani  or  Bel-ibni,  cf.  Slniggle  of
the  Nations,  p.  118,  note  4.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  192,  193,  209,  215.

^  Sargon  insists  several  times  on  the  care  he  has  taken  to  '■  make  the  rights  of  Assur  prevail "
{Cylinder,  1.  5,  in  Lyon,  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  pp.  1,  30,  31,  59),  or  to  re-establish  the  liberties  of
Assur  and  Harrdn,  which  had  long  fallen  into  abeyance  (Inscription  des  Pastes,  11.  10,  11,  in
WiNCKLEK,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  96-99).

'  The  succession  of  events,  as  indicated  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  11.  29-31,
seems  indeed  to  imply  that  the  Babylonians  wailed  to  ascertain  tlie  disposition  of  the  new  king  before
they  decided  what  line  to  adopt.   In  fact,  Shalmaneser  died  in  tlie  month  Tebeth,  and  Sargon  ascended


HIS    ORIGIN  AND    THE  REVOLT   OF  BABYLON.


•223


in  turn  occupied  the  plains  of  the  Lower  Euphrates  and  the  marshes  bordering
on  Arabia,  the  Kakla  alone  had  retained  their  full  vitality.  They  were
constantly  recruited  by  immigrants  from  their  kinsfolk  of  the  desert,  and  the
continual  infiltration  of  these  semi-barbarous  elements  kept  the  race  from
becoming  enervated  by  contact  with  tiie  indigenous  population,  and  more  than
compensated  for  the  losses  in  their  ranks  occasioned  by  war.  The  invasion
of  Tiglath-pileser  and  the  consequent  deportations  of  prisoners  had  decimated


ASSYRIAN    SOLDIERS    PlIKSUING    KALDA    REFI'GEES   IN    A    BED   OF    KEEDS.'

the  tribes  of  Bit-Shilani,  Bit-Shaali,  and  Bit-Amukkani,  the  principalities  of  the
Kalda  which  lay  nearest  to  Babylonian  territory,  and  which  had  borne  the  brunt
of  attack  in  the  preceding  period  ;  but  their  weakness  brought  into  notice
a  power  better  equipped  for  warfare,  whose  situation  in  their  rear  had  as
a  rule  hitherto  preserved  it  from  contact  with  the  Assyrians,  namely,  Bit-
Yakin.*^  The  continual  deposit  of  alluvial  soil  at  the  mouths  of  the  rivers  had
greatly  altered  the  coast-line  from  the  earliest  historic  times  downwards.  The
ancient  estuary  was  partly  filled  up,  especially  on  the  western  side,  where  the
Euphrates  enters  the  Persian  Gulf:  a  narrow  barrier  of  sand  and  silt  extended

the  throne  at  Assiir  in  the  same  month,  and  it  was  only  in  the  montli  Xisan  that  Merodach-baladan
was  proclaimed  kiiifj.  The  three  months  intervening  between  the  accession  of  Sargoii  and  tliat  of  Mero-
dach-baladan evidently  represent  a  period  of  indecision,  when  it  was  not  yet  known  if  the  king  would
follow  the  policy  of  his  predecessors  with  regard  to  Babylon,  or  adopt  a  different  attitude  towards  her.

'  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  reproduced  in  Layaud,  .1fo)i«men(«  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.
pi.  25.

'  For  tliese  wars  of  Tiglatli-pileser  [II.,  ef  suy/rc,  pp.  190-192.


224


S ARGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


between  the  marshes  of  Arabia  and  Susiana,  at  the  spot  where  the  streams
of  fresh  water  met  the  tidal  waters  of  the  sea,  and  all  that  was  left  of  the
ancient  gulf  was  a  vast  lagoon,  or,  as  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  called  it,
a  kind  of  brackish  river,  jNYo-  marratiim.  Bit-Yakiu  occupied  the  southern
and  western  portions  of  this  district,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Tigris  to  the  edge


A   EEED-HnT  OF  THE  BEDAWIN   OF  IKAK.'


of  the  desert.  The  aspect  of  the  country  was  coustantly  changing,  and  presented
no  distinctive  features;  it  was  a  region  difficult  to  attack  and  easy  to  defend;
it  consisted  first  of  a  spongy  plain,  saturated  with  water,  with  scattered
artificial  mounds  on  which  stood  the  clustered  huts  of  the  Tillages ;  between
this  plain  and  the  shore  stretched  a  labyrinth  of  fens  and  peat-bogs,  irregularly
divided  by  canals  and  channels  freshly  formed  each  year  in  flood-time,  meres
strewn  with  floating  islets,  immense  reed-beds  where  the  neighbouring  peasants
took  refuge  from  attack,  and  into  which  no  one  would  venture  to  penetrate
withoirt  hiring  some  friendly  native  as  a  guide.^  In  this  fenland  dwelt  the
Kalda  in  their  low,  small  conical  huts  of  reeds,  somewhat  resembling  giant
beehives,  and  in  all  respects  similar  to  those  which  the  Bedawin  of  Irak
inhabit  at  the  present  day.    Dur-Yakin,  their  capital,  was  probably  situated  on

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  in  Petebs,  Nippur,  vol.  ii.  p.  74.

■  For  Bit-Yakin,  cf.  Fe.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  203 ;  for  the  description  of  the
marshes  the  reader  may  reler  to  the  illustration  on  p.  223  of  this  work,  and  to  the  illustrations  in  the
Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  552,  553.


MEBODACE'BALADAN   OF  BIT-YAKIN  AND   ELAM.  225

the  borders  of  the  gulf,  near  the  Euphrates,  in  such  a  position  as  to  command
the  mouths  of  the  river.  Merodach-baladan,  who  was  King  of  Bit-Yakin  at  the
time  of  Sargon's  accession,  had  become  subject  to  Assyria  in  729  B.C.,  and  had
paid  tribute  to  Tiglath-pileser,  but  he  was  nevertheless  the  most  powerful
chieftain  who  had  borne  rule  over  the  Chaldasans  since  the  death  of  Ukinzir.^
It  was  this  prince  whom  the  Babylonians  chose  to  succeed  Shalmaneser  V.
He  presented  himself  before  the  city,  was  received  with  acclamation,  and  pre-
pared without  delay  to  repulse  any  hostilities  on  the  part  of  the  Assyrians.^

He  found  a  well-disposed  ally  in  Elam.  From  very  ancient  times  the
masters  of  Susa  had  aspired  to  the  possession  of  Mesopotamia  or  the  suzerainty
over  it,  and  fortune  had  several  times  favoured  their  ambitious  designs.    On  one

'  Dur-Yakin  was  situated  on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  gulf,  as  is  proved  by  a  passage  in  the  Bull
Inscription,  11.  33, 34  (cf.  Lton,  Keilschri/ttexte  Sargons,  pp.  42,  43),  where  it  is  stated  that  Sargon  threw
into  the  sea  the  corpses  of  the  soldiers  killed  during  the  siege  ;  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Euphrates
is  implied  in  the  text  of  the  Inscription  des  Fastes,  1.  128  (cf.  Wiscklek,  Die  Keilschri/ttexte  Sargotis,
vol.  i.  p.  129,  et  seq.),  and  the  Annals,  11.  324,  325  (^ihid.,  pp.  54-57),  where  the  measures  taken  by
Merodaeh-baladan  to  defend  his  capital  are  described.  The  name  of  Bit-Yakin,  and  probably  also
tliat  of  Dur-Yakin,  have  been  preserved  to  us  in  the  name  of  Aginis  or  Aginne,  the  name  of  a  city
mentioned  by  Strabo  (XV.  iii.  §  5,  p.  729),  and  by  the  historians  of  Alexander  (  Akdreas,  Aginis,  Ampff,
Alexandreia  13,  in  Paclt-Wissowa,  Iteal-Encyclopadie,  vol.  i.  pp.  810-816,  1390-1395,  IS77-18S0).
Its  site  is  uncertain,  but  can  be  located  near  the  present  town  of  Kornah  (Billerbeck,  Susa,  p.  81 ,
note  1).

'  The  principal  authority  for  the  history  of  Sargon's  reign  is  the  text  of  his  Annals,  discovered  at
Khorsabad,  and  published  by  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,  pis.  63-92,  105-120,  155-160,  and
also  by  Winckleb,  Die  Keilschri/ttexte  Sargons,  vol.  ii.  pis.  1-29,  in  four  versions,  all  ranch  mutilated ;
the  fragments  of  them  have  been  translated  into  French  by  Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Dour-
Sarlcayan,  in  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  309-319,  and  also  by  Men'axt,  Annates  des  rois
d'Assyrie,  pp.  158-179;  into  English  by  Oppekt,  The  Annals  o/  Sargon,  in  the  Records  o/  the  Past,
Ist  series,  vol.  viii.  pp.  21-56 ;  into  German  by  Winckler,  Die  Keilechri/ttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.
2-79  for  the  three  first  versions,  and  pp.  80-95  for  the  fourth.  The  information  furnished  by  the
Annals  is  supplemented  by  that  obtained  from  a  considerable  number  of  documents,  for  the  most  part
discovered  during  the  excavations  at  Khorsabad :  (1)  Inscription  des  Fastes,  published  by  Botta,
op.  cit.,  pis.  93-104, 121-154, 181,  and  by  Winckler,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pis.  30-36;  translated  into  French
by  Oppert  and  Menant,  La  Grande  Inscription  du  Palais  de  Khorsabad,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,
1863,  vol.  i.  pp.  5-26,  vol.  ii.  pp.  475-517;  1864,  vol.  iii.  pp.  5-02,  168-201,  209-265,  373-415;  1865,
vol.  vi.  pp.  133-179,  289-330;  and  again  by  Mexant,  Annates  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  180-192;  into
English  by  Oppekt,  The  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  o/  Khorsabad,  in  the  Records  o/  the  Past,
1st  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  1-20 ;  into  German  by  Wlnxkler,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  90-135.  (2)  The  Inscrip-
tion on  the  Pavement  o/  the  Gateway,  published  by  Botta,  op.  cit.,  pp.  1-21 ;  translated  into  French  by
Mexajjt,  op.  nit.,  pp.  195,  196;  into  German  by  Wixcklek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  136-103.  (3)  Ttie  Bull
Inscription,  published  by  Botta,  op.'cit,  pp.  22-62,  and  by  Lyon,  op.  cit.,  pis.  13-19;  translated  into
Freuch  by  Oppekt,  Les  Inicr.  de  Dour-Sarkayan,  in  Place,  Xiitice  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  283-291,
and  by  Menaijt,  op.  cit.,  pp.  192-195  ;  into  English  by  Oppert,  Bull  Inscription  o/  Klwrsahad,  in  the
Records,  1st  series,  vol.  xi.  pp.  15-26;  into  German  by  LvoN',  op.  cit.,  pp.  40-47,  79-81.  (4)  Tlie
Inscriptions  on  the  back  o/  the  Slabs,  published  by  Botta,  op.  cit.,  pi.  184,  et  seq. ;  translated  into
French  by  Menant,  op.  cit.,  p.  196,  et  seq.;  into  German  by  Winckler,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  164-167.
(5)  The  Cylinder  Inscription,  published  by  H.  Kawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  36 ;  trans-
lated into  French  by  Oppert,  Les  Inscr.  de  Dour-Sarkayan,  in  Place,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  291-303,
and  by  Menant,  op.  cit.,  pp.  199-204;  translated  into  German  by  Eton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  1-22,  30-39.
(G)  Stele  o/  Larnaka,  published  by  H.  Rawlinson,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  11 ;  and  again,  with  a  German
translation  by  Schbader,  Die  Sargonsstele  des  Berliner  Museums,  1882.  There  are,  besides,  half  a
dozen  more  documents  of  less  importance,  which  will  be  referred  to  as  opportunity  occurs.  For  the
chronology  of  the  reign  of  Sargon,  cf.  Tiele,  Babylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  249-282,  and
Wdjckleb,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  xiii.,xiv.

Q


226  SAB G ON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

occasion  they  bad  pressed  forward  their  victorious  arms  as  far  as  the
Mediterranean,^  and  from  that  time  forward,  though  the  theatre  of  their
operations  was  more  restricted,  they  had  never  renounced  the  right  to  interfere
in  Babylonian  affairs,  and  indeed,  not  long  previously,  one  of  them  had  reigned
for  a  period  of  seven  years  in  Babylon  in  the  interval  between  two  dynasties.^
Our  iuformation  with  regard  to  the  order  of  succession  and  the  history  of  these
energetic  and  warlike  monarchs  is  as  yet  very  scanty ;  their  names  even  are
for  the  most  part  lost,  and  only  approximate  dates  can  be  assigned  to  those  of
whom  we  catch  glimpses  from  time  to  time.^  Khumban-uumena,  the  earliest
of  whom  we  have  any  record,  exercised  a  doubtful  authority,  from  Anshan  to
Susa,  somewhere  about  the  fourteenth  century  B.C.,  and  built  a  temple  to  the
god  Kirisha  in  his  capital,  Liyan.^  His  son  Undasgal  carried  on  the  works
begun  by  his  father,''  but  that  is  all  the  information  the  inscriptions  afford
concerning  him,  and  the  mist  of  oblivion  which  for  a  moment  lifted  and
allowed  us  to  discern  dimly  the  outlines  of  this  sovereign,  closes  in  again
and  hides  everything  from  our  view  for  the  succeeding  forty  or  fifty  years.

'  For  these  earliest  Elamite  conquests  in  Babylonia,  cf.  Maspero,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.
29-40,  47,  49.

'  For  the  conflicts  between  Elamand  Karduniash,  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  5G,  et  seq.,596,  612-610;  and
for  tlie  Elamite  who  reigned  at  Babylon  about  the  tenth  ceutury,  cf.  supra,  pp.  4,  5.

'  These  names  are  in  the  majority  of  cases  found  written  on  stamped  and  baked  bricks,  which
have  been  published  by  Loftcs,  Lithograpldc  Facsimiles  of  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,
1852,  by  Francois  Lenormant,  Choix  de  Textes  Cimd'ifornies  inidits  ou  incomph'tement  publics,  pp.
109-141 ;  by  Dieclafoy,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  pp.  308,  309,  311,  429  (No.  284);  and  by  Weissbach,
Amanische  Inschriften,  pis.  i.-v.,  and  Neue  BeitrOge  zur  Kunde  der  Susichen  Inschriften,  pi.  i.  They
were  first  compared  with  the  names  contained  in  the  Aunals  of  Sargon  and  his  successors,  and
assimilated  to  those  of  the  princes  who  were  contemporary  with  Sennacherib  and  Assur-bani-pal
(Fe.  Lenormant,  op.  cit.,  pp.  111-113  ;  Oppebt,  Les  Inscriptions  en  langue  Susieiine,  in  the  Mgmoires
du  Congres  International  de  Faris,  1873,  vol.  ii.  pp.  180,  181 ;  Quentin,  Textes  Susiens,  in  the  Journal
Asiatique,  1891,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  152-155);  then  they  were  referred  to  the  time  of  the  great  Elamite
empire,  and  one  of  them  was  identified  with  that  Kudur-Xakhunta  wlio  had  pillaged  Uruk  (cf.
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  37)  1C35  years  before  Assur-bani-pal  (Billerbeok,  Susa,  pp.  51-56).
Finally,  they  were  brought  down  again  to  an  intermediate  period  (Winckler,  Zu  den  Altsusischeu
Inschriften,  in  the  Zeitsclirift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  323-320),  more  precisely,  to  the  fourteenth
or  thirteenth  century  B.C.  (Weissbach,  A^eue  Beittdge  zur  Kunde  der  Susischen  Inschriften,  pp.  733,  734).
This  last  date  appears  to  be  justified,  at  least  as  the  highest  permissible,  by  the  mention  of  Dur-
kurigalzu  (cf.,  for  the  foundation  of  this  town.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  590),  in  a  text  of  Undasgal
(Oppert,  op.  cit.,  p.  193).

*  Jensen  was  the  first  to  recognise  that  Liyau  was  a  place-name,  and  the  inscriptions  of  Shilkhak-
lusliusinak  add  that  Liyan  was  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  (Weissbach,  Neue  Beitrdge  zur  Kunde
der  Susischen  Inschriften.  p.  735)  ;  perhaps  it  was  the  name  of  a  jjart  of  Susa.  Khumban-numena  has
left  us  no  monuments  of  his  own,  but  he  is  mentioned  on  those  of  his  son  (Opi'EKT,  op.  cit.,  pp.  191, 192,
and  Susian  Texts,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  83,  84).  Lenormant  read  the  name  as
Khumbau-igash  {op.  cit.,  pp.  111-113),  and  Oppert  as  Humbabbak-Masuagi,  with  the  variant  Hum-
masmaki  {Les  Inscriptions  en  langue  Susienne,  p.  181),  Winckler  as  Khum  .  .  .  khumashnagi,  op.  cit.,
pp.  321,  323) ;  the  reading  Khumban-uumena  is  Weissbach's  {Anzanische  Inschriften,  p.  127).

'  Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  en  langue  Susienne,  p.  192,  where  the  name  is  rendered  Undas-Arman
(of.  Id.,  ihid..  p.  181,  and  Susian  Texts,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,  vol.  vii.  p.  83,  note  2);
Lenormant  transcribed  it  Urtaki  (Choix  de  Textes  Cuni'iformes,  pp.  Ill,  113,  123-126).  The  reading
Untasgal,  Undasgal,  of  Weissbach  {Anzanische  Inschr.,  pp.  127,  142)  is  only  provisional :  it  is  not
known  what  Susian  god  is  denoted  by  the  name  written  ak  GAL,  '•  the  great  god."


TEE   CONQUESTS   OF  SEUTRUK-NAEEUNTA   I.


227


^L.^^,^?^^^'


About  the  thirteenth  century  a  gleam  once  more  pierces  the  darkness,  and  a
race  of  warlike  and  pious  kings  emerges  into  view — Khalludush-Inshushinak,
his  son  Shutruk-nakhunta,  the  latter's  two  sons,  Kutur-nakhiinta  and
Shilkhak-Inshushinak,^  and  then  perhaps  a  certain  Kutir-khuban.-^  The  inscrip-
tions on  their  bricks  boast  of  tlieir  power,  their  piety,  and  their  inexhaustible
wealth.  One  after  another  they  repaired  and  enlarged  the  temple  built  by
Khumban-numena  at  Liyan,


erected  sanctuaries  and
palaces  at  Susa,  fortified
their  royal  citadel,  and  ruled
over  Habardip  and  the  Cos-
sajans  as  well  as  over  Anshan
and  Elam.^  They  vigorously
contested  the  possession  of
the  countries  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Tigris  with  the
Babylonians,  and  Shutruk-
nakhunta  even  succeeded  in
conquering  Babylon  itself.
He  deprived  Zamama-shu-
middin,  the  last  but  one  of
the  Cosssean  kings,  of  his
sceptre  and  his  life,  placed
his  own  son  Kutur-nakhunta
on  the  throne,  and  when  the  vanquished  Babylonians  set  up  Bel-nadinshumu  as
a  rival  sovereign,  he  laid  waste  Karduniash  with  fire  and  sword.  After  the  death
of  Bel-nadinshumu,  the  Pashe  princes  continued  to  offer  resistance,  but  at  first
without  success.  Shutruk-nakhunta  had  taken  away  from  the  temple  of  Esagilla
the  famous  statue  of  Bel-Merodach,  whose  hands  had  to  be  taken  by  each  newly

'  The  order  of  succession  of  these  princes  is  proved  by  tlie  genealogies  with  which  their  bricks
are  covered  (Oppekt.  Les  Inscriptions  en  langue  Susienne,  pp.  ISO,  181 ;  Winokler,  Zu  den  Altsusiichen
Inschriften,  in  the  Zeilschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  vi.  pp.  3"20-3'23 ;  Weissbach,  Neue  Beitrage  zur
Kunde  der  Smischen  Imchr.,  pp.  732,  733).  Jensen  lias  shown  that  we  ought  to  read  Khalludush-
Insliushinak  and  Shilkhak-Iusliushinak  (Elamitsche  Eigennamen,  p.  51),  instead  of  the  shorter  forms
Khalludusli  and  Sliilkhak  road  previously.

'  Tlie  mutilated  name  found  in  a  brick  inscription  published  by  Lenormant  ( C/iO( j;  de  textes
Cunei formes,  p.  120,  Xo.  31,  1.  1)  has  been  plausibly  restored  by  Weissbach  as  Kutir-khuban,  and
connected  with  the  Kutir-khuban  mentioned  among  the  sons  of  Shilkhak-Inshushinak  on  a  brick  in
Dieulafoy's  collection,  in  the  Louvre  (Weissbaou,  Anzanische  Inschriften,  pp.  147,  148,  D,  11.  5,  6,
and  Neue  Beitrage,  p.  735).

'  Oppert,  Les  Inscr.  en  langue  Susienne,  pp.  192,  193.  On  the  identification  of  Habardip  witli
the  Amardians  of  classical  times,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  35,  note  1.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Mabcel  Dieulafot,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,
p.  311,  Fig.  I'Jl.  The  original  was  discovered  in  the  excavations  of  Beudcr-Bushir,  and  is  now  in  tlu-
Louvre.


BRICK   BEAUING    THE    NAME    OF   THE    SCSIAN    KING    SHILKHAK-
INSHUSHINAK.''


228


SABGON  II.    OF  ASSTRIA.


elected  king  of  Babylon,  and  had  carried  it  off  in  his  waggons  to  Elara,  together
with  much  spoil  from  the  cities  on  the  Euphrates.^  Nebuchadrezzar  I.  brought
the  statue  back  to  Babylon  after  many  vicissitudes,  and  at  the  same  time
recovered  most  of  his  lost  provinces,'-^  but  he  had  to  leave  at  Susa  tlie  bulk  of

the  trophies  which  had  been  collected  there  in
course  of  the  successful  wars.  One  of  these  re-
presented the  ancient  hero  Naram-sin  standing,
mace  in  hand,  on  the  summit  of  a  hill,  while
his  soldiers  forced  their  way  up  the  slopes,  driving
before  them  the  routed  hosts  of  Susa.  Shutruk-
nakhunta  left  the  figures  and  names  untouched,
but  carved  in  one  corner  of  the  bas-relief  a
dedicatory  inscription,  transforming  this  ancient
proof  of  Babylonian  victories  over  Elam  into  a
trophy  of  Elamite  victories  over  Babylon.  His
descendants  would  assuredly  have  brought  Meso-
jiotamia  into  lasting  subjection,  had  not  the
feudal  organisation  of  their  empire  tolerated  the
existence  of  contemporary  local  dynasties,  the
members  of  which  often  disputed  the  supreme
authority  with  the  rightful  king.  The  dynasty
which  ruled  Habardip^  seems  to  have  had  its
seat  of  government  at  Tarrisha  in  the  valley  of
Malamir.*  Three  hundred  figures  carved  singly
or  in  groups  on  the  rocks  of  Kul-Firaun  ^  portray
its  princes  and  their  ministers  in  every  posture
of  adoration,  but  most  of  them  have  no  accompanying  inscription.     One  large

'  For  this  episode  in  the  Elamite  wars,  which  was  not  known  when  the  Strugyle  of  the  Nations
was  published,  of.  the  notice  by  Wixceler,  Altorientalische  Forscliungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  534-543.  The
name  of  tlie  king  is  destroyed  on  the  Babylonian  document,  but  the  mention  of  Kutur-nakhunta  as
his  son  obliges  us,  till  further  information  comes  to  light,  to  recognise  in  him  the  Shutruk-nakhunta
of  the  bricks  of  Susa,  who  also  had  a  son  Kutur-nakhunta.  This  would  confirm  the  restoration  of
Shutruk-nakhunta  as  the  name  of  a  sovereign  who  boasts,  in  a  mutilated  inscription,  that  he  had
pushed  his  victories  as  far  as  the  Tigris,  and  even  up  to  the  Euphrates  (Fe.  Lenormant,  Choix  de
Textes  Cungiformes,  p.  128,  Xo.  42;  Oppert,  Les  Inscr.  en  lanijite  Stisienne,  pp.  192,  193).

*  For  the  conquest  of  Namar,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  G12-616.

'  The  prince  represented  on  the  bas-reliefs  gives  himself  the  title  Apirra,  the  man  of  Apir,
Apirfi,  or  Habardip  (^Great  Inscription  of  Malamir,  1.  5).

*  Tarrisba  is,  like  Liyan  (cf.  supra,  p.  226.  note  4),  the  name  of  a  town  (Weissbach,  Neue  Beiirdge,
zur  Kunde  der  Susischen  Inschriften,  p.  774),  doubtless  the  capital  of  the  fief  of  Malamir;  it  is
probably  represented  by  the  considerable  ruins  which  Layard  identified  as  the  remains  of  the  Sassanid
city  of  Aidej  (4  Description  of  the  Province  of  Kiizistan.  in  the  Journal  of  the  B.  Geog.  Soc,  IS46,  vol.
xvi.  p.  74,  et  seq.).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  fiom  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Morgan,  published  in  J.  he  Morgan,  Comple
rendu  sommaire  des  Travaux  archiblogiques  executes  du  3  novembre  1S97  au  1"  juin  1S9S.

'  The  monuments  of  Malamir  were  first  described  by  Layard  (op.  cii.,  pp.  74-80)  and  by  Bode


BAS-RELIEF    OF    NARAM-SIN,   TRANSPORTED
TO   SUSA   BY    SHrTRUK-NAKHUNTA.'


THE  PRINCES   OF  MALAMIR.


229


bas-relief,  however,  forms  an  exception,  and  from  its  legend  we  learn  the  name
of  Khanni,  son  of  Takhkhi-khikhutur.^  This  prince,  even  if  possessed  of  no
royal  protocol,  was  none  the  less  a  powerful  and  wealthy  personage.  His  figure
dominates  the  picture,  the  central  space  of  which  it  completely  fills ; '   his


THE    GREAT    KOCK   BAS-RELIEF    OF  MALAIttiB.'

expression  is  calm,  but  somewhat  severe.  His  head  is  covered  by  a  low  cap,
from  whicli  long  locks  escape  and  flow  over  his  shoulders;  the  hair  on  his

(Notes  on  a  Journey  from  Behbehdn  lo  Sinister,  iu  Ihe  J.  B.  G.  S.,  1843.  vol.  xii.  p.  S(J,  et  seq.).  They
have  been  published  by  Layard  (Tmcr.  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pis.  31,  32,  36,  37),  by  Flandin,
from  the  drawings  of  Baron  de  Bode  (Voyage  en  Perse,  vol.  iv.  pis.  22ij,  228),  by  Dieulafoy  {Note
relative  u  Ja  decouverte  sur  le  lomheau  de  Darius  de  sept  Inscriptions  nouvelles,  in  the  Revue  Archeblo-
gique,  1885,  vol.  vi.  pi.  xxiv.,  and  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  33,  Pig.  38).  The  inscriptions  have  been
studied  by  Oppert  (L«s  Inscr.  en  langue  Susienne,  pp.  199-216),  by  Sayce  (The  Inser.  of  Mai- Amir  and
the  Language  of  the  Second  Column  of  the  Ahheemenian  Inscriptions,  in  the  International  Oriental  Con-
gress at  Leyden.  vol.  ii.  pp.  637-756),  and  by  Weisabach  (Neue  BeitrUge  znr  Kunde  des  Susischen
Inschriften,  pp.  742-777,  and  pis.  ii.-iv.).

'  The  name  of  Khanni,  already  recognised  by  Oppert  (Lcs  Inscr.  en  langue  Susienne.  p.  215),  has
been  explained  by  Sayce  as  the  desirable,  and  that  of  his  father,  Takhklii-khikhutur,  as  hclpUhis  thy
tervant  (The  Inscr.  of  Mal-Ainir,  pp.  714.  715  ;  of.  Jense.v,  Elainilische  Eigennamen,  pp.  21G,  225).

'  Perrot  and  Chipiez  (Hittoire  de  I'Art  duns  V Antiquiti^,  vol.  v.  p[).  774, 775),  misled  by  the  analogy
of  the  Hittite  bas-relief  at  Ibiiz  (cf.  the  reproduction  of  this  bas-relief  iu  the  Struggle  of  the  Nations
p.  653),  took  the  largest  figure  for  the  image  of  a  god.  The  inscription  engraved  on  the  robe  V
Khanni  shah  Tahlthi-khthutur,  "I  am  Khanni,  son  of  Takhkhi-khikhutur,"  leaves  no  doubt  that  the
figure  represents  the  prince  himself,  and  not  a  divinity.

'  Drawn  by  Paucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Babin  and  Houssay,  published  by  Mabcel
Dieulafoy,  in  Note  relative,  etc.  (quoted  above),  and  iu  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  33,  Fig.  28;  cf.
Flandin,  Voyage  en  Perse,  vol.  iv.  pp.  220-228,  and  Perbot  and  Chipiez,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  775.


230  SAnaON  11.    OF  ASSYBIA.

face  is  symmetrically  curled  above  the  level  of  his  mouth,  and  terminates
iu  a  pointed  beard.  The  figure  is  clothed  from  head  to  foot  in  a  stiff  robe
and  mantle  adorned  with  tufted  fringes,  and  borders  of  embroidered
rosettes ;  a  girdle  at  the  waist  completes  the  misleading  resemblance  to  the
eala-dress  of  a  Ninevite  monai-ch.  The  hands  are  crossed  on  the  breast  in  an
attitude  of  contemplation,  while  the  prince  gazes  thoughtfully  at  a  sacrifice
which  is  being  offered  on  his  behalf.  At  the  bottom  of  the  picture  stands  a
small  altar,  behind  which  a  priest  in  a  short  tunic  seems  to  be  accomplishing
some  ceremonial  rite,  while  two  men  are  cutting  the  throat  of  a  ram.  Higher
up  the  heads  of  three  rams  lie  beside  their  headless  trunks,  which  are  resting
on  the  ground,  feet  in  the  air,  while  a  servant  brandishes  a  short  sword  with
which  he  is  about  to  decapitate  the  fourth  beast.  Above  these,  again,  tliree
musicians  march  in  procession,  one  playing  on  a  harp,  another  on  a  five-
stringed  lyre,  and  the  third  on  a  tambourine.  An  attendant  holding  a  bow,
and  the  minister  Shutsururazi,  stand  quietly  waiting  till  the  sacrifice  is
accomplished.  The  long  text  which  runs  across  several  of  the  figures  is
doubtless  a  prayer,  and  contains  the  names  of  peoples  and  princes  mingled
with  those  of  deities.  The  memory  of  these  provincial  chiefs  would  be
revived,  and  more  of  their  monuments  discovered,  if  the  mountains  and
inaccessible  valleys  of  ancient  Elam  could  be  thoroughly  explored :  it  is
evident,  from  the  small  portion  of  their  history  which  has  been  brought  to
light,  that  they  must  have  been  great  sources  of  trouble  to  the  dynasties
which  reigned  iu  Susa,  and  that  their  revolts  must  often  have  jeopardised  the
safety  of  the  empire,  in  spite  of  the  assistance  afforded  by  the  Aramceans
from  the  tenth  or  eleventh  centuries  onwards.  All  the  semi-nomadic  tribes
which  densely  peopled  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,  and  whose  advance  towards
the  north  had  been  temporarily  favoured  by  the  weakness  of  Assyria — the
Gambulu,  the  Pukudu,  the  Kutu,  and  the  Itua — had  a  natural  tendency  to  join
forces  with  Elam  for  the  purpose  of  raiding  the  wealthy  cities  of  Chaldsea,  and
this  alliance,  or  subjection,  as  it  might  be  more  properly  termed,  always
insured  them  against  any  reprisals  on  the  part  of  their  victims.^  The  unknown
king  who  dwelt  at  Susa  in  745  B.C.  committed  the  error  of  allowing  Tiglath-
pileser  to  crush  these  allies.^  Khumban-igash,  who  succeeded  this  misguided
monarch  in  742  B.c.,^  did  not  take  up  arms  to  defend  Bit-Amukkani  and  the

•  Fur  tho  advance  of  these  Aramaean  tribes  during  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  century,  cf.  supra,
pp.  lis,  119.

^  For  this  campaign  of  Tiglath-pileser  against  the  Aramaean  tribes  bordering  on  the  Tigris,  cf.
siifra,  pp.  140 -H2.

'  The  date  of  his  accession  is  furnished  by  the  passage  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,
ool.  i.  1.  9  (cf.  WiNCKLEK,  Vie  Bahylonische  Chronik  B,  in  Schkader,  Keilinschrijtliche  Bibliothek,
vol.  ii.  pp.  274,  275),  where  it  is  stated  that  he  ascended  the  throne  of  Elam  in  the  fifth  year  of


TEE  FinST  ENCOUNTER    OF  ASSYRIA   AND   ELAM.  231

other  states  of  the  Kaldil  from  731  to  729,^  but  experience  must  have  taught
him  that  he  had  made  a  mistake  in  remaining  an  unmoved  spectator  of  their
misfortunes  ;  for  when  Merodach-baladan,  in  quest  of  allies,  applied  to  him,  he
unhesitatingly  promised  him  his  support.'^

Assyria  and  E!am  had  hitherto  seldom  encountered  one  another  on  the  field
of  battle.  A  wide  barrier  of  semi-barbarous  states  had  for  a  long  time  held
them  apart,  and  they  would  have  had  to  cross  the  territory  of  the  Babylonians
or  the  Cossfeans  before  coming  into  contact  with  each  other.  Tiglath-pileser  I.,
however,  had  come  into  conflict  with  the  northern  districts  of  Elam  towards
the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  B.c.,^  and  more  recently  the  campaigns  of  Assur-
nazir-pal,  Shalmaneser  III.,  and  Kamman-nirari  had  frequently  brought  these
sovereigns  into  contact  with  tribes  under  the  influence  of  Susa;  but  the
wildness  and  poverty  of  the  country,  and  the  difiiculties  it  offered  to  the
manoeuvres  of  large  armies,  had  always  prevented  the  Assyrian  generals  from
advancing  far  into  its  mountainous  regions.  The  annexation  of  Aramtean
territory  beyond  the  Tigris,  and  the  conquest  of  Babylon  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.,
at  length  broke  through  the  barrier  and  brought  the  two  powers  face  to  face  at  a
point  where  they  could  come  into  conflict  without  being  impeded  by  almost
insurmountable  natural  obstacles,  namely,  in  the  plains  of  the  Umliash  and  the
united  basins  of  the  Lower  Ulai  and  the  Uknu.  Ten  years'  experience  had
probably  sufficed  to  convince  Khumban-igash  of  the  dangers  to  which  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Assyrians  exposed  his  subjects.  The  vigilant  watch  which
the  new-comers  kept  over  their  frontier  rendered  raiding  less  easy  :  and  if  one
of  the  border  chieftains  were  inclined  to  harry,  as  of  old,  an  unlucky  Babylonian
or  Coss.x'an  village,  he  ran  the  risk  of  an  encounter  with  a  well-armed  force,  or
of  being  plundered  in  turn  by  way  of  reprisal.*  An  irregular  but  abundant
source  of  revenue  was  thus  curtailed,  without  taking  into  consideration  the
wars  to  which  such  incidents  must  perforce  lead  sooner  or  later.  Even
unaided  the  Elamites  considered  themselves  capable  of  repelling  any  attack ;
allied  with  the  Babylonians_  or  the  Kalda,  they  felt  certain  of  victory  in  any
circumstances.  Sargon  realised  this  fact  almost  as  fully  as  did  the  Elamites
themselves ;  as  soon,  therefore,  as  his  spies  had  forewarned  him  that  an  invasion

Nabonazir.  The  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  scribes  assimilated  the  Susian  h  to  the  m,  and  also
suppressed  the  initial  aspirate  of  tlic  Elamite  name,  writing  generally  Umman-igash  for  Khum-
ban-igash.

'  For  tliis  second  campaign,  cf.  supra,  pp.  1!)0-102.

'  Sargon  declares  distinctly  that  Merodach-baladan  had  invoked  the  aid  of  Khumban-igash
(Fiiites,  11.  122,  123).

'  For  the  campaign  of  Tiglath-pileser  against  the  tribes  settled  in  the  northern  districts  of  Elam,
cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  <>(J2,  6G3.

*  For  frontier  episodes  of  this  kind  in  the  reign  of  Aasur-bani-pal,  cf.  tho  texts  quoted  by
Johnston,  The  Epistolary  Literature  of  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  pp.  134-146.


232  SARGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

was  imminent,  be  resolved  to  take  the  initiative  and  crush  his  enemies  singly
before  they  succeeded  in  uniting  their  forces.  Khumban-igash  had  advanced  as
far  as  the  walls  of  Durilu,  a  stronghold  which  commanded  the  Umliash,  and  he
there  awaited  the  advent  of  his  allies  before  laying  siege  to  the  town  :  it  was,
however,  the  Assyrian  army  which  came  to  meet  him  and  offered  him  battle.
The  conflict  was  a  sanguinary  one,  as  became  an  engagement  between  such
valiant  foes,  and  both  sides  claimed  the  victory.  The  Assyrians  maintained
their  ground,  forcing  the  Elamites  to  evacuate  their  positions,  and  tarried  some
weeks  longer  to  chastise  those  of  their  Aramaean  subjects  who  had  made  common
cause  with  the  enemy :  they  carried  away  the  Tumuna,  who  had  given  up  their
sheikh  into  the  hands  of  the  emissaries  of  the  Kalda,  and  transported  the
whole  tribe,  without  Merodach-baladan  making  any  attempt  to  save  his  allies,
although  his  army  had  not  as  yet  struck  a  single  blow.^  Having  accomjjlished
this  act  of  vengeance,  the  Assyrians  suspended  operations  and  returned  to
Nineveh  to  repair  their  losses,  probably  intending  to  make  a  great  effort  to
regain  the  whole  of  Babylonia  in  the  ensuing  year.  Grave  events  which  occurred
elsewhere  prevented  them,  however,  from  carrying  this  ambitious  project  into
effect.  The  fame  of  their  war  against  Elam  had  spread  abroad  in  the  Western
provinces  of  the  empire,  and  doubtless  exaggerated  accounts  circulated  with
regard  to  the  battle  of  Durilu  had  roused  the  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  in  the
west.  Sargon  had  scarcely  seated  himself  securely  on  a  throne  to  which  he
was  not  the  direct  heir,  when  he  was  menaced  by  Elam  and  repudiated  by
Chaldaea,  and  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  his  resources  would  prove  equal
to  maintaining  the  integrity  of  his  empire,  or  whether  the  example  set  by
Merodach-baladan  would  not  speedily  be  imitated  by  all  who  groaned  under
the  Assyrian  yoke.  Since  the  decline  of  Damascus  and  Arpad,  Hamath  had
again  taken  a  prominent  place  in  Northern  Syria  :  prompt  submission  had
saved  this  city  from  destruction  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,^  and  it  had
since  prospered  under  the  foreign  rule ;  it  was,  thei'efore,  on  Hamath  that  all
hopes  of  deliverance  still  cherished  by  rulers  and  people  now  centred.     A.  low-

'  The  history  of  this  first  campaign  against  Merodach-baladan,  which  is  found  in  a  dutilated  con-
dition in  the  Annals  of  Sargon,  II.  18-23  (cf.  Winckleb,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  4-7),
exists  nowhere  else  in  a  complete  form,  but  the  facts  are  very  concisely  referred  to  in  the  Pastes,
11.  23, 121-123,  and  in  the  djUnders,  1. 17  (cf  Lton,  Keilschrifttexte  Sargon's,  pp.  32,  33).  The  general
sequence  of  events  is  indicated  by  Pinches'  Bahylonian  Chronicle,  col.  i.  11.  33-37,  but  the  author
places  them  iu  720  B.C.,  the  second  year  of  Merodach-baladan,  contrary  to  the  testimony  of  the
Aimals,  and  attnbutes  the  victory  to  the  Elamites  in  the  battle  of  Durilu,  iu  deference  to  Babylonian
patriotism.  Tiele  was  the  first  to  unravel  the  order  of  events  {BahyloniscU-assijrische  Geschichte,  pp.
239-258,  259,  614,  615),  and  his  conclusions  have  been  adopted  in  their  entirety  by  Winokler  (o^.  cit.,
vol.  i.  pp.  xvii.,  xviii. ;  Geschichte  Babyloniens  unci  Assyrieus,  pp.  125,  126,  237,  23S).  The  course  of
events  after  the  battle  of  Durilu  seems  to  prove  clearly  that  the  Assyrians  remained  masters  of
the  field.

'  For  the  revolt  of  Hamath,  cf.  suyra,  pp.  150-153.


TEE   SYRIAN  REVOLT,    lAUBIDI  AND   BOCCHORIS.  233

born  fellow,  a  smith  named  laubidi/  rose  iu  rebellion  against  the  prince  of
Haniath  for  being  mean-spirited  enough  to  pay  tribute,  proclaimed  himself  king,
and  in  the  space  of  a  few  months  revived  under  his  own  leadership  the  coalition
which  Hadadezer  and  Eezon  II.  had  formed  in  days  gone  by.  Arpad  and  Bit-
Agusi,  Zimyra  and  Northern  Phoenicia,  Damascus  and  its  dependencies,  all
expelled  their  Assyrian  garrisons,  and  Samaria,  though  still  suffering  from  its
overthrow,  summoned  up  courage  to  rid  itself  of  its  governor.^  Meanwhile,
Hannon  of  Gaza,  recently  reinstated  in  his  city  by  Egyptian  support,^  was
carrying  on  negotiations  with  a  view  to  persuading  Egypt  to  interfere  in  the
affairs  of  Syria.  The  last  of  the  Tanite  Pharaohs,  Psamuti,  was  just  dead,  and
Bocchoris,  who  had  long  been  undisputed  master  of  the  Delta,  had  now  ventured
to  assume  the  diadem  openly  (722  B.C.),  a  usurpation  which  the  Ethiopians,
fully  engaged  in  the  Thebaid  and  on  the  Upper  Nile,  seemed  to  regard  with
equanimity.  As  soon  as  the  petty  kings  and  feudal  lords  had  recognised  his
suzerainty,  Bocchoris  listened  favourably  to  the  entreaties  of  Hannon,  and
promised  to  send  an  army  to  Gaza  under  the  command  of  his  general  Shabe.*
Sargon,  threatened  with  the  loss  of  the  entire  western  half  of  his  empire,  de-
sisted for  a  time  from  his  designs  on  Babylon.  Khumban-igash  was  wise
enough  to  refrain  from  provoking  an  enemy  who  left  him  in  peace,  and  Mero-
dach-baladan  did  not  dare  to  enter  the  lists  without  the  support  of  his  con-
federate :  the  victory  of  Durilu,  though  it  had  not  succeeded  in  gaining  a
province  for  Nineveh,  had  at  least  secured  the  south-eastern  frontier  from  attack,
at  all  events  for  so  long  as  it  should  please  Sargon  to  remain  at  a  distance.

'  This  person  is  called  laubidi  in  the  Pastes,  1.  38,  and  in  tlie  Nimroud  Inscription,  1.  8,  but
Ilubidi  in  the  Annuls  of  Sargon,  1.  23,  and  the  earliest  Assyriologists  were  struck  with  the  identity
which  these  variants  seemed  to  establish  between  the  divine  names  lahu  and  Ilu.  The  ideogram
which  follows  his  name  is  translated  smith  by  Oppeut,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  KKursabad,
in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol,  ix.  p.  6,  and  peasant,  labourer,  by  Wincklek,  Altorientalische
Forsehungen,  vol.  i.  p.  548.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  1.  25 ;  cf.  Winckleb,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Bargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  6,  7.

^  For  this  restoration,  cf.  supra,  p.  213.

'  As  long  as  the  name  Shibi,  Shibahi,  Shabe,  in  the  Assyrian  texts  was  identified  with  that  of
Shabaka  (cf.  supra,  p.  213,  note  1),  it  was  necessary  to  recognise  Sabaco  in  the  king  who  supported
Hannon  and  was  conquered  by  Sargon.  Since  this  hypothesis  has  been  abandoned,  the  ascertained
dates  of  Egyptian  chronology  force  us  to  place  these  events  in  the  reign  of  Bocchoris.  By  adding
up  the  number  of  years  assigned  by  tlie  most  trustworthy  tradition  to  the  reigns  of  tlie  three
Ethiopian  kings,  Sabaco  twelve  years,  Shabitoku  twelve  years,  Taharqa(Tirhakah)  twenty-six  years,
we  arrive  at  716  for  the  approximate  date  of  the  death  of  Bocchoris,  and  722  for  his  accession.  One
tradition  assigned  him  a  reign  of  forty  or  forty-four  years  (M.^setho,  in  Mijlleu-Didot,  Pragmenta
Historicum  Grmcorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  592),  and  M.  Ke'villout  consequently  attributes  to  him  a  contract,
preserved  in  the  Louvre,  which  is  dated  "  the  sixteenth  year,"  without  giving  the  name  of  the  king
{Notice  des  Papyrus  demotiques  archaiques,  pp.  212,  213);  if  this  contract  really  belongs  to  the
Ethiopian  period,  as  it  seems  to  do,  it  must  belong  to  the  reign  of  Taliarqa.  I  agree  with  Lepsius
{KSnigshuch,  pp.  8C,  87,  91),  Lauth  {Aus  JEgyytens  Vorzeit,  p.  428),  and  E.  de  Kouge  {Inscription
hisforique  du  roi  Pidnchi-M^riamoun,  p.  2G)  iu  following  the  tradition  which  assigns  a  reign  of  only
six  years  to  Bocclioris,  a  tradition  which  agrees  better  with  the  known  facts  of  contemporary  history.
The  only  authentic  date  of  his  reign  is  the  sixth  year,  on  the  stelae  of  the  Serapeum  (Makiette,  Notice
(lei  soixante-quatre  Apis,  in  the  Bulletin  Arch^ologique  de  V Ath^nseum  Franfais,  1856,  pp.  58-62).


234  SABOON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

The  league  formed  by  Hamath  had  not  much  power  of  cohesion.  laubidi
had  assembled  his  forces  and  the  contingents  of  his  allies  at  the  town  of
Qarqar  as  Hadadezer  had  done  before:  he  was  completely  defeated,  taken
prisoner,  and  flayed  alive.  His  kingdom  was  annexed  to  the  Assyrian  empire,
Qarqar  was  burnt  to  the  ground,  the  fortifications  of  Hamath  were  demolished,  '
and  the  city  obliged  to  furnish  a  force  of  two  hundred  charioteers  and  six
hundred  horsemen,  probably  recruited  from  among  the  families  of  the  upper
classes,  to  serve  as  hostages  as  well  as  auxiliaries.  Arpad,  Zimyra,  Damascus,
Samaria,  all  succumbed  without  serious  opposition,  and  the  citizens  who  had  been
most  seriously  compromised  in  the  revolt  paid  for  their  disaffection  with  their
lives.^  This  success  confirmed  the  neighbouring  states  of  Tyre,  Sidon,  Judah,
Ammon,  and  Moab  in  their  allegiance,  which  had  shown  signs  of  wavering  since
the  commencement  of  hostilities ;  ^  but  Gaza  remained  unsubdued,  and  caused
the  more  uneasiness  because  it  was  perceived  that  behind  her  was  arrayed  all
the  majesty  of  the  Pharaoh.  The  Egyptians,  slow  to  bestir  themselves,  had
not  yet  crossed  the  Isthmus  when  the  Assyrians  appeared  beneath  the  walls
of  Gaza:  Hannon,  worsted  in  a  preliminary  skirmish,  retreated  on  Raphia,
where  Shabe,  the  Egyptian  general,  had  at  length  arrived,  and  the  decisive
battle  took  place  before  this  town.  It  was  the  first  time  that  the  archers  and
charioteers  of  the  Nile  valley  had  measured  forces  with  the  pikemen  and  cavalry
of  that  of  the  Tigris ;  the  engagement  was  hotly  contested,  but  the  generals  and
soldiers  of  Bocchoris,  fighting  according  to  antiquated  methods  of  warfare,  gave
way  before  the  onset  of  the  Assyrian  ranks,  who  were  better  equipped  and
better  led.  iShabe  fled  "  like  a  shepherd  whose  sheep  have  been  stolen,"
Hannon  was  taken  prisoner  and  loaded  with  chains,  and  Raphia  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  conqueror ;  the  inhabitants  who  survived  the  sack  of  their  city
were  driven  into  captivity  to  the  number  of  9033  men,  with  their  flocks  and
household  goods."  The  manifest  superiority  of  Assyria  was  evident  from  the
first  encounter,  but  the  contest  had  been  so  fierce  and  the  result  so  doubtful  that
Sargon  did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  press  his  advantage.  He  judged  rightly
that  these  troops,  whom  he  had  not  dispersed  without  considerable  effort,  con-
stituted merely  an  advanced  guard.  Egypt  was  not  like  the  petty  kingdoms  of
Syria  or  Asia  JMinor,  which  had  but  one  army  apiece,  and  could  not  risk  more

'  Annah  of  Sargon,  11.  23-25  (of.  Oppert,  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Fast,  Ist  series,  vol.
vii.  p.  29;  AVinckler,  Die  Keilschrifttezte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  6,  7),  where  tbe  account  is  much
mutilated ;  Inscription  des  Fastes,  11.  33-36  (cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscr.  in  the  Palace  of  Klwrsabad,  in
Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  p.  6;  Wincklek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  102-105)  ;  Stele  of  Larnaka,
col.  i.  11.  51-65  (cf.  WiNcKLEE,  o-p.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  178,  179).

"  Annah,  11.  27-31  (cf.  Oppekt,  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,  vol.  vii.  p.  29;
Wincklek,  op.  cit ,  pp.  6,  7).  Inscription  des  Fastes,  11.  25,  26  (cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscr.  in  ilte  Palace  of
Klwrsabad,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,  vol.  ix.  p.  5  ;  Wisckler,  op.  cit,  vol.  i.  pp.  100,  101,  and
Vntermcliungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  pp.  92-94).


THE  FIRST  ENCOUNTER    OF   ASSYRIA    AND   EGYPT.


235


thau  one  pitched  battle.  Tliough  Shabe's  force  was  routed,  others  would  not
fail  to  take  its  place  and  contend  as  fiercely  for  the  possession  of  the  country,
and  even  if  the  Assyrians  should  succeed  in  dislodging  them  and  curbing  the
power  of  Bocchoris,  the  fall  of  Sais  or  Memphis,  far  from  putting  an  end  to  the
war,  would  only  raise  fresh  complications.  Above  Memphis  stretched  the
valley  of  the  Nile,  bristling


with  fortresses,  Ehininsu,
Osyrhynchus,  Hermopolis,
Siut,  Thinis,  and  Thebes,  the
famous  city  of  Amon,  en-
throned on  the  banks  of
the  river,  whose  very  name
still  evoked  in  the  minds
of  the  Asiatics  a  vivid  re-
membrance of  all  its  tri-
umphal glories.^  Thebes
itself  formed  merely  one
stage  in  the  journey  towards
Syene,  Ethiopia,  Napata,  and
the  unknown  regions  of
Africa  which  popular  imagi-
nation filled  with  barbarous
races  or  savage  monsters,^
and  however  far  an  alien
army  might  penetrate  in  a
southerly  direction,  it  would  still  meet  with  the  language,  customs,  and  divini-
ties of  Egypt — an  Egypt  whose  boundary  seemed  to  recede  as  the  invader
advanced,  and  which  was  ever  ready  to  oppose  the  enemy  with  fresh  forces
whenever  its  troops  had  suffered  from  his  attacks.  Sargon,  having  reached
Eaphia,  halted  on  the  very- threshold  of  the  unexjilored  realm  whose  portals
stood  ajar  ready  to  admit  him  :  the  same  vague  disquietude  which  had
checked  the  conquering  career  of  the  Pharaohs  on  the  borders  of  Asia^  now

'  Thebes  was  at  that  time  kDOwn  among  the  Semites  by  its  popular  name  of  the  city  of  Amon —
Nuit-Amonu,  Nui-Amonii,  or  the  City  simply — Nuit,  Nui — which  the  Hebrew  writers  transcribed  as
N6-Amon  (Nahum  iii.  8)  or  No  alono  (Jer.  xlvi.  25 ;  Ezek.  xxx.  14,  15,  16),  and  the  Assyrians  by  Ni
(Oppert,  M^moire  sur  leg  rapports  de  VUgypte  et  de  VAssyrie,  pp.  95-98).

^  Cf.  the  description  in  Isa.  xxx.  G  of  the  desert  and  the  isthmus,  "  The  land  of  trouble  and
anguish,  from  whence  come  the  lioness  and  the  lion,  the  viper  and  the  fiery  flying  serpent."

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by  Flaudin  in  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,  vol.  ii.
pi.  120.

'  For  the  hesitation  of  the  Theban  Pharaohs,  cf.  Maspeiio,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  394,  469,  et
seq.,  and  Straggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  16,  17,  88,  100,  106,  et  seq.


lAtlBIDI  OP  HAMATH  BEING  FLAYED  ALIVE."


236  SAROON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

stayed  liis  advauce,  and  bade  liim  turn  back  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  entering
Africa.  He  had  repulsed  the  threatened  invasion,  and  as  a  result  of  his  victory
the  princes  and  towns  which  had  invoked  the  aid  of  the  foreigner  hiy  at  his
mercy ;  he  proceeded,  therefore,  to  reorganise  the  provinces  of  Philistia  and
Israel,  and  received  the  homage  of  Judah  and  her  dependencies.  Ahaz,  while
all  the  neighbouring  states  were  in  revolt,  had  not  wavered  in  his  allegiance  ;
the  pacific  counsels  of  Isaiah  had  once  more  prevailed  over  the  influence  of  the
party  which  looked  for  safety  in  an  alliance  with  Egypt.^  The  whole  country
from  the  Orontes  to  the  mountains  of  Seir  and  the  river  of  Egypt  -  was  again
reduced  to  obedience,  and  set  itself  by  peaceful  labours  to  repair  the  mis-
fortunes which  had  befallen  it  during  the  previous  quarter  of  a  century.  Sargon
returned  to  his  capital,  but  fate  did  not  yet  allow  him  to  renew  his  projects
against  Babylon.  Earely  did  an  insurrection  break  out  in  any  part  of  the
country  on  the  accession  of  a  new  king  at  Nineveh  without  awaking  echoes  in
the  distant  provinces  of  the  empire.  The  report  of  a  revolt  in  Chaldsea  roused
a  slumbering  dissatisfaction  among  the  Syrians,  and  finally  led  them  into
open  rebellion  :  the  episodes  of  the  Syrian  campaign,  narrated  in  Armenia  or
on  the  slopes  of  the  Taurus  with  the  thousand  embellishments  suggested  by  the
rancour  of  the  narrators,  excited  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants  and  soon  rendered
an  outbreak  inevitable.  The  danger  would  have  been  serious  if  the  suppressed
hatred  of  all  had  found  vent  at  the  same  moment,  and  if  insurrections  in  five  or
six  different  parts  of  his  empire  had  to  be  faced  by  the  sovereign  simultaneously;
but  as  a  rule  these  local  wars  broke  out  without  any  concentrated  plan,  and
in  localities  too  remote  from  each  other  to  permit  of  any  possible  co-operation
between  the  assailants ;  each  chief,  before  attempting  to  assert  his  indepen-
dence, seemed  to  wait  until  the  Assyrians  had  had  ample  time  to  crush  the
rebel  who  first  took  the  field,  having  done  which  they  could  turn  the  whole  of
their  forces  against  the  latest  foe.  Thus  laubidi  did  not  risk  a  campaign  till
the  fall  of  Elam  and  Karduniash  had  been  already  decided  on  the  field  of

'  Sargon  probably  alludes  to  homage  received  at  this  time,  when  he  styles  himself  "  the  subduer
of  far-oflf  Judah  "  (Nimroud  Inscr.,  1.  8 ;  ef.  Wincklek,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  108,
109).  It  is  not  certain  that  Ahaz  was  still  King  of  Judah ;  it  was  for  a  long  time  admitted  that
Hezekiah  was  already  king  wlien  these  events  took  place,  in  accordance  with  2  Kings  xviii.  9,  10,
where  it  is  stated  that  Samaria  was  destroyed  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah  (cf.  mpra,  p.  21G,  note  2).
I  consider,  in  agreement  with  several  historians  (Ed.  JIeter,  Geschichte  dee  Alterihums,  vol.  i.  pp.
433,  5G7;  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  606,  note  2),  that  tlie  date  of  Sennacherib's
invasion  of  Judah  must  have  remained  more  firmly  fixed  in  the  minds  of  the  Jewish  historians  than
tliat  of  the  taking  of  Samaria,  and  as  2  Kings  xviii.  13  places  this  invasion  in  the  fourteenth  year  of
Hezekiah,  which  coiTesponds,  as  we  shall  see,  to  the  third  year  of  Sennacherib,  or  702  B.C.  (cf.  infra,
p.  288),  it  seems  better  to  place  the  accession  of  Hezekiah  about  715,  and  prolong  the  reign  of  Ahaz
till  after  the  campaign  of  Sargon  against  Hannon  of  Gaza.

-  This  is  the  boundary  indicated  by  Sargon  in  tlie  Cylinder  Inscription,  1.  13  (cf.  Oppert,  Les
Inscriptions  de  Dour-Sarkaydn,  in  Place,  Ninive,  vol.  ii,  p.  292 ;  Lyon,  KeiUchrifttexte  Sargons,
pp.  30,  31).


UHASTU  AND  THE  COALITION  OF  TEE  NATIONS  OF  THE  NORTH.      237

Durilu ;  iii  the  same  way,  the  nations  of  the  North  and  East  refrained  from
entering  tlie  lists  till  they  had  allowed  Sargon  time  to  destroy  the  league  of
Hamatli  and  repel  the  attack  of  Pharaoh.

They  were  secretly  incited  to  rebellion  by  a  power  which  played  nearly  the
same  part  with  regard  to  them  that  Egypt  had  played  in  Southern  Syria.
Urartu  had  received  a  serious  rebuff  in  735  B.C.,  and  the  burning  of  Dhuspas
had  put  an  end  to  its  ascendency,^  but  the  victory  had  been  effected  at  the  cost
of  so  much  bloodshed  that  Tiglath-pileser  was  not  inclined  to  risk  losing  the
advantage  already  gained  by  pushing  it  too  far  :  he  withdrew,  therefore,  without
concluding  a  treaty,  and  did  not  return,  being  convinced  that  no  further
hostilities  would  be  attempted  till  the  vanquished  enemy  had  recovered  from
his  defeat.  He  was  justified  in  his  anticipations,  for  Sharduris  died  about  730,
without  having  again  taken  up  arms,  and  his  son  Eusas  I.  had  left  Shalmaneser  V.
unmolested :  -  but  the  accession  of  Sargon  and  the  revolts  which  harassed  him
had  awakened  in  Rusas  the  war-like  instincts  of  his  race,  and  the  moment  appeared
advantageous  for  abandoning  his  policy  of  inactivity.  The  remembrance  of
the  successful  exploits  of  Meuuas  and  Argistis  still  lived  in  the  minds  of  his
people,  and  more  than  one  of  his  generals  had  entered  upon  their  military
careers  at  a  time  when,  from  Arpad  and  Carchemisli  to  the  country  of  the
Medes,  quite  a  third  of  the  territory  now  annexed  to  Assyria  had  been  subject
to  the  king  of  Urartu :  ^  Eusas,  therefore,  doubtless  placed  before  himself  the
possibility  of  reconquering  the  lost  provinces,  and  even  winning,  by  a  stroke
of  fortune,  more  than  had  been  by  a  stroke  of  fortune  wrested  from  his  father.
He  began  by  intriguing  with  such  princes  as  were  weary  of  the  Assyrian  rule,
among  the  Mannai,  in  Zikartu,^  among  the  Tabal,  and  even  among  the  Khati.
Iranzu,  who  was  at  that  time  reigning  over  the  Mannai,  refused  to  listen  to  the
suggestions  of  liis  neighbour,  but  two  of  his  towns,  Shuandakhul  and  Durdukka,
deserted  him  in  719  B.C.,  and  ranged  themselves  under  Mitatti,  chief  of  the
Zikartu,  while  about  the  same  time  the  strongholds  of  Sukkia,  Bala,  and
Abitikna,  which  were  on  the  borders  of  Urartu,  broke  the  ties  which  had  Ions

'   For  this  campaign  in  Urartu,  cf.  supra,  pp.  154-150.

'  The  name  of  this  king  is  usually  written  Ursa  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  but  tlie  Annals  of
Sargon,  11.  58,  75,  give  in  each  case  the  form  Kusa  (Wincklek,  Die  KeiUckrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.
pp.  12,  16),  in  accordance  witli  whieli  Snyce  had  already  identified  the  Assyrian  form  Ursa  or  Eusi
with  the  form  Kusas  found  on  some  Urartian  monuments  (T/ie  Cuneiform  hucriplhns  of  Van,  p.  U54).
Belck  and  Lclimann  have  discovered  several  monuments  of  tliis  Rusas  I.,  son  of  Sharduris  (Kn  neuer
Uerrscher  von  Chaldia,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ix.  p.  348).

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  118-122.  140,  143-140.

*  Zikruti,  Zikirtu,  Zikartu,  may  probably  bo  identified  witli  the  Sagartians  of  Herodotus  (I.  cxxv.),
aawas  first  perceived  by  Xorris,  and  tliis  identification,  on  wliieh  Leiiormant  laid  too  much  insistence
(iSur  la  campagne  de  Tiglatliphalazar  II.  dans  I'Ariane,  in  tlie  Zeitse.hrift,  1870,  p.  52),  has  been
adopted  by  Tiele  (Jlabylonuch-assyrisclie  GeschiclUe,  pp.  201,  205),  by  Wiiickler  {Utttersuchungen  zur
Altorientulischen  GeschiclUe,  pp.  112,  113),  and  lastly  by  Ilommel  (_Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  712).


238  SAEQON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

bound  them  to  Assyria,  and  concluded  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  Rusas.  Sargon
was  not  deceived  as  to  the  meaning  of  these  events,  and  at  once  realised  that
this  movement  was  not  one  of  those  local  agitations  which  broke  out  at  intervals
in  one  or  other  of  his  provinces.  His  officers  and  spies  must  have  kept  him
informed  of  the  machinations  of  Rusas  and  of  the  revolutions  which  the  migra-
tions of  the  last  thirty  years  had  provoked  among  the  peoples  of  the  Iranian
table-land.  A  new  race  had  arisen  in  their  rear,  that  of  the  Cimmerians  and
Scythians,  which,  issuing  in  irresistible  waves  from  the  gorges  of  the  Caucasus,
threatened  to  overwhelm  the  whole  ancient  world  of  the  East.  The  stream,
after  a  moment's  vacillation,  took  a  westerly  direction,  and  flooded  Asia  IMinor
from  one  end  to  the  other.^  Some  tribes,  however,  which  had  detached  them-
selves from  the  main  movement  sought  an  outlet  towards  the  south-east,  on  to
the  rich  plains  of  the  Araxes  and  the  country  around  Lake  Urumiah.  The
native  races,  pressed  in  the  rear  by  these  barbarians,  and  hemmed  in  on  either
side  and  in  front  by  Urartu  and  Assyria,  were  forced  into  closer  proximity,  and,
conscious  of  their  individual  weakness,  had  begun  to  form  themselves  into  three
distinct  groups,  varying  considerably  in  compactness, — -the  Medes  in  the  south,
Misianda  in  the  north,^  with  Zikartu  between  them.  Zikartu  was  at  that  time
the  best  organised  of  these  nascent  states,  and  its  king,  Mitatti,  was  not  deficient
either  in  military  talent  or  political  sagacity.  The  peoj^le  over  whom  he  ruled
were,  moreover,  impregnated  with  the  civilisation  of  Mesopotamia,  and  by
constantly  meeting  the  Assyrians  in  battle  they  had  adojited  the  general  prin-
ciples of  their  equipment,  organisation,  and  military  tactics.  The  vigour  of  his
soldiers  and  the  warlike  ardour  which  inspired  them  rendered  his  armies  for-
midable even  to  leaders  as  experienced,  and  warriors  as  hardened,  as  the  officers
and  soldiers  of  Nineveh.  Mitatti  had  strongly  garrisoned  the  two  rebel  cities,
and  trusted  that  if  the  Assyrians  were  unable  to  recapture  them  without  delay,
other  towns  would  not  be  long  in  following  their  example ;  Iranzu  would,  no
doubt,  be  expelled,  his  place  would  be  taken  by  a  hostile  chief,  and  the  Mannai,
joining  hands  with  Urartu  on  the  right  and  Zikartu  on  the  left,  would,  with
these  two  states,  form  a  compact  coalition,  whose  combined  forces  would  menace
the  northern  frontier  of  the  empire  from  the  Zagros  to  the  Taurus.     Sargon,

'  I  shall  return  later  ou,  in  Chapters  IV.  and  V.,  to  the  little  that  is  actually  known  of  the  Cimme-
rian invasion,  and  the  grouping  of  tribes  for  which  it  was  responsible.  It  had  not  sufficient  influence
on  the  policy  of  Assyria,  at  any  rate  at  first,  for  the  scope  of  this  history  to  permit  of  me  doing  more
than  briefly  mention  it.

'  I  shall  revert,  in  Chapters  IV.  and  V.  of  this  liistory,  to  the  origin  of  the  Median  Icingdom.  The
name  of  Misianda  is  formed  by  the  union  of  two  names,  Andiu  or  Andia  and  Misu,  whicli  arc  found
separately  in  the  inscriptions  of  Shalmaueser  III.  (Obelish,  1.  182)  and  of  Ramman-nirari  III.  (Slab
Inscr.  of  Calah,  11.  7,  9 ;  cf.  siqyra,  p.  92,  note  3,  and  p.  96,  note  4).  Andiu  was  the  more  important,
for  Sargon  often  mentions  Andia  or  Andiu  as  synonymous  with  Misianda  (Winokler,  Die  Keil-
achriftlexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  S2,  83,  14S,  149,  176,  177).


DEFEAT   OF  ZIKAETU,    THE   TABAL   AND    THE  KHATI.


239


putting  all  the  available  Assyrian  forces  into  the  field,  hurled  them  against
the  rebels,  and  this  display  of  power  had  the  desired  effect  upon  the
neighbouring  kingdoms :  Kusas  and  Mitiitti  did  not  dare  to  interfere,  the  two
cities  were  taken  by  assault,  burnt  and  razed  to  the  ground,  and  the  inhabitants
of  the  surrounding  districts  of  Sukkia,  Bala,  and  Abitikna  were  driven  into
exile  among  the  Khati.^  The  next  year,  however,  the  war  thus  checked  on
the  Iranian  table-land  broke  out  in  the  north-west,  in  the  mountains  of  Cilicia.
A  Tabal  chief,  Kiakku  of  Shinukhta,  refused  to  pay  his  tribute  (718).  Sargon
seized  him  and  destroyed

his  city ;    his  family  and    rjjxjji  '-svV^    "^  ■     '^-^^  -  "7!^

adherents,  7500  persons
in  all,  were  carried  away
captives  to  Assyria,  and
his  principality  was  given
to  a  rival  chief,  Matti  of
Atuna,  on  a  promise  from
the  latter  of  an  increased
amount  of  tribute.^  In
717  B.C.  more  serious
dangers  openly  declared
themselves.  The  Khi'iti
had  not  forgotten  that
they  had  once  been  the  allies  of  Urartu,  and  that  their  king,  Pisiris,  together
with  Matilu  of  Agusi,^  had  fought  for  Sliarduris  against  Tiglath-pileser  III.
Pisiris  conspired  with  Mita,  chief  of  the  Mushki,  and  proclaimed  his  inde-
pendence ;  but  vengeance  swiftly  and  surely  overtook  him.  He  succumbed
before  his  accomplice  had  time  to  come  to  his  assistance,  and  was  sent  to
join  Kiakku  and  his  adherents  in  prison,  while  tiie  districts  which  he  had
ruled   were   incorporated   into   Assyrian    territory,   and   Carchemish   became

'  Amiah  of  Sargon,  II.  32-42 :  cf.  Oppekt,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  ia  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser ,
vol.  vii.  pp.  29, 30 ;  Winckleh,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargo7is,  vol.  i.  pp.  S,  0 ;  Inscription  des  Pastes,  1. 4S ;
cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsahad,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,  vol.  ix.  p.  7 ;
WiNCKLEK,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  100,  107.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  42-45;  cf.  Oppert,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vii.  p.  30  ;  Wincklkr,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  8-11 ;  Inscription  des  Fastcs,  U.  28,  29 ;  cf.  Oppert,  Great
Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsahad,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  5,  6 ;  Wincklei!,
op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  102, 103.  Tlie  namo  of  Atuna  is  a  variant  of  the  name  Tuna,  which  is  found  in  thi-
inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  QNimroud  Inscr.,  obv.,  1.  .59),  and  Tuna  recalls  the  name  of  the  old
city  of  Tyaua  (Lenormant,  Les  Origines  de  VUisloire,  vol.  iii.  pp.  212,  213,  238),  or  that  of  Tjnna  or
Tunna,  near  Tyaua,  in  the  Taurus  (Rams.a.y,  The  Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  08,310,  311).
Shinukhta,  not  far  from  Atuna,  must  be  the  capital  of  a  district  situated  on  the  Karmalaa  or  the
Saros,  on  the  borders  of  Cilicia  or  Cataonia;  cf  Delattre,  L'Asie  Occid.  dans  les  Inser.  Asstjr.,  p.  68.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  120,  121,  14d-149.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  the  facsimile  by  Flaudin,  published. in  Botta,  Le  Monument
de  Ninive,  vol.  ii.  pi.  89.


TAKIXU    OF    A    CASTLE   IN   ZIKARTU.'


240  SABOON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

the  seat  of  an  Assyrian  prefect  who  ranked  among  the  limmi  from  whom
successive  years  took  their  names.     The  fall  of  Pisiris  made  no  impression
on   his  contemporaries.     They  had  witnessed  the  collapse  of  so  many  great
powers — Elam,    Urartu,  Egypt — that   the   misfortunes   of  so   insignificant   a
personage  awakened   but    little   interest ;   and  yet  with  him   foundered  one
of  the  most  glorious  wrecks  of  the  ancient  world.     For  more  than  a  century
the  Khati  had   been  the  dominant  power   in  North-western   Asia,  and  had
successfully  withstood  the  power  of  Thebes;  crushed  by  the  Peoples  of  the
Sea,   hemmed    in    and   encroached    upon   by  the   rising   waye   of  Aramaean
invasion,  they  had  yet  disputed  their  territory  step  by  step  with  the  Assyrian
generals,  and  the  area  over  which  they  spread  can  be  traced  by  the  monu-
ments  and   inscriptions   scattered    over  Cilicia,    Lycaonia,   Cappadocia,   and
Northern  Syria  as  far  as  the  basins  of  the  Orontes  and  the  Litany.     So  lasting
had  proved  their  influence  on  all  around  them,  and  so  fresh  was  the  memory  of
their  greatness,  tliat  it  would  have  seemed  but  natural  that  their  vitality  should
survive  this  last  blow,  and  that  they  should  enjoy  a  prosperous  future  which
should  vie  with  their  past.    But  events  proved  that  their  national  life  was  dead,
and  that  no  recuperative  power  remained  :  as  soon  as  Sargon  had  overthrown
their  last  prince,  their  tribes  became  merged  in  the  general  body  of  Aramaeans,
and  their  very  name  ere  long  vanished  from  the  pages  of  history.^

Up  to  this  time  Eusas  had  not  directly  interfered  in  these  quarrels  between
the  suzerain  and  his  vassals  :  he  may  have  incited  the  latter  to  revolt,  but  he
had  avoided  compromising  himself,  and  was  waiting  till  the  Manual  had  de-
cided to  make  common  cause  with  him  before  showing  his  hand  openly.  Ever
since  the  skirmish  of  the  year  719,  Mitatti  had  actively  striven  to  tempt  the
Manual  from  their  allegiance,  but  his  intrigues  had  hitherto  proved  of  no  avail
against  the  staunch  fidelity  first  of  Iranzu  and  then  of  Aza,  who  had  succeeded
the  latter  about  718.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year  716  Mitatti  was  more
successful ;  the  Mannai,  seduced  at  length  by  his  promises  and  those  of  Kusas,
assembled  on  Mount  Uaush,  murdered  their  king,  and  leaving  his  corpse  un-
buried,  hastened  to  place  themselves  under  the  command  of  Bagadatti,  regent  of
Umildish.2  Sargon  hurried  to  the  spot,  seized  Bagadatti,  and  had  him  flayed
alive  on  Mount  Uaush,  which  had  just  witnessed  the  murder  of  Aza,  and  ex-
posed the  mass  of  bleeding  flesh  before  the  gaze  of  the  people  to  demonstrate
the  fate  reserved  for  his  enemies.  But  though  he  had  acted  speedily  he  was
too  late,  and  the  fate  of  their  chief,  far  from  discouraging  his  subjects,  confirmed

'  Annals  uf  Sargon,  11.  46-.'j0  :  cf.  Oppebt,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  sex.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  30,  31 ;  AVinokler,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  10,  11.

^  For  Mildish  or  Umildish  and  the  probable  position  of  this  country,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,
p.  G45,  note  1.


DEFEAT  OF   THE  MANNAI  AND    OF  ELLIPI.


241


them  in  their  rebellion.  They  had  placed  upon  the  throne  Ullusunu,  the
brother  of  Aza,  and  this  prince  had  immediately  concluded  an  alliance  with
Eusas,  Jlitatti,  and  the  people  of  Andia ;  his  example  was  soon  followed  by
other  Eastern  chiefs,  Assurli  of  Karallu  and  Itti  of  AUabria,'  whereupon,  as  the
spirit  of  revolt  spread  from  one  to  another,  most  of  the  districts  lately  laid
under  tribute  by  Tiglath-pileser  took  up  arms — Niksama,  Bitsagbati,  Bitkhir-
mami,  Kilambati,  Armangu,  and  even  the  parts  around  Kbarkhar,  and  Ellipi,


TAKING    OF    THE    CITY    OF   KISBISIM   BY    THE    ASSYHIANS."


with  its  reigning  sovereign  Dalta.  The  general  insurrection  dreaded  by
Sargon,  and  which  Kusas  had  for  five  years  been  fomenting,  had,  despite  all
the  efforts  of  the  Assyrian  government,  at  last  broken  out,  and  the  whole  frontier
was  ablaze  from  the  borders  of  Elam  to  those  of  the  Mushku.  Sargon  turned  his
attention  to  where  danger  was  most  urgent ;  he  made  a  descent  on  the  territory
of  the  Mannai,  and  laid  it  waste  "  as  a  swarm  of  locusts  might  have  done  ;  "  he
burnt  their  capital,  Izirtu,  demolished  tlie  fortifications  of  Zibia  and  Armaid,  and
took  Ullusunu  captive,  but,  instead  of  condemning  him  to  death,  he  restored
to  him  his  liberty  and  his  crown  on  condition  of  his  paying  a  regular  tribute.

'  For  Allabria  and  its  eituation,  cf.  tupra,  p.  09,  note  4.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  facsimile  by  Flandin,  pul)li8hed  in  Botta,  Le  Monument  de
Ninive,  vol.  i.  pis.  08, 69.  The  figures  resemijling  stags'  liorns,  wliioh  crown  tlinu  of  the  upper  towers,
are  tongues  of  flame,  as  was  iudicated  by  the  red  colouring  which  still  remained  on  them  when  tlm
bas-relief  was  discovered.

K


242  SAEGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

This  act  of  clemency,  in  contrast  with  the  pitiless  severity  shown  at  the
beginning  of  the  insurrection,  instantly  produced  the  good  effects  he  expected :
the  Mannai  laid  down  their  arms  and  swore  allegiance  to  the  conqueror,  and
their  defection  broke  up  the  coalition.  Sargon  did  not  give  tlie  revolted
provinces  time  to  recover  from  the  dismay  into  which  his  first  victories  bad
thrown  them,  but  marched  rapidly  to  the  south,  and  crushed  them  severally ;
commencing  with  Andia,  where  he  took  4200  prisoners  with  their  cattle,  he  next
attacked  Zikartu,  whose  king,  Mitatti,  took  refuge  in  the  mountains  and  thus
escaped  death  at  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  Assurli  of  Karalia  had  a  similar
fate  to  Bagadatti,  and  was  flayed  alive.  Itti  of  Allabria,  with  half  of  his  sub-
jects, was  carried  away  to  Hamath.  The  towns  of  Niksama  and  SImrgadia  were
annexed  to  the  province  of  Parsuash.  The  town  of  Kishisim  was  reduced  to
ashes,  and  its  king,  Belsharuzur,  together  with  the  treasures  of  his  palace,  was
carried  away  to  Nineveh.  Kharkhar  succumbed  after  a  short  siege,  received  a
new  population,  and  was  henceforward  known  as  Kar-Sharrukiu ;  Dalta  was
restored  to  favour,  and  retained  his  dominion  intact.^  Never  had  so  great
a  danger  beea  so  ably  or  so  courageously  averted.  It  was  not  without  good
reason  that,  after  his  victory  over  the  Mannai,  Sargon,  instead  of  attacking  Eusas,
the  most  obstinate  of  his  foes,  turned  against  the  Medes.  EUipi,  Parsuash,  and
Kharkhar,  comprising  half  the  countries  which  had  joined  in  the  insurrection,
were  on  the  borders  of  Elam  or  had  frequent  relations  with  that  state,  and  it  is
impossible  to  conjecture  what  turn  affairs  might  have  taken  had  Elam  been
induced  to  join  their  league,  and  had  the  Elamite  armies,  in  conjunction  with
those  of  Merodach-baladan,  unexpectedly  fallen  upon  the  Assyrian  rear  by  the
valleys  of  the  Tigris  or  the  Turnat.  Had  the  Elamites,  however,  entertained  a
desire  to  mingle  in  the  fray,  tlie  promptness  with  which  Sargon  had  re-established
order  must  have  given  them  cause  to  reflect  and  induced  them  to  maintain
their  neutrality.  The  year  which  had  opened  so  inauspiciously  thus  ended  in
victory,  though  the  situation  was  still  fraught  with  danger.  The  agitation  which
had  originated  in  the  east  and  north-east  in  716  reached  the  north-west  in  715,
and  spread  as  far  as  the  borders  of  Southern  Syria.  Kusas  had  employed  the
winter  in  secret  negotiations  with  the  Mannai,  and  had  won  over  one  of  their
principal  chiefs,  a  certain  Dayaukku,  whose  name  seems  to  be  identical  with  that
which  the  Greeks  transliterated  as  Deiokes.^    As  soon  as  spring  had  returned  he

'  AnnaU  of  Sargon,  11.  52-74:  cf.  Oppert,  Tlte  Atmah  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  31,  32;  Winokler,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargoyis,  vol.  i.  pp.  10-17.  The  events  are  con-
fused with  those  of  the  following  campaigns  in  the  Inscrifjtion  des  Pastes,  11.  3U-42, 44,  45,  49-56, 58-66
(cf.  Oppert,  The  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsdbad,  vol.  ix.  pp.  6-9 ;  Winokler,  of.  cit ,
pp.  104-111),  as  well  as  in  other  contemporary  documents.

=  Tlie  identity  of  the  name  Dayaukku  with  that  of  Deiokes  was  at  once  recognised  by  G.  Smith,
Assyrian  Uistorij  (in  the  Zeilschrift,  1809,  p.  98) ;  it  has  since  been  admitted  by  all  historians.  I
shall  have  occasion  to  revert  to  this  persooage  at  the  beginning  of  Chapter  IV.  of  this  work.


THE  DEFEAT   OF   THE  MEDES.  243

entered  the  territory  of  Ullusunu,  and  occupied  twenty-two  strongholds,  which
were  jjrobably  betrayed  into  his  hands  by  Dayaukku.'  While  this  was  taking
place  Mita  of  Mushki  invaded  Cilicia,  and  the  Arab  tribes  of  the  Idirmsean  desert
— the  Thamudites,  the  Ibadites,  the  Marsimanu,  and  Khayapa — were  em-
boldened to  carry  their  marauding  expeditions  into  Assyrian  territory.-  The
Assyrian  monarch  was  thus  called  on  to  conduct  three  distinct  wars  simul-
taneously in  three  different  directions ;  he  was,  moreover,  surrounded  by  wavering
subjects  whom  terror  alone  held  to  their  allegiance,  and  whom  the  slightest
imprudence  or  the  least  reverse  might  turn  into  open  foes.

Sargon  resolutely  faced  the  enemy  at  all  three  points  of  attack.  As  in  the
previous  year,  he  reserved  for  himself  the  position  where  danger  was  most
threatening,  directing  the  operations  against  the  Mannai.^  He  captured  one
by  one  the  twenty-two  strongholds  of  Ullusunu  which  Rusas  had  seized,
and  laying  hands  on  Dayaukkn,  sent  him  and  his  family  into  exile  to
Hamath.  This  display  of  energy  determined  lanzu^  of  Nairi  to  receive
the  Assyrian  monarch  courteously  within  the  royal  residence  of  Khubushkia
and  to  supply  him  with  iiorses,  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  in  token  of  homage.
Proceeding  from  thence  in  an  oblique  direction,  Sargon  reached  Andia  and
took  prisoner  its  king  Tilusinas.  Having  by  this  exploit  reduced  the  province
of  Manual  to  order,  he  restored  the  twenty-two  towns  to  Ullusunu,  and  halting
some  days  in  Izirtu,  erected  there  a  statue  of  himself,  according  to  his  custom,
as  a  visible  witness  of  Assyrian  supremacy,  having  done  which,  lie  retraced  his
steps  to  the  south-east.  The  province  of  Kharkhar,  which  had  been  reduced
to  subjection  only  a  few  months  previously,  was  already  in  open  revolt,  and
the  district  of  Kar-Sharrukin  alone  remained  faithful  to  its  governor:  Sargon
had  to  reconquer  it  completely,  town  by  town,  imposing  on  the  four  citadels
of  Eishislu,  Kindau,  Bit-Bagaia,  and  Zaria  the  new  names  of  Kar-Nabu,  Kar-
Sin,  Kar-Rammanu,  and  Kar-Ishtar,  besides  increasing  the  fortifications  of
Kar-Sharrukin.  The  Medes  once  more  acknowledged  his  suzerainty,  and
twenty-two  of  their  chiefs  carne  to  tender  the  oath  of  allegiance  at  his  feet ; '
two   or   three    districts    which    remained    insubordinate   were   given    up    to

'  AnnaU  oj  Sarcinn,  11.  75,  70  :  ef.  OrrEKT,  The  Annals  of  Sargnn,  in  Record.''  r\f  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  32,  33;  Winckleu,  Die  KeiUclmfUexte  Sargone,  vol.  i.  pp.  14,  15.

'  Annals  of  Sargnn,  11.  92-95  :  cf.  Oppebt,  oj).  cit.,  p.  34  ;  Winckler.  op.  cit.,  pp.  20,  21.

'  Tiele  llrBt  ri'inurked  that  these  rising.-!  of  the  different  |ieaple3  took  place  simultaneously  on  tlio
enstern  and  western  tiontisrs;  Sargon  could  lead  only  the  most  important  of  his  armies  in  person,
viz.  tliat  wliich  was  directed  against  Kuaas,  tlie  Mannai  and  the  Medes  {Bahijloiiitcli-antijrhche
Geschichle,  p.  264).  Winckler  even  suggests  tliat  the  expeditions  against  Rusas  and  against  tlie
Medes  were  conducted  simultaneously  {Die  Keihchri/Uexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  xiv.,  xv.).

'  Sargon's  text  seems  to  give  this  as  the  actual  name  of  the  king.  Delitzach  has  shown  that
it  is  the  title  of  the  kings  in  the  local  dialects  {Die  Sprache  der  KosiUer,  pp.  25,  29-38 ;  cf.  Struggle
tif  the  Nutiuns,  p.  114).

°  This  is  the  number  given  in  the  Aunah,  1.  89 ;  the  Fastet,  11.  GO,  07,  give  34  instead  of  22.


244


SABOON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


pillage  as  far  as  Bit-Khamban,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Kimirra  were  sent
into  captivity.^  The  eastern  campaign  was  thus  brought  to  a  most  successful
issue,  fortune,  meanwhile,  having  also  favoured  the  Assyrian  arms  in  the  other
menaced  quarters.  Mita,  after  pushing  forward  at  one  point  as  far  as  the
Mediterranean,  had  been  driven  back  into  the  mountains  by  the  prefect  of  Kui,

and  the  Bedawin  of  the  south
had  sustained  a  serious  re-
verse. These  latter  were  mere
barbarians,  ignorant  of  the
arts  of  reading  and  writing,
and  liitherto  unconquered  by
any  foreign  power :  their  sur-
vivors were  removed  to  Sa-
maria, where  captives  from
Hamath  had  already  been
established,  and  where  they
were  soon  joined  by  further
exiles  from  Babylon.^  This
episode  had  greater  effect
than  its  importance  war-
ranted; or  perhaps  the  ma-
jority of  the  neighbouring
states  made  it  a  convenient  pretext  for  congratulating  Sargon  on  his  victories
over  more  serious  enemies.  He  received  gifts  from  Shamshie,  the  Arabian
queen  who  had  formerly  fought  against  Tiglath-pileser,*  from  Itamar  the
Sabajan,  and  the  sheikhs  of  the  desert,  from  the  kings  of  the  Mediterranean
sea-board,  and  from  the  Pharaoh  himself.^  Bocchoris  had  died  after  a
troublous  reign  of  seven  years."  His  real  character  is  unknown,  but  as  he
left  a  deep  impression  on  the  memories  of  his  people,  it  is  natural  to  conclude

■  A7mals  of  Sargon,  11.  76-90  :  cf.  Oppekt,  The  AnnaU  of  Sargon,  in  Becords  of  the  Past,  lat  ser.,
vol.  fiii.  pp.  33,  3i ;  M'inckler,  Die  KeihchrifUexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  16-19.  The  text  of  the  Aimah
is  imperfect,  but  the  sense  can  be  restored  by  comparison  with  that  of  the  Fastes,  11.  44,  4."),  52-54,
03-67.

=  Antiah  of  Sargon,  11.  92-97,  99,  100  :  cf,  Oitekt,  op.  cil.,  p.  34;  Winckler,  op.  cit,  pp.  20,  21.
For  the  colonisation  of  Samaria,  cf.  Winxklek,  Alttestamentliche  UntersuiAungeri,  pp.  97-107.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  facsimile  by  Flaudin,  in  Bott.\,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,
vol.  i.  p.  76.  The  tongues  of  flame  which  issue  from  the  towers  still  bore  traces  of  red  and  yellow
colouring  when  the  bas-relief  was  discovered.

'  Cf.  fupra,  pp.  188,  189.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  97-99  :  cf.  Oppert,  op.  cit.,  p.  31 ;  Winckleb.  Die  KeihchrifUexte  Sargons,
vol.  i.  pp.  20,  21.

"  For  the  duration  of  his  reign,  cf.  supra,  p.  233,  note  4.  The  two  dynasties  of  Tanis  and  Sais
may  be  for  the  present  reconstituted  as  follows: —


THE    TOWN   OF   BIT-BAGAIA   BURNT   BY    THE    ASSYRIANS."


BOCCEOBIS.


245


that  he  displayed,  at  times,  both  ability  and  energy,  ilany  legends  in  which  the
miraculous  element  prevailed  were  soon  in  circulation  concerning  him.  He  was,
according  to  these  accounts,  weak  in  body  and  insignificant  in  appearance,^  but
made  up  for  these  defects  by  mental  ability  and  sound  judgment.  He  was
credited  with  having  been  simple  in  his  mode  of  life,^  and  was  renowned  as  one
of  the  six  great  legislators  produced  by  Egypt.  A  law  concerning  debt  and  the
legal  rates  of  interest,^  was  attributed  to  him ;  he  was  also  famed  for  the  upright-
ness of  his  judgments,  which  were  regarded  as  due  to  divine  inspiration.  Isis  had
bestowed  on  him  a  serpent,  which,  coiling  itself  round  his  head  when  he  sat  on
the  judgment-seat,  covered  him  with  its  shadow,  and  admonished  him  not  to


KING  BOCCHORIS  GIVING  JUDGMENT  BETWEEN  TWO  WOMEN,   RIVAL   CLAIMANTS
TO   A    CHILD*


forget  for  a  moment  the  inflexible  principles  of  equity  and  truth.''  A  collec-
tion of  the  decisions  he  was  reputed  to  have  delivered  in  famous  cases  existed
in  the  Gneco-Roman  period,  and  one  of  them  is  quoted  at  length  :  he  had
very  ingeniously  condemned  a  courtesan  to  touch  the  shadow  of  a  purse  as
payment  for  the  shadowy  favours  she  had  bestowed  in  a  dream  on  her  lover.^
An    Alexandrian   poet,   Pancrates,   versified   the    accounts   of   this  juridical


SXIV.  (Saite)  Dynasty.
I.  UahkakJ  Bukunibinip    .     .     .     BOCCHORIS


XXIII.  (Tanite)  Dynasty.
I.  8ah.\uuri  Patisibastit  .     .    Petubastis

II.    AKHpiBRt  SoTrCNIAMONU

OsORKON  MaRIAMONU    .      .      OSOBKON  III.
III.  PSAMUTI PSAMMUTHIS       1

Neither  Tafnakhti  nor  any  of  the  local  sovereigns  mentioned  on  the  stele  of  Pionklii  were  eompriscd
in  the  official  computation ;  tliere  is,  therefore,  no  reason  to  add  them  to  this  list.

'  DioDOBCs  SiuuLus,  i.  65,  94.

-  Alexis,  Fragm.  3,  in  MClleb-Didot,  Fragmenta  HUtoricorum  Griecorum,  vol.  iv.  p.  299.

"  DiODoRCs  SicuLUS,  i.  79,  94.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  published  in  the  licndiconti  della  R.  Aceademia  dei
Lined,  ser.  v.  vol.  vi.

'  Plutarch,  On  false  shame,  §  3 ;  the  serpent  is  nothing  else  than  the  urajus  attached  lo  the
head-dress  of  the  king,  and  which  the  Kgyptians  represented  as  alive.

«  Clement  op  ALE.\ANt)RlA,  fttromateis,  iv.  IS.  The  existence  of  this  collection  was  indicated  by
LVMBBOSO,  in  the  Atli  dell'  Aceademia  dei  Lincei,  ser.  iii.,  vol.  xi.  p.  203,  et  seq.,  and  in  the  Archicia
per  lo  Studio  delle  tradizioni  popolari,  vcjI.  ii.  p.  ."iOO,  et  sei[.


24G


SASOON  IJ.    OF  ASSYRIA.


collection/  aud  the  artists  of  the  Imperial  epoch  drew  from  it  motives  for  mural
decoration  ;  they  portrayed  the  king  pronouncing  judgment  between  two  mothers
who  disputed  possession  of  an  infant,  between  two  beggars  laying  claim  to  the
same  cloak,  and  between  three  men  asserting  each  of  them  his  right  to  a  wallet
full  of  food.2  A  less  favourable  tradition  represents  the  king  as  an  avaricious  and
irreligious  sovereign  :  •''  he  is  said  one  day  to  have  conceived  the  sacrilegious
desire  to  bring  about  a  conflict  between  an  ordinary  bull  and  the  Mnevis  adored

at  Heliopolis.*  The  gods,  doubtless  angered  by  his
crimes,  are  recorded  to  have  called  into  being  a
lamb  with  eight  feet,  which,  suddenly  breaking  into
articulate  speech,  predicted  that  Upper  and  Lower
Egypt    would    be   disgraced    by  the    rule  of    a


stranger.


The   monuments  of  his   reign   wliich


have  come  down  to  us  tell  us  nothing  of  his  deeds ;
we  can  only  conjecture  that  after  the  defeat  sus-
tained by  his  generals  at  Kaphia,  the  discords
which  had  ruined  the  preceding  dynasties  again
broke  out  with  renewed  violence.  Indeed,  if  he  suc-

SAEACO."  1      ,      •  .  ,    .

ceeded  in  preserving  his  crown  for  several  years
longer,  he  owed  the  fact  more  to  the  feebleness  of  the  Ethiopians  than  to  his
own  vigour:  no  sooner  did  an  enterprising  prince  appear  at  Barkal  and  demand
that  he  should  render  an  account  of  his  usurpation,  than  his  power  came  to  an
end.  Kaslito  having  died  about  710,'  his  son  Shabaku,  the  Sabaco  of  the
Greeks,  inherited  the  throne,  and  his  daughter  Amenertas  the  priesthood  and
principality  of  Thebes,  in  right  of  her  mother  Shapenuapit.**   Sabaco  was  an  able

'  Panerates  lived  in  the  time  of  Hadrian  (Athen.ecs,  Deipnosophislx.  p.  (J77e),  and  Athenaeus,
who  has  preserved  his  memory  for  us,  quotes  the  tiist  book  of  his  Bocchoreidion  (p.  478  a).

'  Considerable  remains  of  tliis  decorative  cycle  have  been  discovered  at  Pompeii  and  at  Rome,  in
a  scries  of  frescoes,  in  which  Lumbroso  (,Alti  dell'  Accademia  dei  Lincei,  ser.  iii.  vol.  xi.  p.  303,  ct  seq. ;
cf.  Arcliivio  per  lo  Studio  dellc  tradizioni  popolari,  vol.  ii ,  1883,  p.  569,  et  seq.)  and  E.  Lcewy  {Ancddoti
Giudizari  dijiiidi  in  un  Fregio  antico,  in  the  Itendironti  delta  R.  Accademia  dei  Lincei,  scr.  v.  vol.  vi.
pp.  27-45,  pis.  i,,  ii.)  recognise  tlie  features  of  the  legends  of  Bocchoris ;  the  dispute  between  the  two
mothers  recalls  the  famous  judgment  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  10-28).

^  DiODOKUs  SiouLus,  i.  65,  94.

*  .T-^Li.vN,  Hid.  Animal,  xi.  11.

*  This  legend,  preserved  by  Manetho  and  jElian  (^Uid.  Animal,  xii.  3)  is  also  known  from  the
fragments  of  a  demotic  papyrus  at  Vienna,  discovered  and  published  by  Krall  (  Vom  Konig  Bolichoris,
nach  eiuem  demotischen  Papyrus  der  Sammlung  Erzherzng  Rainer.  Innsbruck,  1898),  which  coutalna
the  prophecy  of  the  lamb.

«  Drawn  by  Faucher-Ciudin,  from  Lepsius,  DenkmHler,  iii.  301,  No.  79;  cf.  Eosellini,  Monumenti
Slorici,  pi.  12,  No.  47.

■  The  date  of  the  accession  of  Sabaco  is  here  fixed  at  716-715,  because  I  follow  the  version  of
the  lists  of  Manetho,  which  gives  twelve  years  as  the  nigu  of  that  prince ;  an  inscription  from
Hammamat  mentions  his  twellth  year  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  v.  1  c).

"  For  the  genealogy  of  Sabaco,  Kashto,  and  Amenertas  suggested  by  E.  de  Bouge,  Etude  sur  quelquea
muiTmnents  da  rigne  de  Tahraha  (in  the  Melanges  d' Arch^ologie  Egyptienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  87,  88),  cf.  Mas-
PERO.  Les  Momies  roijales  de  Deir-el-Bahari,  in  the  Me'moires  de  hi  Mission  Fraricaise.  vol.  i.  pp.  752,  753.


OVERTHROW  OF   URZANA   AND  RUSAS.  247

and  energetic  prince,  who  could  by  no  means  tolerate  the  presence  of  a  rival
Pharaoh  in  the  provinces  which  Pionkhi  had  conquered.  He  declared  war,
and,  being  doubtless  supported  in  his  undertaking  by  all  the  petty  kings  and
great  feudal  nobles  whose  jealousy  was  aroused  by  the  unlooked-for  prosperity
of  the  Saite  monarch,  he  defeated  Bocchoris  and  took  him  prisoner.  Taf-
nakhti  had  formerly  recognised  the  Ethiopian  supremacy,  and  Bocchoris,
when  he  succeeded  to  his  father's  dominions,  had  himself  probably  sought
investiture  at  the  hands  of  the  King  of  Napata.  Sabaco  treated  him  as  a
rebel,  and  either  burnt  or  flayed  him  alive  (715).^  The  struggle  was  hardly
over,  when  the  news  of  Sargon's  victories  reached  Egypt.  It  was  natural
that  the  new  king,  not  yet  securely  seated  on  his  throne,  should  desire  to
conciliate  the  friendship  of  a  neighbour  who  was  so  successful  in  war,  and
that  he  should  seize  the  first  available  pretext  to  congratulate  him.  The
Assyrian  on  his  part  received  these  advances  with  satisfaction  and  pride :  he
perceived  in  them  a  guarantee  that  Egyptian  intrigues  with  Tyre  and
Jerusalem  would  cease,  and  that  he  could  henceforth  devote  himself  to  his
projects  against  Eusas  without  being  distracted  by  the  fear  of  an  Ethiopian
attack  and  the  subversion  of  Syria  in  his  rear.

Sargon  took  advantage  of  these  circumstances  to  strike  a  final  blow  at
Urartu.  He  began  in  the  spring  of  714  by  collecting  among  the  Mannai  the
tribute  due  from  Ullusuna,  Dalta,  and  the  Median  chiefs ;  then  pushing  forward
into  the  country  of  the  Zikartu,  he  destroyed  three  forts  and  twenty-four
villages,  and  burnt  their  capital,  Parda.  Mitatti  escaped  servitude,  but  it  was
at  the  price  of  his  power :  a  proscribed  fugitive,  deserted  by  his  followers,
he  took  refuge  in  the  woods,  and  never  submitted  to  his  conqueror;  but
he  troubled  him  no  further,  and  disappeared  from  the  pages  of  history.
Having  achieved  this  result,  Sargon  turned  towards  the  north-west,  and
coming  at  length  into  close  conflict  with  Eusas,  did  not  leave  his  enemy  till
he  had  crushed  him.  He  drove  him  into  the  gorges  of  Uausb,  slaughtered
a  large  number  of  his  troops,  and  swept  away  the  whole  of  his  body-guard —
a  body  of  cavalry  of  two  hundred  men,  all  of  whom  were  connected  by  blood
with  the  reigning  family.  Eusas  quitted  his  chariot,  and,  like  his  father
Sharduris  on  the  night  of  the  disaster  at  Kishtan,  leaped  upon  a  mare,  and  fled,
overwlielmed  with  shame,  into  the  mountains.'^  His  towns,  terror-stricken,
opened  their  gates  at  the  first  summons  to  the  victor;  Sargon  burnt  those
which  he  knew  he  could  not  retain,  granted  the  district  of  Uaush  to  his

•  According  to  Maneibo,  he  was  burnt  alive  (MOllek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  ii.  p.  5!)3 ;
the  tradition  which  mentions  that  ho  was  flayed  alive  is  found  in  John  of  Antioch  (MUllek-Didot,
np.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  510).

•  Cf ,  for  this  episode  of  the  mare  and  the  sliamc  connected  with  it  in  the  cyee  of  the  ancients,
supya,  p.  14G.


248


SARGON  II.    OF  ASSTBIA.


TAKING   OF   A  TOWN    1-N    Ll.Al.lL    l;Y   THE   ASSYRIANS.'


vassal  Ulliisuim  as  a  recompense  for  his  loyalty,  and  then  marched  up  to
rest  awhile  in  Nairi,  where  he  revictualled  his  troops  at  the  expense  of
lanzu  of  Khubushkia.i  jjg  ^^d,  no  doubt,  hoped  that  Urzana  of  Muzazir,  the
last  of  the  friends  of  Eusas  to  hold  out  against  Assyria,  would  make  good  use
of  the  respite  thus,  to  all  appearances  unintentionally,  afforded  him,  and  would
come  to  terms;    but   as   the   appeal  to  his   clemency  was  delayed,  Sargon

suddenly  determined   to  as-
sume  the   aggressive.     Mu-
zazir, entrenched  within  its
mountain  ranges,  was  acces-
sible   only   by    one   or   two
dangerous  passes;  Urzana  had
barricaded    these,    and    be-
lieved himself  in  a  position
to  defy  every   eftbrt  of  the
Assyrians.     Sargon,  equally
convinced  of  the  futility  of
a  front  attack,  had  recourse
to  a  surprise.     Taking  with
him  his  chariots  and  one  tliousand  picked  horsemen,  he  left  the  beaten  track,
and  crossing  the  four  or  five  mountain  chains — the  Shiak,  the  Ardinshi,  the
Ulayau,  and  the  Alluria— which  lay  between  him  and  Muzazir,  he  unexpectedly
bore  down  upon  the  city.     Urzana  escaped  after  a  desperate  resistance,  but  the
place  was  taken  by  assault  and  sacked,  the  palace  destroyed,  the  temple  over-
thrown, and  the  statues  of  the  gods  Khaldia  and  Bagbartu  dragged  from  their
sanctuary.^     The  entire  royal  family  were  sent  into  slavery,  and  with  them
20,170  of  the  inhabitants  who  had  survived  the  siege,  besides  690  mules,  920
oxen,  100,225  sheep,  and  incalculable  spoils  in  gold,  silver,  bronze,  iron,  and
precious  stones  and  stuffs,  the  furniture  of  Urzana,  and  even  his  seal,  being
deposited  in  the  treasury  at  Nineveh.    The  disaster  at  Muzazir  was  the  final  blow
to  Urartu  ;  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  took  place  where  Eusas  himself  was,  and
whether  the  feudatories  refused  him  any  further  allegiance,  but  in  a  short  time
he  found  himself  almost  forsaken,  without  friends,  troops,  or  a  place  of  refuge,
and  reduced  to  choose  between  death  or  the  degradation  of  appealing  to  the
mercy  of  the  conqueror.    He  stabbed  himself  rather  than  yield ;  and  Sargon,

'  For  lanzu  aud  the  nature  of  the  title  he  bore,  of.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  114,  and  also  p.  243,
note  4,  of  the  present  work.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  drawing  by  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive,  vol.  ii.
pi.  90.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  n9,  for  the  pillaging  of  the  temple  of  Muzazir.


TEE   CLOSE   OF  THE   URARTIAN  EMPIRE.


249


THE    SEAL    <)K    ri;ZAXA,    KIN<j    (iF    MrZAzilt/


only  too  thankful  to  be  rid  of  such  a  dangerous  adversary,  stopped  the  pursuit.^
Argistis  II.  succeeded  to  what  was  left  of  his  father's  kingdom,-  and,  being
anxious  above  all  things  to  obtain  peace  for  his  subjects,  suspended  hostilities,
without  however  disarming  his  troops.  As  was  the  case  under  Tiglath-pileser  III.,
Urartu  neither  submitted  to  Assyria,  nor  was  there  any  kind  of  treaty  between
the  belligerents  to  prescribe  the  conditions  of  this  temporary  truce.  Both  sides
maintained  their  positions  on  their  respective  territories :  Sargon  kept  the
frontier  towns  acquired  by  him  in  previous  years,  and  wliich  he  had  an-
nexed to  the  border  provinces,  retain-
ing also  his  suzerainty  over  Muzazir,
the  Mannai,  and  the  Median  states  im-
plicated in  the  struggle ;  Argistis,  on
his  side,  strengthened  himself  in  the
regions  around  the  sources  of  the
Euphrates  and  Lake  Van — in  Biainas,
in  Etius,  and  in  the  plains  of  the
Araxes.  The  material  injuries  which
he  had  received,  however  considerable

they  may  appear,  were  not  irreparable,  and,  as  a  fact,  the  country  quickly
recovered  from  them,  but  the  people's  confidence  in  their  prince  and  his
chiefs  was  destroyed.  The  defeat  of  Sharduris,  following  as  it  did  on  a  period
of  advantageous  victories,  may  have  seemed  to  Argistis  one  of  those  unim-
portant occurrences  which  constantly  take  place  in  the  career  of  the  strongest
nations ;  the  disaster  of  Kusas  proved  to  him  that,  in  attempting  to  wipe  out  his
first  repulse,  he  had  only  made  matters  worse,  and  the  conviction  was  borne
in  upon  his  princes  that  they  were  not  in  a  position  to  contest  the  possession
of  Western  Asia  with  the  Assyrians.  They  therefore  renounced,  more  from
instinct  than  as  the  result  of  deliberation,  the  project  of  enlarging  their  borders
to  the  south,  and  if  they  subsequently  reappeared  on  the  Mesopotamian  plains,
it  was  in  search  of  booty,  and  not  to  acquire  territory.  Any  attempt  to  stop
their  incursions,  or  to  disturb  them  in  their  mountain  fastnesses,  found  them
prepared  to  hold  their  own  with  the  same  obstinacy  as  of  old,  and  they  were

'  Annah  of  Sargon,  II.  101-139;  cf.  Oppert,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  34-37 ;  Winckler,  Die  Keihchrifttexte  Sargonn,  vol.  1.  pp.  20-27.  The  lacunae  In  the
text  of  the  Annals  can  be  partly  filled  in  by  means  of  the  Pastes,  11.  45-47,  72-78  ;  for  the  sequence  of
events,  cf.  Tiele,  Bahijlnnisch-assyr incite  Geechichte,  pp.  265,  26U.

-  No  text  states  positively  that  Arsistis  II.  immediately  succeeded  his  father;  but  he  is  found
mentioned  as  being  Kinf?  of  Urartu  from  708  onwards  (_Fasle8,  1.  113 ;  cf.  infra,  pp.  257,  258),  and
hence  it  has  been  concluded,  not  witliout  some  reason,  that  such  was  the  fact.  Tlie  Vannie  inscrip-
tions have  not  as  yet  given  us  this  sovereign's  name.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  an  impression  of  the  original  seal  which  is  preserved  at  the
Hague;  cf.  J.  Menant,  Catalogue  des  Cylindres  Orienliaix  du  Catnnet  Royal  des  M^dailles  de  La
Ilaye,  pi.  vii.  No.  32;  Lajard,  Introduction  «  V Elude  dii  CuUk  de  Mithra,\)l.  Ixi.  No.  !).


250


SARGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


THE   ASSYRIANS  TAKING   A   MEDIAN   TOWN.'


quite  able  to  safeguard  their  independence  against  an  intruder.  Besides  this,
the  Cimmerians  and  the  Scythians  were  already  pressing  on  their  frontier,  and
were  constantly  harassing  them.  This  fresh  danger  absorbed  their  entire
attention,  and  from  this  time  forward  they  ceased  to  play  a  part  in  general

history ;  the  century  which  had
seen  the  rise  and  growth  of
their  power  was  also  a  witness
of  their  downfall  under  the
attacks  of  Assyria.

During  the  last  months  of
714,  the  tribes  which  had
formerly  constituted  the  king-
dom of  Karalla  mutinied
against  the  tyranny  of  their
governor,  and  invited  Amitash-
shi,  the  brother  of  their  ancient
lord  Assurli,  to  rule  over  them.
Sargon  attacked  them  in  the
spring  of  713,  dispersed  their
troops,  held  them  to  ransom,
and  after  having  once  more  exacted  homage  from  Bit-Dayaukku,^  Ellipi,
and  Allabria,  made  a  raid  extending  as  far  as  the  confines  of  the
Iranian  desert,  the  barren  steppes  of  Eastern  Arabia,^  and  the  district  of
Nagira  belonging  to  the  "  powerful "  Manda.*  While  he  was  thus  prepar-
ing the  way  for  peace  in  his  Median  domains,  one   of  his   generals   crossed

'  Drawn  by  Fauchcr-Gudin,  from  the  facsimile  by  Flandin,  published  in  BoTTA,ie  Monuiitent  de
Ninive,  vol.  ii.  pi.  93.  It  seems  that  this  town  was  called  Amkaru,  and  its  name  appears,  as  far  as  I
know,  in  none  of  the  accounts  which  we  possess  of  the  campaigns.  The  town  was  apparently  situated
in  Karalla  or  in  Median  territory.

-  The  Dayaukku  wlio  gave  his  name  to  this  province  was  at  first  confounded  with  the  personage
who  was  entangled  in  the  affair-s  of  Ullusunu  (cf.  what  is  said  of  him,  pp.  242,  243,  supra),  and
was  then  banished  by  Sargon  to  Hamath  (Fb.  Lenormant,  Leitres  Asstjriologiqucs,  vol.  i.  p.  56,  et  seq. ;
TiELE,  Babylonuch-assyri'che  Geschichte,  p.  263,  note  3;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und
Assyriens,  p.  714;  E.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  AUerlhmns,  vol.  i.  pp.  456,  555).  The  identity  of  the
two  persons  was  disputed  by  G.  Eawlinson  {The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit,  vol.  ii.  p.  383,
note  7)  and  by  Sayce  (E.  Bcnsen,  BihUeche  GleidizMiijlteiten,  p.  142,  et  seq.);  a  good  number  of
historians  now  admit  that  they  were  different  persona  (Delattre,  Le  Peuple  et  I'Empire  des  Medes,
p.  146,  note  1  ;  Winckler,  Vntersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischeit  Geschichte,  pp.  117,  118).  Blt-
Dayaukku  is  evidently  the  district  of  Ecbatana,  as  Oppert  (Le  Peuple  et  la  Langue  des  Medes,  p.  20)
was  the  first  to  point  out;  of.  Winckler,  Vntersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Gesch.,  p.  118.

^  The  Eastern  Arabs  mentioned  here  were  nomadic,  and  inhabited  the  confines  of  the  Great
Desert  to  the  south-east  of  Media  (Delattre,  Le  Peuple  et  I'Empire  des  Medes,  p.  106),  or  the
steppes  of  Northern  Iran  (Winckler,  op.  cit ,  p.  112).  They  are  those  mentioned  in  a  passage  of  Appian
(Syriaca,  §55),  together  with  Parthians,  Bactrians,  and  Tapyrseans,  as  having  submitted  to  Seleucus.

*  The  "  powerful  "Manda,  encamped  in  the  mountain  and  desert  (^nnn/s,  11. 162, 163),  and  who  were
named  after  the  Eastern  Arabs,  must  be  the  peoples  situated  between  the  Caspian  and  the  steppes  of
the  Iranian  plateau,  and  a  branch  of  the  Scythians  who  are  soon  to  appear  in  Asiatic  history.


FOBMATION   OF  AN  ASSYRIAN   PROVINCE  IN  CAPPADOCIA.      251

the  Euphrates  to  chastise  the  Tabal  for  their  ill  deeds.  The  latter  had
figured,  about  the  year  7-10  B.C.,  among  the  peoples  who  had  bowed  before  the
supremacy  of  Urartu,  aud  their  chief,  Uassarmi,  had  been  the  ally  or  vassal  of
Sharduris.  Contemptuously  spared  at  the  taking  of  Arpad,  he  had  not  been
able  to  resign  himself  to  the  Assyrian  yoke,  and  had,  in  an  ill-timed  moment,
thrown  it  off  in  731 ;  he  had,  however,  been  overcome  and  forced  to  surrender,
and  Tiglath-pileser  had  put  in  his  place  a  man  of  obscure  birth,  named  KhulH,
whose  fidelity  had  remained  unshaken  throughout  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  V.
and  the  first  years  of  Sargon.^  Khulli's  son,  Ambaridis,^  the  liusband  of  a
Ninevite  princess,^  who  had  brought  him  as  dowry  a  considerable  part  of
Cilicia,  had  been  unable  to  resist  the  flattering  offers  of  Rusas ;  he  had  broken
the  ties  which  attached  him  to  the  new  Assyrian  dynasty,  but  had  been  left  un-
molested so  long  as  Urartu  and  Muzazir  remained  unshaken,  since  his  position
at  the  western  extremity  of  the  empire  prevented  him  from  influencing  in
the  smallest  degree  the  issue  of  the  struggle,  and  it  was  well  known  that
when  the  fall  of  Eusas  took  place,  Ambaridis  would  be  speedily  brought  to
account.  He  was,  in  fact,  seized,  banished  to  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,  and  his
hereditary  fief  of  Bit-Burutash  annexed  to  Cilicia  under  the  rule  of  an  Assyrian.*
The  following  year  was  signalised  by  a  similar  execution  at  which  Sargon
himself  deigned  to  preside  in  person.  Tarkhunazi,  the  King  of  lliliddu,  not
only  had  taken  advantage  of  the  troubles  consequent  on  the  Armenian  war  to
rebel  against  his  master,  but  had  attacked  Gunzinanu,  who  held,  and  had
ruthlessly  pillaged,  the  neighbouring  district  of  Kauimanu.^  Sargon  overcame
him  in  the  open  field,  took  from  him  his  city  of  Miiiddu,  and  stormed  the  town
of  Tulgarimme  in  which  he  had  taken  refuge."  Here  again  the  native  kingdom
disappeared,  and   was  replaced  by  an   Assyrian   administration.     Kammanu,

'  Cf.  what  is  said  of  this  Uassarmi,  p.  189,  mpra.

■  Tliis  is  the  spelling  of  the  Annah,  1.  168,  but  we  find  also  Ambiiris  (Annah,  1.  175,  Inscrip-
tion den  Faeteg,  1.  2ri)  and  Aniris  (Inscription  ties  Fastes,  1.  31).

'  Wincklor  (Aliur ie nhiUsche  Forschunijeii,  vol.  i.  ]>.  365,  note  3)  is  inclinuJ  to  recognise  iu  tliis
princets  the  ludy  Alilialabisha,  wliom  Sennacherib,  while  still  heir-appurent,  mentions  in  a  despatch
addressed  to  Sargou  (H.  RawlinscIn,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  26,  No   1,  pp.  55-58).

'  AnnaU  iif  Sargon,  II.  168-178:  cf.  Oppebt,  The  Annals  of  Sarijon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  37,  38  ;  Winckleb,  Die  KeMschriftlexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  28-31 ;  Inrcription  des  Fastes,
11.  29-32 ;  cf.  OrPEiiT,  Great  Inscription  in  llie  Palace  of  Khorsahad,  in  Records  of  the  I'ast,  Ist  scr.,
vol.  xi.  p.  67;  WtNCKLER,  Die  KeilschrifUexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  102,  103.

'  Kamnianvi  is  prob.ibly  not  tlie  Kammanene  of  the  (ireek  geographers  (E.  Xoitius,  Assyrian
Dictionary,  v.s.  Kammanu,  p.  573;  Schbauer,  Keilinschriflen  und  Geschichtsforschnnrj,  p.  153),  wbiuh
is  too  lar  north  relatively  to  Jlelitene,  hut  is  probably  Comanii  of  Cappadocia  and  its  district
(Dblattbe,  L'Asie  Ant^rieure,  i>.  65,  and  Encore  un  mot  sur  la  Geographic  .Isiyric/mc,  pp.  31-33).

«  Tulgarimme  has  been  connected  with  the  Togarmah  of  tlio  Uible  {Gen.  x.  3)  by  Hale'vy  and
Delitzseh  (  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  I  p.  246),  and  their  views  on  this  subject  have  been  adopted  by  most
historians  (Fit.  Lenobmant,  Les  (Irigines  de  I'llistoire.  vol.  ii.  p.  41(1;  Wixckleb,  Die  Keilschrifl-
texlc  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  xxix.,  note  5,  and  Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  .issyriens,  p.  246 ;  Hommei.,
Geschichte  liahyloniens  uttd  Assyriens,  p.  715,  note  1  ;  Tiele,  liahylonisch-assyrische  Geschichle,
p.  297;  SCHRADEB,  Die  Keilintchriften  und  das  .ilte  Testament,  1883,  p.  S5).


252  SABGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

wedged  in  between  Urartu  and  Mushki,  separated  these  two  countries,
sometimes  rivals  to  each  other,  but  always  enemies  to  Nineveh.  Its  main-
tenance as  an  independent  kingdom  prevented  them  from  combining  their
efforts,  and  obtaining  that  unity  of  action  which  alone  could  ensure  for
them,  if  not  a  definite  triumph,  at  least  preservation  from  complete  extinction
and  an  opportunity  of  maintaining  their  liberty ;  the  importance  of  the
position,  however,  rendered  it  particularly  perilous  to  hold,  and  the  Assyrians
succeeded  in  so  doing  only  by  strongly  fortifying  it.  Walls  were  built
round  ten  cities,  five  on  the  Urartian  frontier,  three  on  that  of  Mushki,  and
two  on  the  north,  and  the  country  which  they  protected  was  made  into  a  new
province,  that  of  Tulgarimme,  the  district  of  Miliddu  being  confided  to  the
care  of  Mutallu,  Prince  of  Kummukb  (710).i  An  incident  which  took  place
in  the  following  year  furnished  a  pretext  for  completing  the  organisation  and
military  defence  of  this  western  border  province.  Gurgum  had  been  for  thirty
years  or  more  in  the  possession  of  Tarkhulara  ;  this  prince,  after  having  served
Sharduris,  had  transferred  his  homage  to  Tiglath-pileser,-  and  he  had  thence-
forward professed  au  unwavering  loyalty  to  the  Assyrian  sovereigns.  This
accommodating  personage  was  assassinated  by  his  son  Mutallu ;  and  Sargon,
fearing  a  revolt,  hastened,  at  the  head  of  a  detachment  of  picked  troops,  to
avenge  him.  The  murderer  threw  down  his  arms  almost  without  having  struck
a  blow,  and  Gurgum  was  thenceforward  placed  under  the  direct  rule  of
Nineveh.^  The  aftair  had  not  been  brought  to  a  close  before  an  outbreak  took
place  in  Southern  Syria,  which  might  have  entailed  very  serious  consequences
bad  it  not  been  promptly  dealt  with.  Egypt,  united  from  end  to  end  under
the  sceptre  of  Sabaco,  jealously  kept  watch  over  the  political  complications
in  Asia,  and  though  perhaps  she  was  not  sure  enough  of  her  own  strength  to
interfere  openly  before  the  death  of  Rusas,  she  had.  renewed  negotiations  with
the  petty  kingdoms  of  the  Hebrews  and  Philistines.  Ashdod  had  for  some
time  past  showed  signs  of  discontent,  and  it  had  been  found  necessary  to
replace   their  king,  Azuri,  who  had  refused  to  pay  tribute,  by  his  brother

'  Annals  of  Sargon.  11.  178-105  :  cf.  Oppekt,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st
ser.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  38,  39 ;  Winckleb,  Die  KeiUchrifltexte  Sargims,  vol.  i.  pp.  30-33  ;  Inscription  des
Pastes,  11.  78-83 ;  cf.  Oppeut,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsabad,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st
ser.,  vol.  ix.  p.  10;  WiNCKLER,  Die  Keilschriftlexte  Sargons,vul.  i.  pp.  112,  113.  The  scribe  who
drew  up  the  iuscriptions  of  Hall  XIV.  did  nut  understand  the  sequence  of  events,  and  believed  that
Sargon  bad  deprived  Gunzinanu  of  his  territory  (U.  0,  10  ;  cf.  Wincklek,  Die  Keilschriftlexte  Sargons,
vol.  i.  pp.  82,  83) ;  the  scribe  who  had  the  iuscriptions  of  the  gateway  floors  cut  fell  into  the  same
mistake  (iv.  11.  23-27 ;  cf.  Winckleb,  Die  Keihchrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  148,  H9).

-  Cf.  what  is  said  with  regard  to  the  government  of  Gurgum  and  its  prince  under  Tiglath-
pileser  III.,  pp.  121,  148,  149,  supra.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  II.  208-215  :  cf.  Oppebt,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st
ser.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  39-50 ;  Wixckler,  Die  Keilschriftlexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  32-35 ;  Inscription  des  Fastes,
11.  83-89 ;  cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscription  of  the  Palace  of  Khorsabad,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,
vol.  ix.  pp.  12,  13;  Wincklek,  Die  Keihchrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  112-115.


THE  REVOLT  AND    TEE  FALL    OF  ASHDOD.  253

Akhimiti ;  shortly  after  this,  however,  the  people  had  risen  in  rebellion  :  they
had  massacred  Akhimiti,  whom  they  accused  of  being  a  mere  thrall  of
Assyria,  and  had  placed  on  tlie  throne  Yamani,  a  soldier  of  fortune,  probably
an  adventurer  of  Hellenic  extraction.^  The  other  Philistine  cities  had  im-
mediately taken  up  arms ;  Edcm  and  Moab  were  influenced  by  the  general
movement,^  and  Isaiah  was  striving  to  avert  any  imprudent  step  on  the  part
of  Judah.  Sargon  despatched  the  Tartan,^  and  the  rapidity  with  which  that
officer  carried  out  the  campaign  prevented  the  movement  from  spreading
beyond  Philistia.  He  devastated  Ashdod,  and  its  vassal,  Gath,  carried  off  their
gods  and  their  inhabitants,  and  peopled  the  cities  afresh  with  prisoners  from
Asia  Minor,  Urartu,  and  Media.  Yamani  attempted  to  escape  into  Egypt,  but
the  chief  of  Milukhkha  intercepted  him  on  his  way,  and  handed  him  over  in
chains  to  the  conqueror.*  The  latter  took  care  not  to  call  either  Moab,  Edom,
or  Judah  to  account  for  the  part  they  had  taken  in  the  movement,  perhaps
because  they  were  not  mentioned  in  his  instructions,  or  because  he  preferred
not  to  furnish  them,  by  an  untimely  interference,  with  a  pretext  for  calling  in
the  help  of  Egypt.^  The  year  was  doubtless  too  far  advanced  to  allow  him  to
dream  of  marching  against  Pharaoh,  and  moreover  that  would  have  been  one
of  those  important  steps  which  the  king  alone  had  the  right  to  take.  There
was,  however,  no  doubt  that  the  encounter  between  the  two  empires  was
imminent,  and  Isaiah  ventured  to  predict  the  precise  date  of  its  occurrence.
He  walked  stripped  and  barefoot  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem — a  strange

>  This  princL-'s  name,  usually  written  Yamani  {Annah  of  Hall  XIV.,  1. 1 1 ;  Inscription  des  Pastes,
11.  95,  101 ;  Fragment  of  the  Campaign  against  Jshdod.  11.  IS,  40),  is  also  written  Yatuani  in  the  Ammh,
1.  220,  and  this  variation,  which  is  found  again  in  the  name  of  the  island  of  Cyprus  and  the  Cypriotes,
gives  us  grounds  for  believing  that  the  Assyrian  scribe  took  the  race-name  of  thr  prince  for  a  proper
name :  the  new  king  of  Ashdod  would  have  been  a  Yamani,  a  Greek  of  Cyprus  (Winckler,  Die
Keilschr.  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  xxs.,  note  2  ;  Homjiel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  70:>).  Winckler  would  now
be  inclined  to  see  in  this  man  an  Arab,  a  mau  of  Y'emen  (Mmri,  Mduhha,  Ma'in,  i.  p.  26,  note  1).

=  The  Annah  and  the  Fastes  meation  only  the  people  of  Ashdod,  whom  the  scribe  calls  Khati,
probably  from  a  reminiscence  of  the  local  tradition  which  placed  some  of  the  Hittites  in  Southeru
Syria  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Natioyis,  p.  148);  G.  Smith's  fragment  expressly  mentions  along  with  them
the  Philistines,  Judah,  Moab.  Edom,  and  Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt  (11.  29-3G).

"  The  Assyrian  narratives,  as  usual,  give  the  honour  of  conducting  the  campaign  to  the  king
(^Annals.  1.  222,  et  seq. ;  Fattes,  1.  97,  et  seq.).  Isaiah  (xx.  1)  distinctly  says  that  Sargon  sent  the
Tartan  to  quell  the  revolt  of  Ashdod.

*  The  Annah,  11.  225,  226,  state  that  Y'amani  was  made  prisoner  and  taken  to  Assyria.  The
Fastes,  11.  101-103,  more  accurate  on  this  point,  state  that  he  escaped  to  Muzri,  and  that  he  was  given
up  by  the  King  of  Milukhkha.  The  Muzri  mentioned  in  this  passage  would  be,  according  to  Winckler
(AUorientalische  Forxrhungen.  vol.  i.  pp.  27,  28),  the  Arab  district  of  that  name;  but  the  meutiou  of
Pharaoh,  King  of  Muzri,  in  Smith's  fragment  (II.  33,  34),  shows  that  Mu/ri  very  probably  here  means
Egypt ;  Winckler  prefers  to  believe  tliat  Pirn  is  not  the  transcript  of  Pharaoh,  but  the  name  of  the
Arab  prince  of  Muzri  {Musri,  Meluhha,  Ma'in,  i.  pp.  2-4,  14,  15).

^  Annah  of  Sargon,  11.  215-228  :  cf.  OpPEiiT,  The  Annah  of  Sargon,  in  liccords  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vii.  p.  40;  Wincki.kb,  Die  Keilschrifttexte Sargons,  vol.i.  pp.  36-39;  Inscrip.des  Fastes,U. dO-lOO;  cf.
Oppeht,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsabad,  in  Ilecords  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  11,12;
Wi-NCKLER,  Vie  Keilsehrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  114-117.  A  fragment  of  the  Annah,  discovered
by  G.  Smith  {Assyrian  History,  in  the  Zeiltchrift,  1869,  p.  107),  published  by  Winckler  (pp.  cit.,  vol.  i.
pp.  186-189),  gives  a  fully  detailed  account  of  the  campaign ;  unfortunately  it  is  much  mutilated.


254  SAEOON  ir.    OF  ASSYRIA.

procedure  which  he  explained  by  the  words  which  Jahveh  had  put  into  his
lips:  "Like  as  My  servant  Isaiah  bath  walked  naked  and  barefoot  three  years
for  a  sign  and  a  wonder  upon  Egypt  and  upon  Kush  (Ethiopia) ;  so  shall  the
Kino-  of  Assyria  lead  away  the  captives  of  Egypt  and  the  exiles  of  Kush,  young
and  old,  naked  and  barefoot,  and  with  buttocks  uncovered,  to  the  shame  of
Egypt.  And  they  shall  be  dismayed  and  ashamed,  because  of  Kush  their
expectation,  and  of  Egypt  their  glory.  And  the  inhabitants  of  this  coastlaud
shall  say  in  that  day.  Behold,  such  is  our  expectation,  whither  we  fled  for  help
to  be  delivered  from  the  King  of  Assyria  :  and  we,  how  shall  we  escape  ?  "  '

The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  did  not  take  place  as  quickly  as  the
prophet  perhaps  desired.  Egypt  appeared  too  strong  to  be  openly  attacked  by
a  mere  section  of  the  battalions  at  the  disposal  of  Assyria,  and  besides,  it  may
have  been  deemed  imprudent  to  involve  the  army  to  any  serious  extent
on  so  distant  a  field  as  Africa,  when  Babylon  was  ready  and  waiting  to  fall
upon  the  very  heart  of  Assyria  at  the  first  news  of  a  real  or  supposed  reverse.
Circumstances  seemed,  moreover,  to  favour  a  war  against  Merodach-baladan.^
This  sovereign,  who  had  been  received  with  acclamation  by  the  Babylonians,
had  already  lost  the  popularity  he  had  enjoyed  at  his  accession.  The  tickle
character  of  the  people,  which  made  them  nearly  always  welcome  a  fresh
master  with  enthusiasm,  soon  led  them  from  love  and  obedience  to  hatred,  and
finally  to  revolt.  Slerodach-baladan  trusted  to  the  Kalda^  to  help  him  to
maintain  his  position,  and  their  rude  barbarity,  even  if  it  protected  him
against  the  fickleness  of  his  more  civilised  subjects,  increased  the  discontent  at
Kutha,  Sippar,  and  Borsippa.  He  removed  the  statues  of  the  gods  from  these
towns,  imprisoned  the  most  turbulent  citizens,  confiscated  their  goods,  and  dis-
tributed them  among  his  own  followers ;  ^  the  other  cities  took  no  part  in  the
movement,  but  Sargon  must  have  expected  to  find  in  them,  if  not  effective
support,  at  least  sympathies  which  would  facilitate  his  work  of  conquest.  It  is
true  that  Elam,  whose  friendship  for  the  Aramaean  was  still  undiminished,

'  lea.  XX.

'  The  early  Assyriologists  did  not  really  understand  the  true  nature  of  this  war.  They  looked
upon  Merodach-baladan  as  the  lawful  King  of  Babylon,  and  Fr.  Lenormant  made  him  a  Chaldsean
patriot  (Les  Premieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  p.  202,  et  seq.),  wlio  was  defending  his  fatherland  against
the  invader.  The  real  origin  of  Merodaeli-baladan,  the  part  lie  played  at  Babylon,  and  the  reasons
for  his  impotence,  were  brought  to  liglit  for  the  first  time  by  Delattub,  Les  Chald^ens  jusqu'a  la
formation  de  l' Empire  de  liabuchodonosor,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  9-12,  and  Le  Feuple  et  V Empire  des  Medes,
pp.  109-190 ;  then  by  Tiele,  Bahylonisch-assyrische  Oeschichte,  pp.  277-279 ;  and  by  Wixckler,  Unter-
suchungen  zur  Allorientalischeti  GeichiMe,  pp.  55, 56.  For  tlie  question  as  to  priority,  cf.  Delattue,  Un
nouveau  Litre  sur  I'Histoire  Ancienne  de  V Orient,  1889,  p.  12,  and  Les  Chald^ens  jusqu'a  la  formation
de  V Empire  de  Nahuclwdonosor,  preedide considerations  sur  un  lucent  livre  de  j¥.  Hugo  Winclder,  1889,
xii.-25  p. ;  Winckler,  P/agjat  ?  Anticort  avf  die  von  A.  J.  Delattre  S.  J.  gegen  mich  erhohenen  Besehul-
digimgen,  1889, 20  p. ;  and  finally,  Delattre,  Eeponse  au  plaidoyer  de  M.  Hugo  ^yinclshr,  1S89,  p.  20.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  235-238,  300,  361 ;  Inscription  des  Pastes,  11.  121-125,  134-137.

*  For  these  facts,  cf.  the  passage  in  the  Annals,  359-364,  where  the  victorious  Sargon  relates  how
he  undid  the  work  of  Merodach-baladan.


THE  DEFEAT  OF  SHUTRUK-NAEHUNTA   II.  255

remained  (o  be  reckoned  with,  but  Elam  had  lost  much  of  its  prestige  in  the
last  few  years.  Tlie  aged  Khumban-igash  had  died  in  717,^  and  his  successor,
Shutiuk-nakhunta,  had  not  apparently  inherited  all  the  energy  of  his  father,^
and  it  is  possible  that  troubles  had  arisen  among  the  vassals  of  his  own
kingdom  which  prevented  him  from  interfering  on  behalf  of  his  ally.  Sargon
took  account  of  all  these  circumstances  in  arranging  his  plan  of  campaign.  He
divided  his  army  into  two  forces,  one  of  which,  under  his  own  command,  was
to  be  directed  against  Merodach-baladan,  wliile  the  other  was  to  attack  the
insurgent  Aramaeans  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and  was  to  be  manoeuvred
so  as  to  drive  Shutruk-nakhunta  back  on  the  marshes  of  the  Uknu.^  The
eastern  force  was  the  first  to  be  set  in  movement,  and  it  pushed  forward  into
the  territory  of  the  Gambulu.  These  latter  had  concentrated  themselves  round
Dur-Atkharas,  one  of  their  citadels;^  they  had  increased  the  height  of  the
walls,  and  filled  the  ditches  with  water  brought  from  the  Shurappu  by  means
of  a  canal,  and  having  received  a  reinforcement  of  600  horsemen  and  4000  foot
soldiers,  they  had  drawn  them  up  in  front  of  the  ramparts.  A  single  morning
sufficed  to  disperse  them,  and  the  Assyrians,  entering  the  city  with  the  fugitives,
took  possession  of  it  on  the  same  day.  They  made  16,490  prisoners,  and  seized
horses,  mules,  asses,  camels,  and  both  sheep  and  oxen  in  large  numbers.  Eight
of  the  chiefs  of  the  neighbourhood,  who  ruled  over  the  flat  country  between  the
Shurappu  and  the  Uknu,  begged  for  mercy  as  soon  as  they  learned  the  result
of  the  engagement.     The  name  of  Dur-Atkharas  was  changed  to  that  of  Dur-

'  The  date  of  the  death  of  Khumban-ifiash  is  indirectly  given  in  the  passage  of  the  Babylonian
Chronicle  of  Pinchee,  col.  ii.  32-34,  where  it  is  said  that  iu  tlie  first  year  of  Asbshur-nadiu-shumu,
King  of  Babylon,  Ishtar-khundu  (=  Shutruk-nakhunta)  was  dethroned  by  his  brother,  Khallushu,
after  having  reigned  over  Elam  eighteen  years :  these  events  actually  took  place,  as  we  shall  see
below  (cf  p.  299,  infra),  about  the  year  099  before  our  era.

•  Shutruk-Dakhunta  is  the  Susiau  form  of  the  name  (cf.  supra,  pp.  127,  128);  the  Assyrian  texts
distort  it  into  Shutur-nankhundi  (Annals  of  Sargon,  II.  271, 286,  292,  406  ;  Inscription  des  Fastes,  1. 119),
and  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  ii.  11.  32,  31,  into  Ishtar-khundu,  owing  to  a  faint
resemblance  iu  the  sound  of  the  name  of  the  goddess  Ishtar  with  the  form  Shutur,  Sthur,  itself
derived  from  Shutnik,  witii  which  the  name  began.

'  Tlie  earlier  historians  of  Assyria,  misled  in  the  first  jilaca  by  tlie  form  in  which  the  scribes  have
banded  down  the  account  in  the  Annals  and  the  Fastes,  assumed  the  existence  of  a  single  army,  led
by  Sargon  himself,  and  which  would  have  marched  on  all  the  above-mentioned  places  of  the  country,
one  by  one.  Tide  was  the  first  to  recognise  that  Sargon  must  have  left  part  of  his  forces  to  the
command  of  one  of  his  heuteneitita  (Babylunisch-assyrische  G<«cAic7((f',  p.  273).  and  Winckler,  enlarging
on  this  idea,  showed  that  there  were  then  two  armies,  engaged  at  liitlercnt  seats  of  war,  but
manoeuvring  as  far  as  possible  by  mutual  arrangement  (Die  Keilschriftlexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  xxviii.,
note  1  ;  cf  Billerbeck,  Susa,  pp.  79-81,  where  one  of  the  two  armies,  culled  by  the  author  the  army
of  the  north,  is  taid  to  have  been  itself  divided  into  two  corps).

«  The  site  of  Dur-.\tkharas  is  unknown,  billerbeck  places  it  hypotbetically  ou  the  stream  of
Mendeli  (Susa,  p.  80),  and  his  conjecture  is  in  itself  very  plausible.  I  shuuld  incline,  however,  to  place
it  more  to  the  south,  on  account  of  the  passage  in  which  it  is  said  that  the  Kalda,  to  complete  the  de-
fences of  tlie  town,  brought  a  canal  from  the  Shurappu  and  fortified  its  bunks.  The  Shurappu,  accorJing
to  Delitzsch,  would  be  the  Sliatt  Umm-el-Jemai  ( Il'o  lag  das  Parodies  -f  p.  r.»5) ;  according  to  Delattre,
the  Kerkha(Xeg  Traraux  hydrauliquea  en  Buhylonie,  p.  39,  n.  4);  the  account  of  tho  campaign  under
consideration  would  lead  me  to  recognise  in  it  a  watercourse  like  the  Tib,  which  runs  into  tlio  Tigris
near  Aman,  in  which  case  the  ruins  of  Khertb  would  perhaps  correspond  with  the  site  of  Dur-Atkharas.


256  SASGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

Nebo,  the  territory  of  the  Gambulu  was  converted  into  a  province,  and  its
organisation  having  been  completed,  the  army  continued  its  march,  sweeping
before  it  the  Eua,  the  Khindaru,  the  Puqudu,  in  short,  all  the  tribes  occupying
the  district  of  Yatbur.^  The  cliiefs  of  these  provinces  sought  refuge  in  the
morasses  of  the  lower  Kerkha,  but  finding  themselves  surrounded  and  short  of
provisions,  tiiey  were  forced  by  famine  to  yield  to  the  enemy,  and  came
to  terms  with  the  Assyrians,  who  imposed  a  tribute  on  them  and  included  them
within  the  new  province  of  Gambulu.  The  goal  of  this  expedition  was  thus
attained,  and  Elam  separated  from  Karduniash,  but  the  issue  of  the  war
remained  undecided  as  long  as  Shutruk-nakhunta  held  the  cities  at  the  edge
of  the  plain,  from  which  he  could  emerge  at  will  into  the  heart  of  the
Assyrian  position.  The  conqueror  therefore  turned  in  that  direction,  rapidly
took  from  him  the  citadels  of  Shamuna  and  Babduri,  then  those  of  Lakhi-
rimmu  and  Pillutu,  and  pitched  his  camp  on  the  bank  of  the  Naditi,  from
whence  he  despatched  marauding  bands  to  pillage  the  country.  Dismay  spread
throughout  the  district  of  Eashi ;  the  inhabitants,  abandoning  their  cities —
Til-Khumba,  Durmishamash,  Bubi,  and  Khamanu — migrated  as  far  as  Bit-
Imbi ;  Shutruk-nakhunta,  overcome  with  fear,  took  refuge,  so  it  was  said,  in
the  distant  mountains  to  preserve  his  life.^  Sargon,  meanwhile,  had  crossed
the  Euphrates  with  the  other  force,  and  had  marched  straight  upon  Bit-
Dakkuri ;  having  there  noticed  that  the  fortress  of  Dur-Ladinu  was  in  ruins,
be  rebuilt  it,  and,  firmly  installed  within  the  heart  of  the  country,  he  patiently
waited  until  the  eastern  force  had  accomplished  its  mission.  Like  his
adversary,  Merodach-baladan,  he  had  no  desire  to  be  drawn  into  an  engage-
ment until  he  knew  what  chance  there  was  of  the  latter  being  reinforced  by
the  King  of  Elam.  At  the  opening  of  hostilities  Merodach-baladan  claimed
the  help  of  the  Elamite  king,  and  lavished  on  him  magnificent  presents
— a  couch,  a  throne,  a  portable  chair,  a  cup  for  the  royal  offerings,  and  his
own  pectoral  chain ;  these  all  reached  their  destination  in  good  condition,  and
were   graciously  accepted.     But  before  long  the  Elamite  prince,  threatened

'  For  these  peoples,  cf.  p.  110,  supra.

-  None  of  these  places  can  be  identified  with  certainty.  So  far  as  I  can  follow  the  account  of  this
campaign  on  the  map,  it  seems  that  the  attacks  upon  Shutruk-nakhunta  took  place  on  the  plain  and
in  the  mountains  between  the  Ah-i-Gengir  and  the  Tib,  so  that  the  river  Naditi  would  be  the  Aftah
or  one  of  its  tributaries.  If  this  were  so,  Lakhirimmu  and  Pillutu  would  be  situated  somewhere  near
the  Jughai  ben  Euan  and  the  Tepe  Ghulamen  of  de  Morgan's  map  of  Elam,  Shamuna  near  Zirzir-tepi,
Babduri  near  Hosseinijeh.  But  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  thiit  I  do  not  consider  these  comparisons  as
more  than  simple  conjectures.  Bil-lmbi  was  certainly  out  of  the  reacli  of  the  Assyrians,  since  it
was  used  as  a  place  of  refuge  by  the  inhabitants  of  Rashi ;  at  the  same  time  it  must  have  been  close
to  Eashi,  since  the  people  of  this  country  fled  thither.  The  site  of  Ghilan  which  de  Morgan  has
adopted  on  his  map  seems  to  me  to  be  too  far  north  to  comply  with  these  conditions,  and  that  of  Tapa,
approved  by  Billerbeck  {Susa,  p.  73),  too  southerly.  If,  as  I  believe,  Kashi  corresponds  to  the  regions
of  Pushti-kuh  which  lie  on  both  sides  of  the  upper  waters  of  the  Meudeli  stream,  we  ought  to  look
for  Bit-Imbi  somewhere  near  the  Desht-1-Ghoaur  and  the  Zenjan,  near  a  point  whore  communication
with  the  banks  of  the  Ab-i-Kitind  would  be  easy.


TEE  CONQUEST  OF  BABYLON.  257

in  bis  own  domain,  forgot  everything  except  his  own  personal  safety,
and  declared  himself  unable  to  render  Merodach-baladan  any  assistance.
The  latter,  on  receiving  this  news,  threw  himself  with  his  face  in  the  dust,
rent  his  clothes,  and  broke  out  into  loud  weeping;  after  which,  conscious
that  liis  strength  would  not  permit  of  his  meeting  the  enemy  in  the  open
field,  he  withdrew  his  men  from  the  other  side  of  the  Tigris,  escaped  secretly
by  night,  and  retired  with  his  troops  to  the  fortress  of  Ikbibel.  The  inhabi-
tants of  Babylon  and  Borsippa  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  disconcerted  ;
they  brought  the  arks  of  Bel,  Zarpanit,  Nebo,  and  Tashmit  out  of  their
sanctuaries,  and  came  forth  with  chanting  and  musical  instruments  to  salute
Sargon  at  Dur-Ladiiui.  He  entered  the  city  in  their  company,  and  after
he  had  celebrated  the  customary  sacrifices,  the  people  enthroned  him  in
Merodach-baladan's  palace.  Tribute  was  oifered  to  him,  but  he  refused  to
accept  any  part  of  it  for  his  personal  use,  and  applied  it  to  a  work  of  public
utility — the  repairing  of  the  ancient  canal  of  Borsippa,  which  had  become
nearly  filled  up.  This  done,  he  detached  a  body  of  troops  to  occupy  Sippara,
and  returned  to  Assyria,  there  to  take  up  his  winter  quarters.^

Once  again,  therefore,  the  ancient  metropolis  of  the  Euphrates  was  ruled  by
an  Assyrian,  who  united  in  one  protocol  the  titles  of  the  sovereigns  of  Assur
and  Karduniash.  Babylon  possessed  for  the  kings  of  Nineveh  the  same  kind
of  attraction  as  at  a  later  date  drew  the  German  Caesars  to  Eome.  Scarcely
had  the  Assyrian  monarchs  been  crowned  within  their  own  domains,  than  they
turned  their  eyes  towards  Babylon,  and  their  ambition  knew  no  rest  till  the
day  came  for  them  to  present  themselves  in  pomp  within  the  temple  of  its  god
and  implore  his  solemn  consecration.  When  at  length  they  had  received  it,
they  scrupulously  secured  its  renewal  on  every  occasion  which  the  law
prescribed,  and  their  chroniclers  recorded  among  the  important  events  of
the  year,  the  ceremony  in  which  they  "  took  the  hand  of  Bel."  Sargon  there-
fore returned,  in  the  month  Nisan  of  the  year  709,  to  preside  over  the  procession
of  the  god,  and  he  devoutly  accomplished  the  rites  which  constituted  him  the
legitimate  successor  of  the  semi-fabulous  heroes  of  the  old  empire,  foremost
among  whom  was  his  namesake  Sliargani  of  Agadc.^  He  oifered  sacrifices  to
Bel,  Nebo,  and  to  the  divinities  of  Sumir  and  Akkad,  and  he  did  not  return
to  the  camp  until  he  liad  fulfilled  all  the  duties  incumbent  on  his  new  dignity.

'  Aiuiah  of  Sargon,  11.  228-lilG  :  of.  OiTEiiT,  The  Annals  of , Sargon,  in  the  Becords  of  the  Putt,  Ut
ser.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  40-4G ;  Winckler,  Die  Keihchriflttxle  Sanjonn,  vol.  i.  pp.  38-55.  The  Annnh,  in  spite
of  the  mutilation  they  have  sufl'ercd,  are  the  only  docuraentB  wliieh  furnish  us  with  an  almost  com-
plete picture  of  this  campiiign.  In  the  Fasten  the  events  »ro  distributeil  under  various  headings,
aud  the  narrative  is  greatly  abridged  (11.  18-21,  121-126,  140-111);  the  Larnaha  Stele  merely  gives
an  account  of  the  entry  into  Babylon  (c<d.  ii.  11.  1-22).

'  As  to  Shargani  of  Agadc  (Sargon  I.),  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  59(5-599.


258  SABGON  II.    OF  ASSTBIA.

He  was  involved  that  year  in  two  important  wars  at  opposite  points  of  his
empire.     One   was  at  the  north-western  extremity,  against  the  Mushki  and
their  king  Mita,  who,  after  having  supported  Kiisas,  was  now  intriguing  with
Argistis  Tthe  other  in  the  south-east,  against  the  Kalda,  and  probably  also
against  Elara.     He  entrusted  the  conduct  of  the  former  to  the  governor  of
Kui,  but  reserved  to  himself  the  final  reckoning  with  Merodach-baladan.     The
Babylonian  king  had  made  good   use  of  the  respite  given  him  during  the
winter  months.     Too  prudent  to  meet  his  enemy  in  the  open  plain,  lie  had
transformed  his  hereditary  principality  into  a  formidable  citadel.     During  the
preceding  campaign  he  had  devastated  the  whole  of  the  country  lying  between
the  marshes  and  the  territory  occupied  by  the  Assyrians,  and  had  withdrawn
the    inhabitants.      Most   of    the    towns— Ikbibel,     Uru,   Uruk,  Kishik,   and
Nimid-laguda— were  also  deserted,  and  no  garrisons  were  left  in  them.     He
had  added   to  the   fortifications   of  Dur-Yakin,i   and  enlarged  the  moat  till
it  was  two  hundred  cubits  wide  and  eighteen  deep,  so  as  to  reach  the  level
of  infiltration  ;  he  then  turned  into  it  the  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  so  that
the  town  appeared  to  be  floating  on  a  lake,  without  either  bridges  or  quays
by  means  of  which  the  besiegers  might  have  brought  their  machines  within
range  and  their  troops  been  able  to  approach  for  an  assault.    Merodach-baladan
had  been  careful  not  to  shut  himself  within  the  town,  but  had  taken  up  a
position   in   the   marshes,  and    there   awaited  the   arrival  of  the    Assyrians.
8argon,  having  left  Babylon  in  the  month  of  lyyar,  encountered  him  within
sight  of  Dur-Yakin.     The  Aramfean  infantry  were  crushed  by  repeated  charges
from  the  Ninevite  chariotry  and  cavalry,  who  pursued  the  fugitives  to  the
outer  side  of  the  moat,  and  seized  the  camp  with  all  its  baggage  and  the
royal  train,  including  the  king's  tent,  a  canopy  of  solid  silver  which  protected
the  throne,  his  sceptre,  weapons,  and  stores  of  all  kinds.     The  peasants,  to  the
number  of  90,580,  crowded  within  the  lines,  also  fell  into  their  hands,  together
with  their  flocks  and  herds — 2.500  horses,  610  mules,  and  854  camels,  as  well  as
sheep,  oxen,  and  asses  ;  the  remainder  of  the  fugitives  rushed  within  the  outworks
for  refuge  "  like  a  pack  of  wild  boars,"  and  finally  were  driven  into  the  interior
of  the  place,  or  scattered  among  the  beds  of  reeds  along  the  coast.     Sargon  cut
down  the  groves  of  palm  trees  which  adorned  the  suburbs,  and  piled  up  their
trunks  in  the  moat,  thus  quickly  forming  a  causeway  right  up  to  the  walls.
Merodach-baladan  had  been  wounded  in  the  arm  ^  during  the  engagement,  but,
nevertheless,  fought  stubbornly  in  defence  of  his  city ;  when  be  saw  that  its

'  As  to  the  position  occupied  by  Dur-Yakin,  near  the  modern  town  of  Qornah,  cf.  p.  225,  suj)ra.

'  The  IiiscripdoH  des  Fastes,  11.  IHo,  134,  states  that  he  was  made  prisoner  with  all  his  family;
the  text  of  the  Anmils,  1.  349,  admits  that  he  escaped.  We  shall  find  him  reappearing  again  at  the
beginning  of  the  reign  of  Sennnacherib  ;  cf.  pp.  274,  275,  infra.


SUBMISSION  OF  THE  MUSHKI  AND  OF  THE  GREEKS  OF  CYPRUS.      259

fall  was  inevitable,  he  fled  to  the  other  side  of  the  gulf,  and  took  refuge  among
the  mud  flats  of  the  Lower  Ulai.  Sargon  set  fire  to  Dur-Yakio,  levelled  its
towers  and  walls  with  the  ground,  and  demolished  its  houses,  temples,  and
palaces.  It  had  been  a  sort  of  penal  settlement,  to  which  the  Kalda  rulers
used  to  consign  those  of  their  subjects  belonging  to  the  old  aboriginal  race,
who  had  rendered  themselves  obnoxious  by  their  wealth  or  independence
of  character ;  the  number  of  these  prisoners  was  considerable,  Babylon,  Bor-
sippa,  Nipur,  and  Sippar,  not  to  speak  of  Uru,  Uruk,  Eridu,  Larsam,  and
Kishik,  having  all  of  them  furnished  their  share.  Sargon  released  them  all,
and  restored  their  gods  to  the  temples  ;  he  expelled  the  nomads  from  the  estates
which,  contrary  to  all  justice,  had  been  distributed  among  them  in  preceding
years,  and  reinstated  the  former  owners.  Karduniash,  which  had  been
oppressed  for  twelve  long  years  by  a  semi-barbarian  despot,  now  breathed
again,  and  hailed  Sargon  as  its  deliverer,  while  he  on  his  part  was  actively  en-
gaged in  organising  his  conquest.  The  voluntary  submission  of  Upiri,  Kin"-
of  Dilmun,^  who  lived  isolated  in  the  open  sea,  "  as  though  in  a  bird's  nest,"
secured  to  Sargon  possession  of  the  watercourses  which  flowed  beyond
the  Chaldseau  lake  into  the  Persian  Gulf:  no  sooner  had  he  obtained  it
than  he  quitted  the  neighbourhood  of  Dur-Yakin,  crossed  the  Tigris,  and
reinforced  the  garrisons  which  lined  his  Elamite  frontier  on  this  side.  He
had  just  finished  building  a  strongly  fortified  citadel  on  the  site  of  Sagbat,'^
when  ambassadors  arrived  from  Mita.^  The  governor  of  Kui  had  at  length
triumjjhed  over  the  obstinacy  of  the  Mushki,  and  after  driving  them  from
village  to  village,  had  compelled  them  to  sue  for  terms :  the  tidings  of  the
victories  over  the  Kalda  had  doubtless  hastened  their  decision,  but  they
were  still  so  powerful  that  it  was  thought  wiser  not  to  impose  too
rigorous  conditions  upon  them.  Mita  agreed  to  pay  tribute,  and  surrendered
one  or  two  districts,  which  were  turned  into  an  Aramaean  settlement :  the
inhabitants  were  transferred  to  Bit-Yakin,  where  they  had  to  make  the  best
they  cijuld  of  lands  that  had  been  devastated  by  war.^  At  this  juncture  the
Greeks  of  Cyprus  flattered  the  pride  of  the  Assyrians  in  a  most  unexpected

'  As  to  the  site  of  Dilmun,  cf.  X>a«7«  of  Chilization,  p.  562,  note  7.

'  Tliis  Sagbat,  which  must  not  be  confused  with  the  district  of  Bit-S.igbnti  mentioned  in  the
reign  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  seems  to  correspond  with  a  post  to  tlic  south  of  Uurihi,  perhaps  tlie  ruins
of  Baksayeh,  on  the  Tcheugula.

'  ^iina/s  o/.s'arjon,  11.  317-371 :  cf.  Opi'EKT,  The  Annah  nf  Sargon,  in  the  Records  of  the  Pust,
1st  ser.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  ll>-49;  W'incklei;,  Vie  Krilnchri/ttej^te  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  51-63.  An  abridged
narrative  of  the  same  events  is  found  in  the  Inscription  den  Fastes,  11.  l'J6-138,  141,  145 :  cf.  Oppekt,
Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khoreabad,  in  the  Jiecordt  of  the  Pa»t,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  14-17;
WiNCKLEit,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  120-125,  12(j,  127.

'  Annah  of  Sargon,  11.  371-383:  cf.  Oppert,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,
Ist  ser.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  49.  50;  Winckler;  Die  Keilschrlfttexte  Sargonf,  vol.  i.  pp.  tj2-G5;  Inscription
dts  Faftis,  11.  149-153;  cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khorsahad,  in  the  Records  of
the  Patt,  let  ser.,  vol.  i.x.  pp.  17,  18;  Wincklek,  Die  Keilschriftlexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  126-129.


260


SARGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


STELE  AT  LAKNAKA.'


way :  after  the  manner  of  their  race  they  scoured  the  seas,

and   their  fleets  persistently  devastated   the   coasts  of

Syria  and  Cilicia.^     Seven  of  their  kings  were  so  far

alarmed  by  the  report  of  Sargon's  achievements  as  to

dread  punishment  for  their  misdeeds.     They  therefore

sent  him  presents,  and,  for  the  moment,  abandoned  their

piratical  expeditions  in  Phoenician  waters.     The  homage

of  these  inveterate  robbers  raised  Sargon  in  his  own  eyes

and  in  those  of  his  subjects.^     Some  years  later,  about

708  B.C.,  he  presented  them  with  a  stele  of  black  marble,

on  which  he  had  engraved  his  own  portrait,  together  with

a  long  inscription  setting  forth  his  most  glorious  exploits.

They  set  it  up  at  Kition  (Citium),  where  it  has  been  jire-

served  amongst    the  ruins,  a   priceless   witness   to  the

greatness  of  Assyria.*

While  war  thus  raged  around  him,  Sargon  still  found

time  for  works  of  a  peaceful  character.     He  set  himself

to  remodel  and  complete  the  system  of  irrigation  in  the

Assyrian  plain ;  he  repaired  the  dykes,  and  cleaned  out

and  made  good  the  beds  of  the  canals  which  had  been

neglected  during   the   troublous  times  of  the  last  generation.''     He  erected

buildings    at    Calah  ^    and    at   Nineveh,''    but     in    these    cities   everything

seemed  to  recall  too  vividly  the  memory  of  the  sovereigns  who  had  gone  before

him :  he  wished  for  a  capital  which  should  belong  to  himself  alone,  where  he

would  not  be  reminded  of  a  past  in  which  he  had  no  part.^     After  meditating

'  Their  misdeeds  are  indicated  in  the  Cylinder  Inscription  (I.  21;  cf.  Lyon,  KeiUchrifliexie
Sargcms,  pp.  32,  33),  wliich  was  first  accurately  explained  by  Fr.  Delitzsch  (Wo  lag  das  Paradies'!
p.  248),  and  in  which  Sargon  boasts  that  he  has  "  torn  the  Ionian  from  the  midst  of  the  seas  and
thus  restored  peace  to  the  countries  of  Kui  and  Tyre."

^  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  3S3-388  :  cf.  Oppert,  Tlie  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  Ist  ser.,
vol.  vii.  p.  51 ;  Wisckler,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-66 ;  Inscrip.  des  Pastes,  11. 145-149,
where  Winckler  (Eeilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  ix.,  note  C,  and  Altorient.  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  367,
note  1)  regards  the  Assyrian  expression  la-nagi  as  a  blundering  transcription  of  the  Greelc  'Iodvik-^.

'  Larnaka  Stele,  col.  ii.  11.  43-62 ;    cf.  Winckler,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  182,  183.
This  stele  was  discovered  at  Larnaka,  and  is  now  in  the  Berlin  Museum.
*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  the  plaster  cast  in  the  Louvre.

'  Cylinder  Inscription,  11.  36,  37  :  cf.  Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Dour-SarJMyan,  in  Place,  Ninive
et  VAssyrie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  296,  297  ;  Lyon,  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  pp.  34,  35.  As  to  works  of  the  same
nature  carried  out  in  Babylon,  cf.  Atinals,  11.  302-304.

"  At  C.ilali,  he  lived  in  an  old  palace  of  Assur-nazir-pal  restored  and  adapted  for  his  use,  as
shown  by  the  inscription  published  by  Latard,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Cliaracters,  pi.  xxxiii.
11.  13-22 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  170-173.

"  Inscription  on  the  Bricks  at  Kouyunjih  (in  H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  6,  No.  7 ;
cf.  WiNOELER,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  193),  relating  to  the  rebuilding  of  a  temple
of  Nebo  and  Mardnk.

'  The  account  of  the  building  of  Dur-Sharrukin  is  to  be  found  in  a  more  or  less  complete  form  at
the  end  of  all  Sargon's  historical  inscriptions,  e.g.  in  the  Annuls,  11.  414-460,  in  the  Inscription  des
Pastes,  11.  153-194,  in  the  Annals  of  Room  XIV.,  11.  65-89,  in  the  Inscription  on  the  Pavement  of  the


BUILD  IN  as  AT  DUR-SHAREUKIN.


261


day  and  night,  his  choice  fell  upon  the
village  of  Maganubbii,  a
little  to  the  north-east  of
Nineveh,  in  a  wide  plain
which  extends  from  the
banks  of  the  Khuzur  to  the
hills  of  Muzri,  and  by  a  single
decree  he  pxpropriated  all
its  inhabitants.  He  then
built  on  the  land  which  he
had  purchased  from  them  a
city  of  unrivalled  magnifi-
cence, which  he  called  by  his
own  name,  Dur-Sharrukin.^
The  ground  plan  of  it  is  of
rectangular  shape,  the  sides
being  about  1900  yards  long
by  1800  yards  wide,  each
corner  exactly  facing  one  of
the  four  points  of  the  com-
pass.^ Its  walls  rest  on  a
limestone  sub-structure  some  three  feet  six  inches  high,  and  rise  fifty-seven  feet
above  the  ground  ;  they  are  strengthened,  every  thirty  yards  or  so,  by  battle-
mented  towers  which  project  thirteen  feet  from  the  face  of  the  wall  and  stand
sixteen  feet  higher  than  the  ramparts.''     Access  was  gained  to  the  interior  by

Gatet,  ii.  11.  18^4,  iii.  11.  23-45,  iv.  11.  90-158,  v.  11.  28-39,  iu  the  Cylinder  Inscription,  11.  11-71,  in
the  Inscription  of  the  Bulls.  11.  39-107  ;  the  Inscription  on  the  Reverse  of  the  Slabs  is  devoted  to  it,  as
is  also  that  of  the  Foundation  Tablets.

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  iU,  415.  In  most  of  the  texts  the  village  of  Magannbba  is  not  named ;  it
is  mentioned  in  the  Cylinder  Inscription,  1.  44,  and  this  document  is  the  only  one  which  furnishes
details  of  the  expropriation,  etc.  (11.  44-52  ;  cf.  Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Vour-Sarkaydn,  in  Place,
Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29G,  297  ;  Lyon,  Keilschrifttexle  Surgons,  pp.  34-37).  The  modern
name  of  the  place  is  Khorsabad,  the  city  of  Khosroes,  but  the  name  of  its  founder  was  still  associated
with  its  ruins,  in  the  time  of  Yakut,  who  mentions  him  under  the  name  of  Sarghun.  It  was  first
explored  in  1843  by  Botta,  wlio  published  tlie  result  of  his  excavations  in  S(.'vural  works  of  very
varied  range,  in  Lettres  sur  les  dgcouvertes  de  Khorsabad,  and  iu  Le  Monument  de  Ninii-e,  1S4G-1S30  ;
then  by  Place  and  Oppert,  whose  researches  are  embodied  in  the  three  volumes  entitled  Ninive  et
VAasyrie,  1800-1809.  The  antiquities  collected  there  by  Botta  and  Place  constitute  the  bulk  of  the
Assyrian  Museum  in  the  Louvre  ;  unfortunately,  a  part  of  the  objects  collected  by  Place  went  to  the
bottom  of  the  Tigris  with  the  lighter  wliich  was  carrying  them.

'  Reduction  by  Fauchor-Gudin,  from  the  plan  published  in  Place,  Ninive  et  VAstyrie,  pi.  2.

'  Place,  Ninire  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pj).  100,  101.  Botta  mistook  the  site  for  a  "paradise  "  belong-
ing to  the  palace  ;  Place  recognised  it  as  the  actual  site  of  the  city  itself  {Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.
pp.  153-157).

*  Place,  Ninive  el  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  1 01  -107.  Place  reckoned  the  height  of  the  wall  at  75  feet,
a  measurement  adopted  by  Perrot  and  Chipiez  (Hisloire  de  I' Art  dans  lAntiquitiT,  vol.  ii.  p.  478);
Dieulufoy  has  shown  that  the  lieight  of  the  wall  must  be  reduced  to  47  feet,  and  that  of  the  towers
about  Go  feet  (VAcropde  de  Suse,  p.  178).


f^imz^sMm^S^


PLAN  OP   THE   ROYAL  CITT  OP  DUR-SBARRUKtN.=


26-2  S ARGON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.

eight  gates,  two  on  each  side  of  the  square,  each  of  them  marked  by  two  towers
separated  from  one  another  by  the  width  of  the  bay.  Every  gate  had  its
patron,  chosen  from  among  the  gods  of  the  city  ;  there  was  the  gate  of
Shamasb,  the  gate  of  Eamman,  those  of  Bel  and  Beltis,  of  Ann,  of  Ishtar,
of  Ell,  and  of  the  Lady  of  the  Gods.^  Each  of  them  was  protected  externally
by  a  migdol,  or  small  castle,  built  in  the  Syrian  style,'^  and  flanked  at  each  corner
by  a  low  tower  thirteen  yards  in  width ;  five  allowed  of  the  passage  of  beasts  as
well  as  men.  It  was  througli  these  that  the  peasants  came  in  every  morning,
driving  their  cattle  before  them,  or  jolting  along  in  waggons  laden  with  fruit
and  vegetables.  After  passing  the  outposts,  they  crossed  a  paved  courtyard,
then  made  their  way  between  the  two  towers  through  a  vaulted  passage  over
iifty  yards  long,  intersected  at  almost  equal  intervals  by  two  transverse
galleries.  The  other  three  gates  had  a  special  arrangement  of  their  own ;  a
flight  of  twelve  steps  built  out  in  front  of  the  courtyard  rendered  them  in-
accessible to  animals  or  vehicles.  At  the  entrance  to  the  passage  towered  two
colossal  bulls  with  human  heads,  standing  like  sentinels — their  faces  and  fore-
parts turned  outward,  their  hind-quarters  ranged  along  the  inner  walls — as
though  gazing  before  them  into  space  in  company  with  two  winged  genii.
The  arch  supported  by  their  mitred  heads  was  ornamented  by  a  course  of
enamelled  bricks,  on  which  other  genii,  facing  one  another  in  pairs,  offered  pine-
cones  across  a  circular  ornament  of  many  colours.  These  were  the  mystic
guardians  of  the  city,  who  shielded  it  not  only  from  the  attacks  of  men,  but
also  from  invasions  of  evil  spirits  and  pernicious  diseases.^  The  rays  of  the  sun
made  the  forecourt  warm  in  winter,  while  it  was  always  cool  under  the  archway
in  summer;  the  gates  served  as  resorts  for  pleasure  or  business,  where  old  men
and  idlers  congregated  to  discuss  their  affairs  and  settle  the  destinies  of  the
State,  merchants  bargained  and  disposed  of  their  goods,  and  the  judge  and
notables  of  the  neighbouring  quarter  held  their  courts.^  It  was  here  that  the
king  generally  exposed  to  view  the  chieftains  and  kings  whom  he  had  taken
captive ;  here  they  lay,  chained  like  dogs  in  cages,  dependent  on  the  pity  of

'  The  number  of  the  gates  and  their  names  are  given  by  Sargon  himself,  in  an  abbreviated  form,
in  the  Inscription  of  the  Bulls,  11.  81-90,  and  in  that  of  the  Cylinders,  II.  1)6-70:  they  appear  in  a
more  complete  form  in  the  Annals  nf  Hall  XIV.,  11.  78-84.

'  As  already  stated,  this  is  what  the  inscriptions  describe  as  a  "  bit-khildni  in  the  manner  of  the
country  of  Kliati"  (^Inscription  on  the  Reverse  of  the  ,s7afcs,  11.  20,  21  ;  Inscription  on  the  Paveinent  of
the  Gates,  11.  28-30  ;  Inscription  des  Fusles,  11.  161,  162).  Cf.  the  description  and  illustration  of  a
bil-khildni,  on  pp.  206,  207,  supra ;  the  parts  described  on  the  present  page  can  be  readily  identified
in  the  woodcut.

'  For  a  description  of  the  gates  of  the  city,  cf.  Place,  Ninive  et  V  Assijrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  16!i-196.  Tlic
part  played  by  the  sacred  bulla  as  guardians  has  been  briefly  indicated  in  the  Dann  of  Civilization,
p.  633.

*  A  vivid  description  of  the  uses  of  the  gates  is  given  by  Place,  Ninive  et  VAssyrle,  vol.  i.  pp.  183-
188);  cf.  the  same  custom  among  the  Hebrews  (fien.  xix.  1 ;  xxiii.  10,  16,  IS;  Exdh  iv.  1,  2,  'J-12;
heut.  xxi.  18-21).


THE  GATES,   WALLS,  AND  POPULATION  OF  DUR-SHABRVEIN.      263


their  guards  or  of  passers-by  for  such  miserable  fare  as  might  be  flung  to  them,
and,  the  first  feeling  of  curiosity  once  passed,  no  longer  provoking  even  the
jeers  of  the  crowd,  until  a  day  came  when  their  victor  took  it  into  his  head  to
remove  them  from  their  ignominious  position,  and  either  restored  them  to  their
thrones  or  sent  them  to  the  executioner.'     The  town  itself,  being  built  from
plans  drawn  up  by  one  mind,  must  have  presented  few  of  the  irregularities
of  outline  charcicteristic  of  ancient  cities.     The  streets  leading  from  the  gates
were  of  uniform  breadth  througliout,  from  one  side  of  the  enclosure  to  the  other.
They   were   paved,   had   no
sideways   or  footpaths,   and
crossed  one  another  at  right
angles.^       The    houses    on
either  side  of  them  seem,  for
the  most  part,  to  have  con-
sisted    of    a    single    story.
They  were   built  of   bricks,
either  baked  or  unbaked,  the
outer  surfaces  of  which  were
covered  with  white  or  tinted
rough-casting.  The  high  and
narrow    doors    were    nearly
always  hidden  away  in  a  corner  of  the  front ;  the  bare  monotony  of  the  walls  was
only  relieved  here  and  there  at  long  intervals  by  tiny  windows,  but  often  instead
of  a  flat  roof  the  building  was  surmounted  by  a  conical  dome  or  by  semi-cupolas,
the  concave  sides  of  which  were  turned  inwards.^     The  inhabitants  varied  greatly
in  race  and  language :  Sargon  had  filled  his  city  with  prisoners  collected  from  all
the  four  quarters  of  his  empire,  from  Elam,  Chaldaia,  and  Media,  from  Urartu
and  labal,  Syria  and  Palestine,  and  in  order  to  keep  these  incongruous  elements
in  check  he  added  a  number  of  Assyrians,  of  the  mercantile,  oftieial,  or  priestly
classes."     He  could  overlook  the  whole  city  from  the  palace  which  he  had  built
on  both  sides  the  north-eastern  wall  of  the  town,  half  within  and  half  without
the  ramparts.     Like  all  palaces  built  on  the  Euphratean  model,  this  royal
castle  stood  on  an  artificial  eminence  of  bricks  formed  of  two  rectangles  joined

To  mention  but  a  siugle  instance,  it  was  in  this  way  that  Assur-bani-pal  treated  tlic  Arab  kings
captured  by  him  {Rassam  Cijlinder,  col.  viii.  II.  8-14,  27,  y8;   col.  is.  II.  103-111).

'  Place,  yinice  el  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  l'J8,  199;  ef.  PEiiROT  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans
I'AiiliquU^,  vol.  ii.  pp.  490-492.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  drawing  published  in  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  pi.  15.

*  Place,  Ninne  et  VAeii/rie,  vol.  i.  pp.  208,  209  ;  cf.  Pekuot  and  Chipiez,  Hlstmre  de  lArt  dans
I  Antiquity,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14;"),  14C,  466-468.

'  InsrriptioH  of  the  Bulls,  11.  92-97;  Cijlinder  Inacriptioit,  11.  72-74;  Aimuls  of  Hull  XIV.,
11.87-89.


PART    OF   THE    ENAMELLED    COCHSE    OF    A    liATE.^


264


SABOON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


together  in  the  shape  of  the  letter  T.'  The  only  entrance  to  it  was  on  the
city  side,  foot-passengers  being  admitted  by  a  double  flight  of  steps  built  out
in  front  of  the  ramparts,  horsemen  and  chariots  by  means  of  an  inclined  plane
which  rose  in  a  gentle  gradient  along  the  right  flank  of  the  masonry  work,  and
terminated  on  its  eastern  front.  Two  main  gates  corresponded  to  these  two
means  of  approach  ;    the  one  on  the  north-east  led  straight  to   the   royal


BIRD  S   EYE   VIEW  OF   SARQON  S   PALACE   AT   DUB-SHABBDKJN."


apartments,  the  other  faced  the  city  and  opened  on  to  the  double  staircase.  It
was  readily  distinguisliable  from  a  distance  by  its  two  flagstaffs  bearing
the  royal  standard,  and  its  two  towers,  at  the  base  of  which  were  winged
bulls  and  colossal  figures  of  Gilgames  crushing  the  lion.^  Two  bulls  of
still  more  monstrous  size  stood  sentry  on  either  side  of  tlie  gate,  the  arch
was  outlined  by  a  course  of  enamelled  bricks,  while  higher  up,  imme-
diately beneath  the  battlements,  was  an  enamelled  mosaic  showing  the  king
in  all  his  glory.  This  triumphal  arch  was  reserved  for  his  special  use,  the
common  people  being  admitted  by  two  side  doors  of  smaller  size  less  richly
decorated.

Sargon   resided   at  Calah,  where  he  had   taken   up   his   quarters   in   the

'  As  to  the  constructiou  of  this  mound,  its  dimensions  and  general  arrangement,  cf.  Place,
Ninire  el  I'Assyrle,  vol.  i.  pp.  23-40.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  restoration  by  Thomas  in  Place,  Ninive  et  VAasyrie.  pi.
18  his.

'  One  of  these  figures  of  Gilgames  is  reproduced  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  575.


ROYAL  PALACE  AT  DUR-SEARRUKIN.


265


former  palace  of  Assur-nazir-pal/  while  his  new  city  was  still  in  the  hands  of
the  builders.  Every  moment  that  he  could  spare  from  his  military  and
administrative  labours  was  devoted  to  hastening  on  the  progress  of  the  work,
and  whenever  he  gained  a  victory  or  pillaged  a  district,  he  invariably  set  aside
a  considerable  part  of  the  booty  in  order  to  meet  the  outlay  which  the  building
involved.  Thus  we  find  ^^  ^  that  on  returning  from


his  tenth  campaign  he


%JhJix^3\IhJ'hj:\


-/SuSuSviJ^"


'hJhJK^^JhJhJ^


HbMiMyyS'


brought  with   him  an


:fe€i


ONE  OP  THE  GATES  OF  THE  PALACE  AT  DDK-SHABRUKiN.-

immense  convoy  laden  with  timber,  stone,  and  precious  metals  which  he  had  col-
lected in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Taurus  or  among  the  mountains  of  Assyria,
including  coloured  marbles,  lapis-lazuli,  rock  crystal,  pine,  cedar,  and  cypress-
wood,  gold,  silver,  and  bronze,  all  of  which  was  destined  for  Dur-Sharrukin  ;  the
quantity  of  silver  included  among  these  materials  was  so  great  that  its  value  fell
to  a  level  with  that  of  copper.^  The  interior  of  the  building,  as  in  the  case  of
the  old  Chaldaean  palaces,  was  separated  into  two  well-marked  divisions.*  The
larger  of  these  was  used  by  the  king  in  his  public  capacity,  and  to  this  the
nobles  and  soldiers,  and  even  the  common  people,  were  admitted  under  certain
conditions  and  on  certain  days  prescribed  by  custom.''     The  outer  court  was

'  Nimroud  Intcription,  1.  13;  cf.  Winokler,  Die  KeiUchrifUexte  Sarcjons,  vol.  i.  pp.  170,  171.
'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  restoration  by  Tliomas,  in  Pi.aue,  Ninive  et  VAssyrie,  pi.  20.
^  Annah  of  Sanjon,  11.  196-208 :  cf.  Ori'EKT,   Tlie  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,
l.st  ser.,  vol.  vii.  p.  39  ;  Wincklek,  Die  Keihchriftie3:te  Sarijons,  vol.  i.  pp.  34,  35.

*  Cf.  what  has  been  said  of  the  palace  of  Gudea  in  the  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  709-718.
'  For  a  description  of  this  part  of  the  palace,  cf.  Place,  Ninive  et  VAssyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  47-105.


•2GG


SAEOON  II.    OF  ASSYBIA.


4


PLAN   OF  THE   EXCAVATED  PORTIONS   OF  THE
PALACE  AT  DUR-SHARKVKIN.*


lined  on  three  sides  by  warehouses  and  depots,
in  which  were  stored  the  provisions,  com-
modities, and  implements  required  for  the
host  of  courtiers  and  slaves  who  depended  on
the  sovereign  for  support.^  Each  room  had,
as  may  still  be  seen,  its  own  special  purpose
There  were  cellars  for  wine  and  oil,  with  their
rows  of  large  oblong  jars ;  ^  then  there  were
store-rooms  for  implements  of  iron,  which
Place  found  full  of  rusty  helmets,  swords,
pieces  of  armour,  maces,  and  ploughshares;  a
little  further  on  were  rooms  for  the  storage
of  copper  weapons,^  enamelled  bricks,*  and
precious  metals,and  the  king's  private  treasury,
in  which  were  hidden  away  the  spoils  of  tlie
vanquished  or  the  regular  taxes  paid  by  his  subjects;  some  fine  bronze  lions  of
marvellous  workmanship  and  lifelike  expression  were  found  still  shut  up  here.

The  kitchens  adjoined  the  pan-
tries, and  the  stables  for  horses  and
camels  communicated  direct  with
the  coach-houses  in  which  the  state
chariots  were  kept,  while  the  privies
were  discreetly  hidden  in  a  se-
cluded corner.'^  On  the  other  side,
among  the  buildings  occupying  the
southern  angle  of  the  courtyard,
the  menials  of  the  palace  lived
huddled  together,  each  family
quartered  in  small,  dark  rooms.*
The  royal  a^partments,  properly  so
called,  stood  at  the  back  of  these  domestic  offices,  facing  the  south-east,
near  the  spot  where  the  inclined  plane  debouched  on  to  the  city  ramparts.
The  monumental  entrance  to  these   apartments  was   guarded,  in   accordance

'  Place,  Ninire  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  80-82.
'  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  82,  83.

■'  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  84-89;  this  is  room  84  on  Place's  plan.
*  Place,  Ninire  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-6G,  S9-90;  the  helmets  were  in  rooms  16   and  17.  tlic
Ijiles  of  arms  in  room  18,  and  the  other  implements  in  room  88.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  plan  by  Thomas,  iu  Place,  Ninire  et  I'Assyrie,  pi.  o.

"  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  p.  89.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  original  in  the  Louvre.

'  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  93-105.


mm


ONE  OP   THE  BEONZE   LIONS   PK03I    DTJR-SHARRDKIN.'


THE  ROYAL    APARTMENTS  AT  DUR-SHARRUKIN.


•267


with  religious  custom,  by  a  company  of  winged  bulls ;  behind  this  gate
was  a  lawn,  then  a  second  gate,  a  corridor  and  a  grand  quadrangle  in
tlie  very  centre  of  the  palace.^  The  king  occupied  a  suite  of  some  twenty
rooms  of  a  rather  simple  character ;  here  he  slept,  ate,  worked,  and  trans-
acted the  greater  part  of  his  daily  business,  guarded  by  his  eunuchs  and
attended  by  his  ministers  and  secretaries.  The  remaining  rooms  were  apart-
ments of  state,  all  of  the  same  pattern,  in  which  the  crowd  of  courtiers
and  employes  assembled  while  waiting  for  a  private  audience  or  to  inter-
cept the  king  as  he  passed.^  A  subdued  light  made  its  way  from  above
through  narrow  windows  let  into  the  massive  arches.^     The  walls  were  lined


A  HDNTING   EXPEDITION  IN   THE  WOODS  NEAK  DUR-SHARKUkIn.*

to  a  height  of  over  nine  feet  from  the  floor  with  endless  bas-reliefs,  in  greyish
alabaster,  picked  out  in  bright  colours,  and  illustrating  the  principal  occupations
in  which  the  sovereign  spent  his  days,  such  as  the  audiences  to  ambassadors,
hunting  in  the  woods,  sieges  and  battles.  A  few  brief  inscriptions  interspersed
above  pictures  of  cities  and  persons  indicated  the  names  of  the  vanquished
chiefs  or  the  scenes  of  the  various  events  portrayed  ;  detailed  descriptions  were
engraved  on  the  back  of  the  slabs  facing  the  brick  wall  against  which  they
rested.  This  was  a  precautionary  measure,  the  necessity  for  which  had  been  but
too  plainly  proved  by  past  experience.  Every  one — the  king  himself  included
— well  knew  that  some  day  or  other  Dur-Sharrukin  would  be  forsaken  just  as

'  For  the  gates  of  tlie  palace,  of.  tLe  description  giveu  by  Place,  Niiiive  et  l'Assyrie,vol.  ii.  pp.  21-28.

'^  Tliese  were  tbe  portions  laid  bare  by  Botta,  illustrated  and  described  by  him,  and  afterwards
studied  afresh  by  1'lace,  Xinloe  et  L'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  47-49.

'  As  to  the  lighting,  cf.  Place,  Ninive  et  VAssyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  307-315,  and  Perrot  and  Chipiez,
Hittoire  de  I'AH  dans  I'Antiquite,  vol.  ii.  pp.  18U-19tJ.

*  Drawn  by  Fauchir-Gudin,  from  a  drawing  by  Flandin,  in  Botta,  Le  Munuinent  de  Ninive,
vol.  ii.  pi.  108.


268


SABQON  II.    OF  ASSYRIA.


THE  zigsurXt  at  dcr-shabrukIn.*


above  the  esplanade


the   palaces   of  previous  dynasties  had   beeu,  and  it  was
hoped  that  inscriptions  concealed  in  this  manner  would
run  a  better  chance  of  escaping  the  violence  of  man  or
tlie  ravages  of  time ;  preserved  in  them,  the  memory
of  Sargon  would  rise  triumphant  from  the  ruins.    The
gods  reigned  supreme  over  the  north-east  angle  of  the
platform,  and  a  large  irregular  block  of  buildings
was  given  up  to  their  priests ;  their  cells  contained
nothing    of    any     particular     interest,     merely
white  walls  and  black  plinths,  adorned  here  and
there  with  frescoes  embellished  by  arabesques,
and  pictures  of  animals  and  symbolical  genii.^
The  ziggurat  rose  to  a  height  of  some  141  feet
It  had  seven  storeys  dedicated  to  the  gods  of  the  seven
planets,  each  storey  being  painted  in
the  special  colour  of  its  god — tlie  first
white,   the   second    black,   the   third
purple,  the  fourth  blue,  the  fifth  a  ver-
milion red ;  the  sixth  was  coated  with
silver,  and  the  seventh  gilded.    There
was  no  chamber  in  the  centre  of  the
tower,  but  a  small  gilded  chapel  pro-
bably  stood   at   its   base,  which    was
used  for  the  worship  of  Assur  or  of
Ishtar.^    The  harem,  or  Bit-riduti,  was
at  the  southern  corner  of  the  enclosure,
almost  in  the  shadow  of  the  ziggurat}
Sargon    had    probably   three  queens
when   he   founded    his    city,   for   the
harem  is  divided  into  three  separate
apartments,  of  which  the  two  larger
look   out   on   the    same    quadrangle.
Two  courses  of  enamelled  bricks  ran
along    the   base   of   the    fapade,     while    statues    were    placed   at    intervals

'  Place,  Mnive  et  VAmjrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  J49-151.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  restoration  by  Thomas,  in  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  pi.  37.

'  Place,  Xinive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  137-148  ;  the  four  lower  stories  of  the  ziggurat  are  all  that
now  remain.     Cf.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  ii.  pp.  403-406.

*  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  107-130.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  restoration  by  Thomas,  in  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,
pi.  25,  4.


section  of  a  bedroom  in  the  harem.'


THE  ZIGOUBAT  AND    TEE  HAREM   OF  DUB-SHARRUKIN.


269


against  the  wall,  and  the  bay  of  the  gateway  was  framed  by  two  bronze
palm  trees  gilt:  the  palm  being  the  emblem  of  fruitfulness  and  grace,
no  more  fitting  decoration  could  have  been  chosen  for  this  part  of  the
building.i  The  arrangement  was  the  same  in  all  three  divisions:  an  ante-
chamber  of  greater  width  than  length ;  an  apartment,  one  half  of  which
was  open   to  the   sky,  while  the   other  was   covered  by  a  half-dome,  and  a


MAIN   DOOR  OF  THE  HAREM   AT  DUR-SHARRUKtN.'


flight  of  twelve  steps,  leading  to  an  alcove  in  which  stood  a  high  wooden
couch.  The  queens  and  princesses  spent  their  lives  in  this  prison-like  hU-
ricluti :  their  time  was  taken  up  with  dress,  embroidery,  needlework,  dancing
and  singing,  the  monotony  of  this  routine  being  relieved  by  endless  quarrels,
feuds,  and  intrigues.  The  male  children  remained  in  the  harem  until  the
age  of  puberty,  when  they  left  it  in  order  to  continue  their  education  as
princes  and  soldiers  under  the  guidance  of  their  father.^  This  group  of  build-
ings was  completed  by  a  park,  in  which  cedars  of  Lebanon,  pines,  cypresses,
gazelles,  stags,  wild  asses  and  cattle,  and  even  lions,  were  acclimatised,  in
addition  to  a  heterogeneous  collection  of  other  trees  and  animals.     Here,  the

'  Place,  Ninive  et  VAssyrie,  vol.  i.  pp.  116-127.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  the  restoration  by  Thomas,  in  Pr,ACE,  Ninive  et  VAssyrie,
pi.  24.

"  An  inscription  of  Aesur-ljani-pal,  published  by  Eawlinson,  Cim.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  v.
pi.  i.  col.  i.  11.  11-3-1,  and  afterwards  translated  by  .Jensen  in  the  KeilinschriftUelie  Bihliothelc,
vol.  ii.  pp.  154-157,  gives  a  summary  description  of  the  life  led  in  the  harem  by  heirs  to
tlie  throne,  and  describes  generally  the  kind  of  education  received  by  them  from  their  earliest
childhood.


270  SAR60N  Jr.    OF  ASSYRIA.

1
king  gave  himself  up  to  the  pleasures  of  the  chase,  and  sometimes  invited  one

or  other  of  his  wives  to  come  thither  and  banquet  or  drink  with  him.^

After  Mita's  surrender,  Sargon  had  hoped  to  be  allowed  to  finisli  building

his  city  in  peace ;  but  an  ill-advised  movement  in  Kummukh  obliged  him  to

don  his  harness  again  (708  B.C.).     King  Mutallu  had  entered  into  an  alliance

with  Argistis  of  Urartu,  and  took  the  field  with  his  army ;  but  when  details  of

what  had  taken  place  in  Chaldaja  reached  his  ears,  and  he  learnt  the  punishment

that  had  been  inflicted  on  the  people  of  Bit-Yakin,  his  courage  failed  him.     He

fled  without  waiting  for  the  Assyrians  to  appear,  and  so  great  was  his  haste

tliat  he  had  no  time  to  take  his  family  and  treasure  with  him.     Sargon  annexed

his  kingdom,  placed  it  under  the  government  of  the  tartan,  and  incorporated  into

his  own  the  whole  army  of  Kummukh,  including  150  chariots,  1500  horsemen,

20,000  archers,  and  10,000  pikemen.'^     In  the  following  year  (707)  his  vassal

Dalta  died,  leaving  two  sons,  Nibi  and  Ishpabara,   both  of  whom    claimed

possession  of  the  fief  of  EUipi ;  Nibi  appealed  to  Elam  for  help,  and  Ishpabara

at  once  turned  for  aid  to  Assyria.     Sargon  sent  him  a  body  of  troops,  commanded

by  seven  of  his  generals,  while  Shutruk-nakhunta  lent  his  p-otigd  4500  bowmen  ;

Ishpabara  won  the  day,  took  the  city  of  Marubishti  by  storm,  and  compelled

his  brother  to  take  refuge  in  Susian  territory.*    The  affair  was  over  so  quickly

that  it  caused  practically  no  delay  in  the  completion  of  tlie  works  at  the

capital.     The  consecration  of  a  new  city  necessitated  the  observance  of  a  host

of  complicated  ceremonies,  which  extended  over  several  months.     First  of  all

provision  had  to  be  made  for  its  religious  worship ;  the  omens  were  consulted

in  order  to  determine  which  of  the  gods  were  to  be  invoked,  and,  when  this  was

decided,  there  followed  the  installation  of  the  various  statues  and  arks  which

were  to  preside  over  the  destinies  of  the  city  and  the  priests  to  whom  they

were  intrusted  ;  the  solemn  inauguration  took  place  on  the  22nd  day  of  Tisri,

in  the  year  707  B.C.,  and  from  that  day  forward  Dur-Sharrukin  occupied  the

»  Annals  of  Ball  XIV.,  11.  65,  66:  cf.  Winckler,  Die  KdUchriftlexle  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  88-91  :
Inscription  of  the  Btills,  11.  41,  42;  cf.  Lyon,  Die  Keihchrifttexte  Sargons,  pp.  42,  43.  We  shall  see
below  the  bas-relief  showing  Assur-bani-pal  drinking  with  the  queen  in  the  palace  garden.

=  Annals  of  Sargon.  11.  3S8-401 :  cf.  Oppekt,  The  Annals  of  Sargon,  in  Secords  of  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vU.  pp.  51,  52  ;  Winckler,  Die  Keiis.  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-69 ;  Inscrip.  cles  Fastes,  11.  112-117  ;
cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscrip.  in  I'alace  of  Khorsabad,  in  Records,  etc.,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  1 2, 13  ;  Winckler,
Die  Keils.  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  116-119.  The  date  has  been  destroyed  in  the  Annals,  but  the  Eponym
Canon  places  au  expedition  against  Kummukh,  which  must  be  identical  with  that  of  the  mutilated  text,
in  the  fifteenth  year  of  tlie  reign,  in  the  eponymous  year  of  office  of  Shaiuash-upakhkhir  (Schrader,
Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  i.  pp.  209, 214, 215,  vol.  iii.  2ud  pt.,  pp.  146,  147  ;  ef.  Tiele,  Bab.-aes.  Gesch.,  pp.  179,  ISO).

'  Annals  of  Sargon,  11.  402-414  :  cf.  Oppert,  The  Annals  of  .Sargon,  in  Records  of  the  Fart,  1st  ser.,
vol.  vii.  pp.  52-53;  Wixckler,  ZJ«e  Keilschrifftexte  .Sargons.  vol.  i.  pp.  68-71 ;  Inscription  des  Fastes,
11.  117-121 ;  cf.  Oppert,  Great  Inscription  in  the  Palace  of  Khortahad,  in  Records  of  the  Past.  1st  ser.,
vol.  xi.  p.  13;  Winckler,  Die  Keilschrifttexle  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  118-121.  The  date  is  missing  in
the  text  of  tbe  Annals,  and  the  campaign  may  have  taken  place  in  the  same  year  as  the  campaign
against  Kummukh,  that  is  to  say,  possibly  in  708  ;  it  could  not  have  been  later  than  tlie  year  707,  for  ihe
Inscription  des  Fastes  included,  as  the  compiler  himself  asserted  (1.  23),  events  which  occurred  from
the  beginning  of  the  reign  until  the  fifteenth  year  (Tiele.  Babylonisch-assyrische  Geschiclite,  p.  ISO).


DEATH   OF  SAROON^mS   CHARAGTEB.  271

rank  ofiScially  assigned  to  it  among  the  capitals  of  the  empire.  Sargou,
however,  did  not  foimally  take  up  his  residence  within  it  till  six  months  later,
on  the  6th  day  of  lyyar,  706.^  He  must,  by  this  time,  have  been  advancing
in  years,  and  even  if  we  assume  him  to  have  been  a  young  man  when  he
ascended  the  throne,  after  the  sixteen  years  of  bodily  fatigue  and  mental  worry
through  which  he  had  passed  since  coming  into  power,  he  must  have  needed
repose.  He  handed  over  the  government  of  the  northern  provinces  to  his
eldest  sou  Sin-akhe-irba,  better  known  to  us  as  Sennacherib,  whom  he  regarded
as  his  successor ;  to  him  he  transferred  the  responsibility  of  keeping  watch
over  the  movements  of  the  Mannai,  of  Urartu,  and  of  the  restless  barbarians
who  dwelt  beyond  the  zone  of  civilised  states  on  the  banks  of  the  Halys,  or  at
the  foot  of  the  distant  Caucasus :  ^  a  revolt  among  the  Tabal,  in  706,  was
promptly  suppressed  by  his  young  and  energetic  deputy.^  As  for  Sargon
himself,  he  was  content  to  retain  the  direct  control  of  the  more  pacific
provinces,  such  as  Babylon,  the  regions  of  the  Middle  Euphrates,  and  Syria,
and  he  doubtless  hoped  to  enjoy  during  his  later  years  such  tranquillity  as
was  necessary  to  enable  him  to  place  his  conquests  on  a  stable  basis.  The
envious  fates,  however,  allowed  him  but  little  more  than  twelve  short  months  :
he  perished  early  in  705  B.C.,  assassinated  by  some  soldier  of  alien  birth,  if  I
interpret  rightly  the  mutilated  text  which  furnishes  us  with  a  brief  mention  of
the  disaster.  Sennacherib  was  recalled  in  haste  from  the  frontier,  and  proclaimed
king  immediately  on  his  arrival,  thus  ascending  unopposed  to  the  throne  on  the
r2th  day  of  Ab."*  His  father's  body  had  been  left  unburied,  doubtless  in  order
that  he  might  verify  with  his  own  eyes  the  truth  of  what  had  been  told  him
concerning  his  death,  and  thus  have  no  ground  for  harbouring  suspicions  that
would  have  boded  ill  for  the  safety  of  the  late  king's  councillors  and  servants.
He  looked  upon  his  father's  miserable  ending  as  a  punishment  for  some  un-
known transgression,  and  consulted  the  gods  to  learn  what  it  was  that  had
aroused  their  anger,  refusing  to  authorise  the  burial  within  the  palace  until
the  various  expiatory  rites  suggested  by  the  ora?le  had  been  duly  performed.^

'  T)ie  dates  of  the  inauguration  of  Dar-Sharrukin  are  supplied  by  a  fragment  of  the  Eponym  Canon,
of  which  the  sense  is  still  somewhat  obscure  (Schrader,  Keilinschriftliclie  Sibliothel;  vol.  i.  pp.  214,
215),  anil  the  first  date  is  also  indicated  in  the  Babijloiiian  Clironicle  of  Pinches,  col.  ii.  1.  S.

-  Winckler  has  discovered  and  published  (^Sammlung  von  Keilschrifttexten  :  Texte  von  verschiedenen
Inhalts,  pp.  8  and  U,  Nos.  54lii  and  1080)  some  of  Sennacherib's  despatches,  in  which  he  informs  his
father  of  the  advances  of  the  Cimmerians  on  Urartu  ;  cf.  Winckler,  GeschicMe  Israels,  vol.  i.  p.  18.5.

^  Sab.  Citron,  of  Pmches,  col.  ii.  1.  9  (cf.  Winckleh,  Bab.  Chronih  B,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  278,  279),  where  the  conduct  of  the  campaign  is  attributed,  as  is  natural,  to  Sargon  himself.

■*  Eponym  Canon,  in  Schrader,  op.  <:■/(.,  vol.  i.  pp.  214, 215;  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Sennacherib,  p.  10.

^  This  is  my  interpretation  of  the  text  published  and  translated  by  Winckler  {i<ammlung  van
Eeihchriftlexten  :  Texte  von  verschiedenen  Inhalts,  p.  52,  and  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.
410-415).  Winckler  sees  in  it  the  account  of  a  campaign  during  which  Sargon  was  killed  by  moun-
taineers, as  was  Cyrus  in  later  times  by  the  Massagetaj ;  the  king's  body  (according  to  him)  remained
unburied,  and  was  recovered  by  Sennacherib  only  alter  considerable  delay.  In  support  of  his  version
of  this  event  Winckler  cites  the  passage  in  Isa.  xiv.  4-20o,  which  he  takes  as  having  been  composeil
to  exult  over  the  death  of  Sargon,  and  then  afterwards  adapted  to  the  death  of  a  king  of  Babylon.


272  SABGON  IL    OF  ASSYRIA.

Thus  mysteriously  disappeared  the  founder  of  the  mightiest  dynasty  that  ever
ruled  in  Assyria,  perhaps  even  in  the  whole  of  Western  Asia.  At  first  sight,  it
would  seem  easy  enough  to  determine  what  manner  of  man  he  was  and  to  what
qualities  he  owed  his  greatness,  thanks  to  the  abundance  of  documents  which
his  contemporaries  have  bequeathed  to  us;  but  when  we  come  to  examine
more  closely,  we  soon  find  the  task  to  be  by  no  means  a  simple  one.  The
inscriptions  maintain  so  discreet  a  silence  with  regard  to  the  antecedents  of  the
kings  before  their  accession,  and  concerning  their  education  and  private  life,
that  at  this  distance  of  time  we  cannot  succeed  in  forming  any  clear  idea  as
to  their  individual  temperament  and  character.  The  monuments  record  such
achievements  as  they  took  pride  in,  in  terms  of  uniform  praise  which  conceal
or  obliterate  the  personality  of  the  king  in  question ;  it  is  always  the  ideal
Assyrian  sovereign  who  is  held  up  for  our  admiration  under  a  score  of  different
names,  and  if,  here  and  there,  we  come  upon  some  trait  which  indicates  the
special  genius  of  this  or  that  monarch,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  scribe  has
allowed  it  to  slip  in  by  accident,  quite  unconscious  of  the  fact  that  he  is  thus
affording  us  a  glimpse  of  his  master's  true  character  and  disposition.  A  study
of  Sargon's  campaigns  as  revealed  in  his  annals  will  speedily  convince  us  that
he  was  something  more  than  a  fearless  general,  with  a  keen  eye  to  plunder,  who
could  see  nothing  in  the  most  successful  expedition  but  a  means  of  enriching
his  people  or  adding  to  the  splendours  of  his  court.  He  was  evidently  convinced
that  certain  nations,  such  as  Urartu  and  Elam,  would  never  really  assimilate
with  his  own  subjects,  and,  in  their  case,  he  adhered  strictly  to  the  old  system
of  warfare,  and  did  all  he  could  to  bring  about  their  ruin  ;  other  nations,  on  the
contrary,  he  regarded  as  capable  of  amalgamation  with  the  Assyrians,  and  these
he  did  his  best  to  protect  from  the  worst  consequences  of  their  rebellion  and
resistance.  He  withdrew  them  from  the  influence  of  their  native  dynasties,
and  converted  their  territories  into  provinces  under  his  own  vigilant
administration,  and  though  he  did  not  scruple  to  send  the  more  turbulent
elements  among  them  into  exile,  and  did  his  best  to  weaken  them  by  founding
alien  colonies  in  their  midst,  yet  he  respected  their  religion,  customs,  and  laws,
and,  in  return  for  their  obedience  to  his  rule,  guaranteed  them  an  equitable
and  judicious  government.  Moreover,  he  took  quite  as  much  interest  in  their
well-being  as  in  his  own  military  successes,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  heroic
struggles  against  Kusas  and  Merodach-baladan  he  contrived  to  find  time  for
the  consideration  of  such  prosaic  themes  as  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  and  of
corn ;  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  best  methods  of  storing  wine,  and  sought
to  prevent  "  oil,  which  is  the  life  of  man  and  healeth  wounds,  from  rising  in
price,  and  the  cost  of  sesame  from  exceeding  that  of  wheat."  ^    We  seem  to  see

'  Cylinder  Inscription,  11.  39-42 ;  Lyon,  Die  Keihchrifitexte  Sargons,  pp.  34,  35.


ACCESSION   OF  SENNACHERIB.  27 ii

in  him,  not  only  the  stern  and  at  times  cruel  conqueror,  but  also  the  gracious
monarch,  kind  and  considerate  to  his  people,  and  merciful  to  the  vanquished
when  policy  permitted  him  to  indulge  his  natural  leaning  to  clemency.

Sennacherib  either  failed  to  inherit  his  father's  good  fortune,  or  lacked  his
ability.^  He  was  not  deficient  in  military  genius,  nor  in  the  energy  necessary
to  withstand  the  various  enemies  who  rose  against  him  at  widely  removed
points  of  his  frontier,  but  he  had  neither  the  adaptability  of  character  nor  the
delicate  tact  required  to  manage  successfully  the  heterogeneous  elements  com-
bined under  his  sway.  He  lacked  the  wisdom  to  conciliate  the  vanquished,
or  opportunely  to  check  his  own  repressive  measures;  he  destroyed  towns,
massacred  entire  tribes,  and  laid  whole  tracts  of  country  waste,  and  by  fail-
ing to  repeople  these  with  captive  exiles  from  other  nations,  or  to  import
colonists  in  sufficient  numbers,  he  found  himself  towards  the  end  of  his  reign
ruling  over  a  sparsely  inhabited  desert  where  his  father  had  bequeathed  to  him
flourishing  provinces  and  populous  cities.  His  was  the  system  of  the  first
Assyrian  conquerors,  Shalmaneser  III.  and  Assur-nazir-pal,  substituted  for  that
of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  Sargon.  The  assimilation  of  the  conquered  peoples
to  their  conquerors  was  retarded,  tribute  was  no  longer  paid  regularly,  and  the
loss  of  revenue  under  this  head  was  not  compensated  by  the  uncertain  increase
in  the  spoils  obtained  by  war;  the  recruiting  of  the  army,  rendered  more
difficult  by  the  depopulation  of  revolted  districts,  weighed  heavier  still  on
those  which  remained  faithful,  and  began,  as  in  former  times,  to  exhaust  the

'  The  two  principal  documents  for  the  reign  of  Sennacherib  are  engraved  on  cylinders :  the
Tmjlur  Cylinder  and  the  Bellino  Cylinder,  duplicates  of  which,  more  or  less  perfect,  exist  in  the
collections  of  the  British  Museum  (cf.  Bezold,  Inschri/ten  Sa/iherib's,  in  Schrader,  Keilins.  Bihliothel!,
vol.  ii.  p.  80,  note  1).  The  Taylor  Cylinder  contains  the  history  of  the  first  eight  years  of  the  reign.
It  was  found  at  Kouyunjik  or  Nebi-Yunus,  and  was  published  in  H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  IT'.  A.,  vol.  i.
pis.  37-42 ;  it  has  been  translated  into  French  by  Oppekt,  Les  Inscr.  Assyr.  des  Sargonides,  pp.  41-53,
and  by  Menant,  Annales  des  Hois  d'Asstjrie,  pp.  214-225;  into  English  by  Fox  Talbot,  Inscr.  of
Sennacherib,  containing  the  Annals  of  the  first  eight  years  of  his  reign,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  vol.  i.,
1st  ser.,  pp.  33-53 ;  into  German  by  R.  Horning,  Das  Sechsseitige  Prisma  des  Sanherib  in  transcribirten
Gruudtexte  mid  Uebersetzung,  1878,  in-8°,  and  by  Bezold,  op.  cit.,  pp.  80-113.  The  Bellino  Cylinder,
which  is  a  sort  of  duplicate  of  the  preceding,  treats  of  the  two  first  years  of  this  reign.  It  has  been
published  by  Geotefend,  BemerhUngen  zur  Inschrift  eines  Thongefasses  mit  ninivitischer  Keilschrift,
in  the  Abhandlungen  der  KOnigl.  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen,  1850,  and  in  Layard,
Inscr.  in  the  Cuneiform  Cliar.,  pis.  63,  64 ;  it  has  been  translated  into  French  by  Oppebt,  Expedition
en  Mesopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  297,  et  seq.,  and  by  Menant,  Annates  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  225-230;  into
English  by  Fox.  Talbot,  The  Inscr.  on  the  Bellino  Cylinder,  comprising  the  first  two  years  of  the  reign
of  Sennacherib,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  vol.  i.,  1st  ser.,  pp.  23-32  (cf.  the  former  translations  by  the
same  author  in  /.  R.  As.  Soc,  18C0,  vol.  xviii.  p.  76,  et  seq.,  and  in  the  Transactions  of  the  R.  Soc.  of
Literature,  vol.  viii.  p.  369,  et  seq.).  The  Bavian  Stele,  published  from  copies  taken  by  Layard  in
H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  A.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  14,  has  been  transcribed  and  commented  on  by  Pognon,
L' Inscription  de  Bavian,  Texte,  traduction  et  commentaire  philologique  in-8°,  1879-1880  ;  cf.  the  former
translations  into  French  by  Menant,  Ninice  et  VAssyrie,  pp.  234-237  ;  into  English  by  Pinches,  Tlie
Bavian  Inscr.  of  Sennacherib,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  21-28.  All  these  texts,  and
others  which  are  less  perfect  or  less  important,  were  collected,  transcribed,  translated,  and  the
paragraphs  composing  them  classed  in  chronological  order  by  G.  Smith ;  this  work,  interrupted  by  the
premature  death  of  the  author,  when  he  had  only  sketched  out  the  later  portions,  has  been  completed  and
edited  by  Sayce,  under  the  title :  History  of  Sennacherib,  translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions,  1878.


274  SENNACHERIB.

nation.  The  news  of  Sargon's  murder,  published  throughout  the  Eastern
world,  had  rekindled  hope  in  the  countries  recently  subjugated  by  Assyria,
as  well  as  in  those  hostile  to  her.  Phojnicia,  Egypt,  Media,  and  E!am  roused
themselves  from  their  lethargy  and  anxiously  awaited  the  turn  which
events  should  take  at  Nineveh  and  Babylon.  Sennacherib  did  not  con-
sider it  to  his  interest  to  assume  the  crown  of  Chaldaja,  and  to  treat  on  a
footing  of  absolute  equality  a  country  which  had  been  subdued  by  force  of
arms :  he  relegated  it  to  the  rank  of  a  vassal  state,  and  while  reserving  the
suzerainty  for  himself,  sent  thither  one  of  his  brothers  to  rule  as  king.'  The
Babylonians  were  indignant  at  this  slight.  Accustomed  to  see  their  foreign
ruler  conform  to  their  national  customs,  take  tlie  hands  of  Bel,  and  assume  or
receive  from  them  a  new  throne-name,  they  could  not  resign  themselves  to
descend  to  the  level  of  mere  tributaries  :  in  less  than  two  years  they  rebelled,
assassinated  the  king  who  had  been  imposed  upon  them,  and  proclaimed  in  his
stead  Marduk-zakir-shumu,^  who  was  merely  the  son  of  a  female  slave  (704  B.C.).
This  was  the  signal  for  a  general  insurrection  in  Chaldaja  and  the  eastern  part
of  the  empire.  Merodach-baladan,  who  had  remained  in  hiding  in  the  valleys
on  the  Elamite  frontier  since  his  defeat  in  709  B.C.,  suddenly  issued  forth  with
his  adherents,  and  marched  at  once  to  Babylon  ;  the  very  news  of  his  approach
caused  a  sedition,  in  the  midst  of  which  Marduk-zakir-shumu  perished,  after
having  reigned  for  only  one  month.^     Merodach-baladan  re-entered  his  former

'  The  events  which  took  place  at  Babylon  at  the  beginninj:  of  Sennacherib's  reign  are  known  to
us  from  the  fragments  of  Berosii3(MuLLEK-DiDOT,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grsecorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  504;
cf.  SoHRADEK,  ZuT  Kritik  der  Chronolngischen  Aiigahen  des  Alexander  Polyhistor  und  des  Ahydenus,
18S0,  pp.  1-15),  compared  wilh  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy  and  Pinches'  Babylonian  Canon  (Schradek,
Keiliiischri/tUche  BilUothch,  pp.  290,  291).  The  first  interregnum  in  the  CauoQ  of  Ptolemy  (704-702
li.c.)  is  filled  in  Pinches'  Canon  by  three  kings  who  are  said  to  have  reigned  as  follows:  Sennacherib,
two  years ;  Marduk-zakir-shumu,  one  month;  Merodach-baladan,  nine  months.  Berosiis  substitutes  for
Sennacherib  one  of  his  brotliers,  whose  name  apparently  he  did  not  know  ;  and  this  is  the  version  I
liave  adopted,  in  agreement  with  most  modern  historians  (Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  deg  AUciiliuihs,  vol.  i.
p.  464;  TiELE,  Bahijlonisch-assyriche  Geschichte,  pp.  285,312;  Hommel,  Geech.  Bah.  und  Am.,  pp.
tiSG,  731),  as  best  (allying  with  the  evident  lack  of  affection  for  Babylon  displayed  by  Sennacherib
throughout  his  reign.

^  The  servile  origin  of  this  personage  is  indicated  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Canon  (TOe  Bidnjlonian
Kings  of  the  Second  J'erind,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1883-1884,  vol.  vi.  col.  iv.  1.  13) ;
he  might,  however,  be  connected  through  his  father  with  a  princely,  or  even  a  royal,  family,  and
thereby  be  in  a  position  to  win  popular  support.  Among  modern  Assyriologists,  some  suppose  that
the  name  Akises  iu  Berosus  is  a  corruption  of  [Marduk-]zakir[shumu],  as  Schrader  {Die  Keilin-
schrifiliclie  Bahylonische  KSnigsUste,  iu  the  t<ilzungshirichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciencei  in  Berlin,  1887,
p.  948,  et  seq  )  ;  others  consider  Akises- Akishu  as  beiug  the  personal  name  of  the  king,  and  Marduk-
zakir-shumu  his  throne-name  (Tiele,  Bahyl.-assijr.  Geschichte,  p.  313,  note  1;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bub.
und  A»s.,  p.  686,  note  3).

'  Many  authorities  have  thought  the  Merodach-baladan  of  Sennacherib's  reign  a  difl'erent  person
from  the  king  who  bore  that  name  under  Sargon.  Schrader,  who  at  tirst  defended  this  hypothesis
(Die  Keilins.  und  das  Alte  Testament,  1st  edit.,  pp.  213-217;  cf.  Ed.  Meter,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,
vol.  i.  p.  464),  has  since  renounced  it  (Die  Keilins.  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  341-343),
and  has  returned  to  the  opinion  of  the  first  interpreters  (G.  Kawlinsox,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,
2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  156,  157  ;  Fr.  Lenormant,  Les  Premieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  p.  263  ;  Menant,


TEE  REVOLT  OF  BABYLON   UNDER   MERODACH-BALADAN.        275

capital,  aud  as  soon  as  he  was  once  more  seated  on  the  throne,  he  endeavoured
to  form  alliances  with  all  the  princes,  both  small  and  great,  who  might  create  a
diversion  in  his  favour.  His  envoys  obtained  promises  of  help  from  Elam ;
other  emissaries  hastened  to  Syria  to  solicit  the  alliance  of  Hezekiah,  and
might  have  even  proceeded  to  Egypt  if  their  sovereign's  good  fortune  had
lasted  long  enough.'  But  Sennacherib  did  not  waste  his  opportunities  in
lengthy  preparations.  The  magnificent  army  left  by  Sargon  was  at  his  dis-
posal, and  summoning  it  at  once  into  the  field,  he  advanced  on  the  town  of
Kish,  where  the  Kalda  monarch  was  entrenched  with  his  Aramsean  forces  and
the  Elamite  auxiliaries  furnished  by  Shutruk-nakhunta.  The  battle  issued  in
the  complete  rout  of  the  confederate  forces.  Merodach-baladan  fled  almost
unattended,  first  to  Guzummanu,  and  then  to  the  marshes  of  the  Tigris,  where
he  found  a  temporary  refuge ;  the  troops  who  were  despatched  in  pursuit
followed  him  for  five  days,  and  then,  having  failed  to  secure  the  fugitive,  gave
up  the  search.'-^  His  camp  fell  into  the  possession  of  the  victor,  witli  all
its  contents — chariots,  horses,  mules,  camels,  and  herds  of  cattle  belonging  to
the  commissariat  department  of  the  army  :  Babylon  threw  open  its  gates
without  resistance,  hoping,  no  doubt,  that  Sennacherib  would  at  length  resolve
to  imitate  the  precedent  set  by  his  father  and  retain  the  royal  dignity  for
himself.  He  did,  indeed,  consent  to  remit  the  punishment  for  this  first  in-
surrection, and  contented  himself  with  pillaging  the  royal  treasury  and  palace,
but  he  did  not  deign  to  assume  the  crown,  conferring  it  on  Belibni,  a  Babylonian
of  noble  birth,  who  had  been  taken,  when  quite  a  child,  to  Nineveh  and
educated  there  under  the  eyes  of  Sargon.^  While  he  was  thus  reorganising
the  government,  his  generals  were   bringing  the  campaign  to  a  close :  they

Bahylone  et  la  Chakl^e,  p.  158),  adopted  now  by  nearly  all  historians  (Delattbe,  Les  Chald^ens  jmqu'ii
la  formation  de  VEmpire  de  Nabuchodonosor,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  12,  13;  Winckler,  V ntermrhungen  zur
AUorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  56,  and  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  129,  259 ;  Hommel,  Gesck.  Bab.  und
Ass.,  p.  731);  TiELE,  Babyl.-assyr.  Geschichte,  p.  285,  and  p.  313,  note  1,  still  hesitates  which  view  to
adopt.

'  2  Kings  xx.  12-19  ;  fsa.  xxxix.  The  embassy  to  Hezekiah  has  been  assigned  to  the  first
reign  of  Merodach-baladan,  under  Sargon  (Fr.  Lekormant,  Les  Premieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  pp.
231-241 ;  TiELE,  Babijl.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  319 ;  Homuei,,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  704 ;  Wincklek,
Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  p.  xsxi.,  note  2;  Alttestamentliche  Vntersuchungen,  pp.  155,  156;
Geschichte  Israels,  vol.  i.  pp.  181,  182).  In  accordance  with  the  information  obtained  from  the
Assyrian  monuments,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  could  only  have  taken  place  during  his  second  reign,  in
703  B.C.;  cf.  ScuRADEr,,  Bie  Keilins.  und  das  Alte  Testament.  1883,  pp.  343,  344;  Delattre,  Les
Chalde'ens,  2ud  edit.,  p.  12;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  466;  MiJRDTER  and
Delitzsch,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  197  ;  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  014.

^  The  detail  is  furnished  by  the  Bellino  Cylinder,  1.  10 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Sennacherib,
p.  26.  Berosus  affirmed  that  Merodach-baladan  was  put  to  death  by  Belibni  (Muller-Didot,  Frag.
Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  504).

'  The  name  is  transcribed  Belibos  in  Greek,  aud  it  seems  as  if  the  Assyrian  variants  justify  the
pronunciation  Belibuah  (Schradek,  Zur  Kritik  des  Ghronologischen  Angabtu  des  Alexander  Polyhistor
und  des  Abydenus,  p.  9,  note  1,  and  Die  Keilins.  und  das  Alte  Testament,  1883,  p.  349).  Pinches'
Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  ii.  II.  23,  24,  26,  28,  gives  the  spelling  Bel-ib-ni.


276  SENNACHERIB.

sacked,  one  after  another,  eighty-nine  strongholds  and  eight  hundred  and
twenty  villages  of  the  Kalda;  they  drove  out  the  Arabian  and  Aramaean
garrisons  which  Merodach-baladan  had  placed  in  the  cities  of  Karduniash,  in
Uruk,  Nipnr,  Kuta,  and  Kharshag-kalamma,  and  tliey  re-established  Assyrian
supremacy  over  all  the  tribes  on  the  east  of  the  Tigris  up  to  the  frontiers  of
Elam,  the  Tumuna,  the  Ubudu,  the  Gambulu,  and  the  Khindaru,  as  also  over
the  Nabataeans  and  Hagarenes,  who  wandered  over  the  deserts  of  Arabia  to  the
west  of  the  mouths  of  the  Euphrates.  The  booty  was  enormous:  208,000
prisoners,  both  male  and  female,  7200  horses,  11,073  asses,  5230  camels,
80,100  oxen,  800,500  sheep,  made  their  way  like  a  gigantic  horde  of  emigrants
to  Assyria  under  the  escort  of  the  victorioiis  army.  Sleanwhile  the  Khirimmu
remained  defiant,  and  showed  not  the  slightest  intention  to  submit :  their
strongholds  had  to  be  attacked  and  the  inhabitants  annihilated  before  order
could  in  any  way  be  restored  in  the  country.  The  second  reign  of  Merodach-
baladan  had  lasted  barely  nine  months.'

The  blow  which  ruined  Merodach-baladan  broke  up  the  coalition  which  he
had  tried  to  form  against  Assyria.  Babylon  was  the  only  rallying-point  where
states  so  remote,  and  such  entire  strangers  to  each  other  as  Judah  and  Elam,
could  enter  into  friendly  relations  and  arrange  a  plan  of  combined  action.
Having  lost  Babylon  as  a  centre,  they  were  once  more  hopelessly  isolated,  and
had  no  means  of  concerting  measures  against  the  common  foe :  they  renounced
all  offensive  action,  and  waited  under  arms  to  see  how  the  conqueror  would
deal  with  each  severally.  The  most  threatening  storm,  however,  was  not  that
which  was  gathering  over  Palestine,  even  were  Egypt  to  be  drawn  into  open
war ;  for  a  revolt  of  the  western  provinces,  however  serious,  was  never  likely  to
lead  to  disastrous  complications,  and  the  distance  from  Pelusium  to  the  Tigris
was  too  great  for  a  victory  of  the  Pharaoh  to  compromise  effectually  the  safety
of  the  empire.  On  the  other  hand,  should  intervention  on  the  part  of  Elam  in
the  affairs  of  Babylon  or  Media  be  crowned  with  success,  the  most  disastrous
consequences  might  ensue:  it  would  mean  the  loss  of  Karduniash,  or  of
the  frontier  districts  won  with  such  difficulty  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and
8argon;  it  would  entail  permanent  hostilities  on  the  Tigris  and  the  Zab,  and
perhaps  the  appearance  of  barbarian  troops  under  the  walls  of  Calah  or  of
Nineveh.  Elam  had  assisted  Merodach-baladan,  and  its  soldiers  had  fought
on  the  plains  of  Kish.  Months  had  elapsed  since  that  battle,  yet  Shutruk-
nakhunta  showed  no  disposition  to  take  the  initiative :  he  accepted  his  defeat
at  all  events  for  the  time,  but  though  he  put  off"  the  day  of  reckoning  till  a

'   Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  i.  11. 19-G2  (Bezold,  Insehriften  Sanherilfs,  in  Schkader,  Keilins  Bihliotheh,
vol.  ii.  pp.  82-87;;  cf.  Smith-Satce,  History  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  24-42.


CAMPAIGN  AGAINST  TEE   GOSS^ANS  AND    THE  MEDES.         277

more  favourable  opportunity,  it  argued  neither  weakness  nor  discouragement,
and  he  was  ready  to  give  a  fierce  reception  to  any  Assyrian  monarch  who
should  venture  within  his  domain.  Sennacherib,  knowing  both  the  character
and  resources  of  the  Elamite  king,  did  not  attempt  to  meet  him  in  the  open
field,  but  wreaked  his  resentment  on  the  frontier  tribes  who  had  rebelled  at  the
instigation  of  the  Elamites,  on  the  Cossseans,  on  Ellipi,  and  its  king  Ishpabara.^
He  pursued  the  inhabitants  into  the  narrow  valleys  and  forests  of  the  Khoatras,
where  his  chariots  were  unable  to  follow  :  proceeding  with  his  troops,
sometimes  on  horseback,  at  other  times  on  foot,  he  reduced  Bit-kilamzak,
Khardishpi,  and  Bit-kubatti  to  ashes,  and  annexed  the  territories  of  the
Cossaeans  and  the  Yasubigalla  to  the  prefecture  of  Arrapkha.  Thence
he  entered  Ellipi,  where  Ishpabara  did  not  venture  to  come  to  close  quarters
with  him  in  the  open  field,  but  led  him  on  from  town  to  town.  He  destroyed
the  two  royal  seats  of  Marubishti  and  Akkuddu,  and  thirty-four  of  their
dependent  strongholds ;  he  took  possession  of  Zizirtu,  Kummalu,  the  district
of  Bitbarru,  and  the  city  of  Elinzash,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  Kar-Senna-
cherib, — the  fortress  of  Sennacherib, — and  annexed  them  to  the  government  of
Kharkhar.  The  distant  Modes,  disquieted  at  his  advance,  sent  him  presents,
and  renewed  the  assurances  of  devotion  they  had  given  to  Sargon,  but
Sennacherib  did  not  push  forward  into  their  territory  as  his  predecessors  had
done :  he  M'as  content  to  have  maintained  his  authority  as  far  as  his  outlying
posts,  and  to  have  strengthened  the  Assyrian  empire  by  acquiring  some  well-
situated  positions  near  the  main  routes  which  led  from  the  Iranian  table-land  to
the  plains  of  Mesopotamia.^  Having  accomplislied  this,  he  at  once  turned  his
attention  towards  the  west,  where  the  spirit  of  rebellion  was  still  active  in  the
countries  bordering  on  the  African  frontier.  Sabaco,  now  undisputed  master  of
Egypt,^  was  not  content,  like  Pionkhi,  to  bring  Egypt  proper  into  a  position
of  dependence,  and  govern  it  at  a  distance,  by  means  of  his  generals.  He  took  up
his  residence  within  it,  at  least  during  part  of  every  year,  and  played  tlie  rule  of
Pharaoh  so  well  that  his  Egyptian  subjects,  both  at  Thebes  and  in  the  Delta,
were  obliged  to  acknowledge  his  sovereignty  and  recognise  him  as  the  founder
of  a  new  dynasty.  He  kept  a  close  watch  over  the  vassal  princes,  placing
garrisons  in  Memphis  and  the  other  principal  citadels,  and  throughout  the
country  he   took  in  iiand  public  works  which   had   been  almost   completely

'  For  this  individual,  and  tlie  manner  in  whicli  he  liad  been  raised  to  the  throne  by  Sargon  some
years  previously,  of.  supra,  p.  270.

-  Taylor  Cijllnder,  col.  i.  11.  63-82,  col.  ii.  11.  1-33  (Bezold,  Inachri/ten  Saiiherib'a,  in  Schradek.
Keilim.  Biblwtlieh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  88-91 ;  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  History  tif  Sennacherib,  pp.  43-52).
Delattre  (£s  Peuple  ct  I'Eiiipire  des  Medes,  pp.  118-120)  considerably  reduces  the  successes  of
Sennacherib  in  these  regions.

'  For  the  accession  of  Sabaco,  cf.  supra,  pp.  24G,  247.


278  SENNACHERIB.

interrupted  for  more  tliau  a  century  owing  to  tiie  civil  wars  :  tlie  highways
were  repaired,  the  canals  cleaned  out  and  enlarged,  and  the  foundations  of  the
towns  raised  above  the  level  of  the  inundation.'  Buhastis  especially  profited
under  his  rule,  and  regained  the  ascendency  it  luid  lost  ever  since  tiie  accession
of  the  second  Tauite  dynasty  ;  but  this  partiality  was  not  to  the  detriment  of
other  cities.-  Several  of  the  temples  at  Memphis  were  restored,  and  the  inscrip-
tions effaced  by  time  were  re-engraved.^  Thebes,  happy  under  the  government
of  Amenertas  and  her  husband  Pionkhi,  profited  largely  by  the  liberality  of  its
Ethiopian  rulers.  At  Luxor  Sabaco  restored  the  decoration  of  the  principal
gateway  between  the  two  pylons,''  and  repaired  several  portions  of  the  temple

of  Amon  at  Karnak.^'  History  subsequently
related  that,  in  order  to  obtain  sufficient
workmen,  lie  substituted  forced  labour  for
the  penalty  of  death :  a  policy  which,  be-
side being  profitable,  would  win  for  him  a
reputation  for  clemency."  Egypt,  at  length
reduced  to  peace  and  order,  began  once
more    to  flourish,   and   to    display  that  in-

Cl.AV    SE.\L    WITH    CAUTOICHE    OF    SABACO.'  '■        •'

herent  vitality  of  which  she  had  so  often
given  proof,  and  her  reviving  prosperity  attracted  as  of  old  the  attention
of  foreign  powers.  At  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  Sabaco  had  attempted  to
meddle  in  the  intrigues  of  Syria,  but  the  ease  with  which  Sargon  had  quelled
the  revolt  of  Ashdod  had  inspired  the  Egyptian  monarch  with  salutary  distrust
in  his  own  power ;  he  had  sent  presents  to  the  conqueror  and  received  gifts  in
exchange,  which  furnished  him  with  a  pretext  for  enrolling  the  Asiatic  peoples
among  the  tributary  nations  whose  names  he  inscribed  on  his  triumphal  lists.*
Since  then  he  had  had  some  diplomatic  correspondence  with  his  powerful  neigh-

'  Herodotus,  II.  cxssvii. ;  Diodorus  Siculus,  i.  Go ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Eerodot'a  Ziceites  Buck,  i)p.
495,  496.

-  Herodotus,  II.  cxxxviii.  The  excavations  of  Naville  have  not  discovered  any  monument  which
bears  signs  of  the  restorations  undertaken  by  Sabaco  ia  the  city  of  Bubastis.

'  Cf.  tlie  fragments  of  statues  bearing  his  name  noted  l>y  Mariette,  ikiniiineiils  Divers,  pi.  29  d.
A  demotic  contract  of  tlie  Ptolemaic  era  still  mentions,  at  Memphis,  the  street  of  Sabaeo  (Revillout,
Ilypotheque  legale  de  lafemme,  ia  the  Revue  Egtjplologique,  vol.  i.  p.  126,  note,  and  p.  148.  note  1).

*  Champollion,  Monuments  de  V£gijpte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  ccexxxvii. ;  Rosellini,  Mouumenti  Storici,
pi.  cli.  2,  3,  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  175,  170;  cf.  Daresst,  Notice  explicative  des  mines  du  Temple  de  Louxor,
p.  27.

'  Champollion,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  129,  et  seq. ;  Rosellini,  op.  ciL.  vol.  iv.  pp.  176,  177;  Lepsics,
Denlim.,  iii.  69  d,  v.  1  a,  t;  Brugsch,  Reiaebericlde  aus  JEgypten,  p.  170;  Mariette,  Karnak,  pi.  45  c,
and  pp.  9,  10,  28,  69.

«  Herodotcs,  II.  cxxxvii. ;  Diodorus,  i.  65 ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Eerodot's  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  495,  496.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by  Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  132.

*  For  these  gifts,  cf.  supra,  pp.  244,  247.  It  was  jirobably  with  reference  to  this  exchange  of
presents  that  Sabaco  caused  the  bae-relief  at  Karnak  to  be  engraved,  in  whicli  he  represents  liimself
as  victorious  over  both  Asiatics  and  Africans  (Lepsius,  Denkm.,  v.  1  o).


8  ABA  CO    AND    SHABlTOKU   OF  EGYPT.  279

bour,  and  a  document  bearing  his  name  was  laid  up  in  the  archives  at  Galah,
where  the  clay  seal  once  attached  to  it  has  been  discovered.'  Peace  had  lasted
for  a  dozen  years,  when  he  died  about  703  B.C.,  and  his  son  Shabitokii  ascended
the  throne.^  The  temporary  embarrassments  in  which  the  Babylonian  revo-
lution had  plunged  Sennacherib  must  have  otTered  a  tempting  opportunity  for
interference  to  this  inexperienced  king.

Tyre  and  Judah  alone  of  all  the  Syrian  states  retained  a  sufficiently  inde-
pendent spirit  to  cherish  any  hope  of  deliverance  from  the  foreign  yoke.
Tyre  still  maintained  her  supremacy  over  Southern  Phoenicia,  and  her  rulers
were  also  kings  of  Sidon.^  The  long  reign  of  Ethbaal  and  his  alliance  with
the  kings  of  Israel  had  gradually  repaired  the  losses  occasioned  by  civil
discord,  and  had  restored  Tyre  to  the  high  degree  of  prosperity  which  it  had
enjoyed  under  Hiram.  Few  actual  facts  are  known  whicli  can  enlighten  us  as
to  the  activity  which  prevailed  under  Eth-baal :  we  know,  however,  that  he
rebuilt  the  small  town  of  Botrys,  which  had  been  destroyed  in  the  course  of
some  civil  war,  and  that  he  founded  the  city  of  Auza  in  Libyan  territory,  at
the  foot  of  the  mountains  of  Aures,  in  one  of  the  richest  mineral  districts
of  modern  Algeria."'  In  876  B.C.  Assur-nazir-pal  had  crossed  the  Lebanon
and  skirted  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean:  Eth-baal,  naturally  com-
pliant, had  loaded  him  with  gifts,  and  by  this  opportune  submission  had
j^reserved  his  cities  and  country  from  the  horrors  of  invasion.^  Twenty  years
later  Shalmaneser  III.  had  returned  to  Syria,  and  had  come  into  conflict  with
Damascus.  The  northern  Phoenicians  formed  a  league  with  Ben-hadad
(Adadidri)  to  withstand  him,  and  drew  upon  themselves  the  penalty  of  their
rashness;    the   Tyrians,  faithful    to   their   usual   policy,  preferred   to   submit

■  Layaud,  Nineveh  and  Babijluii,  pp.  132-134,  with  Birch's  note  on  King  Sabaco.

-  One  version  of  Manetho  asaigns  twelve  years  to  the  reign  of  Sabaco  (MCllep.-Didot,  Fragmenta
llistoricumm  Gnecorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  5i)3),  and  this  tluratiun  is  confirmed  by  uu  inscription  in  Hanimamat,
dated  in  his  twelfth  year  (Lepsius,  Denhn.,  v.  1  e).  Sabaco  having  succeeded  to  the  throne  in  716-
715  B.C.  (cf.  supra,  p.  233,  note  1,  and  p.  246,  note  7),  bis  reign  brings  us  down  to  704  or  703  li.c,  which
obliges  us  to  place  the  accession  of  Sbabi-toku  in  the  year  following  the  deatli  of  Sargon.

^  Eth-baal  II.,  who,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  native  historians  (Menasdee,  Fragm.  1,  in
MiJLLEn-DiDOT,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  44U),  belonged  to  the  royal  family  of  Tyre,  is  called  King  of  the
Sidonians  in  the  Bible  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  and  the  Assyrian  texts  similarly  call  Elulai  King  of  the
Sidouians  {Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  1.  35),  while  Menander  mentions  him  as  King  of  Tyre  (JcsEPnus.
Ant.Jiid.y'w.  14,  §  2).  It  is  probable  that  the  King  of  Sidou,  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Shalmaneser  III.
aide  by  side  with  the  King  of  Tyre,  was  a  vassal  of  the  Tyrian  monarch.

♦  The  two  facts  are  preserved  ia  a  passage  of  Menander  {Fragm.  4,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT.  op.  cit.,
vol.  iv.  p.  447).  I  admit  the  identity  of  the  Auza  mentioned  in  this  fragment  with  the  Auzea  of
Tacitus  {Annals,  iv.  25),  and  with  the  Colonia  Sepiimiii  Aur.  Auzientlum  of  the  Koman  inscriptions
{Corpus  Ins.  Lat.,  vol.  viii.  No.  9062)  the  jireaent  Aumale.  Gutschnjid  preferred  to  rtcognise  in  it  the
Uzita  of  Strabo  (XVII.  iii.  §  12,  p.  831)  and  of  Ptolemy  (iv.  3,  37),  not  far  from  Leptis  the  Less  {Kleine
Schriften,  vol.  ii.  p.  59).

^  Cf.  supra,  p.  41.  The  King  of  Tyre  who  sent  gifts  to  Assur-nazir-pal  is  not  named  in  the
Assyrian  documents:  our  kuowledge  of  Tyrian  chronology  permits  us  with  all  probability  to  identify
him  with  Eth-baid.


280  SENNACHERIB.

voluntarily  and  purchase  peace.  Their  conduct  showed  the  greater  wisdom
in  that,  after  the  death  of  Eth-baal,  internal  troubles  again  broke  out  with
renewed  fierceness  and  with  even  more  disastrous  results.  His  immediate
successor  was  Balezor  (854-846  B.C.),  followed  by  Mutton  I.  (845-821  b.c.),^
who  flung  himself  at  the  feet  of  Shalmaneser  III.,  in  842  B.C.,  in  the  camp
at  Baalirasi,  and  renewed  his  homage  three  years  later,  in  839  B.C.-  The
legends  concerning  the  foundation  of  Carthage  blend  with  our  slight  know-
ledge of  his  history.  They  attribute  to  Mutton  I.  a  daughter  named  Elissa,  who
was  married  to  her  uncle  Sicharbal,  high  priest  of  Melkarth,  and  a  young  sou
named  Pygmalion  (820-774  B.C.).  Sicharbal  had  been  nominated  by  Mutton
as  regent  during  the  minority  of  Pygmalion,  but  he  was  overthrown  by  the
people,  and  some  years  later  murdered  by  his  ward.  From  that  time  forward
Elissa's  one  aim  was  to  avenge  the  murder  of  her  husband.  She  formed  a
conspiracy  which  was  joined  by  all  the  nobles,  but  being  betrayed  and
threatened  with  death,  she  seized  a  fleet  which  lay  ready  to  sail  in  the
harbour,  and  embarking  with  all  her  adherents  set  sail  for  Africa,  landing  in
the  district  of  ZeugitanG,  where  the  Sidonians  had  already  built  Kambe.  There
she  purchased  a  tract  of  land  from  larbas,  chief  of  the  Liby-phoenicians,  and
built  on  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  factory  a  new  town,  Qart-hadshat,  which  the
Greeks  called  Carchedo  and  the  Eomans  Carthage.^  The  genius  of  Virgil
has  rendered  the  name  of  Dido  illustrious :  but  history  fails  to  recognise  in
the  narratives  which  form  the  basis  of  his  tale  anything  beyond  a  legendary
account  fabricated  after  the  actual  origin  (814-813  B.C.)  of  the  great  Punic
city  had  been  forgotten.  Thus  weakened,  Tyre  could  less  than  ever  think  of
opposing  the  ambitious  designs  of  Assyria :  Pygmalion  took  no  part  in  the
rebellions  of  the  petty  Syrian  kings  against  Samsi-ramman,  and  in  803  B.C.  he
received  his  suzerain  Eammau-nirari  w  ith  the  accustomed  gifts,  when  that  king
passed  through  Phoenicia  before  attacking  Damascus.''  Pygmalion  died  about
774  B.C.,  and  the  names  of  his  immediate  successors  are  not  known ;  ^  it  may  be

'  Menandee,  Fragm.  1,  in  Miilleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iv.  p.  446;  cf.  G.  Rawlinson,
History  of  Phoenicia,  pp.  435,  436 ;  Pietschmasn,  Geschichte  der  Phoaizier,  pp.  298.  299.  Muttou.
transcribed  Mitenna  by  the  Assyrians,  is  the  Phoenician  form  of  the  name  Mattan,  which  occurs  in
the  story  of  Athaliah  (cf.  supra,  p.  100).

-  Cf.  supra,  pp.  86,  87.  Here  again  the  Assyrian  documents  fail  to  supply  the  name  of  the  king
who  paid  the  tribute.

^  Tlie  narratives  concerning  the  foundation  of  Carthage  have  been  criticised  by  Otto  Meltzer,
Geschichte  der  Karthager,  vol.  i.  pp.  90-10]  ;  for  the  objections  urged  by  Gutschmid  {Kleitie  Schriften,
vol.  ii.  pp.  89-94),  cf  the  reply  of  Orio  Meltzer,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  457,  458.

'  For  this  campaign,  cf.  supra,  pp.  99,  101,  102.

'  The  fragment  of  Menander  which  has  preserved  for  us  the  list  of  Tyrian  kings  from  Abi-baal  to
Pygmalion  {Fragm.  1,  in  Muller-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  445,  446),  was  only  quoted  by  Josephus
{Contra  Apionem,  1,  §  18),  because,  the  seventh  year  of  Pygmalion's  reign  corresponding  to  the  date  of
the  foundation  of  Carthage, — 814-813  B.C.  according  to  the  chronological  system  of  Timajus, — the
Hebrew  historian  found  in  it  a  fixed  date  which  seemed  to  permit  of  his  establishing  the  chronology


KINGS   OF  TYBE  FROM  ETE-BAAL   I.    TO   MUTTON  II.  281

supposed,  however,  that  when  tlie  power  of  Mneveh  temporarily  declined,
the  ties  which  held  Tyre  to  Assyria  became  naturally  relaxed,  and  the  city
released  herself  from  the  burden  of  a  tribute  which  had  in  the  past  been  very
irregularly  paid.  The  yoke  was  reassumed  half  a  century  later,  at  the  mere
echo  of  the  first  victories  of  Tiglath-pileser  III. ;  and  Hiram  II.,  who  then
reigned  in  Tyre,  hastened  to  carry  to  the  camp  at  Arpad  assurances  of  his
fidelity  (742  B.C.).  He  gave  pledges  of  his  allegiance  once  more  in  738  B.c.ji
then  he  disappears,  and  Mutton  II.  takes  his  place  about  736  B.C.  This  king
cast  off,  unhai^pily  for  himself,  his  hereditary  apathy,  and  as  soon  as
a  pretext  offered  itself,  abandoned  the  policy  of  neutrality  to  which  his
ancestors  had  adhered  so  firmly.  He  entered  into  an  alliance  in  734  B.C.  with
Damascus,  Israel  and  Philistia,  secretly  supported  and  probably  instigated  by
Egypt ;  then,  when  Israel  was  conquered  and  Damascus  overthrown,  he  delayed
repairing  his  error  till  an  Assyrian  army  appeared  before  Tyre :  he  had  then  to
pay  the  price  of  his  temerity  by  120  talents  of  gold  and  many  loads  of  mer-
chandise (728  B.C.).  The  punishment  was  light  and  the  loss  inconsiderable  in
comparison  with  the  accumulated  wealth  of  the  city,  which  its  maritime  trade
was  daily  increasing :  *  Slutton  thought  the  episode  was  closed,^  but  the  peace-
ful policy  of  his  house,  having  been  twice  interrupted,  could  not  be  resumed.
Southern  Phrenicia,  having  once  launched  on  the  stream  of  Asiatic  politics,
followed  its  fluctuations,  and  was  compelled  henceforth  to  employ  in  her  own
defence  the  forces  which  had  hitherto  been  utilised  in  promoting  her  colonial
enterprises.

But  it  was  not  due  to  the  foolish  caj^rice  of  ignorant  or  rash  sovereigns  that
Tyre  renounced  her  former  neutral  policy  :  she  was  constrained  to  do  so,  almost
perforce,  by  the  changes  which  had  taken  place  in  Europe.^  The  progress  of
the  Greeks,  and  their  triumph  in  the  waters  of  the  zEgean  and  Ionian  Seas,
and  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  Etruscan  navy  after  the  end  of  the  ninth  century,
had  gradually  restricted  the  Phoenician  merchantmen  to  the  coasts  of  the
Western  Mediterranean  andthe  Atlantic:  they  industriously  exploited  the  mineral
wealth  of  Africa  and  Spain,  and  traffic  with  the  barbarous  tribes  of  Morocco
and  Lusitania,  as  well  as  the  discovery  and  working  of  the  British  tin  mines,

of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  on  a  trustworthy  basis  between  the  reign  of  Pygmalion  and  Hiram  I.,
the  contemporary  of  David  and  Solomon.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  119,  152,  153,  on  the  homage  paid  twice  by  Hiram  II.  to  Tiglath-pileser.

*  [For  a  description  of  the  trade  carried  on  by  Tyre,  cf.  Ezeh.  xsvi.,  xxvii.,  and  xxviii.— Tk.]

-  For  all  these  facts,  cf.  supra,  pp.  188,  IS'J.  Pygmalion  having  died  about  774  B.C.,  and  Hiram  II.
not  appearing  till  742  B.C.,  it  is  probable  that  we  should  intercalate  between  these  two  kings  at  least
one  sovereign  whose  name  is  still  unknown.

^  The  same  reasons  which  compelled  me  to  forego  treating  in  my  previous  works,  The  Dawn  of
Civilization  and  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  several  matters  which  were  comprised  in  my  original
scheme,  compel  me  here  to  avoid  any  discussion  on  Tyrian  colonisation  and  the  Greek  colonisation  in
Cyprus ;  I  can  only  indicate  briefly  the  facts  necessary  to  the  comprehension  of  the  history  of  the
Phcenicians  of  the  continent  as  well  as  of  that  of  the  Assyrians.


282


SENNAGEEBIB.


A   PHOENICIAN  GALLEY   WITH  TWO   BANKS  OF   OARS.'


had  largely  compensated  for  the  losses  occasioned  by  the  closing  of  the  Greek  and
Italian  markets.  Their  ships,  obliged  now  to  coast  along  the  inhospitable  cliffs
of  Northern  Africa  and  to  face  the  open  sea,  were  more  strongly  and  scientifically
built  than  any  vessels  hitherto  constructed.  The  Egyptian  undecked  galleys,
with  stem  and  stern  curving  inwards,  were  discarded  as  a  build  ill  adapted  to
resist  the  attacks  of  wind  or  wave.  The  new  Phoenician  galley  had  a  long,  low,
narrow,  well-balanced  hull,  the  stern  raised  and  curving  inwards  above  the

steersman)  as  heretofore,
but  the  bows  pointed  and
furnished  with  a  sharp
ram  projecting  from  the
keel,  equally  serviceable
to  cleave  the  waves  or  to
stave  in  the  side  of  an
enemy's  ship.  Motive
power  was  supplied  by
two  banks  of  oars,  the
upper  ones  resting  in  row-
locks on  the  gunwale,
the  lower  ones  in  row-
locks pierced  in  the  timbers  of  the  vessel's  side.  An  upper  deck,  supported  by
stout  posts,  ran  from  stem  to  stern,  above  the  heads  of  the  rowers,  and  was
reserved  for  the  soldiers  and  the  rest  of  the  crew  :  on  a  light  railing  surround-
ing it  were  hung  the  circular  shields  of  the  former,  forming  as  it  were  a
rampart  on  either  side.  The  mast,  passing  through  both  decks,  was  firmly  fixed
in  the  keel,  and  was  supported  by  two  stays  made  fast  to  stem  and  stern.  The
rectangular  sail  was  attached  to  a  yard  which  could  be  hoisted  or  lowered  at
will.  The  wealth  which  accrued  to  the  Tyrians  from  their  naval  expeditions
had  rendered  the  superiority  of  Tyre  over  the  neighbouring  cities  so  manifest
that  they  had  nearly  all  become  her  vassals.  Arvad  and  Northern  Phoenicia
were  still  independent,  as  also  the  sacred  city  of  Byblos,  but  the  entire  coast
from  the  Nahr-el-Kelb  to  the  headland  formed  by  Mount  Carmel  was  directly
subject  to  Tyre,^  comprising  the  two  Sidons,  Bit-ziti,  and  Sarepta,  the  country
from  Mahalliba  to  the  fords  of  the  Litany, Ushu  and  its  hinterland  as  far  as  Kana,
Akzib,  Akko,  and  Dora ;  and  this  compact  territory,  partly  protected  by  the

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Latard,  Mon.  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  71 ;  for  the  rest  of  the  bas-
relief,  cf.  infra,  p.  301.  Sennacherib  affirms  that  vessels  of  this  type  hail  been  constructed  by  Syrian
shipwrights,  and  were  manned  by  Tyrian,  Sidouian.  and  Ionian  sailors  (G.  Smith.  HiaUinj  of
Hennncherib,  pp.  00,  91).

-  The  kings  of  Arvad  and  Byblos  are  still  found  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  Sennacherib's
reign  (^Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  pji.  i9,  50).


ELULAI  AND    THE   KINGDOM   OF   TYRE.


range  of  Lebanon,  and  secured  by  the  habitual  prudence  of  its  rulers  from  the
invasions  whicli  had  desolated  Syria,  formed  the  most  flourishing,  and  perhaps
also  the  most  populous,  kingdom  which  still  existed  between  the  Euphrates
and  the  Egyptian  desert.^  Besides  these,  some  parts  of  Cyprus  were  dependent
on  Tyre,  though  the  Achaean  colonies,  continually  reinforced  by  fresh  immi-
grants, had  absorbed  most  of  the  native
population  and  driven  the  rest  into  the
mountains.  A  hybrid  civilisation  had
developed  among  these  early  Greek
settlers,  amalgamating  the  customs,  re-
ligions, and  arts  of  the  ancient  eastern
world  of  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Chaldsea  in
variable  proportions :  their  script  was
probably  derived  from  one  of  the  Asianic
systems  whose  monuments  are  still  but
partly  known,  and  it  consisted  of  a  sylla-
bary awkwardly  adapted  to  a  language  for
which  it  had  not  been  designed.  A  dozen
petty  kings,  of  whom  the  majority  were
Grreeks,  disputed  possession  of  the
northern  and  eastern  parts  of  the  island,
atldalion,  Khytros,Paphos,  Soli,Kourion,
Tamassos,  and  Ledron.  The  Phcenicians
had  given  way  at  first  before  the  in-
vaders, and  had  grouped  themselves  in  the  eastern  plain  round  Kition  ;  they  had,
liowever,  subsequently  assumed  the  offensive,  and  endeavoured  to  regain  the
territory  they  had  lost.  Kition,  which  had  been  destroyed  in  one  of  their  wars,
had  been  rebuilt, and  thus  obtained  the  name  of  Qart-hadshat,  "the  new  city."^


'  The  extfut  of  the  kingdom  of  Tyre  is  inilicateil  by  the  passage  in  whicli  Sennacherib  enumerated
the  cities  which  he  had  taken  from  Elulai  {Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  11.  38-44).  For  the  situation  of
Little  Sidon,  Bit-ziti,  Mahalliba,  and  Ushu.  cf.  JIaspeuo,  Be  quelqaes  Localit^s  voisines  de  Sidon,  in
the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  101-103.  To  these  must  be  added  Dor.  to  the  south  of  Carmel,
which  was  always  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Tyrians,  and  whose  isolated  position  between  (he
headland,  the  sea,  and  the  forest  miglit  cause  the  Assyrians  to  leave  it  unmolested.

'  The  name  of  this  city,  at  first  read  as  Amtikhadashti,  and  identified  with  Ammokhostos  or  witli
Amathoua, — Amti-Khadashti  would  in  this  case  be  equivahnt  to  New  Amathous  (Schradek,  Keilins.
and  Geschichts/.,  p.  214,  note  2), — is  really  Karti-Khadashti,  as  is  proved  by  the  variant  reading
discovered  by  Sehrader  (Zur  Kritik  dcr  Inschrijten  Tiglatli-Pileser's,  p.  33),  and  tliis  is  identical  with
the  native  name  of  Carthage  in  Africa.  For  the  identity  of  this  Cyprian  Carthage  with  Kition,  cf.
Six,  Da  Classement  des  S^ritS  Cypriotes,  in  the  Reuue  Numisiiuitiqae,  3rd  sen,  vol.  i.  p.  253,  and
more  particularly  Sohkadek,  Zur  Geographie  des  Asityrischen  Reichs,  pp.  17-24.  This  new  city  must
have  been  of  some  antiquity  by  the  time  of  Elulai.  for  it  is  mentioned  on  a  fragment  of  a  bronze  vase
i'ound  in  Cyprus  itself,  and  published  in  the  Corpus  InscripHonam  Semiticaram,  vol.  i.  pi.  iv. ;  this
fragment  belonged  to  a  King  Hiram,  who  according  to  .some  authorities  would  be  Hiram  II.,  according
to  others,  Hiram  I.  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  574).


284  SENNACHERIB.

Mutton's  successor,  Elulai,^  continued,  as  we  know,  the  work  of  defence  and
conquest:    perhaps  it  was  with  a  view  to  checking  his  advance  that  seven
kings  of  Cyprus  sent  an  embassy,  in  709  B.C.,  to  his  suzerain,  Sargon,  and
placed  themselves  under   the  protection  of  Assyria.^     If  this   was   actually
the   case,  and   Elulai   was   compelled    to   suspend   hostilities   against    these
hereditary   foes,   one   can    understand    that    this    grievance,   added    to    the
reasons  for  uneasiness  inspired  by  the  situation  of  his  continental  dominions,
may    have   given   him  the    desire   to   rid    himself  of  the   yoke  of  Assyria,
and  contributed   to    his   resolution   to  ally  himself   with  the  powers   which
were  taking  up  arms  against  her.     The  constant  intercourse  of  his  subjects
with   the   Delta,   and   his   natural   anxiety  to   avoid    anytliiug   which  might
close  one  of  the  richest  markets  of  the  world  to  the  Tyriaa  trade,  inclined
him  to  receive  favourably  the  overtures  of  the  Pharaoh:    the  emissaries  of
Shabitoku  found  him  as  much  disposed   as   Hezekiah  himself  to  begin  the
struggle.     The  latter  monarch,  who  had  ascended  the  throne  while  still  very
young,  had  at  first  shown  no  ambition  beyond  the  carrying  out  of  religious
reforms.^      His   father  Aliaz    had   been   far  from  orthodox,  in   spite  of  the
influence  exerted  over  him  by  Isaiah.     During  his  visit  to  Tiglath-pileser  at
Damascus  (729  B.C.)  he  had  noticed  an  altar  whose  design  pleased  him.     He
sent  a  description  of  it  to  the  high  priest  Urijah,  with  orders  to  have  a  similar
one  constructed,  and  erected  in  the  court  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem :  this
altar  he  appropriated  to  his  personal  use,  and  caused  the  priests  to  minister  at
it,  instead  of  at  the  old  altar,  which  he  relegated  to  an  inferior  position.     He
also  effected  changes  in  the  temple  furniture,  which  doubtless  appeared  to  him
old-fashioned  in  comparison  with  the  splendours  of  the  Assyrian  worship  which
he  had  witnessed,  and  he  made  some  alterations  in  the  approaches  to  the
temple,  wishing,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  that  the  King  of  Judah  should  hence-
forth, like  his  brother  of  Nineveh,  have  a  private  means  of  access  to  his
national  god.'*     This  was  but  the  least  of  his  offences :  for  had  he  not  offered
his  own  son  as  a  holocaust  at  the  moment  he  felt  himself  most  menaced  by  the
league  of  Israel  and  Damascus  ?  ^     Among  the  people  themselves  there  were
many  faint-hearted  and  faithless,  who,  doubting  the  power  of  the  God  of  their
forefathers,  turned  aside  to  the  gods  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  besought
from  them  the  succour  they  despaired  of  receiving  from  any  other  source ;  the

'  Menandek,  in  Josephus,  Ant.  Jud.,  viii.  5,  §  3,  where  the  reading  of  GutscUmid  (JLleine  Scliriften,
vol.  ii.  pp.  8S,  89),  according  to  which  the  fragment  would  refer  to  the  people  of  Utica,  does  not  seem
to  me  preferable  to  the  ancient  reading,  which  makes  it  refer  to  the  people  of  Kitiou  (.cf.  Lanuau,
JBeitrdge  zur  Alterthuiuskunde  dets  Orients,  pp.  IS,  19).

*  For  the  submission  of  the  Cypriots,  cf.  supra,  pp.  259,  2G0.

^  For  the  date  of  Hezekiah's  accession,  cf.  supra,  p,  236,  note  1.

*  2  Kings  xvl  10-18.

'  Cf.  lupra,  pp.  185,  186.


JUDAH  AND    TEE  REFOItMS    OF  EEZEKIAH.  285

worship  of  Jahveh  was  confounded  with  that  of  Moloch  in  the  valley  of  the
children  of  Hinnom,  where  there  was  a  sanctuary  or  Tophet,  at  which  the
people  celebrated  the  most  horrible  rites :  a  large  and  fierce  pyre  was  kept
continually  burning  there,  to  consume  the  children  whose  fathers  brought  them
to  offer  in  sacrifice.^  Isaiah  complains  bitterly  of  these  unbelievers  who  pro-
faned the  land  with  their  idols,  "  worshipping  the  work  of  their  own  hands,
that  which  their  own  fingers  have  made."^  The  new  king,  obedient  to  the
divine  command,  renounced  the  errors  of  his  father ;  he  removed  the  fetishes
with  wliich  the  superstition  of  his  predecessors  had  cumbered  the  temple,  and
which  they  had  connected  with  the  worship  of  Jahveh,  and  in  his  zeal  even
destroyed  the  ancient  brazen  serpent,  the  Nehushtan,  the  origin  of  which  was
attributed  to  Moses.^  On  the  occasion  of  the  revolt  of  Yamani,  Isaiah  counselled
Hezekiah  to  remain  neutral,  and  this  prudence  enabled  him  to  look  on  in
security  at  the  ruin  of  the  Philistines,  the  hereditary  foes  of  his  race.^  Under
his  wise  administration  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  secured  against  anno3^ance  from
envious  neighbours  by  the  protection  which  Assur  freely  afforded  to  its  obedient
vassals,  and  revived  by  thirty  years  of  peace,  rose  rapidly  from  the  rank  of
secondary  importance  which  it  had  formerly  been  content  to  occupy.  "  Their
land  was  full  of  silver  and  gold,  neither  was  there  any  end  of  their  treasures ;
their  laud  also  was  full  of  horses,  neither  was  there  any  end  of  their  chariots."  ^
Now  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel  had  been  reduced  to  the  condition  of  an  Assyrian
province,  it  was  on  Judah  and  its  capital  that  the  hopes  of  the  whole  Hebrew
nation  were  centred.

Tyre  and  Jerusalem  had  hitherto  formed  the  extreme  outwork  of  the  Syrian
states ;  they  were  the  only  remaining  barrier  which  separated  the  empires  of
Egypt  and  Assyria,  and  it  was  to  the  interest  of  the  Pharaoh  to  purchase  their
alliance  and  increase  their  strength  by  every  means  in  his  power.  Negotiations
must  have  been  going  on  for  some  time  between  the  three  powers,  but  up  to
the  time  of  the  death  of  Sargon  and  the  return  of  Merodach-baladau  to  Babylon
their  results  had  been  unimportant,  and  it  was  possible  that  the  disasters  which
had  befallen  the  Kalda  would  tend  to  cool  the  ardour  of  the  allies.  An  unfore-
seen circumstance  opportunely  rekindled  their  zeal,  and  determined  them
to  try  their  fortune.  The  inhabitants  of  Ekron,  dissatisfied  with  Padi,  the
chief    whom  the  Assyrians  had  set  over  them,  seized    his   person  and  sent

'  Isa.  XXX.  33,  where  the  prophet  describes  the  Tophet  Jahveh's  anger  is  preparing  for  Assyria.

'  Im.  ii.  8.

'  2  Kings  xviii.  4.  I  leave  the  account  of  this  religious  reformation  in  the  place  assigned  to  it  in
the  Bible;  other  historians  relegate  it  to  a  time  posterior  to  the  invasion  of  Sennacherib  (Stade,
Gesddclde  des  Yolhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  pp.  (J07,  608).

*  For  the  revolt  of  Yamani,  cf.  supra,  pp.  252,  253.

*  Isa.  ii.  7,  where  the  description  applies  better  to  the  later  years  of  Ahaz  or  the  reign  of
Hezekiah  than  to  the  years  preceding  the  war  against  Pekah  and  Rezin.


286


SENNACHERIB.


him  in  chains  to  Hezekiah.^  To  accept  the  present  was  equivaleiit  to  open
rebellion,  and  a  declaration  of  war  against  the  power  of  the  suzerain.  Isaiah,  as
usual,  wished  Judah  to  rely  on  Jahveh  alone,  and  preached  against  alliance
with  the  Babylonians,  for  he  foresaw  that  success  would  merely  result  in
substitutino'  the  Kalda  for  the  Ninevite  monarch,  and  in  aggravating  the  con-
dition of  Judah.  "All  that  is  in  thine  house,"  he  said  to  Hezekiah,  "and  that
which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store  unto  this  day,  shall  be  carried  to

Babylon  ;  nothing  shall
be  left,  saith  the  Lord.
And  of  thy  sons  that
shall  issue  from  thee,
which  thou  shalt  beget,
shall  they  take  away ;  and
they  shall  be  eunuchs  in
the  palace  of  the  King
of  Babylon."  Hezekiah
did  not  pay  much  heed
to  the  prediction,  for,  he
reflected,  "  peace  and
truth  shall  be  in  my
days,"  and  the  future
troubled  him  little.^
When  the  overthrow  of
Merodach-baladan      had


RapUu
Haphia


THE  CAMPAIGN    *~
ofSENNACHERIB
in  Judea.


taken  place,  the  prophet  still  more  earnestly  urged  the  people  not  to
incur  the  vengeance  of  Assyria  without  other  help  tlian  that  of  Tyre  or
Ethiopia,  and  Eliakim,  son  of  Hilkiah,  spoke  in  the  same  strain ;  but  Shebna,
the  prefect  of  the  palace,  declaimed  against  this  advice,  and  the  latter's  counsel
prevailed  with  his  master.^  Hezekiah  agreed  to  accept  the  sovereignty  over
Ekron  which  its'  inhabitants  offered  to  him,  but  a  remnant  of  prudence  kept
him  from  putting  Padi  to  death,  and  he  contented  himself  with  casting  him
into  prison.*     Isaiah,  though  temporarily  out  of  favour  with  the  king,  ceased

'  The  name  of  tUe  city,  written  Amgarruna  (Smith-Satce,  Uistury  of  Sennacherih,  p.  57),  and
identified  witli  Migron  of  Benjamin  (Isa.  x.  28)  by  Oppert  (Expe'lition  en  iUsopota::ne.  vol.  i.  p.  370)
and  by  Menaut  {Annalei  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  p.  218),  is  really  Alikaron-Elsrou,  as  Hiucks  (Layard,
Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  121)  and  Eawlinson  (Assyrian  Bislory,  iu  tlie  Atliemeum,  Aug.  2o,  1851)
have  recognised  (cf.  Fixzi,  Bicerche  per  Jo  Studio  deW  Anlichita  Assira,  pp.  385,  386 ;  Fr.  Lenormant,
Les  Premieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  pp.  273-275  ;  Fk.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  i  p.  287 ;
Delattre,  L'Asie  Anterieure  dans  les  Inscriptions  Assyriennes,  p.  90).

=  2  Kings  xx.  16-19.

=  Tliis  follows  from  the  terms  in  which  tlie  prophet  compares  the  two  men  (7«o.  xxii.  15-25).

*  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  II.  69-72;  cf.  Smith-Satoe,  History  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  57,  58.


ALLIANCE   OF  JUDAE  AND    TYRE    WITH  EGYPT.  287

not  to  proclaim  aloud  in  all  quarters  the  will  of  the  Almighty.  "  Woe  to  the
rebellious  children,  saith  the  Lord,  that  take  counsel,  but  not  of  Me  ;  and  that
cover  with  a  covering  (form  alliances),  but  not  of  My  spirit,  that  they  may  add
sin  to  sin  :  that  walk  to  go  down  into  Egypt,  and  have  not  asked  at  My  mouth,
to  strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength  of  Pharaoh,  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow
of  Egypt !  Therefore  shall  the  strength  of  Pharaoh  be  your  shame,  and  the
trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt  your  confusion.  When  your  princes  shall  be  at
Tanis,  and  your  messengers  shall  come  to  Heracleopolis,*  you  shall  all  be  ashamed
of  a  people  that  cannot  profit  you.  .  .  .  For  Egypt  helpeth  in  vain,  and  to  no
purpose :  therefore  have  I  called  her  Rahab  tliat  sitteth  still."  ^  He  returned,
unwearied  and  with  varying  imagery,  to  his  theme,  contrasting  the  uncertainty
and  frailty  of  the  expedients  of  worldly  wisdom  urged  by  the  military  party,
with  the  steadfast  will  of  Jahveh  and  the  irresistible  authority  with  which  He
invests  His  faithful  servants.  "The  Egyptians  are  men,  and  not  God;  and
tJieir  horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit :  and  when  the  Lord  shall  stretch  out  His
hand,  both  he  that  helpeth  shall  stumble,  and  he  that  is  holpen  shall  fall,  and
they  shall  all  fail  together.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  me,  Like  as  when
tlie  lion  growleth,  and  the  young  lion  over  his  prey,  if  a  multitude  of  shepherds
be  called  forth  against  him,  he  will  not  be  dismayed  at  their  voice,  nor  abase
himself  for  the  noise  of  them :  so  sliall  the  Lord  of  hosts  come  down  to  fi^ht

D

ujwn  Mount  Zion,  and  upon  the  hill  thereof.  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord
of  hosts  protect  Jerusalem  :  He  will  protect  and  deliver  it.  Turn  ye  unto
Him  from  whom  ye  have  deeply  revolted,  0  children  of  Israel."  ^  No  one,
however,  gave  heed  to  his  warnings,  either  king  or  people ;  but  the  example
of  Phoenicia  soon  proved  that  he  was  right.  When  Sennacherib  bestirred
himself,  in  the  spring  of  702  B.C.,  either  the  Ethiopians  were  not  ready,  or  they
dared  not  advance  to  encounter  him  in  Ccele-Syria,  and  they  left  Elulai  to  get
out  of  his  difliculties  as  best  he  might.  He  had  no  army  to  risk  in  a  pitched
battle;  but  fondly  imagined  that  his  cities,  long  since  fortified,  and  protected
on  the  east  by  the  range  of  Lebanon,  would  offer  a  resistance  sufficiently
stubborn  to  wear  out  the  patience  of  his  assailant.  The  Assyrians,  however,
disconcerted  his  plans.  Instead  of  advancing  against  him  by  the  pass  of  Nahr-
el-Kebir,  according  to  their  usual  custom,  they  attacked  him  in  flank,  descending
into  the  very  midst  of  his  positions  by  the  col  of  Legnia  or  one  of  the  neigh-
bouring passes.^    They  captured  in  succession  the  two  Sidons,  Bit-ziti,  Sarepta,

*  [Heb.  Hanes.— Tk.]

'  lia.  XXX.  1-5,  7.     In  verses  i,  5,  the  original  test  employs  the  third  person ;  I  have  restored
the  second  person,  to  avoid  confusion.
'  Isa.  xxxi.  3-6.
^  This  follows  from  the  very  order  in  which  the  cities  were  taken  in  the  course  of  this  campaign.


288  SENNACHERIB.

Mahalliba,  Ushu,  Akzib,  and  Acco :  Elulai,  reduced  to  the  possession  of  the
ishmd  of  Tyre  alone,  retreated  to  one  of  his  colonies  in  Cyprus,  where  he  died
some  years  later,  without  having  set  foot  again  on  the  continent.  All  his
former  possessions  on  the  mainland  were  given  to  a  certain  Eth-baal,  who  chose
Sidon  for  his  seat  of  government,  and  Tyre  lost  by  this  one  skirmish  the  rank
of  metropolis  which  she  had  enjoyed  for  centuries.^

This  summary  punishment  decided  all  the  Syrian  princes  who  were  not
compromised  beyond  hope  of  pardon  to  humble  themselves  before  the  suzerain.
Menahem  of  Samsi-muruna,-  Abdiliti  of  Arvad,  Uru-malik  of  Byblos,  Piidu-
ilu  of  Ammon,  Chemosh-nadab  of  Moab,  JMalik-rammu  of  Edom,  Jlitinti  of
Ashdod,  all  brought  their  tribute  in  person  to  the  Assyrian  camp  before  Ushu :  '^
Zedekiah  of  Ashkelon  and  Hezekiah  of  Judah  alone  persisted  in  their  hostility.
Egypt  had  at  length  been  moved  by  the  misfortunes  of  her  allies,  and  the
Ethiopian  troops  had  advanced  to  the  seat  of  war,  but  they  did  not  arrive  in
time  to  save  Zedekiah  :  Sennacherib  razed  to  the  ground  all  his  strongholds  one
after  another,  Beth-dagon,  Joppa,  Bene-berak,  and  Hazor,*  took  him  prisoner  at
Ascalon,  and  sent  him  with  his  family  to  Assyria,  setting  up  Sharludari,  son  of
Rukibti,  in  his  stead.  Sennacherib  then  turned  against  Ekron,  and  was  about
to  begin  the  siege  of  the  city,  when  the  long-expected  Egyptians  at  length
made  their  appearance.  Shabitoku  did  not  command  them  in  person,  but  he
had  sent  his  best  troops— the  contingents  furnished  by  the  petty  kings  of  the
Delta,  and  the  sheikhs  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  who  were  vassals  of  Egypt.
The  encounter  took  place  near  Altaku,''  and  on  this  occasion  again,  as  at  Raphia,

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  11.  34-46 :  cf.  Smith-S.\tce,  Eisi.  of  Sennaclterih,  pp.  53-55.  67.  68 ;
Bezold,  Inschriften  Sanlierib's,  in  Schkadee,  Eeilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  90,  91.  The  Assyrian
text  gives  for  the  name  of  the  King  of  Sidon  a  shortened  form  Tu-haal  instead  of  Eth-baal,  paralleled
by  Lulia  for  Elulai.

'  Several  of  the  early  Assyriologists  read  Usi-muruna,  and  identified  the  city  bearing  this  name
with  Samaria  (Fox  Talbot,  in  the  J.  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.  six.  p.  144  ;  Noeris,  Assyrian  Dictionary,
p.  292 ;  Fixzi,  Ricerche  per  lo  Studio  delV  Antichith  Assira.  p.  379  ;  Schradek,  Die  Eeilinschrifteti  und
das  Alte  Testament,  1st  edit.,  p.  93;  Smith-Satce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  55-72),  which  was  not
approved  of  by  H.  Eawlinson  nor  by  Fr.  Lenormant  {Les  Premieres  Civilisations,  vol.  ii.  p.  272,  note  2).
The  discovery  of  the  reading  Samsi-muruna  on  a  fragment  of  the  time  of  Assur-bani-pal  (cf.  Schkadee,
Zur  Kritilc  der  Inschriften  Tiglatpilesers  II..  pp.  33,  34)  no  longer  permits  of  this  identification,  and
obliges  us  to  look  for  the  city  in  Phoenicia.  Some  time  ago  Fr.  Lenormant  {ibid.)  ventured  to  suggest
Orthosia :  Hale'vy  is  content  to  explain  the  name  as  Shamash  is  our  lord  {Melanges  de  Critique  et
d'Histoire  relatifs  aux  peuples  s^mitiques,  p.  35) ;  Delitzsch  recognises  in  it  a  Phoenician  city  (  Wo  lag
das  Paradies!  pp.  286, 287),  and  other  Assyriologists  give  its  name  without  trying  to  locate  it  on  the  map.

'  The  last  detail  is  found  in  Bull  Inscr.  Xo.  4  (Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  p.  65 ;  cf.
Bezold,  Inschriften  Sanherib's,  in  Schkadee,  Keilins.  Bibliothel;  vol.  ii.  p.  91,  note  42).

'  These  are  the  cities  attributed  to  the  tribes  of  Dan  and  Judah  in  Josh.  xv.  25,  41 ;  xix.  45.
Beth-dagon  is  now  Bet-Dejan;  Azuru  is  Yazur,  to  the  south-east  of  Joppa  ;  Beni-barak  is  Ibn-Abrak,
to  the  north-east  of  the  same  town.

'  Altakn  is  certainly  Eltekeh  of  Dan  {Josh.  xix.  44),  as  was  seen  from  tlie  outset;  the  site,
however,  of  Eltekeh  cannot  be  fixed  with  any  certainty.  It  has  been  located  at  Bet-Lukkieb,  in  the
mountainous  country  north-west  of  Jerusalem,  but  this  position  in  no  way  corresponds  to  the  require-
ments of  the  Assyrian  text,  according  to  which  the  battle  took  place  on  a  plain  large  enough  for  the
evolutions  of  the  Egyptian  chariots,  and  situated  between  the  group  of  towns  formed  by  Beth-dagon,


THE  RUIN   OF  THE   TYRIAN  KINGDOM.


289


the  scientific  tactics  of  the  Assyrians  prevailed  over  the  stereotyped  organisa-
tion of  Pharaoh's  army :  the  Ethiopian  generals  left  some  of  their  chariots  in  the
hands  of  the  conqueror,  and  retreated  with  the  remnants  of  their  force  beyond
the  Isthmus.  Altaku  capitulated,  an  example  followed  by  the  neighbouring
fortress  of  Timnath,  and  subsequently  by  Ekron  itself,  all  three  being  made  to  feel
Sennacherib's  vengeance.  "  The  nobles  and  chiefs  who  had  offended,  I  slew,"
he  remarks,  "  and  set  up  their
corpses  on  stakes  in  a  circle
round  the  city;  those  of  the
inhabitants  who  had  offended
and  committed  crimes,  1  took
them  prisoners,  and  for  the
rest  who  had  neither  offended
nor  transgressed,  I  pardoned
them."  ^  We  may  here  pause
to  inquire  how  Hezekiah  was
occupied  while  his  fate  was
being  decided  on  the  field  of
Altaku.  He  was  fortifying
Jerusalem,  and  storing  within
it  munitions  of  war,  and  en-
rolling Jewish  soldiers  and
mercenary  troops  from  the
Arab  tribes  of  the  desert.^  He
had  suddenly  become  aware
that  large  portions  of  the  wall
of  the  city  of  David  had
crumbled  away,  and  he  set
about  demolishing  the  neigh-
bouring houses  to  obtain  materials  for  repairing  these  breaches :  he  hastily
strengthened  the  weak  points  in  his  fortifications,  stopped  up  the  springs
which  flowed  into  the  Gihon,  and  cut  off  the  brook  itself,  constructing
a  reservoir  between  the  inner  and  outer  city  walls  to  store  up  the  waters  of

•Toppa,  Beni-barak,  and  Hazor,  which  Sennacherib  liad  just  captured,  and  the  cities  of  Ekron,  Timnath,
and  Eltekeli,  which  he  took  directly  after  his  victory :  a  suitable  locality  must  be  looked  for  in  the
vicinity  of  Ramleh  or  Zernuka.

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  47-83,  col.  iv.  11. 1-7 ;  cf.  Bezold,  Inschriflen  Sanherib's,  in  Schradeu,
Keilins.  Bibliotheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  90-95;  Smith-Sayce,  Hiet.  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  55-60.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  given  in  Loetet,  La  Syrie  d'aujourd'hui,  p.  632.

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  31-33  ;  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  p.  63.  The  Urbi
mentioned  in  this  passage  are  the  Arabs  of  the  North  Arabian  desert,  connected  with  the  Kalda  and
Eastern  Aramaeans  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  TT'o  lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  305,  306).

U


THE    PASS   OF    LEGNIA.    IX    LEBANOK."


290  SENNA  GEEBIB.

the  ancient  pool.     These  alterations  ^  rendered  the  city,  which  from  its  natural
position  was  well  defended,  so  impregnable  that  Sennacherib  decided  not  to
attack  it  until   the   rest  of  the   kingdom   had   been   subjugated :    with   this
object  ia  Tiew  he  pitched  his  camp  before  Lachish,  whence  he  could  keep  a
watch  over  the  main  routes  from  Egypt  where  they  crossed  the  frontier,  and
then  scattered  his  forces  over  the  land  of  Judah,  delivering  it  up  to  pillage  in
a  systematic  manner.     He  took  forty-six  walled  towns,  and  numberless  strong-
holds and  villages,  demolishing  the  walls  and  leading  into  captivity  200,150
persons  of  all  ages  and  conditions,  together  with  their  household  goods,  their
horses,  asses,  mules,  camels,  oxen,  and  sheep  ;  ^  it  was  a  war  as  disastrous  in  its
effects  as  that  which  terminated  in  the  fall  of  Samaria,  or  which  led  to  the  final
captivity  in  Babylon.^     The  work  of  destruction  accomplished,  the  Eabshakeh
brought  up  all  his  forces  and  threw  up  a  complete  circle  of  earthworks  round
Jerusalem :  Hezekiah  found  himself  shut  up  in  his  capital  "  like  a  bird  in  a
cage."*     The  inhabitants  soon  became  accustomed   to  this  isolated  life,  but
Isaiah   was    indignant   at   seeing  them    indifferent   to   their  calamities,   and
inveighed    against   them    with    angry  eloquence :     "  What  aileth  thee    now,
that  thou  art  wholly  gone  up  to  the  housetops?      0  thou  that  art  full  of
shoutings,    a  tumultuous  city,  a  joyous  town ;    thy  slain  are  not  slain  with
the  sword,  neither  are  they  dead  in  battle.     All  thy  rulers  fled  away  together,
they  are  made  prisoners  without  drawing  the  bow  ;  they  are  come  hither  from
afar  for  safety,  and  all  that  meet  together  here  shall  be  taken  together."  *
The  danger  was  urgent ;  the  Assyrians  were  massed  in  their  entrenchments
with  their   auxiliaries    ranged  behind   them  to  support  them :   "  Elam   bare
the  quiver  with  chariots  of  men  and  horsemen,  and  Kir  uncovered  the  shield
(for  the  assault).     And  it  came  to  pass  that  thy  choicest  valleys  were  full  of
chariots,  and  the  horsemen  set  themselves  in  array  at  thy  gate,  and  he  took
away  the  covering   of  Judah."      In  those   days,  therefore,  Jahveh,  without
pity  for   His   people,  called   them   to   "  weeping,  and   to   mourning,  and   to
baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth :  and  behold,  joy  and  gladness,  slaying
oxen  and  killing  sheep,  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine :  let  us  eat  and  drink,
for  to-morrow  we  shall  die.     And  the  Lord  of  hosts  revealed  Himself  in  mine
ears,  Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged  from  you  till  ye  die,  saith  the
Lord,  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  ^     The  prophet  threw  the  blame  on  the  courtiers,

'  I»a.  sxii.  8-11.

■■'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  11-20  ;  cf.  Smitu-Satoe,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  61,  62,  66,  69.  An
allusion  to  the  sojourn  of  Sennacherib  near  Lachish  is  found  in  2  Kings  xviii.  14-17;  xix.  8,  and  in
Isa.  xxsvi.  2;  xxxvii.  8.

'  It  seems  that  the  Jewish  historian  Demetrios  considered  the  captivities  under  Nebuchadrezzar
and  Sennacherib  to  be  on  the  same  footing  (MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Frarfmenta  Hist.  G-riBc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  208).    ■

*  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  1.  20  ;  cf.  Smith-Satce,  op.  cit.,  p.  62.  ^  Isa.  xsii.  1-14.

*  [The  E.V.  gives  this  passage  as  follows:  "They  were  bound  by  the  archers:  all  that  were
found  of  thee  were  bound  together,  they  fled  afar  off." — Tk.]


m


.^T


r  n


y  I


^jj  ■'%


a   s^


a    I


o  ^


VN


A'


in?    V


WW


"ly


'   )


'  ).


9a

n

tf

m

rjl

;«

•P^

n

1-1

p

CO

fl

o

W

H

ni

3

-^

pq

J

y

^

:a

a

::3

Q

^.-z'


<  1 1'


JU&%>-


L


292  SENNA  CBEEIB.

especially  Shebna,  who  still  hoped  for  succour  from  the  Egyptians,  and  kept
up  the  king's  illusions  on  this  point.  He  threatened  him  with  the  divine
anger ;  he  depicted  him  as  seized  by  Jahveh,  rolled  and  kneaded  into  a  lump,
"  and  tossed  like  a  ball  into  a  large  country  :  there  shalt  thou  die,  and  there  shall
be  the  chariots  of  thy  glory,  thou  shame  of  thy  lord's  house.  And  I  will  thrust
thee  from  thy  office,  and  from  thy  station  he  shall  pull  thee  down ! "  ^  Meanwhile,
day  after  day  elapsed,  and  Pharaoh  did  not  hasten  to  the  rescue.  Hezekiah's
eyes  were  opened ;  he  dismissed  Shebna,  and  degraded  him  to  the  position  of
scribe,  and  set  Eliakim  in  his  place  in  the  Council  of  State.^  Isaiah's  influence
revived,  and  he  persuaded  the  king  to  sue  for  peace  while  yet  there  was  time.

Sennacherib  was  encamped  at  Lachish ;  but  tlie  Tartan  and  his  two
lieutenants  received  the  overtures  of  peace,  and  proposed  a  parley  near  the
conduit  of  the  upper  pool,  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field.  Hezekiah  did
not  venture  to  go  in  person  to  the  meeting-place  ;  he  sent  Eliakim,  the  new
prefect  of  the  palace,  Shebna,  and  tlie  chancellor  Joah,  the  chief  cupbearer,
and  tradition  relates  that  the  Assyrian  addressed  them  in  severe  terms  in  his
master's  name :  "  Now  on  whom  dost  thou  trust,  that  thou  rebellest  against
me  ?  Behold,  thou  trustest  upon  the  staff  of  this  bruised  reed,  even  upon
Egypt ;  whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his  hand  and  pierce  it :  so  is
Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt,  to  all  that  trust  on  him."  Then,  as  he  continued  to
declaim  in  a  loud  voice,  so  tliat  the  crowds  gathered  on  the  wall  could  hear
him,  the  delegates  besought  him  to  speak  in  Aramaic,  which  they  understood,
but  "  speak  not  to  us  in  the  Jews'  language,  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that  are
on  the  wall ! "  Instead,  however,  of  granting  their  request,  the  Assyrian
general  advanced  towards  the  spectators  and  addressed  them  in  Hebrew :
"  Hear  ye  the  words  of  the  great  king,  the  King  of  Assyria.  Let  not  Hezekiah
deceive  you ;  for  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  you :  neither  let  Hezekiah
make  you  trust  in  the  Lord,  saying,  The  Lord  will  surely  deliver  ns :  this
city  shall  not  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  Hearken  not  to
Hezekiah :  for  thus  saith  the  King  of  Assyria,  Make  your  peace  with  me,  and
come  out  to  me ;  and  eat  ye  every  one  of  his  vine,  and  every  one  of  his  fig
tree,  and  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own  cistern  ;  until  I  come  and
take  you  away  to  a  land  like  your  own  land,  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,  a  land  of
bread  and  vineyards.  Beware  lest  Hezekiah  persuade  you,  saying.  The  Lord
will  deliver  us ! "  The  specified  conditions  were  less  hard  than  might  have
been  feared.^     The  Jewish  king  was  to  give  up  his  wives  and  daughters  as

'  Isa.  x2ii.  15-19.

'  In  the  duplicate  narrative  of  these  negotiations  with  the  Assyrian  generals,  Shebna  is  in  fiict
considered  as  a  mere  scribe,  while  Eliakim  is  the  prefect  of  the  king's  house  (2  Kinijs  xviii.  IS,  37 ;
xix.  2  ;  laa.  sxxvi.  3,  22  ;  xxxvii.  2).

'  The  Hebrew  version  of  these  events  is  recorded  in  2  Kings  xviii.  13-37  ;  six.,  and  in  Isa.  xsxvi..


TEE  SIEGE   OF  JEEUSALEM.  293

hostages,  to  pledge  himself  to  pay  a  regular  tribute,  and  disburse  immediately  a
ransom  of  thirty  talents  of  gold,  and  eight  hundred  talents  of  silver  :  he  could
only  make  up  this  large  sum  by  emptying  the  royal  and  sacred  treasuries,
and  taking  down  the  plates  of  gold  with  which  merely  a  short  while  before
he  had  adorned  the  doors  and  lintels  of  the  temple.  Padi  was  released  from
his  long  captivity,  reseated  on  his  throne,  and  received  several  Jewish  towns
as  an  indemnity ;  other  portions  of  territory  were  bestowed  upon  Mitinti  of
Ashdod  and  Zillibel  of  Gaza  as  a  reward  for  their  loyalty.^  Hezekiah  issued
from  the  struggle  with  his  territory  curtailed  and  his  kingdom  devastated ;  the
last  obstacle  which  stood  in  the  way  of  the  Assyrians'  victorious  advance  fell
with  him,  and  Sennacherib  could  now  push  forward  with  perfect  safety  towards
the  Nile.  He  had,  indeed,  already  planned  an  attack  on  Egypt,  and  had
reached  the  isthmus,  when  a  mysterious  accident  arrested  his  further  progress,
The  conflict  on  the  plains  of  Altaku  had  been  severe ;  and  the  army,  already
seriously  diminished  by  its  victory,  had  been  still  further  weakened  during  the
campaign  in  Judaea,  and  possibly  the  excesses  indulged  in  by  the  soldiery  had
developed  in  them  the  germs  of  one  of  those  terrible  epidemics  which  had  de-
vastated Western  Asia  several  times  in  the  course  of  the  century :  whatever  may
have  been  the  cause,  half  the  army  was  destroyed  by  pestilence  before  it  reached
the  frontier  of  the  Delta,  and  Sennacherib  led  back  the  shattered  remnants
of  his  force   to  Nineveh.^      The   Hebrews   did    not  hesitate   to  ascribe   the

xxxvii.,  with  only  one  important  divergence,  namely,  the  absence  from  Isaiah  of  verses  14-16  of
2  Kings  xviii.  This  particular  passage,  in  which  the  name  of  the  king  has  a  peculiar  form,  is  a
detached  fragment  of  an  older  document,  perhaps  the  official  annals  of  the  kingdom,  wliose  contents
agreed  with  the  facts  recorded  in  the  Assyriau  text,  The  rest  is  borrowed  from  the  cycle  of  prophetic
narratives,  and  contains  two  different  versions  of  the  same  events.  The  first  comprises  2  Kinrjs  xviii.
13,  17-37;  six.  l-'Ja,  366-37,  where  Sennacherib  is  represented  as  desjiatehing  a  verbal  message  to
Hezekiah  by  the  Tartan  and  his  captains.  Tlie  second  consists  merely  of  2  Kings  xix.  96-36o,
and  in  this  has  been  inserted  a  long  prophecy  of  Isaiah's  (xix.  21-31)  which  has  but  a  vague  con-
nection with  the  rest  of  the  narrative.  In  this  Sennacherib  defied  Hezekiah  in  a  letter,  which  the
Jewisli  king  spread  before  the  Lord,  and  shortly  afterwards  received  a  reply  through  the  prophet.
The  two  versions  were  combined  towards  the  end  of  the  seventh  or  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  by
the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Kings,  and  passed  thence  into  the  collection  of  the  prophecies  attri-
buted to  Isaiah.

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  8-11,  20-41  ;  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  60-64.  The
sequence  of  events  is  not  very  well  observed  in  the  Assyrian  text,  and  the  liberation  of  Padi  is  in-
serted in  11.  S-11,  before  the  account  of  the  war  with  Hezekiah.  It  seems  very  unlikely  that  the
King  of  Judah  would  have  released  his  prisoner  before  his  treaty  with  Sennacherib;  the  Assyrian
scribe,  wishing  to  bring  together  all  the  facts  relating  to  Ekron,  anticipated  this  event.  Hebrew
tradition  fixed  the  ransom  at  the  lowest  figure,  300  talents  of  silver  instead  of  the  800  given  in  the
Assyrian  document  (2  Kings  xviii.  14),  and  authorities  have  tried  to  reconcile  this  divergence  by
speculating  on  the  difi'erent  values  represented  by  a  talent  in  dift'erent  countries  and  epochs  (Brandis,
Miinz-,  Mass-,  und  Gewichtswesen  in  Vorderasien,  p.  98).

-  The  Assyrian  texts  are  silent  about  this  catastrophe,  and  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hebrews
seem  to  refer  it  to  the  camp  at  Libnah  in  Palestine  (2  Kings  xix.  8-35) ;  the  Egyptian  legend  related
by  Herodotus  (II.  cxli. ;  cf.  infra,  p.  294)  seems  to  prove  that  it  took  place  near  the  Egyptian  frontier.
Josephus  (^Ant.  Jud,,  x.  1,  §  4)  takes  the  king  .is  far  as  Pelusium,  and  describes  the  destruction  of  the
Assyrian  army  as  taking  place  in  the  camp  before  this  town.  He  may  have  been  misled  by  the
meaning  "  mud,"  which  attaches  to  the  name  of  Libnah  as  well  as  to  that  of  Pelnsium.     Oppert


294  SENNACHERIIi.

event  to  the  vengeance  of  Jahveh,  and  to  make  it  a  subject  of  thankfulness.
They  related  that  before  their  brutal  conqueror  quitted  the  country  he  had
sent  a  parting  message  to  Hezekiah :  "  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou
trustest  deceive  thee,  saying,  Jerusalem  shall  not  be  given  into  the  hand  of
the  King  of  Assyria.  Behold,  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assyria
have  done  to  all  lands,  by  destroying  them  utterly;  and  shalt  thou  be  de-
livered ?  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered  them  which  my  fathers
have  destroyed,  Gozan  and  Haran  and  Kezeph,  and  the  children  of  Eden
which  were  in  Telassar  ?  Where  is  the  King  of  Hamath,  and  the  King  of
Arpad,  and  the  King  of  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  of  Hena,  and  Ivvah  ? "
Hezekiah,  having  received  this  letter  of  defiance,  laid  it  in  the  temple  before
Jahveh,  and  prostrated  himself  in  prayer :  the  response  came  to  him  through
the  mouth  of  Isaiah.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  King  of  Assyria,
He  shall  not  come  unto  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  neitlier  shall  he
come  before  it  with  a  shield,  nor  cast  a  mount  against  it.  By  the  way  that  he
came,  by  the  same  shall  he  return,  and  he  shall  not  come  unto  this  city,  saith
the  Lord.  For  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save  it,  for  Mine  own  sake  and  for  My
servant  David's  sake.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that  the  angel  of  the
Lord  went  forth,  and  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  an  hundred  four-
score and  five  thousand :  and  when  men  arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold,
they  were  all  dead  corpses."  ^  The  Egyptians  considered  the  event  no  less
miraculous  than  did  the  Hebrews,  and  one  of  their  popular  tales  ascribed  the
prodigy  to  Phtah,  the  god  of  Memphis.  Sethon,  the  high  priest  of  Phtah,
lived  in  a  time  of  national  distress,  and  the  warrior  class,  whom  he  had
deprived  of  some  of  its  privileges,  refused  to  take  up  arms  in  his  behalf.
He  repaired,  therefore,  to  the  temple  to  implore  divine  assistance,  and,  falling
asleep,  was  visited  by  a  dream.  The  god  appeared  to  him,  and  promised  to
send  him  some  auxiliaries  who  should  ensure  him  success.  He  enlisted  such
of  the  Egyptians  as  were  willing  to  follow  him,  shopkeepers,  fullers,  and
sutlers,  and  led  them  to  Pelusium  to  resist  the  threatened  invasion.  In  the
night  a  legion  of  field-mice  came  forth,  whence  no  one  knew,  and,  noiselessly
spreading  throughout  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians,  gnawed  the  quivers,  the  bow-
strings, and  the  straps  of  the  bucklers  in  such  a  way  that,  on  the  morrow,  the
enemy,  finding  themselves  disarmed,  fled  after  a  mere  pretence  at  resistance,
and   suffered   severe   losses.      A   statue   was   long   shown   in   the   temple    at

upheld  his  opinion,  and  identified  the  Libnah  of  the  biblical  narrative  with  the  Pelusium  of  Herodotus
{M^moire  sur  Us  Rapports  de  VEgypte  ei  de  I'Assyrie,  pp.  34-36).  It  is  probable  that  each  of  the  two
nations  referred  the  scene  of  the  miracle  to  a  different  locality.

'  2  Kings  xix.  S-35 ;  Isa.  sxxvii.  8-36 ;  this  is  the  second  tradition  of  which  mention  has  been
made  (cf.  supra,  p.  292,  note  3),  but  already  amalgamated  with  the  first  to  form  the  narrative  as  it
now  stands.


THE  EGYPTIAN  EXPEDITION  AND   DISASTER   AT  PELUSIUM.     295

Memphis  portraying  this  Sethon :  he  was  represented  holding  a  mouse  in  his
hand,  and  the  inscription  bade  men  reverence  the  god  who  had  wrought  this
miracle.^

The  disaster  was  a  terrible  one:  Sennacherib's  triumphant  advance  was
suddenly  checked,  and  he  was  forced  to  return  to  Asia  when  the  goal  of  his
ambition  was  almost  reached.     The  loss  of  a  single  army,  however  much  to
be  deplored,  was  not  irreparable,  since  Assyria  could  furnish  her  sovereign
with  a  second  force  as  numerous  as  that  which  lay  buried  in  the  desert  on  the
road  to  Egypt,  but  it  was  uncertain  what  effect  the  news  of  the  calamity  and
the  sight  of  the  survivors  might  have  on  the  minds  of  his  subjects  and  rivals.
The  latter  took  no  immediate  action,  and  the  secret  joy  which  they  must  have
experienced  did  not  blind  them   to  the  real  facts  of  the  case ;    for  though
the  power  of  Assyria  was  shaken,  she  was  still  stronger  than  any  one  of  them
severally,  or  even  than  all  of  them  together,  and  to  attack  her  or  rebel  against
her  now,  was  to  court  defeat  with  as  much  certainty  as  in  past  days.     The
Pharaoh    kept    himself    behind    his    rivers ;    the   military  science  and  skill
which   had  baffled  his  generals  on  the  field  of  Altaku  did  not  inspire  him
with  any  desire  to  reappear  on  the  plains  of  Palestine.     Hezekiah,  King  of
Judah,  had  emptied  his  treasury  to  furnish  his  ransom,  his  strongholds  had
capitulated  one  by  one,  and  his  territory,  diminished  by  the  loss  of  some  of  the
towns  of  the  Shephelah,^  was  little  better  than  a  waste  of  smoking  ruins.     He
thought  himself  fortunate  to  have  preserved  his  power  under  the  suzerainty  of
Assyria,  and  his  sole  aim  for  many  years  was  to  refill  his  treasury,  reconstitute
his  army,  and  re-establish  his  kingdom.    The  Philistine  and  Nabataean  princes,
and  the  chiefs  of  Moab,  Ammon,  and  Idumsea,  had  nothing  to  gain  by  war,
being  too  feeble  to  have  any  chance  of  success  without  the  help  of  Judah,
Tyre,  and  Egypt.     The  Syrians  maintained  a  peaceful   attitude,  which  was
certainly  their  wisest  policy ;  and  during  the  following  quarter  of  a  century  they
loyally  obeyed  their  governors,  and  gave  Sennacherib  no  cause  to  revisit  them.
It  was  fortunate  for  him  that  they  did  so,  for  the  peoples  of  the  North  and
East,  the  Kalda,  and,  above  all,  the  Elamites,  were  the  cause  of  much  trouble,
and  exclusively  occupied  his  attention  during  several  years.     The  inhabitants
of  Bit-Yakin,  urged  on  either  by  their  natural  restlessness  or  by  the  news  of

'  Herodotus,  II.  cxli. ;  cf.  Wiedemaott,  Herodot's  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  501-505.  The  statue  with
which  this  legend  had  been  connected,  must  have  represented  a  king  offering  the  image  of  a
mouse  crouching  on  a  basket,  like  the  cynocephalus  on  the  hieroglyphic  sign  which  denotes
centuries  or  the  frog  of  the  goddess  Hiqit.  Historians  have  desired  to  recognise  in  Sethon  a
Kin"  Zet  of  the  XXIII"'  dynasty  (Lepsius,  Koiiigsbuch,  pp.  46,  47),  or  even  Shabitoku  of  the  XXV*
dynasty  (Lacth,  Aue  JEgypten's  Vorzeit,  pp.  439,  44U) ;  Krall  identified  him  with  Satui  in  the  de-
motic story  of  Satni-Khamois  {Ein  neuer  historischer  Boman  in  Demotiiclter  Schri/t,  p.  1,  note  3).

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  293,  for  the  portions  of  territory  which  Hezekiah  had  to  cede  to  Padi  of  Ekron,
Mitinti  of  Ashdod,  and  Zillibel  of  Gaza.


296  8ENNACEEBIB.

the  misfortune  wliicli  bad  befallen  tbeir  enemy,  determined  once  more  to  try
the  fortunes  of  war.     Incited  by  Marduk-ushezib,^  one  of  their  princes,  and  by
Merodach-baladan,  these  people  of  the  marshes  intrigued  with  the  courts  of
Babylon  and  Susa,  and  were  emboldened  to  turn  against  the  Assyrian  garrisons
stationed  in  their  midst  to  preserve  order.     Sennacherib's  vengeance  fell  first
on  Marduk-ushezib,  who  fled  from  his  stronghold  of  Bittutu  after  sustaining  a
short  siege.     Merodach-baladan,  deserted  by  his  accomplice,  put  the  statues
of  his  gods  and  his  royal  treasures  on  board  his  fleet,  and  embarking  with  his
followers  crossed  the  lagoon,  and  effected  a  landing  in  the  district  of  Nagitu,
in  Susian  territory,  beyond  the  mouth  of  the  Ulai.^     Sennacherib  entered  Bit-
Yakin  without  striking  a  blow,  and  completed  the  destruction  of  the  half-
deserted  town ;  lie  next  proceeded  to  demolish  the  other  cities  one  after  the
other,  carrying  off  into  captivity  all  the  men  and  cattle  who  fell  in  his  way.
The  Elamites,  disconcerted  by  the  rapidity  of  his  action,  allowed  him  to  crush
their  allies  unopposed ;  and  as  they  had  not  openly  intervened,  the  conqueror
refrained  from  calling  them  to  account  for  their  intrigues.     Babylon  paid  the
penalty  for  all :    its  sovereign,  Belibni,  who  had  failed  to  make  the  sacred
autliority  of  the  suzerain  respected  in  the  city,  and  who,  perhaps,  had  taken
some  part  in  the  conspiracy,  was  with  his  family  deported  to  Nineveh,  and  his
vacant  throne  was  given  to   Assur-nadin-shumu,  a  younger   son  of  Sargon
(699  B.C.).'    Order  was  once  more  restored  in  Karduniash,  but  Sennacherib  felt
that   its   submissiou   would   be   neither   sincere    nor   permanent,   so   long   as
Merodach-baladan  was  hovering  on  its  frontier  possessed  of  an  army,  a  fleet,
and  a  supply  of  treasure,  and  prepared  to  enter  the  lists  as  soon  as  circumstances
seemed  favourable  to  his  cause.     Sennacherib  resolved,  therefore,  to  cross  the
head  of  the  Persian  Gulf  and  deal  him  such  a  blow  as  would  once  for  all  end  the
contest ;  but  troubles  which  broke  out  on  the  Urartian  frontier  as  soon  as  he

'  Three  kings  of  Babylon  at  this  period  bore  very  similar  names — Marduk-ushezib,  Nergal-ushezib,
and  Mushezib-marduk.  Nergal-ushozib  is  the  elder  of  the  two  whom  the  texts  oall  Shuzub,  and
whom  Assyriologists  at  first  confused  one  with  another.  Tiele  was  the  first  to  distinguish  them  (_Schuzuh
de  Babylonier  en  Schuzub  de  Clialdss'er  Koningen  van  Bahel,  in  the  iHudes  ArcMologiques,  Historiques  el
Linguiitiques  d^diees  a  M.  Leemans,  pp.  109,  110,  and  Bahylonisch-agsyrische-Geschichte,  pp.  321-323),
and  his  view  has  been  since  accepted  by  all  Assyriologists  (Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriftiiche  Bahy-
lonische  Kijnigsliste,  p.  12,  note  1,  and  p.  25 ;  HoiiliEL,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  33,  note  1 ;  DelitzsCH  and
MuKDTER,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  178-201 ;  Wixcklek,  Gesch.  Bab  und  Ass.,  pp.  130-132,306).  The
second  of  the  two  Shuzubs, Mushezib-marduk,  is  the  Mesesi-moidakos  of  the  Koyal  Canon  of  Ptolemy.

'  Nagitu  was  bounded  by  the  Nar-Marratum  and  the  Ulai  (Fk.  Delitzscii,  Wo  lag  das  Parodies  i
pp.  323,  32i),  which  allows  us  to  identify  it  with  the  territory  south  of  Edrisieh  (Billerbeck,  Susa,
p.  80).

^  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  pp.  42-65  :  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  73-78 ;  Bezold,
Inschriften  SanJierib's,  in  Schradeb,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  96-99.  Berosua,  misled  by  the
deposition  of  Belibni,  thought  that  the  expedition  was  directed  against  Babylon  itself  (MC-lleb-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Historicorum  Graicorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  504);  he  has  likewise  confouuded  Assur-nadin-
shumu  with  Esar-haddon,  and  he  has  given  this  latter,  whom  he  calls  Asordanes,  as  the  immediate
successor  of  Belibni.  The  date  699  b.o.  for  these  events  is  indicated  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,
col.  ii.  11.  26-30,  which  places  them  in  the  third  year  of  Belibni.


A    RAID    AMONG    TUE    WOODS   AND    MOUNTAINS.

Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Latard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  70.


298  SENNACHERIB.

returned  forced  him  to  put  off  his  project.     The  tribes  of  Tumurru,  who  had
placed  their  strongholds  like  eyries   among  the   peaks  of  Nipur,  had  been
making    frequent    descents  on   the   plains  of  the   Tigris,   which   they    had
ravaged  unchecked  by  any  fear  of  Assyrian  power.     Sennacherib  formed  an
entrenched  camp  at  the  foot  of  their  mountain  retreat,  and  there  left  the
greater  part  of  his  army,  while  lie  set  out  on  an  adventurous  expedition  with  a
picked  body  of  infantry  and  cavalry.     Over  ravines  and  torrents,  up  rough  and
diiBcult  slopes,  they  made  their  way,  the  king  himself  being  conveyed  in  a
litter,  as  there  were  no  roads  practicable  for  his  royal  chariot ;  he  even  deigned
to  walk  when  the  hillsides  were  too  steep  for  his  bearers  to  carry  him;  he
climbed  like  a  goat,  slept  on  the  bare  rocks,  drank  putrid  water  from  a  leathern
bottle,  and  after  many  liardships  at  length  came  up  with  the  enemy.      He
burnt  their  villages,  and  carried  off  herds  of  cattle  and  troops  of  captives;
but  this  exploit  was  more  a  satisfaction  of  his  vanity  than  a  distinct  advantage
gained,  for  the  pillaging  of  the  plains  of  the  Tigris  probably  recommenced  as
soon  as  the  king  had  quitted  the  country.     The  same  year  he  pushed  as  far
as  Dayaini,  where  similar  tactics  were  employed.     Constructing  a  camji  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Mount  Auara  and  Mount  Uppa,  he  forced  his  way  to  the
capital,  Ukki,  traversing  a  complicated  network  of  gorges  and  forests  which
had  hitherto  been  considered  impenetrable.    The  king,  Maniya,  fled ;  Ukki  was
taken  by  assault  and  pillaged,  the  spoil  obtained  from  it  slightly  exceeding
that  from  Tumurru  (699  B.C.).    Shortly  afterwards  the  province  of  Tulgarimme
revolted  in  concert  with  the  Tabal :  Sennacherib  overcame  the  allied  forces,
and  led  his  victorious  regiments  through  the  defiles  of  the  Taurus.^     Greek
pirates  or  colonists   having  ventured   from  time  to  time  to  ravage  the  sea-
board, he  destroyed  one  of  their  fleets  near  the  mouth  of  the  Saros,  and  took
advantage  of  his  sojourn  in  this  region  to  fortify  the  two  cities  of  Tarsus  and
Ankhiale,  to  defend  his  Cilician  frontier  against  the  peoples  of  Asia  Minor .^

This  was  a  necessary  precaution,  for  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor  was  just
then  stirred  by  the  inrush  of  new  nations  which  were  devastating  the  country,^
and  the  effect  of  these  convulsions  was  beginning  to  be  felt  in  the  country

•  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  II.  66-S2,  col.  iv.  11.  1-19  :  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  SennacJierib,  pp.
79-87;  Bezold,  Inschriften  Sariherib's,  in  ScnRAT)-ER,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  98-101.  The
dates  of  and  connection  between  these  two  wars  are  not  determined  with  any  certainty.  Some  autho-
rities assign  them  both  to  the  same  year,  somewhere  between  699  and  696  B.C.  (Tiele,  Babyl.-assyr.
Getcli.,  pp.  297,  298,  320),  while  others  assign  them  to  two  different  years,  tlie  first  to  699  or  696  B.C.,
the  second  to  698  or  695  B.C.  (Smith-Sayce,  op.  cit.,  p.  87 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Babyl.  und  Assyr.,  p.  718).

'  The  encounter  of  the  Assyrians  with  the  Greeks  is  only  known  to  us  from  a  fragment  of  Berosua
(MtJLLER-DiDOT.  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  504).  The  foundation  of  Tarsus  is  defiuitely  attributed
to  Sennacherib  in  the  same  passage;  that  of  Ankhiale  is  referred  to  tlie  fabulous  Sardanapalus
(Straeo,  XIV.  V.  §  9,  p.  672,  quoting  Aristobulus),  but  most  historians  with  much  probability  attribute
the  foundation  to  Sennacherib  (Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  dcs  AUerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  471-473,  vol.  ii.  p.  454;
Tiele,  Babyl.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  298;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Babyl.  und.  Assyr.,  p.  719,  note  1).

'  Cf.  the  summary  account  of  these  events,  supra,  p.  238.


PBEPARATIONS   FOB    THE  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  ELAM.         299

to  the  south  of  the  central  plain,  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus,  and  on  the
frontiers  of  the  Assyrian  empire.  Barbarian  hordes,  attracted  by  the  fame
of  the  ancient  Hittite  sanctuaries  in  the  upper  basin  of  the  Euphrates  and
the  Araxes,  had  descended  now  and  again  to  measure  their  strength  against  the
advanced  posts  of  Assyria  or  Urartu,  but  had  subsequently  withdrawn  and  dis-
appeared beyond  the  Halys.  Their  movements  may  at  this  time  have  been  so
aggressive  as  to  arouse  serious  anxiety  in  the  minds  of  the  Ninevite  rulers ;  it
is  certain  that  Sennacherib,  though  apparently  hindered  by  no  revolt,  delayed
the  execution  of  the  projects  he  had  formed  against  Merodach-baladan  for
three  years ;  and  it  is  possible  his  inaction  may  be  attributed  to  the  fear  of
some  complication  arising  on  his  north-western  frontier.  He  did  not  carry  out
his  scheme  till  G95  B.C.,  when  all  danger  in  that  quarter  had  passed  away.
The  enterprise  was  a  difficult  one,  for  Nagitu  and  the  neighbouring  districts
were  dependencies  of  Susa,  and  could  not  be  reached  by  land  without  a  violation
of  Elamite  neutrality,  which  would  almost  inevitably  lead  to  a  conilict.
Shutruk-nakhunta  was  no  longer  alive.  In  the  very  year  in  which  his  rival
had  set  up  Assur-nadin-shumu  as  King  of  Karduniash,  a  revolution  had  broken
out  in  Elam,  which  was  in  all  probability  connected  with  the  events  then  taking
place  in  Babylon.  His  subjects  were  angry  with  him  for  having  failed  to  send
timely  succour  to  his  allies  the  Kalda,  and  for  having  allowed  Bit-Yakin  to  be
destroyed :  his  own  brother  Khalludush  sided  with  the  malcontents,  threw
Shutruk-nakhunta  into  prison,  and  proclaimed  himself  kiug.^  This  time  the
Ninevites,  thinking  that  Elam  was  certain  to  intervene,  sought  how  they
might  finally  overpower  Merodach-baladan  before  this  interference  could  prove
effectual.  The  feudal  constitution  of  the  Elamite  monarchy  rendered,  as  we
know,  the  mobilisation  of  the  army  at  the  opening  of  a  war  a  long  and  difficult
task  :  weeks  might  easily  elapse  before  the  first  and  second  grades  of  feudatory
nobility  could  join  the  royal  troops  and  form  a  combined  army  capable  of
striking  an  important  blow.^  This  was  a  cause  of  dangerous  inferiority  in  a
conflict  with  the  Assyrians,  the  chief  part  of  whose  forces,  bivouacking  close  to
the  capital  during  the  winter  months,  could  leave  their  quarters  and  set  out
on  a  campaign  at  little  more  than  a  day's  notice  ;  the  kings  of  Elam  minimised
the  danger  by  keeping  sufficient  troops  under  arms  on  their  northern  and
western  frontiers  to  meet  any  emergency,  but  an  attack  by  sea  seemed  to  them
so  unlikely  that  they  had  not,  for  a  long  time  past,  thought  of  protecting  their
coast-line.  The  ancient  Chaldsean  cities,  Uru,  Lagash,  Uruk,  and  Eridu  had
possessed  fleets  on  the  Persian  Gulf;  but  the  times  were  long  past  when  they

'  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  ii.  11.  32-35,  where  the  new  king  is  called  Khallushu,  instead
of  Khalluilush,  the  form  given  in  the  inscriptions  of  Sennacherib.

For  all  the  difficulties  which  the  feudal  constitution  of  their  empire  caused  the  kings  of  Susa,
of.  supra,  pp.  228-230.


300


SENNACHERIB.


■■!■-  V        -S-


THE  NARMARRATUM
I  vn  the  ti^e  of

I  StNNACMERlB

. ft B Jt ii.KJ


used  to  send  to  procure  stone  and  wood  from  the  countries  of  JFagan  and
Meluklikha,  and  tlie  seas  which  they  had  ruled  were  now  traversed  only  by
merchant  vessels  or  fishing-boats.  Besides  this,  the  condition  of  the  estuary
seemed  to  prohibit  all  attack  from  that  side.  The  space  between  Bit-Yakin
and  the  long  line  of  dunes  or  mud-banks  which  blocked  the  entrance  to
it  was  not  so  much  a  gulf  as  a  lagoon  of  uncertain  and  shifting  extent ;
the  water  flowed  only  in  the  middle,  being  stagnant  near  the  shores;  the
whole  expanse  was  irregularly  dotted  over  with  mud-banks,  and  its  surface
was  constantly  altered  by  the  alluvial  soil  brought  down  by  the  Tigris,
the  Euphrates,  the  Ulai,  and  the  Uknu.  The  navigation  of  this  lagoon
was  dangerous,  for  the   relative  positions  of  the  channels  and  shallows  were

constantly  shifting,  and  vessels  of  deep
draught  often  ran  aground  in  passing  from
one  end  of  it  to  the  other.^  Sennacherib
decided  to  march  his  force  to  the  mouth  of
the  Euphrates,  and,  embarking  it  there,  to
bring  it  to  bear  suddenly  on  the  portion  of
Elamite  territory  nearest  to  Nagitu :  if  all
went  well,  he  would  thus  have  time  to  crush
the  rising  power  of  Merodach-baladan  and
regain  his  own  port  of  departure  before
Khalludusli  could  muster  a  suiScient  army  to  render  efficient  succour  to  his
vassal.

More  than  a  year  was  consumed  in  preparations.  The  united  cities  of
Chaldsea  being  unable  to  furnish  the  transports  required  to  convoy  such  a  large
host  across  the  Xar-Marratum,  it  was  necessary  to  construct  a  fleet,  and  to  do
so  in  such  a  way  that  the  enemy  should  have  no  suspicion  of  danger.
Sennacherib  accordingly  set  up  his  dockyards  at  Tul-barsip  on  the  Euphrates
and  at  Nineveh  on  the  Tigris,  and  Syrian  shipwrights  built  him  a  fleet  of
vessels  after  two  distinct  types.  Some  were  galleys  identical  in  build  and
equipment  with  those  which  the  Mediterranean  natives  used  for  their  traffic  with
distant  lands.^     The  others  followed  the  old  Babylonian  model,  with  stem  and

'  For  tbe  earliest  cou6gnration  of  tbese  districts,  cf.  Maspero,  Daion  of  Civilization,  pp.  548,  549,
552,  553.  The  condition  I  describe  here  ia  very  similar  to  what  Alexander's  admirals  found  350
years  later.  Arrian  has  preserved  for  us  the  account  of  Nearchus'  navigation  in  tbese  waters
(_Historia  Indica,  §§  xli.,  slii.,  in  MCller-Didot,  Oeographi  Grasci  Minores,  vol.  i.  pp.  365-3()8),  and
his  description  shows  such  a  well-defined  condition  of  the  estuary  that  its  main  outline  must  have
remained  unchanged  for  a  considerable  time  ;  the  only  subsequent  alterations  which  had  taken  place
must  have  been  in  the  internal  configuration,  where  the  deposit  of  alluvium  miist  have  necessarily
reduced  the  area  of  the  lake  since  the  time  of  Sennacherib.  The  little  map  inserted  in  the  text  has
no  pretension  to  scientific  exactitude ;  its  only  object  is  to  show  roughly  what  the  estuary  of  the
Euphrates  was  like,  and  to  illustrate  approximately  the  course  of  the  Assyrian  expedition.

'  Cf  the  vignette  reproduced  supra,  p.  282.


TEE  ASSYRIAN  FLEET   ON   THE  NAB-MABSATUM.


301


stern  both  raised,  the  bows  being  sometimes  distinguished  by  the  carving  of  a
horse's  head,  which  justified  the  name  of  sea-horse  given  to  a  vessel  of  this
kind.  They  had  no  masts,  but  propelling  power  was  provided  by  two  banks  of
oars  one  above  the  other,  as  in  the  galleys.  The  two  divisions  of  the  fleet
were  ready  at  the  beginning  of  694  B.C.,  and  it  was  arranged  that  they  should
meet  at  Bit-Dakkuri,  to  the  south  of  Babylon.  The  fleet  from  Tul-barsip  had
merely  to  descend  the  Euphrates  to  reach  the  meeting-place,^  but  that  from


THE    FLEET   OP    SENNACHERIB    ON    THE    NAR-31 ARKATLM."

Nineveh  had  to  make  a  more  complicated  journey.  By  following  the  course
of  the  Tigris  to  its  mouth  it  would  have  had  to  skirt  the  coast  of  Elam  for  a
considerable  distance,  and  would  inevitably  have  aroused  the  suspicions  of
Khalludush ;  the  passage  of  such  a  strong  squadron  must  have  revealed  to
him  the  importance  of  the  enterprise,  and  put  him  on  his  guard.  The  vessels
therefore  stayed  their  course  at  Uj)!,  where  they  were  drawn  ashore  and  trans-
ported on  rollers  across  the  narrow  isthmus  which  separates  tlie  Tigris  from  the

'  The  story  of  the  preparations,  as  it  has  beea  transmitted  to  us  in  Sennacherib's  inscriptions
(Smith-Satce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  90-92,  102,  103),  is  curiously  similar  to  the  accounts  given
by  the  Greek  historians  of  the  vessels  Alexander  had  built  at  Babylon  ami  Thapsacus  by  Phoenician
workmen,  which  descended  the  Euplirates  to  join  the  fleet  in  the  Persian  Gulf  (Arrian,  Anabasis,  VII.
XX.  §§  3-6 ;  ef.  Plutarch,  Life  of  Alexander,  §  68).  This  fleet  consisted  of  quinquiremes,  according
to  Aristobulus,  who  was  present  at  their  construction  :  Quintus-Curtius  (x.  1,  §  19)  makes  them  all
vessels  with  seven  banks  of  oars,  but  he  evidently  confuses  the  galleys  built  at  Thapsacus  with  those
which  came  in  sections  from  Phoenicia  and  which  Alexander  had  put  together  at  Babylon.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Latard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  71.


302  SENNACHERIB.

Ai-aklitu  canal,  on  which  they  were  then  relaunched.  Either  the  canal  had
not  been  well  kept,  or  else  it  never  had  the  necessary  depth  at  certain  places ;
but  the  crews  managed  to  overcome  all  obstacles  and  rejoined  their  comrades
in  due  time.^  Sennacherib  was  ready  waiting  for  them  with  all  his  troops —
foot-soldiers,  cliarioteers,  and  horsemen — and  with  supplies  of  food  for  the  men,
and  of  barley  and  oats  for  the  horses;  as  soon  as  the  last  contingent  had
arrived,  he  gave  the  signal  for  departure,  and  all  advanced  together,  the  army
marching  along  the  southern  bank,  the  fleet  descending  the  current,  to  the
little  port  of  Bab-Salimeti,  some  twelve  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  river.^
There  they  halted  in  order  to  proceed  to  the  final  embarcation,  but  at  the  last
moment  their  inexperience  of  the  sea  nearly  compromised  the  success  of  the
expedition.  Even  if  they  were  not  absolutely  ignorant  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of
the  tide,  they  certainly  did  not  know  how  dangerous  the  spring  tide  could
prove  at  the  equinox  under  the  influence  of  a  south  wind.  The  rising  tide
then  comes  into  conflict  with  the  volume  of  water  brought  down  by  the  stream,
and  in  the  encounter  the  banks  are  broken  down,  and  sometimes  large  districts
are  inundated :  this  is  what  happened  that  year,  to  the  terror  of  the  Assyrians.
Their  camp  was  invaded  and  completely  flooded  by  the  waves ;  the  king  and
his  soldiers  took  refuge  in  haste  on  the  galleys,  where  they  were  kept  prisoners
for  five  days  "  as  in  a  huge  cage."  As  soon  as  the  waters  abated,  they  completed
their  preparations  and  started  on  their  voyage.  At  the  point  where  the
Euphrates  enters  the  lagoon,  Sennacherib  pushed  forward  to  the  front  of  the
line,  and,  standing  in  the  bows  of  his  flag-ship,  offered  a  sacrifice  to  Ea,  the
god  of  the  Ocean.  Having  made  a  solemn  libation,  he  threw  into  the  water  a
gold  model  of  a  ship,  a  golden  fish,  and  an  image  of  the  god  himself,  likewise
in  gold ;  this  ceremony  performed,  he  returned  to  the  port  of  Bab-Salimeti
with  his  guard,  wliile  the  bulk  of  his  forces  continued  their  voyage  eastward.
The  passage  took  place  without  mishap,  but  they  could  not  disembark  on  the
shore  of  the  gulf  itself,  which  was  unapproachable  by  reason  of  the  deposits
of  semi-liquid  mud  which  girdled  it;  they  therefore  put  into  the  mouth
of  the  Ulai,  and  ascended  the  river  till  they  reached  a  spot  where  the  slimy
reed-beds  gave  place  to  firm  ground,  which  permitted  them  to  draw  tlieir
ships  to  land.^     The  inhabitants   assembled  hastily  at  sight  of  the  enemy,

'  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies  ?  p.  74,  where  the  right  sense  of  the  passage,  misunderstood
by  Smith,  has  been  indicated  for  the  first  time.

'  The  mouth  of  the  Euphrates  being  at  that  time  not  far  from  the  site  of  Kornah,  Bab-Salimeti,
which  was  about  twelve  miles  distant,  must  have  been  somewhere  near  the  present  village  of  Abu-
Hath-a,  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river ;  cf  Billerbeck,  Geographisclie  Untersuchmigen,  p.  47.  Fr.  De-
litzsch placed  this  town  north  of  the  Euphrates  nearer  to  Kornah,  on  the  map  which  accompanied
his  work  entitled  Wo  lag  das  Paradies '/

'  Billerbeck  recognises  in  the  narrative  of  Sennacherib  the  indication  of  two  attempts  at  debarca-
tioD,  of  which  the  second  only  can  have  been  successful  {op.  cit.,  pp.  47,  48) ;  I  can  distinguish  only
one  crossing.


DESCENT   ON  NAGITD.


303


and  the  news,  spreading  through  the  neighbouring  tribes,  brought  together  for
their  defence  a  confused  crowd  of  archers,  chariots,  and  horsemen.  The
Assyrians,  leaping  into  the  stream  and  climbing  up  the  bank,  easily  over-
powered these  undisciplined  troops.  They  captured  at  the  first  onset  Nagitu,
Nagitu-Dibina,  Khilmu,  Pillatu,  and  Khupapanu;  and  raiding  the  Kalda,
forced  them  on  board  the  fleet  with  their  gods,  their  families,  their  flocks,
and  household  possessions,  and  beat  a  hurried  retreat  with  their  booty.
Merodach  -  baladan   himself  _^_____„_„^-


A


,^:'(


t;i  V


W^'


^i^^l^


and  his  children  once
more  escaped  their  clutches,
but  the  State  he  had  tried
to  create  was  annihilated,
and  his  power  utterly
crushed.  Sennacherib  re-
ceived his  generals  with
great  demonstrations  of  joy
at  Bab-Salimeti,  and  carried
the  spoil  in  triumph  to
Nineveh.^  Khalludush,  ex-
asperated by  the  affront  put
upon  him,  instantly  retaliated
by  invading  Karduniash,
where. he  pushed  forward  as
far  as  Sippara,  pillaging  and
destroying  the  inhabitants
without  opposition.  The
Babylonians  who  had  ac-
companied Merodach-bala-
dan  into  exile,  returned  in
the  train  of  the  Elamites,-and,  secretly  stealing  back  to  their  homes,  stirred  up
a  general  revolt:  Assur-nadin-shumu,  taken  prisoner  by  his  own  subjects,  was
put  in  chains  and  despatched  to  Susa,  his  throne  being  bestowed  on  a  Babylonian
named  Nergal-ushezib,^  who  at  once  took  the  field  (694  B.C.).    His  preliminary


,1  )i  Ji  'i  'i~"  ■


W^^^;¥\


iiilliiii;


KJl^


A    SKIRMISH    LS    THE    MARSHES.''


'  Smith-Sayce,  KUt.  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  88-100,  102,  103 ;  cf.  Bezold,  Inschriften  Sanherib's,  in
SoHRADER,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  100,  101.  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  ii.  11.  36-39,
places  the  taking  of  Nagitu  in  the  sixth  year  of  Assur-nadin-shumu,  which  supplies  the  date
691-693  B.C.  for  the  expedition.  For  the  appreciation  of  these  events,  see  the  observations  of
BiLLERBECK,  Susa,  pp.  84-86,  and  Geograpliische  Untersuchungen,  pp.  46-48.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  p.  27.

'  This  is  the  prince  whom  the  Assyrian  documents  name  Shuzub,  and  whom  we  might  call  Shuzub
the  Babylonian,  in  contradistinction  to  Mushezib-marduk,  who  is  Shuzub  the  Kaldu ;  cf.  supra,
p.  296,  note  1.


304  SENNACHERIB.

efforts  were  successful :  he  ravaged  the  frontier  along  the  Turnat  with  the  help  of
the  Elamites,  and  took  by  assault  the  city  of  Nipur,  which  refused  to  desert  the
cause  of  Sennacherib  (693  B.C.).  Meanwhile  the  Assyrian  generals  had  captured
TJruk  (Erech)  on  the  1st  of  Tisri,  after  the  retreat  of  Khalludush ;  and  having
sacked  the  city,  were  retreating  northwards  with  their  spoil  when  they
were  defeated  on  the  7tli  near  Nipur  by  Nergal-ushezib.  He  had  already
rescued  the  statues  of  the  gods  and  the  treasure,  when  his  horse  fell  in  the
midst  of  the  fray,  and  he  could  not  disengage  himself.  His  vanquished  foes
led  him  captive  to  Nineveh,  where  Sennacherib  exposed  him  in  chains  at  the
principal  gateway  of  his  palace :  the  Babylonians,  who  owed  to  him  their
latest  success,  summoned  a  Kaldu  prince,  Mushezib-marduk,  son  of  Gahul,  to
take  command.  He  hastened  to  comply,  and  with  the  assistance  of  Elamite
troops  offered  such  a  determined  resistance  to  all  attack,  that  he  was  finally
left  in  undisturbed  possession  of  his  kingdom  (692  B.C.) :  the  actual  result  to
Assyria,  therefore,  of  the  ephemeral  victory  gained  by  the  fleet  had  been  the
loss  of  Babylon.^

A  revolution  in  Elam  speedily  afforded  Assyria  an  opportunity  for  revenge.
When  Nergal-ushezib  was  taken  prisoner,  the  people  of  Susa,  dissatisfied  with
the  want  of  activity  displayed  by  Khalludush,  conspired  to  depose  him:  on
hearing,  therefore,  the  news  of  the  revolutions  in  Chaldaea,  they  rose  in  revolt
on  the  26th  of  Tisri,  and,  besieging  him  in  his  palace,  put  him  to  death,  and
elected  a  certain  Kutur-nakhunta  as  his  successor.'^  Sennacherib,  without
a  moment's  hesitation,  crossed  the  frontier  at  Durilu,  before  order  was
re-established  at  Susa,  and  recovered,  after  very  slight  resistance,  Eaza  and
Bit-khairi  which  Shutruk-nakhunta  had  taken  from  Sargon.  This  preliminary
success  laid  the  lower  plain  of  Susiana  at  his  mercy,  and  he  ravaged  it  pitilessly
from  Eaza  to  Bit-bunaki.  "  Thirty-four  strongholds  and  the  townships  depending
on  them,  whose  number  is  unequalled,  I  besieged  and  took  by  assault,  their
inhabitants  I  led  into  captivity,  I  demolished  them  and  reduced  them  to  ashes :
I  caused  the  smoke  of  their  burning  to  rise  into  the  wide  heaven,  like  the
smoke  of  one  great  sacrifice."  Kutur-nakhunta,  still  insecurely  seated  on  the
throne  of  Susa,  retreated  with  his  army  towards  Khaidalu,  in  the  almost
unexplored  regions  which  bordered  the  Iranian  plateau,^  and  entrenched
himself  strongly  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains.     The  season  was  already  well

'  The  order  of  events  is  given  by  Finches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  ii.  11.  39^8,  col.  iii.  11.  1-9 ;
the  Assyrian  texts  add  a  certain  number  of  contradictory  details  to  the  information  it  conveys  (Smith-
Sa'YCE,  Hist,  of  Setmaclierib,  pp.  100,  101,  103-105:  cf.  Bezolv,  Inschnf ten  Sanherib's,  in  Soheader,
Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  100-103).

-  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iii.  11.  6-9,  where  the  new  king  is  called  by  the  abbreviated
name  of  Kudur ;  the  full  form  Kudur-nankhnudi  is  given  by  the  Assyrian  texts  (Taylor  Cylinder.
col.  iv.  1.  70),  the  Susian  original  of  which  is  Kutur-nakhunta.

'  Khaidalu  is  very  probably  the  present  Dis  Malkan  (Bii.lerbeok,  Siisn,  p.  72).


THE  INVASION   OF  EL  AM.


305


advanced  when  the  Assyrians  set  out  on  this  expedition,  and  November  set  iu
while  they  were  ravaging  the  plain  :  but  the  weather  was  still  so  fine  that
Sennacherib  determined  to  take  advantage  of  it  to  march  upon  Madaktu.
Hardly  had  he  scaled  the  heights  when  winter  fell  upon  him  with  its
accompaniment  of  cold  and  squally  weather.  "Violent  storms  broke  out,
it  rained  and  snowed  incessantly,  the  torrents  and  streams  overflowed  their
banks,"  so  that  hostilities  had  to  be  suspended  and  the  troops  ordered  back  to
Nineveh/  The  effect  produced,  however,  by  these  bold  measures  was  in  no
way  diminished :  though  Kutur-nakhunta  had  not  had  the  necessary  time  to

prepare  for  the  contest,  he

was  nevertheless  discredited     ;  v^'c^^^S^cS-      '  /'

among  his  subjects  for  failing
to  bring  them  out  of  it  with
glory,  and  three  months
after  the  retreat  of  the  As-
syrians he  was  assassinated
iu  a  riot  on  the  20th  of  Ab,
692  B.C.-  His  younger
brother,  Umman  -  minanu,
assumed  the  crown,  and
though  his  enemies  disdain-
fully refused  to  credit  him
with  either  prudence  or  judgment,  he  soon  restored  iiis  kingdom  to  such  a
formidable  degree  of  power  that  Mushezib-marduk  thought  the  opportunity
a  favourable  one  for  striking  a  blow  at  Assyria,  from  which  she  could
never  recover.  Elam  had  plenty  of  troops,  but  was  deficient  in  the
resources  necessary  to  pay  the  men  and  their  chiefs,  and  to  induce  the  tribes
of  the  table-land  to  furnish  their  contingents.  Mushezib-marduk,  there-
fore, emptied  the  sacred  treasury  of  £-sagilla,  and  sent  the  gold  and
silver  of  Bel  and  Zarpanit  to  Umman-minauu  with  a  message  which  ran
thus:  "Assemble  thine  army,  and  prepare  thy  camp,  come  to  Babylon  and
strengthen  our  hands,  for  thou  art  our  help."  The  Elamite  asked  nothing
better  than  to  avenge  the  provinces  so  cruelly  harassed,  and  the  cities  consumed
in  the  course  of  the  last  campaign :  he  summoned  all  his  nobles,  from  the  least

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  43-79:  of.  Smith-Sayce,  Hist,  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  lOG-110;
Bezold,  Inschriften  Sanherib's,  in  Schradek,  Keilins.  Bibliolheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  102-105.

■  The  Assyrian  documents  merely  mention  the  death  of  Kutur-nakhunta  less  than  three  mouths
after  the  return  of  Sennacherib  to  Nineveh  (Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  79-90,  col.  v.  11.  1-4).
Pinches'  Babylonian  Clironicle,  col.  iii.  II.  14-10,  only  mentions  the  revolution  in  which  he  perished,
and  informs  us  that  he  had  reigned  ten  months.  It  contracts  Umman-minanu,  the  name  of  the
Elamite  king,  to  Blinanu.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Layard,  Monuments  of  Nineveli,  vol.  i.  pi.  64.

X


THE   HOKSE  OP  NERGAL-USHEZIB   FALLING   IN  THE  BATTLE.'


306  SENNACHERIB.

to  the  greatest,  aud  enlisted  the  help  of  the  troops  of  Parsuas,  Ellipi,  and  Anziin,
the  Aramasau  Puqudu  and  Gambulu  of  the  Tigris,  as  well  as  the  Aramaeans  of
the  Euphrates,  and  the  peoples  of  Bit-Adini  and  Bit-Amukkani,  who  had  rallied
round  Samuna,  son  of  Merodach-baladan,  and  joined  forces  with  the  soldiers
of  Mushezib-marduk  in  Babylon.  "  Like  an  invasion  of  countless  locusts
swooping  down  upon  the  land,  they  assembled,  resolved  to  give  me  battle,
and  the  dust  of  their  feet  rose  before  me,  like  a  thick  cloud  which  darkens
the  copper-coloured  dome  of  the  sky."  The  conflict  took  place  near  the
township  of  Khalule,  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,  not  far  from  the  confluence  of
this  river  with  the  Turnat.'  At  this  point  the  Turnat,  flowing  through  the
plain,  divides  into  several  branches,  which  ramify  again  and  again,  and  form
a  kind  of  delta  extending  from  the  ruins  of  Nayan  to  those  of  Keshadeh.
During  the  whole  of  the  day  the  engagement  between  the  two  hosts  raged  on
this  unstable  soil,  and  their  leaders  themselves  sold  their  lives  dearly  in  the
struggle.  Sennacherib  invoked  the  help  of  Assur,  Sin,  Shamash,  Nebo,
Bel,  Nergal,  Ishtar  of  Nineveh,  and  Ishtar  of  Arbela,  and  the  gods  hoard  his
prayers.  "  Like  a  lion  I  raged,  I  donned  my  harness,  I  covered  my  head  with
my  casque,  the  badge  of  war ;  my  powerful  battle-chariot,  which  mows
down  the  rebels,  I  ascended  it  in  haste  in  the  rage  of  my  heart ;  the  strong
bow  which  Assur  entrusted  to  me,  I  seized  it,  and  the  javelin,  destroyer  of  life,
I  grasped  it :  the  whole  host  of  obdurate  rebels  I  charged,  shining  like  silver  or
like  the  day,  and  I  roared  as  Eamman  roareth."  Khumba-undash,  the  Elamite
general,  was  killed  in  one  of  the  first  encounters,  and  many  of  his  ofHcers
perished  around  him,  "  of  those  who  wore  golden  daggers  at  their  belts,  and
bracelets  of  gold  on  their  wrists."  They  fell  one  after  the  other,  "  like  fat  bulls
chained  "  for  the  sacrifice,  or  like  sheep,  and  their  blood  flowed  on  the  broad
plain  as  the  water  after  a  violent  storm  :  the  horses  plunged  in  it  up  to  their
knees,  and  the  body  of  the  royal  chariot  was  reddened  with  it.  A  son  of
Merodach-baladan,  Nabu-shumishkun,  was  taken  prisoner,  but  Umman-minanu
and  Mushezib-marduk  escaped  unhurt  from  the  fatal  field.  It  seems  as  if
fortune  had  at  last  decided  in  favour  of  the  Assyrians,  and  they  proclaimed
the  fact  loudly,  but  their  success  was  not  so  evident  as  to  j^reclude  their
adversaries  also  claiming  the  victory  with  some  show  of  truth.     In  any  case,

'  Fr.  Delitzsch  placed  Khalulo  near  Bagdad,  but  was  uncertain  whether  it  lay  ou  the  right  or
left  bank  of  the  river  (Ho  lafj  das  Paradiesi  p.  207).  Billerbeek  places  the  site  on  the  left  bank  in
the  delta  of  the  Dlyala  (^Geographische  Untersuchungen,  p.  11,  note  1),  perhaps  on  tlie  site  of  the
town  of  Hebheb  in  the  present  canton  of  Khalis  (Susa,  p.  90).  Haui)t  (The  Battle  of  Halule,  in  the
Andotcr  Ueniew,  1887,  p.  542,  et  seq.)  attributes  to  the  name  the  signification  Jioles,  logs,  and  this
interpretation  agrees  well  enough  with  the  state  of  the  country  round  the  mouths  of  the  Diyala,  in  the
low-lying  district  which  separates  that  river  from  the  Tigris  ;  he  compares  it  with  the  name  Ilaulaych,
quoted  by  Arab  geographers  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  with  that  of  the  canton  of  HfUeh,  mentioned
in  Syrian  texts  as  belonging  to  the  district  of  Kadhan,  between  the  Adhem  and  tlio  Diyala.


BATTLE   OF  KEALULE.  307

the  losses  on  both  sides  were  so  considerable  as  to  force  the  two  belligerents  to
suspend  operations ;  they  returned  each  to  his  capital,  and  matters  remained
much  as  they  had  been  before  the  battle  took  place/

Years  might  have  elapsed  before  Sennacherib  could  have  ventured  to
recommence  hostilities :  he  was  not  deluded  by  the  exaggerated  estimate  of
his  victory  in  the  accounts  given  by  his  court  historians,  and  he  recognised
the  fact  that  the  issue  of  the  struggle  must  be  uncertain  as  long  as  the  alliance
subsisted  between  Elam  and  Chaldsea.  But  fortune  came  to  his  aid  sooner
than  he  had  expected.  Umman-minauu  was  not  absolute  in  his  dominions
any  more  than  his  predecessors  had  been,  and  the  losses  he  had  sustained
at  Khalule,  without  obtaining  any  compensating  advantages  in  the  form  of
prisoners  or  spoil,  had  lowered  him  in  the  estimation  of  his  vassals  ;  Mushezib-
marduk,  on  the  other  hand,  had  emptied  his  treasuries,  and  though  Karduniash
was  wealthy,  it  was  hardly  able,  after  such  a  short  interval,  to  provide  further
subsidies  to  purchase  the  assistance  of  the  mountain  tribes.  Sennacherib's
emissai'ies  kept  him  well  informed  of  all  that  occurred  in  the  enemy's  court,
and  he  accordingly  took  the  field  again  at  the  beginning  of  689  B.C.,  and  on
this  occasion  circumstances  seemed  likely  to  combine  to  give  him  an  easy
victory."  Mushezib-marduk  shut  himself  up  in  Babylon,  not  doubting  that
the  Elamites  would  hasten  to  his  succour  as  soon  as  they  should  hear  of
his  distress ;  but  his  expectation  was  not  fulfilled.  Umman-minauu  was  struck
down  by  apoplexy,  on  the  1 5th  of  Nisan,  and  though  his  illness  did  not  at  once
terminate  fatally,  he  was  left  paralysed  with  distorted  mouth,  and  loss  of
speech,  incapable  of  action,  and  almost  unfit  to  govern.^  His  seizure  put  a
stop  to  his  warlike  preparations:  and  his  ministers,  preoccupied  with  the
urgent  question  of  the  succession  to  the  throne,  had  no  desire  to  provoke  a
conflict  with  Assyria,  the  issue  of  which  could  not  be  foretold  ;  they  therefore

'  Taylor  Cylinder,  col.  v.  11.  5-85,  col.  vii.  11.  1-24:  cf.  Smith-Satce,  Sist.  of  Sennacherib,
pp.  114-132;  Bezold,  2jisc7ir/;(f«  Sanherib's,ia  ScmxA.DER,  Keilins.  Biblioiliel:,  \o\.  ii.  pp.  101-111.
An  animated  description  of  the  battle  has  been  given  by  Haupt  {TIte  Battle  of  UaluU,  ti91  b.c,  in  the
Andocer  Review,  18SG,  p.  5J2,  et  seq.).  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iii.  II.  lG-18,  attributes
the  victory  to  the  Elamites,  and  says  that  tlie  year  in  which  the  battle  was  fought  was  unknown.
The  testimony  of  this  chronicle  is  so  often  marred  by  partiality,  that  to  prefer  it  always  to  that  of
the  Ninevite  inscriptions  shows  deficiency  of  critical  ability :  the  course  of  events  seems  to  me  to
prove  that  the  advantage  remained  with  the  Assyrians,  tliough  the  victory  was  uot  decisive.  The
date,  which  necessarily  falls  between  692  and  689  B.C.,  has  been  decided  by  general  considerations  as
G91  B.C.,  the  very  year  in  which  the  Taylor  Cylinder  was  written.

^  The  Assyrian  documents  insert  the  account  of  the  capture  of  Babylon  directly  after  the  battle
of  Khalule  (Baeian  Inscription,  1.  43,  et  seq.),  and  modern  historians  therefore  concluded  that  the
two  events  took  place  within  a  few  months  of  each  other  (Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alterthuins,
vol.  i.  p.  470).  The  information  aftorded  by  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iii.  11.  22-26,  has
enabled  us  to  correct  this  mistake,  and  to  bring  down  the  date  of  the  taking  of  Babylon  to  689  b.c.
(TiELE,  Bab.-ass.  Geacli.,  pp.  305,  324 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  733,  734  ;  Mukdtek  and
Deutzsoh,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  201,  202 ;  Wixckler,  Gcsch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  132).

^  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iii.  11.  19-21,


308  SEXNACHEBIB.

left  their  ally  to  defend  bis  own  interests  as  best  be  might.  Babylon,  reduced
to  rely  entirely  on  its  own  resources,  does  not  seem  to  have  held  out  long,  and
perhaps  the  remembrance  of  the  treatment  it  had  received  on  former  occasions
may  account  for  the  very  slight  resistance  it  now  offered.  The  Assyrian  kings
who  had  from  time  to  time  conquered  Babylon,  had  always  treated  it  with  great
consideration.  They  had  looked  upon  it  as  a  sacred  city,  whose  caprices  and
outbreaks  must  always  be  pardoned ;  it  was  only  with  infinite  precautions
that  they  had  imposed  their  commands  upon  it,  and  even  when  they  had
felt  that  severity  was  desirable,  they  had  restrained  themselves  in  using  it,
and  humoured  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  inhabitants.  Tiglath-pileser  III,
Shalmaneser  \.,  and  Sargon  had  all  preferred  to  be  legally  crowned  as
sovereigns  of  Babylon  instead  of  remaining  merely  its  masters  by  right  of
conquest,  and  though  Sennacherib  had  refused  compliance  with  the  traditions
by  which  his  predecessors  had  submitted  to  be  bound,  he  had  behaved  with
unwonted  lenity  after  quelling  the  two  previous  revolts.  He  now  recognised
that  his  clemency  had  been  shown  in  vain,  and  his  small  stock  of  patience  was
completely  exhausted  just  when  fate  threw  the  rebellious  city  into  his  power.
If  the  inhabitants  had  expected  to  be  once  more  let  off  easily,  their  illusions
were  speedily  dissipated :  they  were  slain  by  the  sword  as  if  tliey  had  been
ordinary  foes,  such  as  Jews,  Tibarenians,  or  Kalda  of  Bit-Yakin,  and  they  were
spared  none  of  the  horrors  which  custom  then  permitted  the  stronger  to  inflict
upon  the  weaker.  For  several  days  the  pitiless  massacre  lasted.  Young  and
old,  all  who  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  soldiery,  perished  by  the  sword ;  piles  of
corpses  filled  the  streets  and  the  approaches  to  the  temples,  especially  the
avenue  of  winged  bulls  which  led  to  E-sagilla,^  and,  even  after  the  first  fury
of  carnage  had  been  appeased,  it  was  only  to  be  succeeded  by  more  organised
pillage.  Mushezib-marduk  was  sent  into  exile  with  his  family,  and  immense
convoys  of  prisoners  and  spoil  followed  him.  The  treasures  carried  off  from
the  royal  palace,  the  temples,  and  the  houses  of  the  rich  nobles  were  divided
among  the  conquerors ;  they  comprised  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  costly  stuffs,
and  provisions  of  all  sorts.  The  sacred  edifices  were  sacked,  the  images  hacked
to  pieces  or  carried  off  to  Nineveh :  Bel-Marduk,  introduced  into  the  sanctuary
of  Assur,  became  subordinate  to  the  rival  deity  amid  a  crowd  of  strange  gods.
In  the  inmost  recess  of  a  chapel  were  discovered  some  ancient  statues  of
Eamman  and  Shala  of  E-kallati,  which  Marduk-nadin-akhe  had  carried  off  in
the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  and  these  were  brought  back  in  triumph  to  their
own  land,  after  an  absence  of  four  hundred  and  eighteen  years.^     The  buildings

'  Cylinder  of  Asmr-haui-pal,  col.  iv.  11.  70-73 ;  cf.  S.  Alden-Smith,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Asur-
banipah,  vol.  i.  pp.  3i,  35.

'  For  this  date,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  663.


TAKING   AND   DESTRUCTION  OF  BABYLON.  309

themselves  suffered  a  like  fate  to  that  of  their  owners  and  their  gods.     "  The

city  and  its  houses,  from  foundation  to  roof,  I  destroyed  them,  I  demolished

them,   I   burnt   them    with   fire ;    walls,   gateways,   sacred   chapels,   and   the

towers   of    earth   and   tiles,   I  laid  them   all   low   and   cast   them    into    the

Arakhtu."  ^     The   incessant   revolts   of    the   people  justified   this   wholesale

destruction.     Babylon,  as  we  have  said  before,^  was  too  powerful  to  be  reduced

for  long  to  the  second  rank  in   a   Mesopotamian   empire  :   as   soon   as   fate

established  the  seat  of  empire  in  the  districts  bordering  on  the  Euphrates  and

the  middle  course  of  the  Tigris,  its  well-chosen  situation,  its  size,  its  riches,

the  extent  of  its  population,  the  number  of  its  temples,  and  the  beauty  of  its

palaces,  all  conspired  to  make  it  the  capital  of  the  country.     In  vain  Assur,

Calah,  or  Nineveh  thrust  themselves  into  the  foremost  rank,  and  by  a  strenuous

effort  made  their  princes  rulers  of  Babylon ;  in  a  short  time  Babylon  replenished

her  treasury,  found  allies,  soldiers,  and  leaders,  and  in  spite  of  reverses  of  fortune

soon  regained  the  upper  hand.     The  only  treatment  which  could  effectually

destroy  her  ascendency  was  that  of  leaving  in  her  not  one  brick  upon  another,

thus  preventing  her  from  being   re-peopled   for  several  generations,  since  a

new  city  could  not  at  once  spring  up  from  the  ashes  of  the  old ;  until  she  had

been  utterly  destroyed  her  conquerors  had  still  reason  to  fear  her.      This  fact

Sennacherib,  or  his  councillors,  knew  well.     If  he  merits  any  reproach,  it  is  not

for  having  seized  the  opportunity  of  destroying  the  city  which  Babylon  offered

him,  but  rather  for  not  .having  persevered  in  his  design  to  the  end,  and  reduced

her  to  a  mere  name.

In  the  midst  of  these  costly  and  absorbing  wars,  we  may  well  wonder  how
Sennacherib  found  time  and  means  to  build  villas  or  temples  ;  yet  he  is  neverthe-
less, among  the  kings  of  Assyria,  the  monarch  who  has  left  us  the  largest  number
of  monuments."  He  restored  a  shrine  of  Nergal  in  the  small  town  of  Tarbizi ;  ^
he  fortified  the  village  of  Alshi ;  *  and  in  704.  B.C.  he  founded  a  royal  residence  ^

'  Bavian  Inscription,  U.  43-54:  cf.  Smith-Sayce,  ffisL  of  Sennaclierib,  pp.  132-135;  Pognon,
L' Inecription  de  Bavian,  pp.  17-21,  85-95,  125;  Bezold,  Inschriften  Sanherib' s,  in  Schradek,
Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  116-119.  Pinches'  Babylonian  Cltronicle,  col.  iii.  1.  2i,  attributes
to  the  reign  of  Mnshezib-marduli  a  period  of  four  years,  whicli  enables  us  to  fix  the  date  of  tlie
taking  of  the  city  as  689  b.u.  (Tiele,  Babylonisch-asiyrische  Geschichte,  p.  324 ;  Hommel,  Geach.  Bab.
und  Ass.,  pp.  733,  734 ;  Delitzsch  and  Mobdter,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  2U1,  202 ;
WiNCKLER,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  132).

=  Cf.  supra,  pp.  196,  197.

'  All  the  texts  relating  to  the  buildings  of  Sennacherib  have  been  collected,  translated,  and  com-
mented on,  for  the  first  time,  by  Melssner  and  Eost,  Die  Bau inschriften  Sanheribs,  1893.

'  The  erection  of  the  temple  at  Tarbizi  is  known  from  inscriptions  on  bricks  and  stone  (H.
Rawunson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  7,  Nos.  viii.  and  c. ;  cf.  Oppekt,  E.qiidUioH  en  M^sopotamie,  vol.  i.
p.  348),  and  on  clay  tablets  (H.  Kawlinson,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pi.  3,  No.  13),  which  come  from  Sherif-
K.haD,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  site  where  Tarbizi  itself  stood,  as  well  as  from  a  fragment  discovered
at  Kouyunjik  (Meissneu  and  RosT,  op.  cit.,  pp.  89,  92,  93).

'  A  brick  from  the  Kalaa,  or  citadel  of  f^hemamek  (Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  190,  191),


•]  1 0  SENNA  CHESIB.

in  the  fortress  of  Kakzi,  which  defended  the  approach  to  Cahih  from  the  south-
east.^ He  did  not  reside  much  at  Dur-Sharrukin,  neither  did  he  complete  the
decoration  of  his  father's  palace  there  :  his  pride  as  a  victorious  warrior  suffered
when  his  surroundings  reminded  him  of  a  more  successful  conqueror  than
himself,  and  Calah  itself  was  too  full  of  memories  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and
the  sovereigns  of  the  eighth  century  for  him  to  desire  to  establish  his  court
there.  He  preferred  to  reside  at  Nineveh,  which  had  been  much  neglected  by
his  predecessors,  and  where  the  crumbling  edifices  merely  recalled  the  memory
of  long-vanished  splendours.  He  selected  this  city  as  his  residence  at  the  very
beginning  of  his  reign,  perhaps  while  he  was  still  only  crown  prince,  and  began
by  repairing  its  ancient  fortifications  ;  later  on,  when  the  success  of  his  earlier


THE   MOUNDS   OK   KISEVEH   SEEN    FROM    THE  TERRACE   OF   A    HOCSE   IN   SIOSIL."

campaigns  had  furnished  him  with  a  sufficient  supply  of  prisoners,  he  undertook
the  restoration  of  the  whole  city,  with  its  avenues,  streets,  canals,  quays,  gardens,
and  aqueducts :  the  labour  of  all  the  captives  brought  together  from  diiferent
quarters  of  his  empire  was  pressed  into  the  execution  of  his  plans — the  Kalda,
the  Aramseans,  the  Mannai,  the  people  of  Kui,  the  Cilicians,  the  Philistines,
and  the  Tyrians ;  the  provinces  vied  with  each  other  in  furnishing  him  with
materials  without  stint, — precious  woods  were  procured  from  Syria,  marbles
from  Kapri-dargila,  alabaster  from  Balad,  while  Bit-Yakin  provided  the  rushes
to  be  laid  between  the  courses  of  brickwork.  The  river  Tebilti,  after  causing  the
downfall  of  the  royal  mausolea  and  "  displaying  to  the  light  of  day  the  coffins
which  they  concealed,"  had  sapped  the  foundations  of  the  palace  of  Assur-
nazir-pal,  and  caused  it  to  fall  in  :  ^  a  muddy  pool  now  occupied  the  north-
western quarter,  between  the  court  of  Ishtar  and  the  lofty  ziggurat  of  Assur.
This  pool   Sennacherib   filled  up,  and  regulated  the   course    of  the   stream,

and  preserved  ia  the  British  Museum  (H.  Kawlinson,  Cun.  his.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  7,  No.  viii.  H);
Kalaa  is  the  site  of  the  citj-  of  Alshi,  -which  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  neighbouring  fortress
of  Kalzi  or  Kakzi  (Meissnee  and  KoST,  Die  Bauinschriften  Sanheribs,  pp.  S9,  90,  92,  93).

'  Fragment  of  the  Eponym  Canon,  published  by  H.  Eawlinson,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pi.  09;  cf.
ScHKADEE,  EeilinschriftUche  Bibliothek,  vol.  i.  pp.  214,  215.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  lithograph  in  Latabd,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  70.

*  For  the  palace  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  cf.  eupra,  pp.  44,  45.


TEE  BUILDINGS  AT  NINEVEH.


311


providing  against  the  recurrence  of  such  accidents  in  future  by  building  a
substructure  of  masonry,  454  cubits  long  by  289  wide,  formed  of  large  blocks  of
stone  cemented  together  by  bitumen.  On  this  he  erected  a  magnificent  palace,
a  Bit-Kluliini  in  the  Syrian  style,i  with  woodwork  of  fragrant  cedar  and  cypress
overlaid  with  gold  and  silver,  panellings  of  sculptured  marble  and  alabaster,
and  friezes  and  cornices  in  glazed  tiles  of  brilliant  colouring :  inspired  by  the


e»iiiiiii»iB


KING   SENNACHEBIB  WATCHING   THE  TUANSrOliT  OF
A  COLOSSAL   STATUE.'


goddess  Nin-kurra,  be  caused  winged  bulls  of  white  alabaster  and  limestone
statues  of  the  gods  to  be  hewn  iu  the  quarries  of  Balad  near  Nineveh.  He
presided  in  person  at  all  these  operations — at  the  raising  of  the  soil,  the  making
of  the  substructures  of  the  terrace,  the  transport  of  the  colossal  statues  or  blocks
and  their  subsequent  erection  ;  indeed,  he  was  to  be  seen  at  every  turn,  standing
in  his  ebony  and  ivory  chariot,  drawn  by  a  team  of  men.  When  the  building
was  finished,  he  was  so  delighted  with  its  beauty  that  he  named  it  "  the
incomparable  palace,"  ^  and  his  admiration  was  shared  by  his  contemporaries ;
they  were  never  wearied  of  extolling  in  glowing  terms  the  twelve  bronze  lions,
the  twelve  winged  bulls,  and  the  twenty-four  statues  of  goddesses  which  kept
watch  over  the  entrance,  and  for  the  construction  of  which  a  new  method  of

'  For  the  Bit-Khilani  in  the  Syrian  style,  and  the  aspect  they  presented,  of.  supra,  pp.  205-207.
'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Ciudiu,  from  Latard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  12.
'  For  this  "  incomparable  palace  " — Ekallu  sha  shanina  la  Ishu — and  for  the  texts  which  describe
its  erection,  of.  Meissnbb  and  BosT,  Die  Bauinschri/ten  Sarikerihs,  pp.  1-46.


312


SEXXACBERIB.


rapid  casting  had  been  invented.  Formerly  tlie  erection  of  such  edifices  cost
much  in  suffering  to  the  artificers  employed  on  them,  but  Sennacherib  brought
his  great  enterprise  to  a  prompt  completion  without  extravagant  outlay  or
unnecessary  hardship  inflicted  on  his  workmen.  He  proceeded  to  annex  the
neighbouring  quarters  of  the  city,  relegating  the  inhabitants  to  the  suburbs


ASSTBIAN   BAS-RELIEFS   AT  B AVIAN.'

while  he  laid  out  a  great  park  on  the  land  thus  cleared ;  this  park  was  well
planted  with  trees,  like  the  heights  of  Amanus,  and  in  it  flourished  side  by  side
all  the  forest  growths  indigenous  to  the  Cilician  mountains  and  the  plains  of
Chaldtea.  A  lake,  fed  by  a  canal  leading  from  the  Khuzur,  supplied  it  with
water,  which  was  conducted  in  streams  and  rills  through  the  thickets,  keeping
them  always  fresh  and  green.  Vines  trained  on  trellises  afforded  a  grateful
shade  during  the  sultry  hours  of  the  day ;  birds  sang  in  the  branches,  herds  of
wild  boar  and  deer  roamed  through  the  coverts,  in  order  that  the  prince  might
enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the  chase  without  quitting  his  own  private  grounds.
The  main  part  of  these  constructions  was  finished  about  700  B.C.,  but  many
details  were  left  incomplete,  and  the  work  was  still  proceeding  after  the  court


Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin.  from  a  sketch  in  Layakd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  182.


DECORATION   OF  TEE  PALACE   OF  KOUTUNJIK.  313

had  long  been  in  residence  on  the  spot.    Meanwhile  a  smaller  palace,  as  well  as


y


-f)f  "^


Z^T


-*-n#r,nrj^     ,


GREAT   ASSYBIAX    STELE    AT   BAVIAN.'


barracks  and  a  depot  for  arms  and  provisions,  sprang  up  elsewhere.^    Eighteen
aqueducts,  carried  across  the  country,  brought  the  water  from  the  Muzri  to  the

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Layard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  51.

-  The  inscrii^tions  icferring  to  the  arsenal — htt-kutalli — have  been  translated  and  commented  on
in  the  special  collection  of  Meissneb  and  Rost,  Die  Sauinschriften  Sanheribs,  pp.  47-61.


314  SENNA  CBERIB.

Khuzur,  and  secured  an  adequate  supply  to  tlie  city  ;  the  Niuevites,  who  had
hitherto  relied  upon  rain-water  for  the  replenishing  of  their  cisterns,  awoke
one  day  to  find  themselves  released  from  all  anxiety  on  this  score.  An  ancient
and  semi-subterranean  canal,  which  Assur-nazir-pal  had  constructed  nearly  two
centuries  before,  but  which,  owing  to  the  neglect  of  his  successors,  had  become
choked  up,  was  cleaned  out,  enlarged,  and  repaired,  and  made  capable  of  bringing
water  to  their  doors  from  the  springs  of  Mount  Tas,  in  the  same  year  as  that  in
which  the  battle  of  Khalule  took  place.'  At  a  later  date,  magnificent  bas-reliefs,
carved  on  the  rock  by  order  of  Esar-haddon,  representing  winged  bulls,  figures
of  the  gods  and  of  the  king,  with  explanatory  inscriptions,  marked  the  site  of
the  springs,  and  formed  a  kind  of  monumental  facade  to  the  ravine  in  which
they  took  their  rise."

It  would  be  hard  to  account  for  the  rapidity  with  which  these  great  works
were  completed,  did  one  not  remember  that  Sargon  had  previously  carried  out
extensive  architectural  schemes,  in  which  he  must  have  employed  all  the
available  artists  in  his  empire.  The  revolutions  which  had  shattered  the  realm
under  the  last  descendants  of  Assur-nazir-pal,  and  the  consequent  impoverish-
ment of  the  kingdom,  had  not  been  without  a  disastrous  effect  on  the  schools
of  Assyrian  sculpture.  Since  the  royal  treasury  alone  was  able  to  bear  the
expense  of  those  vast  compositions  in  which  the  artistic  skill  of  the  period
could  have  free  play,  the  closing  of  the  royal  workshops,  owing  to  the
misfortunes  of  the  time,  had  the  immediate  effect  of  emptying  the  sculptors'
studios.  Even  though  the  period  of  depression  lasted  for  the  space  of  two
or  three  generations  only,  it  became  difficult  to  obtain  artistic  workmen ;  and
those  who  were  not  discouraged  from  the  pursuit  of  art  by  the  uncertainty  of
employment,  no  longer  possessed  the  high  degree  of  skill  attained  by  their
predecessors,  owing  to  lack  of  opportunity  to  cultivate  it.  (Sculpture  was  at  a
very  low  ebb  when  Tiglath-pileser  III.  desired  to  emulate  the  royal  builders  of
days  gone  by,  and  the  awkwardness  of  composition  noticeable  in  some  of  his
bas-reliefs,  and  the  almost  barbaric  style  of  the  stela;  erected  by  persons  of  even
so  high  a  rank  as  Belharran-beluzur,  prove  the  lamentable  deficiency  of  good
artists  at  that  epoch,  and  show  that  the  king  had  no  choice  but  to  employ  all
the  surviving  members  of  the  ancient  guilds,  whether  good,  bad,  or  indifferent
workmen.     The  increased  demand,  however,  soon  produced  an  adequate  supply

'  Mount  Tas  is  the  group  of  Lills  enclosing  the  ravine  of  Bavian.  These  works  were
described  iu  the  Bavian  inscription,  of  which  they  occupy  the  whole  of  the  first  part :  cf.  Pognqn,
L' Inscription  de  Baiiaii,  pp.  6-15,  35-72 ;  Meissnee  and  EosT,  Die  Bauimchriften  Sanlieribs,
pp.  66,  72-77.

*  The  Bavian  text  speaks  of  six  inscriptions  and  statues  which  the  king  had  engraved  on  the
Mount  of  Tas,  at  the  source  of  the  stream  (Pognon,  op.  cit.,  pp.  20,  21);  these  are  the  monuments
described  and  in  some  instances  sketched  in  Latard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  pp.  176-183.


SCENES   OF  FIGHTING,  BUNTING,   AND   BUILDING.


315


of  workers,  and  when  Sargon  ascended  the  throne,  the  royal  guild  of  sculptors
had  been  thoroughly  reconstituted ;  the  inefficient  workmen  on  whom  Tiglath-
pileser  and  Shalmaneser  had  been  obliged  to  rely  had  been  eliminated  in
course  of  time,  and  many  of  the  sculptures  which  adorned  the  palace  at
Khorsabad  display  a  purity  of  design  and  boldness  of  execution  comparable  to
that  of  the  best  Egyptian  art.     The  composition  still  shows  traces  of  Chaldsean


AN   ASSYRIAN   CAVALIIY   UAID   THROUGH   THE   WOODS.'

stiffness,  and  the  exaggerated  drawing  of  the  muscles  produces  an  occasionally
unpleasing  heaviness  of  outline,  but  none  the  less  the  work  as  a  whole  consti-
tutes one  of  the  richest  and  most  ingenious  schemes  of  decoration  ever  devised,
which,  while  its  colouring  was  still  perfect,  must  have  equalled  in  splendour  the
great  triumphal  battle^scenes  at  Ibsambul  or  Medinet-Habu.  Sennacherib
found  ready  to  his  hand  a  body  of  well-trained  artists,  whose  number  had
considerably  increased  during  the  reign  of  Sargon,  and  he  profited  by  the
experience  which  they  had  acquired  and  the  talent  that  many  of  them  had
developed.^  What  immediately  strikes  the  spectator  in  the  series  of  pictures
produced  under  his  auspices,  is  the  great  skill  with  which  his  artists  covered
the  whole  surface  at  their  disposal  without  overcrowding  it.      They  no  longer

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudin,  from  Layart),  Monumenls  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  81.

'  The  features  of  Assyrian  sculpture,  under  Sennacherib,  were  first  noted  by  Bawlinsox,  Tke
Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii  pp.  181-183  ;  cf.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Hlstmre  de  I'Art  da)is  I' Antiquity,
vol.  ii.  pp.  630-647.


316  SEN^'■A  CBEBIB.

treated  their  subject,  whether  it  were  a  warlike  expedition,  a  huntin"-  excursion,
a  sacrificial  scene,  or  an  episode  of  domestic  life,  as  a  simple  juxtaposition  of
groups  of  almost  equal  importance  ranged  at  the  same  elevation  along  the
walls,  the  subject  of  each  bas-relief  being  complete  in  itself  and  without  any
necessary  connection  with  its  neighbour.     They  now  selected  two   or  three
principal  incidents  from  the  subjects  proposed  to  them  for  representation,  and
round  these  they  grouped  such  of  the  less  important  episodes  as  lent  them-
selres  best  to  picturesque  treatment,  and  scattered  sparingly   over  the   rest
of  the  field  the  minor  accessories  which   seemed   suitable  to  indicate  more
precisely  the  scene  of  the  action.     Under  the  auspices  of  this  later  school,
Assyrian  foot-soldiers    are   no   longer   depicted   attacking  the   barbarians  of
Media  or  Elam  on  backgrounds  of  smooth    stone,  where  no  line  marks  the
various  levels,  and  where  the  remoter  figures  appear  to  be  walking  in  the  air
without  anything  to  support  them.      If  the  battle  represented  took  place  on  a
wooded  slope  crowned  by  a  stronghold  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  the  artist,  in
order  to  give  an  impression  of  the  surroundings,  covered  his  background  with
guilloche  patterns  by  which  to  represent  the  rugged  surface  of  the  mountains ; "
he  placed  here   and   there  groups  of  various  kinds  of  trees,  esjjecially  the
straight  cypresses  and  firs  which  grew  upon  the  slopes  of  the  Iranian  table-
land :  or  he  represented  a  body  of  lancers  galloping  in  single  file  along  the
narrow  woodland  paths,  and  hastening  to  surprise  a  distant  enemy,  or  again
foot-soldiers  chasing  their  foes  through  the  forest  or  engaging  them  in  single
combat ;  while  in  the  comers  of  the  picture  the  wounded  are  being  stabbed
or  otherwise    despatched,  fugitives  are  trying  to  escape  through  the  under-
growth, and  shepherds  are  pleading   with  the  victors  for  their  lives.     It  is
the    actual  scene  the  sculptor  sets  himself  to  depict,  and  one  is  sometimes
inclined  to  ask,  while   noting  the  precision   with   which   the  details  of  the
battle   are  rendered,  whether   the   picture   was  not  drawn  on  the  spot,  and
whether  the  conqueror  did  not  carry  artists  in  his  train  to  make  sketches  for
the  decorators  of  the  main  features  of  the  country  traversed  and  of  the  victories
won.     The  masses  of  infantry  seem  actually  in  motion,  a  troop  of  horsemen
rush  blindly  over  uneven  ground,  and  the  episodes  of  their  raid  are  unfolded  in
all  their  confusion  with  unfailing  animation.     For  the  first  time  a  spectator  can
realise  Assyrian  warfare  with  its  striking  contrasts  of  bravery  and  unbridled
cruelty  ;  he  is  no  longer  reduced  to  spell  out  laboriously  a  monotonous  narra-
tive of  a  battle,  for  the  battle  takes  place  actually  before  his  eyes.      And  after
the  return  from  the  scene  of  action,  when  it  is  desired  to  show  how  the  victor
employed  his  prisoners  for  the  greater  honour  of  his  gods  and  his  own  glory,

'  See,  among  others,  the  illustration  on  p.  297  of  this  work.


—  I  i'J


O      g

a     s

=   I


a    a
g  %

?      X:


3 1 8  SEXNA  CHEF  in.

the  picture  is  no  less  detailed  and  realistic.  There  we  see  them,  the  noble  and
the  great  of  all  the  conquered  nations,  Chaldneans  and  Elamites,  inhabitants  of
Cilicia,  Phoenicia,  and  Judfea,  harnessed  to  ropes  and  goaded  by  the  whips  of
the  overseers,  dragging  the  colossal  bull  which  is  destined  to  mount  guard  at
the  gates  of  the  palace  :  with  bodies  bent,  pendant  arms,  and  faces  contorted
with  pain,  tliey,  who  had  been  the  chief  men  in  their  cities,  now  take  the  place
of  beasts  of  burden,  while  Sennacherib,  erect  on  his  state  chariot,  with
steady  glance  and  lips  compressed,  watches  them  as  they  pass  slowly  before
him  in  their  ignominy  and  misery.

After  the  destruction  of  Babylon  there  is  a  pause  in  the  history  of
the  conqueror,  and  with  him  in  tliat  of  Assyria  itself.  It  seems  as  if
Nineveh  had  been  exhausted  by  the  greatness  of  her  effort,  and  was  stopping
to  take  breath  before  setting  out  on  a  fresh  career  of  conquest  :  the  other
nations  also,  as  if  overwhelmed  by  the  magnitude  of  the  catastrophe,  appear
to  have  henceforth  despaired  of  their  own  security,  and  sought  only  how
to  avoid  whatever  might  rouse  against  them  the  enmity  of  the  master  of  the
hour.  His  empire  formed  a  compact  and  solid  block  in  their  midst,  on  which
no  human  force  seemed  capable  of  making  any  impression.  Tliey  had  attacked
it  each  in  turn,  or  all  at  once,  Elam  in  the  east,  Urartu  in  tlie  north,  Egypt
in  the  south-west,  and  their  efforts  had  not  only  miserably  failed,  but  had  for
the  most  part  drawn  down  upon  them  disastrous  reprisals.  The  people  of
Urartu  remained  in  gloomy  inaction  amidst  their  mountains,  tlie  Elamites  had
lost  their  supremacy  over  half  the  Aramrean  tribes,  and  if  Egypt  was  as  yet
inaccessible  beyond  the  intervening  deserts,  she  owed  it  less  to  the  strength  of
her  armies  than  to  the  mysterious  fatality  at  Libnah.  In  one  half-century  the
Assyrians  had  effectually  and  permanently  disabled  the  first  of  these  kingdoms,
and  inflicted  on  the  others  such  serious  injuries  that  they  were  slow  in  recover-
ing from  them.  The  fate  of  these  proud  nations  had  intimidated  the  inferior
states — Arabs,  Medes,  tribes  of  Asia  Minor,  barbarous  Cimmerians  or  Scythians,
— all  alike  were  careful  to  repress  their  natural  inclinations  to  rapine  and
phmder.  If  occasionally  their  love  of  booty  overpowered  their  prudence,  and
they  hazarded  a  raid  on  some  defenceless  village  in  the  neighbouring  border
territory,  troops  were  hastily  despatched  from  the  nearest  Assyrian  garrison,
who  speedily  drove  them  back  across  the  frontier,  and  pursuing  them  into  their
own  country,  inflicted  on  them  so  severe  a  punishment  that  they  remained  for
some  considerable  time  paralysed  by  awe  and  terror.  Assyria  was  the  fore-
most kingdom  of  the  East,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  hegemony
which  she  exercised  over  all  the  countries  within  her  reach  cannot  be  accounted
for  solely  by  her  military  superiority.     Not  only  did  she  excel  in  the  art  of


TEE  STATE  OF  THE  EMPIRE  AFTER  THE  TAKING  OF  BABYLON.      319


SENNACHERIB.'


conquest,  as  many  before  her  had  done — Babylonians,  Elamites,  Hittites,  and
Egyptians — but  she  did  what  none  of  them  had  been  able  to  accomplish  ;  she
exacted  lasting  obedience  from  the  conquered  nations,  ruling  them  with  a  firm
hand,  and  accustoming  them  to  live  on  good  terms  with  one  another  in  spite
of  diversity  of  race,  and  this  with  a  light  rein,  with  unfailing  tact,  and
apparently  with  but  little  effort.  The  system  of  deportation  so  resolutely
carried  out  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  Sargon  began  to  produce  effect,  and  up
to  this  time  the  most  happy  results  only  were  discernible.  The  colonies  which
had  been  planted  throughout  the  empire  from  Palestine  to  Media,  some  of  them
two  generations  previously,  others  within  recent
years,  were  becoming  more  and  more  acclimatised
to  their  new  surroundings,  on  which  they  were  pro-
ducing the  effect  desired  by  their  conquerors ;
they  were  meant  to  hold  in  check  the  populations
in  whose  midst  they  had  been  set  down,  to  act
as  a  curb  upon  them,  and  also  to  break  up  their
national  unity  and  thus  gradually  prepare  them
for  absorption  into  a  wider  fatherland,  in  which
they  would  cease  to  be  exclusively  Damascenes,
Samaritans,   Hittites,   or    Aramreans,   since    they

would  become  Assyrians  and  fellow-citizens  of  a  mighty  empire.  The  provinces,
brought  at  length  under  a  regular  system  of  government,  protected  against
external  dangers  and  internal  discord  by  a  well-disciplined  soldiery,  and
enjoying  a  peace  and  security  they  had  rarely  known  in  the  days  of  tlieir
independence,  gradually  became  accustomed  to  live  in  concord  under  the  rule
of  a  common  sovereign,  and  to  feel  themselves  portions  of  a  single  empire.
The  speech  of  Assyria  was  their  ofHcial  language,  the  gods  of  Assyria  were
associated  with  their  national  gods  in  the  prayers  they  offered  up  for  the
welfare  of  the  sovereign,  and  foreign  nations  with  whom  they  were  brought
into  communication  no.  longer  distinguished  between  them  and  their
conquerors,  calling  their  country  Assyria,  and  regarding  its  inhabitants  as
Assyrians.  As  is  invariably  the  case,  domestic  peace  and  good  administra-
tion had  caused  a  sudden  development  of  wealth  and  commercial  activity.
Although  Nineveh  and  Calah  never  became  such  centres  of  trade  and
industry  as  Babylon  had  been,  yet  the  presence  of  the  court  and  the
sovereign  attracted  thither  merchants  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  The
.  Medes,  reaching  the  capital  by  way  of  the  passes  of  Rowandiz  and  Suleimaniyeh,
brought  in  the  lapis-lazuli,  precious  stones,  metals,  and  woollen  stuffs  of  Central
'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Latard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  5.


320


SENNACHERIB.


Asia  and  the  farthest  East,  while  the  Phcenicians  and  even  Greeks,  who  were
already  following  in  their  footsteps,  came  thither  to  sell  in  the  bazaars  of
Assyria  the  most  precious  of  the  wares  brought  back  by  their  merchant  vessels
from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  Atlantic,  and  the  farthest  West.  The
great  cities  of  the  triangle  of  Assyria  were  gradually  supplanting  all  the
capitals  of  tho  ancient  world,  not  excepting  Memphis,  and  becoming  the
centres  of  universal  trade  ;  unexcelled  for  centuries  in  the  arts  of  war,  Assyria
was  in  a  fair  way  to  become  mistress  also  in  the  arts  of  peace.  A  Jewish
prophet  thus  described  the  empire  at  a  later  date  :  "  The  Assyrian  was  a  cedar
in  Lebanon  with  fair  branches,  and  with  a  shadowing  shroud,  and  of  an  higli
stature ;  and  his  top  was  among  the  thick  clouds.  The  waters  nourished  him,
the  deep  made  him  grow :  therefore  his  stature  was  exalted  above  all  the  trees
of  the  field,  and  his  boughs  were  multiplied,  and  his  branches  became  long  by
reason  of  many  waters,  when  he  shot  them  forth.  All  the  fowls  of  the  heaven
made  their  nests  in  his  boughs,  and  under  his  branches  did  all  the  beasts  of  the
field  bring  forth  their  young,  and  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations.
Thus  was  he  fair  in  his  greatness,  in  the  length  of  his  branches :  for  his  root
was  by  many  waters.  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him  :  the
fir  trees  were  not  like  his  boughs,  and  the  plane  trees  were  not  as  his  branches  ;
nor  was  any  tree  like  unto  him  in  beauty  :  so  that  all  the  trees  of  Eden,  that
were  in  the  garden  of  God,  envied  him  "  {Ezek.  xxxi.  3-9).


THE   POAVER  OF  ASSYRIA  AT   ITS  ZENITH.
ESARHADDON    AND   ASSUR-BANI-PAL.


THE    MEDES    AND   CIMMEKIASS  :    LYDIA — THE    CONQUEST   OF    EGYPT,    OF    ARABIA,

AND    OF   ELAM.

Last  years  of  Sennacherib — New  races  appear  upon  the  scene — The  Medes  :  De'iokes  and  the
foundation  of  Ecbatann,  the  Bit-Dayaukhu  and  their  ori(jin — The  races  of  Asia  Minor — Tlie
Phrygians,  their  earliest  rulers,  their  conquests,  and  their  religion — Last  of  the  Eeraclidce  in
Lydia,  trade  and  constitution  of  their  kingdom — The  Tylonidiv  and  Mermnadw — The  Cimme-
rians driven  hack  into  Asia  by  the  Scythians — The  Treres.

Murder  of  Sennacherib  and  accession  of  Esarhaddon  :  defeat  of  Sharezer  (681  B.C.) — Cam-
paigns  against  the  Kalda,  the  Cimmerians,  the  tribes  of  Cilicia,  and  against  Sidon  (680-679  B.C.)  ;
Cimmerian  and  Scythian  i7ivasions,  revolt  of  the  Mannai,  and  expeditions  against  the  Medes;
submission  of  the  northern  Arabs  (678-676  b.c.) — Egyptian  affairs;  Taharqa  (Tirhakah),  his
building  operations,  his  Syrian  policy — Disturbances  on  the  frontiers  of  Elam  and  Urartu.

First  invasion  of  Egypt  and  subjection  of  the  country  to  Nineveh  (670  B.C.) — Intrigues  of
rival  claimants  to  the  throne,  and  division  of  the  Assyrian  empire  between  Assur-bani-pal
and  Shamash-shumukin  (668  B.C.) — Revolt  of  Egypt  and  death  of  Esarhaddon  (668  b.c.)  ;
accession  of  Assur-bani-pal ;  his  campaign  against  Kirbit ;  defeat  of  Taharqa  and  reconstitution
of  the  Egyptian  province  (667  b.c.)— A  fairs  of  Asia  Minor :  Oyges  {6d3  b.c),  his  roars  against
the  Creeks  and  Cimmerians  ;  he  sends  ambassadors  to  Nineveh  (664  B.C.).


.\


(      322      )

Tanuafamanu  nas^'i-ts  the  authority  of  Ethiopia  in  Egypt  (66-!:  b.c),  and  Tammaritu  of
Elam  invades  Karduniash  ;  reconquest  of  the  Said  and  sack  of  Thehes — Psammetichus  I.  and  the
rise  of  the  XXVP  dynasty — Disturbances  among  the  Medes  and  Mannai — War  against  Teum-
man  and  the  victory  of  Tulliz  (660  b.c.)  :  Elam  yields  to  the  Assyrians  for  the  first  time —
Shamash-shumuhin  at  Babylon ;  is  at  first  on  good  terms  with  his  brother,  then  becomes  dissatis-
fied, and  forms  a  coalition  against  the  Ninevite  supremacy.

Tlie  Uruk  incident  and  outbreak  of  the  war  between  Karduniash,  Elam,  and  Assyria ;  Elam
disabled  by  domestic  discords — Siege  and  capture  of  Babylon  ;  Assur-bani-pal  ascmds  the  throne
under  the  name  of  Kandalanu  (648-646  b.c.) — Revolt  of  Egypt :  defeat  and  death  of  Oyges
(642  B.C.) :  Ardys  drives  out  the  Cimmerians  and  Dugdamis  is  killed  in  C'iUcia — Submission  of
A rabia.

Revolutions  in  Elam — Attack  on  Indabigash — Tammaritu  restored  to  power — Pillage  and
destruction  of  Susa — Campaign  against  the  Arabs  of  Kedar  and  the  Nabatceans :  suppression
of  the  Tyrian  rebellion — Dying  struggles  of  Elam — Capture  of  Mudakfu  and  surrender  of
Khumbdn-khaldash — The  power  of  Assyria  reaches  its  zenith.


J  f''^-^^^*',  (I — cj?;..     //////iigSSi


OXE  OF  THE   EGYPTIAN  IVORIES   FOCND  IN   ASSYRIA.'


CHAPTER    IV.

THE      POWER      OF      ASSYRIA      AT       ITS      ZENITH.
ESARHADDON      AND      ASSURBANI-PAL.


The  Medes  and  Cimmerians :  Lydia — The  conquest  of  Egypt,  of  Arabia,  and  of  Elam.

AS    we    have    already    seen,   Sennacherib   reigned  for   eight
years   after    his  triumph ;    eight  years  of  tranquillity  at
home,    and    of  peace   with  all    his    neighbours    abroad.     If   we
examine  the  contemporary  monuments  or  the  documents  of  a
later  period,  and  attempt  to  glean    from    them  some  details
concerning  the  close  of  his  career,  we  find  that  there  is
a  complete  absence  of  any  record  of  national  movement
on  tlie  part  of  either  Elam,  Urartu,  or  Egypt.     The  only
event  of  which  any  definite  mention  is  made  is  a  raid
across  the  north  of  Arabia,  in  the  course  of  which  Hazael,
King   of  Adumu,    and  chief    among   the    princes  of
Kedar,  was  despoiled  of  the  images  of  his  gods.-     The
older  states  of  the  Oriental  world  had,  as  we  have  pointed  out,  grown  weary

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  Latard.  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  89,  11.  The  initial,
also  by  Faucher-GuJin,  represents  Taliarqa  in  a  kneeling  attitude,  and  is  taken  from  a  bronze
statuette  in  tLe  Maegregor  collection,  published  by  Sch^fer,  Eine  Bronzefigur  des  Taharha,  in  the
Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxiii.  pi.  vi.  1.

'  Frism  Inscription,  col.  ii.  II.  o5-5S,  col.  iii.  1.  1 ;  cf.    BrDGE,  Tlie  History  of  Esarlioddon,  pp.  52,


324  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

of  warfare  whicli  brought  them  nothing  but  loss  of  men  and  treasure ;  but
behind  these  states,  on  the  distant  horizon  t..  the  east  and  north-west,  were
rising  up  new  nations  whose  growth  and  erratic  movements  assumed  au  im-
portance that  became   daily  more   and    more   alarming.      On  the   east,   the
Medes,   till   lately   uudistinguishable   from   the   other   tribes   occupying   the
western   corner   of  the  Iranian  table-laud,  had   recently  broken  away  from
the  main  body,  and,  rallying   round  a  single   leader,  already  gave   promise
of  establishing    an  empire   formidable   alike   by   the   energy   of  its   people
and   the   extent   of  its  domain.     A  tradition   afterwards   accepted  by  them
attributed   their   earlier  successes  to  a  certain  Deiokes,  son  of  Phraortes,  a
man  wiser  than  his  fellows,  who  first  set  himself  to  deal  out  justice  in  his  own
household.     The  men  of  his  village,  observing  his  merits,  chose  him  to  be  the
arbiter  of  all  their  disputes,  and,  being  secretly  ambitious  of  sovereign  power,
he  did  his  best  to  settle  their  differences  on  lines  of  the  strictest  equity  and
justice.     "  By  these  means  he  gained  such  credit  with  his  fellow-citizens  as  to
attract  the  attention  of  those  who  lived  in  the  neighbouring  villages,  who  had
suffered  from  unjust  judgments,  so  that  when  they  heard  of  the  singular  up-
rightness  of  Deiokes  and  of  the  equity  of  his  decisions  they  joyfully  had
recourse  to  him  until  at  last  they  came  to  put  confidence  in  no  one  else.     The
number  of  complaints   brought  before  him  continually  increasing  as  people
learnt  more  and  more  the  justice  of  his  judgments,  Deiokes,  finding  himself
now   all-important,  announced   that   he   did   not  intend   any   longer  to  hear
causes,  and  appeared  no  more  in  the  seat  in  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to
sit  and  administer  justice.     '  It  was  not  to  his  advantage,'  he  said,  '  to  spend
the  whole  day  in  regulating  other  men's  affairs  to  the  neglect  of  his  own.'
Hereupon  robbery  and  lawlessness  broke  out  afresh  and  prevailed  throiighout
the  country  even  more  than  heretofore ;  wherefore  the  Medes  assembled  from
all  quarters  and  held  a  consultation  on  the  state  of  affairs.     The  speakers,  as  I

54,  55.  Winckler  follows  G.  Smith  (^Elstury  of  Sennacherib,  pp.  137-139)  in  supposing  that  Senna-
cherib undertook,  in  his  latter  years,  a  second  campaign  against  Palestine  and  Egypt,  in  the  course
of  which  Jerusalem  was  besieged  a  second  time  (Alttestameiitliche  Vntersuchungen,  pp.  36-38 ;  Gesch.
Bah  und  Ass.,  pp.  254,  255,  257,  258,  33i;  AltorientaUsche  Forsckmigen,  vol.  i.  p.  69).  Adumu  has  by
several  Assyriologists  been  identified  with  the  country  of  Edom  (Nokris,  Assyrian  Dictionary  p.  19  ;
TiELB,  Bab.-ass.  Gesch.,  p.  348;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  708,  where  the  city  of  Adumu  ,s
tentatively  identitied  with  Petra) ;  Halevy  has  connected  the  name  with  that  of  the  town  of  Udumeh,
which  lies  near  Yabrud,  to  the  north-east  of  Damascus  (Essai  sur  les  Inscriptions  du.  *«;«>  P;  ^'^\)'
and  Winckler  places  it  in  Djauf  {Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  267),  where  Finzi  had  already  CKicerche
per  lo  Studio  delV  Antichita  Assira,  pp.  393,  394)  sought  to  locate  the  biblical  Dumah  (Ge«.  xsv.  14  ;
Isa.  xxi.  11),  the  Dumaitha  of  Ptolemy  (v.  19,  §  7,  cf  viii.  22,  §  3),  and  Domata  of  Plmy  (E.  Nat
vi  32).  It  ought  really  to  be  looked  for  further  north,  in  the  country  of  Kedar,  properly  so  called.
It  is,  indeed,  evident  from  a  comparison  of  the  texts  that  the  Assyrians  called  the  desert  tribes  to
the  north  and  south  of  Palmyra,  Aribi  or  Qidri  indifferently  (Delitzsoii,  Wo  lag  das  Paradtesi
p.  299  ;  Delattbe,  VAsie  Occidentale,  pp.  102-104,  120-122).


DEIOKES  AND    THE  FOUNDATION   OF  ECBATANA.  325

think,  were  chiefly  friends  of  Deiokes.  '  We  cannot  possibly,'  they  said, '  go
on  living  in  this  country  if  things  continue  as  they  now  are ;  let  us,  therefore,
set  a  king  over  us,  so  that  the  land  may  be  well  governed,  and  we  ourselves
may  be  able  to  attend  to  our  own  affairs,  and  not  be  forced  to  quit  our  country
on  account  of  anarchy.'  After  speaking  thus,  they  persuaded  themselves  that
they  desired  a  king,  and  forthwith  debated  wliom  they  should  choose.  Deiokes
was  proposed  and  warmly  praised  by  all,  so  they  agreed  to  elect  him."  *  Where-
upon Deiokes  had  a  great  palace  built,  and  enrolled  a  bodyguard  to  attend  upon
him.  He  next  called  upon  his  subjects  to  leave  their  villages,  and  "  the  Medes,
obedient  to  his  orders,  built  the  city  now  called  Agbatana,-  the  walls  of  which
are  of  great  size  and  strength,  rising  in  circles  one  within  the  other.  The  walls
are  concentric,  and  so  arranged  that  they  rise  one  above  the  other  by  the  height
of  their  battlements.  The  nature  of  the  ground,  which  is  a  gentle  hill,  favoured
this  arangement.  The  number  of  the  circles  is  seven,  the  royal  palace  and  the
treasuries  standing  within  the  last.  The  circuit  of  the  outer  wall  is  very  nearly
the  same  as  that  of  Athens.  Of  this  wall  the  battlements  are  white,  of  the
next  black,  of  the  third  scarlet,  of  the  fourth  blue,  of  the  fifth  orange.  The
two  last  have  their  battlements  coated  respectively  with  silver  and  gold.  All
these  fortifications  Deiokes  caused  to  be  raised  for  himself  and  his  own  palace  ;
the  people  he  required  to  dwell  outside  the  citadel.  When  the  town  was
finished,  he  established  a  rule  that  no  one  should  have  direct  access  to  the  king,
but  that  all  communications  should  pa.ss  through  the  hands  of  messengers.  It
was  declared  to  be  unseemly  for  any  one  to  see  the  king  face  to  face,  or  to
laugh  or  spit  in  his  presence.  This  ceremonial  Deiokes  established  for  his  own
security,  fearing  lest  his  compeers  who  had  been  brought  up  with  him,  and  were
of  as  good  family  and  parts  as  he,  should  be  vexed  at  the  sight  of  him  and
conspire  against  him  :  he  thought  that  by  rendering  himself  invisible  to  his
vassals  they  would  in  time  come  to  regard  him  as  quite  a  different  sort  of
being  from  themselves."  ^

Two  or  three  facts  stand  out  from  this  legendary  background.  It  is  probable
that  Deiokes  was  an  actual  person ;  that  the  empire  of  the  ]Medes  first  took
shape  under  his  auspices  ;  that  he  formed  an  important  kingdom  at  the  foot  of
Mount  Elvend,  and  founded  Ecbatana  the  Great,  or,  at  any  rate,  helped  to

'  Herodotus,  I.  xcvi.-scviii.

'  Agbatana  (^schylus,  Persm,  IG;  Herodotus,  I.  xcviii. ;  Aristophaxbs,  Acharniatis,  64)  or
Ecbatana  is  the  Greek  form  of  the  old  Iranian  name  Haugmatana,  Hagmatina,  borne  by  the  city  in
the  great  inscription  of  Behistun  (col.  ii.  1.  76 ;  cf.  Weis^b.^ch  and  Bang,  Die  Altpersische  KeiUnschri/ten,
pp.  20,  21).  Modern  writers,  inspired  by  Herodotus'  legend,  explain  this  name  as  "the  meeting-
place"  of  the  tribes  (G.  Kawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  363;  Spiegel,
Erdnisdie  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  i.  p.  103,  note  1).     It  is  now  called  Hamadan.

^  Herodotus,  I.  xcviii.,  xcix.


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZEKITH.


STOSE  LION"   AT  HAJIADAX.'


raise  it  to  tJie  rank  of  a  capital.*  Its  site  was  liappily  choseu,  in  a  ricli  aud
fertUe  valley,  close  to  where  the  roads  emerge  which  cross  the  Zagros  chaiu  of
mountains  and  connect  Iran  with  the  yallevs  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,
almost  on  the  border  of  the  salt  desert  which  forms  and  renders  sterile  the
centred  regions  of  the  plateau.  Mount  Elvend  shelters  it,  and  feeds  with  its
snows  the  streams  that  irrigate  it,  whose  waters  transform  the  whole  country
round  into  one  vast  orchard.  The  modern  town  has,  as  it  were,  swallowed  up
all  traces  of  its  predecessor ;  a  stone  lion,  overthrown  aud  mutilated,  marks  the
site  of  the  royal  p\lace.     The  chronological  reckoning  of  the  native  annalists,

as  handed  down  to  us  by
Herodotus,  credits  Deiokes
with  a  reign  of  fitty-three
years,  which  occupied  al-
most the  whole  of  the  first
half  of  the  seventh  cen-
tury, i.e.  from  709  to  656,
or  from  700  to  (547  b.c.^
The  records  of  Xineveh
mention  a  certain  Day-
aukku  who  was  governor  of  the  Mannai,  and  an  ally  of  the  Assyrians  in  the
days  of  Sargon,  and  was  afterwards  deported  with  his  family  to  Hamiith  in
715 :  *  two  years  later  reference  is  made  to  ;\n  expedition  across  the  territory
of  Bit-Dayaukku,  which  is  described  as  lying  between  Ellipi  and  Karalla,  thus
corresponding  to  the  modem  province  of  Hamadan.^  It  is  quite  within  the
bounds  of  possibility  that  the  Dayaukku  who  gave  his  name  to  this  district

•  The  existence  of  Deiokes  has  beea  called  in  question  by  Grote  (History  of  Grteee,  toI.  iii.
p.  307.  et  seq.)  and  by  the  Kawlinsons  (Serodotut,  vol.  i.  p.  3'2I,  and  The  Fire  Great  Monardiies,
2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  3S0-3S3).  Most  recent  historians,  howeTci,  accept  the  story  of  this  personage
as  true  in  its  main  facts  (Fb.  Lesokmaxt,  Ixttres  Assyrioloijiquei,  1st  ser.,  vol.  i.  pp.  55-62 ;  Sfiegkl,
Eraaisdiz  AUcrthumsf.unde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2iS-252 ;  Deuittre,  L(  Peuple  et  rEttipire  des  3Iedes,  pp.  129-
146;  XoLPEKE,  Au/^Ut  nir  P^rsiscAcN  Geschichte,  pp.  4-6:  Jrsn,  GeschieMe  des  Alten  PerHem,
pp.  5-7) ;  some  believe  him  to  have  been  merely  the  ancestor  of  the  royal  house  which  later  on
founded  the  united  kingdom  of  the  iledes  (Ed.  Metek,  Getehichti  des  J/krtt um*,  voL  i.  p.  555 ;
Pkashek,  ilexiien  und  das  Hans  Kyaxares.  p.  40,  and  Beitrage  itir  Jfedi^hen  Getehidiie,  in  Becueil
de  Traraitr,  vol.  six.  p.  202:  Wkckixk,  rniersudiungen  sur  AUorientali^en  Gtschidtte,  p.  US).

'  HeroJotus  (I.  cii.)  expressly  attributes  a  reign  of  fifty-three  years  to  his  Deiokes,  and  the
total  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  which  we  obtain  by  adding  together  the  number  of  years  assigned
by  bim  to  the  four  Median  kings  (53  +  22  -!-  40  -!-  35")  brings  us  back  to  709-70S.  if  we  admit,  as  he
does,  that  the  year  of  the  proclamation  by  Cyrus  as  King  of  Persia  (559-55S)  was  that  in  which
Astyages  was  oreithrown  (L  cxxx.") ;  we  get  700-699  as  the  date  of  Deiokes'  accession,  if  we
separate  the  two  facts.,  as  the  monuments  compel  us  to  do,  and  reckon  the  hundred  and  fifty  years
of  the  Sledian  empire  from  the  fall  of  Astyages  in  550-549.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin.  fivm  Fi_i5i>is  and  Coste,  Voyage  en  Perse,  pi.  25.  and  p.  17.

•  Jnnnlj  of  Sargon,  11.  75-77,  and  Inscription  des  Fafte&,  1.  49 :  cf  p.  243,  infra.

•  Annals  of  Sargon,  1.  140 ;  cf.  p.  250.  infra.  As  to  the  probable  position  of  EUipi  and  Karalla,
cf.  the  map  on  p.  141,  infra.  The  name  Bit-D.iyaukku  is  probably  only  the  Assyrian  equivalent
of  the- native  appellation.


THE  MEDES,    THE   BIT-DATAUKKO  AND    THEIR    ORIGIN.


327


was  identical  with  the  Deiokes  of  later  writers/  He  was  the  official  ancestor
of  a  royal  house,  a  fact  proved  by  the  way  in  which  his  conqueror  uses
the  name  to  distinguish  the  country  over  which  he  had  ruled ;  moreover,  the
epoch  assigned  to  him  by  contemporary  chronicders  coincides  closely  enough
with  that  indicated  by  tradition  in  the  case  of  Deiokes.  He  was  never  the
august  sovereign  that  posterity  afterwards  made  him  out  to  be,  and  his  terri-
tory included  barely  lialf  of  what  constituted  the  province  of  Media  in
classical  times;    he   contrived,   however — and    it   was   this   that   gained  him


^'■^^»^'-  '^^^


r


VIEW   OF    HAMADAK    ASD    MOtTST  EL7EXD    IS    WISTEE."

universal  renown  in  later  days — to  create  a  central  rallying-point  for  the  Median
tribes  around  which  they  henceforth  grouped  themselves.  The  work  of  concen-
tration was  merely  in  its  initial  stage  during  the  lifetime  of  Sennacherib,  and
little  or  nothing  was  felt  of  its  effects  outside  its  immediate  area  of  influence,
but  the  pacific  character  ascribed  to  the  worthy  Deiokes  by  popular  legends,  is
to  a  certain  extent  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  the  monuments  :  they  record
only  one  expedition,  in  702,  against  EUipi  and  the  neighbouring  tribes,  in  the
"ourse  of  which  some  portions  of  the  newly  acquired  territory  were  annexed


^^^^'     The  form  Deiokes,  in  place  of  Daiokes,  is  due  to  the  Ionic  dialect  employed  by  Herodotus  (cf.
\E,  Au/ealze  zur  Persiechen  Geschichte,  pp.  6,  147).    Juati  (Iranuches  Namenhuch,  p.  76)  regards
6  as  an  abbreviated  form  of  the  ancient  Persian  Dahyaupaii  =  "the  master  of  a  province,"
A'ox,p9uffix  -/.-a.

f/ipiawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  ilorgan;  cf.  J.  de  3Iobgas,  Mission  Scieniifique
,1  Perse,  vol.  ii.  pi.  Ivi.


328  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT   ITS   ZENITH.

to  the  province  of  KharkhaiV  and  after  mentioning  this  the  annals  have  nothing
further  to  reUite  during  the  rest  of  the  reign.  Sennacherib  was  too  much  taken
up  with  his  retah'atory  measures  against  Babylon,  or  his  disputes  with  Elam,  to
think  of  venturing  on  expeditions  such  as  those  which  had  brought  Tiglath-
pileser  III.  or  Sargon  within  sight  of  Mount  Bikni ;  while  the  Medes,  on  their
part,  had  suffered  so  many  reverses  under  these  two  nionarchs  that  they  pro-
bably thought  twice  before  attacking  any  of  tlie  outposts  scattered  along  the
Assyrian  frontier :  nothing  occurred  to  disturb  their  tranquillity  during  the
early  years  of  the  seventh  century,  and  this  peaceful  interval  probably  enabled
Deiokes  to  consolidate,  if  not  to  extend,  his  growing  authority.  But  if  matters
were  quiet,  at  all  events  on  the  surface,  in  this  direction,  the  nations  on  the
north  and  north-west  had  for  some  time  past  begun  to  adopt  a  more  threaten-
ing attitude.  That  migration  of  races  between  Europe  and  Asia,  which  had
been  in  such  active  progress  about  the  middle  of  the  second  millennium  before
our  era,  had  increased  twofold  in  intensity  after  the  rise  of  the  XX'"  Egyp-
tian dynasty,^  and  from  thenceforward  a  wave  of  new  races  had  gradually  spread
over  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor,  and  had  either  driven  the  older  jaeoples  into
the  less  fertile  or  more  inaccessible  districts,  or  else  had  overrun  and  absorbed
them.  Many  of  the  nations  that  had  fought  against  Kamses  II.  and  Kamses
III.,  such  as  the  Uashasha,  the  Shagalasha,  the  Zakkali,  the  Danauna,  and  the
Tursha,  had  disappeared,  but  the  Thracians,  whose  appearance  on  the  scene
caused  such  consternation  in  days  gone  by,  had  taken  root  in  the  very
heart  of  the  peninsula,  and  had,  in  the  course  of  three  or  four  generations,
succeeded  in  establishing  a  thriving  state.^  The  legend  which  traced  the
descent  of  the  royal  line''  back  to  the  fabulous  hero  Ascanius  proves  that
at  the  outset  the  haughty  tribe  of  the  Ascanians  must  have  taken  pre-
cedence over  their  fellows  ;  ^  it  soon  degenerated,  however,  and  before  long  the

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  on  this  subject  on  p.  277,  supra.

'  Cf.,  for  the  movements  of  these  ruces,  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  362,  363,  461-470.  Here,
again,  the  limitations  to  which  the  original  plan  of  my  work  has  been  subjected  have  obliged  me  to
suppress  nearly  everythiug  connected  with  what  we  know  of  the  nations  of  Asia  Minor;  I  have
merely  retained  such  few  details  of  Phrygian  and  Lydian  history  as  are  necessary  to  enable  the
reader  to  understand  the  politics  of  the  ancient  empires  of  the  East.

^  Cf  what  has  been  s.ii.i  on  this  subject  iu  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  586,  5!)7.  I  may
mention  that  several  scholars,  such  as  Ramsay,  for  instance  (A  Study  of  Phrygian  Art,  in  Jour,  of  Hel-
lenic Studies,  1888),  place  the  arrival  of  the  Phrygians  in  Asia  Minor  as  late  as  the  ninth  century  B.C.

'  This  Ascanius  is  mentioned  in  the  Hiad  (Bk.  II.  SU2,  863 :  ^6pKi/s  ai  ipvyas  ^ye,  Kai  'A<rKdvtos
deoeiSj]!, — T^V  e'l  'AaKavt-qs  ;  cf.  StrabO,  XII.  iv.  §  5,  p.  564).

=  The  name  of  this  tribe  was  retained  by  a  district  afterwards  included  iu  the  province  of
Bithynia,  viz.  Ascania,  on  the  shores  of  the  Ascanian  lake :  the  distribution  of  place  and  persona'
names  over  the  face  of  the  country  makes  it  seem  extremely  probable  that  Ascania  and  the  ear'
Ascanians  occupied  the  wliole  of  the  region  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  Propontis  ;  In  other  v/r     >  >.
the  very  country  iu  which,  according  to  Xanthus  of  Lydia  (MOller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graic..  -^         *
p.  37),  the  Phrygians  first  established  themselves  after  their  arrival  in  Asia  (8tkabo,  XII.  viiii^
p.  572).    As  to  the  application  of  the  name  Ashkenaz  {Gen.  x.  3)  by  Kabbinical  commentators,  and  i-,.^
identification  with  Ascauia  and  Phrygia,  cf.  Fb.  Lenobmant,  Les  Grig,  de  I'Hist,  vol.  ii.  pp.  388-395.


330  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

Phrygian  tribe  gained  the  upper  hand  and  gave  its  name  to  the  whole  nation.'
Phrygia  proper,  the  country  first  colonised  by  them,  lay  between  Mount
Dindymus  and  the  river  Halys,  in  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Sangarios  and  its
affluents :  it  was  there  that  the  towns  and  strongholds  of  their  most  venerated
leaders,  such  as  Midaion,  Dorylaion,  Gordiaion,  Tataion,  and  many  others
stood  close  together,  perpetuating  the  memory  of  IMidas,  Dorylas,  Gordios,  and
Tatas.^  Its  climate  was  severe  and  liable  to  great  extremes  of  temperature,
being  bitterly  cold  in  winter  and  almost  tropical  during  the  summer  months ;
forests  of  oak  and  pine,  however,  and  fields  of  corn  flourished,  while  the  moun-
tain slopes  favoured  the  growth  of  the  vine  ;  it  was,  in  short,  an  excellent  and
fertile  country,  well  fitted  for  the  develoj^ment  of  a  nation  of  vine-dressers  and
tillers  of  the  soil.  The  slaying  of  an  ox  or  the  destruction  of  an  agricultural
implement  was  punishable  by  death,^  and  legend  relates  that  Gordios,  tlie  first
Phrygian  king,  was  a  peasant  by  birth.  His  sole  patrimony  consisted  of  a
single  pair  of  oxen,  and  the  waggon  used  by  him  in  bringing  home  his  sheaves
after  tlie  harvest  was  afterwards  placed  as  an  offering  in  the  temple  of  Cybele
at  Aucyra  by  his  son  Midas ;  there  was  a  local  tradition  according  to  which
the  welfare  of  all  Asia  depended  on  the  knot  which  bound  the  yoke  to  the  pole
being  preserved  intact.^  Midas  did  not  imitate  his  father's  simple  habits,
and  the  poets,  after  crediting  him  with  fabulous  wealth,  tried  also  to  make
out  that  he  was  a  conqueror.  The  kingdom  expanded  in  all  directions,  and
soon  included  the  upper  valley  of  the  Mteander,  with  its  primeval  sanctuaries,
Kydrara,  Colossse,  and  Kylcenae,  founded  wherever  exhalations  of  steam  and
boiling  springs  betrayed  the  presence  of  some  supernatural  power.  The  southern
shores  of  the  Hellespont,  which  formed  part  of  the  Troad,  and  was  the  former  terri-
tory of  Ascania,  belonged  to  it,  as  did  also  the  majority  of  the  peoples  scattered
along  the  coast  of  the  Euxine  between  the  mouth  of  the  Sangarios  and  that  of
the  Halys ;  those  portions  of  the  central  steppe  which  border  on  Lake  Tatta
were  also  for  a  time  subject  to  it,^  Lydia  was  under  its  influence/  and  it  is  no
exaggeration  to  say  that  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  before  our  era

'  As  to  the  early  form  of  their  name,  Bryges  (Herodotus,  VII.  Ixvii. ;  Strabo,  VIl.  iii.  §  2,  p.  295,
and  Fragm.  24,  ed.  Mcller-Didot,  p.  278),  cf  Tomasohek,  Die  Allen  Thraker,  aud  Kretscbmer.
Einleitung  in  die  Geschichte  der  Griechischen  Sprache.  p.  229.

-  As  to  the  derivation  of  the  names  of  Plirygian  towns  and  castles,  cf.  Ramsay,  The  Historical
Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  144,  439.

'  NicoLAus  OF  Damasoos,  Fragm.  128,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  461,  who
probably  took  his  facts  from  Xanthus  of  Lydia.

*  Ahrian,  Anaiasis,  II.  iii.  §§  2-4;  QosTCS  Curtius,  iii.  1;  ^Eliax,  De  Natura  Animalitim,
xili.  1 ;  cf.  GtJTSCHunD,  Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  iii.  pp.  457-16.5.

>  Salambria  in  Garsauria  bears  a  name  of  Thracian  and,  consequently.  Phrygian  origin ;  cf.
Kretsohuer,  Einleitung  in  die  Geschichte  der  Griechischen  Sprache,  p.  206.

°  Cf.  the  traditions  in  regard  to  the  Phrygian  Sipylus,  and  in  regard  to  the  Phrygian  origin  of
Tantalus,  Pelops,  and  Xiobe  (Strabo,  XII.  viii.  §  2,  p.  571 ;  HERODOTrs,  VIl.  ii.).


TEE  PHRTGIANS,  THEIR  EABLIEST  RULERS,  THEIR  CONQUESTS.       331

there  was  a  regular  Phrygian  empire  which  held  sway,  almost  without  a  rival,
oyer  the  western  half  of  Asia  Minor.^

It  has  left  behind  it  so  few  relics  of  its  existence,  that  we  can  only  guess  at
what  it  must  have  been  in  the  days  of  its  prosperity.  Three  or  four  ruined
fortresses,  a  few  votive  stela;,  and  a  dozen  bas-reliefs  cut  on  the  faces  of  cliffs
in  a  style  which  at  first  recalls  the  Hittite  and  Asianic  carvings  of  the  preced-
ing age,  and  afterwards,  as  we  come  down  to  later  times,  betrays  the  influence


MONUMENT    COilMEMOlCATIVE   OF   illDAS."


of  early  Greek  art.^  In  the  midst  of  one  of  their  cemeteries  we  come  upon
a  monument  resembling  the  facade  of  a  house  or  temple  cut  out  of  the  virgin
rock  ;  it  consists  of  a  lo-w  triangular  pediment,  surmounted  by  a  double
scroll,  then  a  rectangle  of  greater  length  than  height,  framed  between  two
pilasters  and  a  horizontal  string-course,  the  centre  being  decorated  with  a
geometrical  design  of  crosses  in  a  way  which  suggests  the  pattern  of  a
carpet ;  a  recess  is  hollowed  out  on  a  level  with  the  ground,  and  filled  by

'  As  to  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  a  study  of  geographical  names  with  regard  to  the
extension  of  the  Phrygian  empire,  cf.  Kretschmer,  Einleitung  in  die  Geschichle  der  GriecMtcheii
Spraclie,  pp.  203-208.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  plate  in  Pekrot  and  Chipiez,  Hittoire  de  VArt  dans  VA?iti-
quit^,  vol.  T.  p.  83.

^  For  a  survey  of  the  art  of  the  Phrygian  monuments,  cf.  Ramsay,  A  Study  of  Phrygian  Art,  in
the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  vol.  ix.  pp.  350-382,  and  vol.  x.  pp.  147-189 ;  also  Perrot  and  Chipiez.
Jlietoire  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  1-235,  S9U-902.


332


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


a  blind  door  witli  rebated  doorposts.  Is  it  a  tomb?  The  inscription  carefully-
engraved  above  one  side  of  the  pediment  contains  the  name  of  Midas,  and
seems  to  show  that  we  have  before  us  a  commemorative  monument,  piously
dedicated  by  a  certain  Ates  in  honour  of  the  Phrygian  hero.^  Elsewhere  we
come  upon  the  outlines  of  a  draped  female  form,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes

accompanied  by  two  lions,  or  of  a  man
clothed  in  a  short  tunic,  holding  a
sort  of  straight  sceptre  in  his  baud,
and  we  fancy  that  we  have  the
image  of  a  god  before  our  eyes,
though  we  cannot  say  which  of  the
deities  handed  down  by  tradition  it
may  represent.^  The  religion  of  the
Phrygians  is  shrouded  in  the  same
mystery  as  their  civilisation  and  their
art,  and  presents  a  curious  mixture
of  European  and  Asianic  elements.
The  old  aboriginal  races  had  wor-
shipped from  time  immemorial  a
certain  mother-goddess,  Ma,  or  Amma,
the  black  earth,  which  brings  forth
without  ceasing,  and  nourishes  all
living  things.^  Her  central  place  of
A  PHRYGIAN  Gow.*  worship    scoms,   originally,   to    have

been  in  the  region  of  the  Anti-taurus,  and  it  was  there  that  her  sacred  cities —
Tyana,  Venasa,  and  the  Cappadocian  Comana — were  to  be  found  as  late  as  Komau
times ;  in  these  towns  her  priests  were  regarded  as  kings,  and  thousands  of  her
priestesses  spent  lives  of  prostitution  in  her  service ;  but  her  sanctuaries,  with
their  special  rites  and  regulations,  were  scattered  over  the  whole  peninsula.^  She
was  sometimes  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  meteoric  stone,  or   betyle

'  This  is  the  view  taken  by  Pekkot  and  Chipiez,  Eistoire  de  I'Art  dans  V AnHqnitC,  vol.  v.  p.  102;
other  authorities  take  it  to  be  the  real  tomb  of  some  deceased  Jlidas.  and  not  a  commemorative  chapel
in  honour  of  the  original  Midas  (cf.  again  Kamsat,  A  Study  of  Phrygian  Art,  in  the  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies,  vol.  x.  pp.  156-161).

-  Pehkot  and  Chipiez,  Eistoire  de  I'Art  dang  VAntiquite',  vol.  v.  p.  146,  et  seq.

^  Etymologicon  Magnum,  s.v.  'Atj.iia,  with  its  secondary  forms  'Afifids  and  'Adnata,  'A^/ii'a;  among
the  Lydians  Ma  was  identified  with  the  Greek  Ehea  (Stephen  or  Byzantum,  s.v.  Mda-Tavpa').

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  by  Ramsay,  Studies  in  Asia  Minor,  in  the  Journal  of
Hellenic  Studies,  pi.  sxi.  B  ;  cf.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Eistoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiqtiit€,  vol.  iv.
pp.  721,  722,  and  vol.  v.  p.  147,  where  the  figure  is  described  as  th.it  of  a  priest,  not  of  a  god.

'  As  to  the  constitution  of  Comana  in  Cappadocia,  cf.  Strabo,  XII.  ii.  §  3,  p.  535 ;  a  list  of  some
of  the  towns  iu  which  it  obtained  is  given  by  Ramsay,  Fre-Eellenic  Monuments  of  Cappadocia,  in  the
Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiv.  p.  77,  et  seq.


FEET 01  AN  BELIEFS   AND   MONUMENTS.


333


similar  to  those  found  in  Canaan ;  ^  more  frequently  sbe  was  represented  in  female
shape,  with  attendant  lions,  or  plared  erect  on  a  lion  in  the  attitude  of  walking.^
A  moon-god,  j\len,  shared  divine  honours  with  her,^  and  with  a  goddess  Nana
whose  son  Atys  had  been  the  only  love  of  Ma  and  the  victim  of  her  passion.  We
are  told  that  she  compelled  him  to  emasculate  himseK  in  a  fit  of  mad  de-
lirium, and  then  transformed  him  into  a  pine  tree :  thenceforward  her  priests
made  the  sacrifice  of  their
virility  with  their  own  hands
at  the  moment  of  dedicating  -v_«___™,

themselves  to  the  service  of  the     "^  sP*^^   %^lL.\'^r

goddess.^  The  gods  introduced
from  Thrace  by  the  Phrygians
showed  a  close  affinity  with
those  of  the  purely  Asianic
peoples.  Precedence  was  uni-
versally given  to  a  celestial
divinity  named  Bagaios.Lordof
the  Oak,  perhaps  because  he  was
worshipped   under   a    gigantic

'  E.g.  at  Mount  Dindymus  and  at
Pessinus,  which  latter  place  was  sup-
posed to  possess  the  oldest  sanctuary  of
Cybele  (Appian,  De  Bello  Annibalico,
§   Ivi.  :    Herodiax,   i.    1]  ;    .\mmiancs

MAKCELLtsrs,  XXII.  ix.  §§  5-7).  The  Pessinus  stone,  which  was  carried  oft"  to  Rome  in  201  B.C.,
was  small,  irregular  in  shape,  and  of  a  dark  colour.  Another  stone  represented  Cybele  on  Jlount
Ida  (Clacdian,  De  Baptu  Proserpiux,  11.  202-209).

-  She  is  shown  between  two  lions  as  in  the  illustration  on  this  page ;  elsewhere  she  appears  erect
on  the  back  of  a  lion,  in  one  of  the  monuments  reproduced  by  Pebrot  and  Chipiez,  Ristoire  de
I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  050,  651.

^  As  to  Men  and  his  associates,  of.  Waddington  and  Lebas,  Voyage  Arche'ologique,  Explication
des  Inscriptions,  iii.,  Nos.  6G7,  668.  Ramsay  believes  the  god  to  be  the  Phrygian  Manes,  transformed
into  Men  by  popular  etymology  during  the  Greek  epoch,  and  then  identified  with  a  moon-god  {Cities
and  Bishoprics  of  Phrygia,  vol.  i.  pp.  169,  294) ;  Kretschmer  is  inclined  to  accept  this  hypothesis
(EinlMtung  in  die  Geschichte  der  Griechischen  Sprache,  p.  197,  note  4).  Seeing  how  little  we  know
of  the  early  attributes  of  this  god,  I  am  somewhat  inclined  to  reverse  Ramsay's  theory  :  a  native
god.  Men,  may  have  been  changed  to  Manes  by  popular  etymology,  and  afterwards  identified  with
Manes,  a  purely  Phrygian  deity.

■*  Nana  was  made  out  to  be  the  daughter  of  the  river  Saugarios.  She  is  said  to  have  conceived
Atys  by  placing  in  her  bosom  the  fruit  of  an  almond  tree  which  sprang  from  the  hermaphrodite
Agdistis  (ef.  the  legends  borrowed  from  Timotheus  by  Arnobius,  Adcersus  Nationes.  v.  5-7,  and  those
preserved  by  Pausanias,  VII.  sviii.  §  5).  This  was  the  form — extremely  ancient  in  its  main  features
—in  which  the  legend  was  preserved  at  Pessinus.  For  other  versions,  ef.  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv.  221-224;
Jclian,  Serm.  V.,  De  Mater  Deorum,  p.  1C5  B  ;  Sallcst  Phil.,  De  Diis  et  Mundo.  iv. ;  Diodokus  Sicclus,
iii.  58,  59  ;  Firmiccs  JIaterncs,  De  Erroribus  prof,  religion.,  27, 1.  ed.  Halm.  As  to  the  Syrian  origin
of  Atys  or  Attes  and  his  supposed  identity  with  Ave.  cf  Ed.  ^Ieyeb,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums.  vol.  i.  pp.
807.  308,  who  declares  unhesitatingly  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  plausible  conjecture  :  the  myth  of
Atys  and  that  of  Adonis  subsequently  became  merged  into  one  another  during  the  Alexandrine  period.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  sketch  by  Ramsay,  in  the  Journal  of  HMenic  Studies,  1884,
vol.  V.  p.  285;  cf.  Perrot  and  CinpiEZ,  Bistoire  de  I'Art  dans  VAntiquite,  vol.  v.  pp.  156,  157.


the  mother-goddess  between  LIOSS."


334


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYBIA    AT  ITS   ZENITH.


sacred  oak ;  ^  he  was  king  of  gods  aud  meu,"^  their  father,^  lord  of  the  thunder  and
the  lightning,*  the  warrior  who  charges  in  his  chariot.^  He,  doubtless,  allowed
a  queen-regent  of  the  earth  to  share  his  throne,®  but  Sauazios,''  another  and,  at
first,  less  venerable  deity  liad  thrown  this  august  pair  into  the  shade.^     The

Greeks,  finding  this  Sauazios
at  the  head  of  the  Phrygian
Pantheon,  identified  him  with
their  Zeus,^  or,  less  frequently,
with  the  Sun ;  ^^  he  was  really
a  variant  of  their  Dionysos."
He  became  torpid  in  the
autumn,   and    slept   a    death-

'  The  name  Bagaios  (Hesyohids,
x.r.l.)  was  for  a  long  time  identified
with  tlio  Sanscrit  bhdga-,  tlie  Old-
Persian  haga  and  the  Old-.Slavouic
borju  =  "  god."  Torp  (Indogermanische
Forseliungen,  v.  p.  193)  has  recently-
Bought  to  derive  it  from  a  Phrygian
word  baga,  which  he  connects  with  the
O.H.G.  buohha  and  Latin  fagm,  thus
muking  tlie  god  the  presiding  genius
of  the  oak,  tpriyovaios .  This  etymology
has  been  adopted  and  defended  by
Kretschmer,  EinUitung  in  die  Ge-
scMchte  der  Griechhchen  Spraehe,  pp.
198,  199.

-  In  the  inscriptions  he  is  called  ffa-
<n\fvs,  "  king,"  and  ripavvos"  tyrant."
'  In  this  capacity  he  bore  the  sur-
name Papas.     Cf.  the   fragment  from
Aekian,    Bijlhin.,    quoted    by    Eusta-
thius,    avdvTiS    els    Ta    S/fpa    rail'    opwy  BiBuvoi   eKa.\ovp  Uairav  rhv  Aia  KoX  'Attii/  rhv  avTdv,  and  tlie
inscription  at  Prusa,  dedicated  to  Zeus  TraTrjriSos  {Miltheilungen  aus  (Esterr.,  vol.  vii.  p.  174,  et  seq.).

*  BpovTuv.  He  is  called  Bpoi'Tui;'  nai  'haTpiinmv  in  an  inscription  at  Laodicea  (Allien.  Mittkeilungen,
vol.  xiii.  p.  235,  No.  1).

'^  BeV^/ios  or  Bfvvevs,  from  the  Thracian  Benna,  "  chariot "  (Ramsay,  A  Study  of  Fhrygian  Art,  in
the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  1887,  p.  512).

*  The  existence  of  such  a  goddess  may  be  deduced  from  the  passage  in  which  Dionysius  of
Halioarnassus  (Ant.  Rom.,  i.  27)  states  that  ilanes,  first  king  of  the  Phrygians,  was  the  son  of  Zeus
and  Demeter.

'  As  to  the  various  forms  of  this  name,  Sabazios  or  Sauazios,  cf.  Kretschmer,  Einleitung  in  die
GeschicMe  der  Grieehischen  Spraehe,  pp.  195,  196;  its  original  meaning  is  not  known.

*  This  is  proved  by  dedications  to  the  Aii  'Sa0a(lti>  in  Greek  inscriptions  in  Phrygia;  as  to
Sabazios-Sauazios,  cf  Ramsay,  The  Cities  and  Bishoprics  of  Phrygia,  vol.  i.  pp.  294,  295.

°  He  is  represented  on  votive  bas-reliefs  with  a  radiated  crown  on  his  head;  cf  an  inscription  at
Nicopolis  quoted  in  the  3Iitl.  aus  (Esterr.,  vol.  x.  p.  241,  No.  6,  Ai!  'Ha(w  MfyaAy  Kvpfy  2.a$a(l(ji  ayi(ii.

'"  Nymphis,  in  iliJLLEn-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec.,  vol.  iii.  p.  14 :  Aiofvaios  Kal  2a0a.Cws  eTs  ea-ri
Beds ;  cf.  DiODORUs  .^icuLus,  iv.  4.

"  As  to  the  nature  of  the  god,  cf.  especially  the  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  Parthey's  ed.,  §  09,  pp.  121,
122,  where  his  name  Sauazios  does  not  appear,  but  he  is  simply  described  as  <5  Beds ;  as  to  the
meaning  and  possible  derivation  of  the  word  Sauades,  cf.  Kretschmer,  op.  cit.,  p.  196,  note  2.

'-  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Chantre.  It  is  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  at  laslli-
kiaia  (cf  Peerot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  645,  646),  to  which  we
shall  have  occasion  to  refer  later  on  in  Chapter  V.  of  the  present  volume.


THE   MOTHEB-GODDESS   AND   ATYS.'


THE  PHRYGIAN   GODS.


335


like  sleep  all  through  the  winter ;  but  no  sooner  did  he  feel  the  warmth  of  the
tirst  breath  of  s^jriug,  than  he  again  awoke,  glowing  with  youth,  and  revelled
during  his  summer  in  the  heart  of  the  forest  or  on  the  mountain-side,  leading
a  life  of  riot  and  intoxication,  guarded  by  a  band  of  Sauades,  spirits  of  the
springs  and  streams,  the  Sileni  of  Greek  mythology.  The  resemblances  de-
tected by  the  new-comers  between  the  orgies  of  Thrace  and  those  of  Asia


THE   GOD    m6n    associated    WITH    THE   SUN    AND    OTHER    DEITIES.'

quickly  led  to  confusion  between  the  different  dogmas  and  divinities.  The
Phrygians  adopted  Ma,  and  made  her  their  queen,  the  Cybele  who  dwells  in
the  hills,^  and  takes  her  title  from  the  mountain -tops  which  she  inhabits —
Dindymene  on  Mount  Dindymus,  Sipylene  on  Mount  Sipylus.  She  is  always
the  earth,  but  the  earth  uutilled,  and  is  seated  in  the  midst  of  lions,  or  borne
through  her  domain  in  a  car  drawn  by  lions,  accompanied  by  a  troop  of  Cory-
bantes  with  dishevelled  locks.  Sauazios,  identified  with  the  Asianic  Atys,  became
her  lover  and  her  priest,  and  Men,  transformed  by  popular  etymology  into
Manes,  the  good  and  beautiful,  was  looked  upon  as  the  giver  of  good  luck,

'  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Perdrizet,  in  the  Bulletin  de  Correspondance
Heiynique,  1896,  pi.  vi.  The  last  figure  on  the  left  is  the  god  Men  ;  the  Sun  overlooks  all  the  rest,
and  a  god  bearing  an  axe  occupies  the  extreme  right  of  the  picture.  The  shapes  of  these  ancient
aboriginal  deities  have  been  modified  by  the  influence  of  Grffico-Koman  syncretism,  and  I  merely
give  these  figures,  as  I  do  many  others,  for  lack  of  better  representations.

'  According  to  Hesychius,  Injhela  is  the  Phrygian  word  for  "  mountain,"  "  cave :  "  Ki'-ySeAa,  upti
•tpuyi'as  Koi  avTpa  Kal  ed\afj.oi.  As  to  this  goddess,  ef.  Decliarme's  article  in  Saglio,  Victionuaire  des
Antiquitifs,  vol.  ii.  p.  IGVO,  et  seq.


.1


336  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

who  protects  men  after  death  as  well  as  in  life.  This  religion,  evolved  from
so  many  diverse  elements,  possessed  a  character  of  sombre  poetry  and  sensual
fanaticism  which  appealed  strongly  to  the  Greek  imagination:  they  quickly
adopted  even  its  most  barbarous  mysteries,  those  celebrated  in  honour  of  the
goddess  and  Atys,  or  of  Sauazios.  They  tell  us  but  little  of  the  inner  significance
of  the  symbols  and  doctrines  taught  by  its  votaries,  but  have  frequently  described
its  outward  manifestations.  These  consisted  of  aimless  wanderings  through  the
forests,  in  which  the  priest,  incarnate  representative  of  his  god,  led  after  him
the  ministers  of  the  temple,  who  were  identified  with  the  Sauades  and  nymphs
of  the  heavenly  host.  Men  heard  them  passing  in  the  night,  heralded  by  the
piercing  notes  of  the  flute  provoking  to  frenzy,  and  by  the  clash  of  brazen
cymbals,  acompanied  by  the  din  of  uproarious  ecstasy  :  these  sounds  were  broken
at  intervals  by  the  bellowing  of  bulls  and  the  roll  of
drums,  like  the  rumbling  of  subterranean  thunder.^
!£^:  ri^^'i* '^aSs  ^  Midas  followed  a  Gordios,  and  a  Gordios  a  Midas,  in

jf>i' <-rY ^"'\    ''alternate  succession,  and  under  their  rule  the  Phrygian
^  *if>      '  ''jf^     empire  enjoyed  a  period  of  prosperous  obscurity.     Lydia
'  ■^'^^'^  ^  ^       led  an  uneventful  existence  beside  them,  under  dynasties


^


which  have  received  merely  passing  notice  at  the  hands

MIDAS  OP  PHRYGIA.-  „,/-,,,  •    i  rm  i-        •  i

ot  the  Greek  chroniclers,  ihey  credit  it  at  the  outset
with  the  almost  fabulous  royal  line  of  the  Atyadae,  in  one  of  whose  reigns
the  Tyrseni  are  said  to  have  migrated  into  Italy.^  Towards  the  twelfth
century  the  Atyadse  were  supplanted  by  a  family  of  Heraclidfe,  who
traced  their  descent  to  a  certain  Agron,  whose  personality  is  only  a  degree
less  mythical  than  his  ancestry;  he  was  descended  from  Heracles  through
AlciBus,  Belus,  and  Ninus.  Whether  these  last  two  names  point  to  inter-
course with  one  or  other  of  the  courts  on  tlie  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  it  is
difficult  to  say.*  Twenty-one  Heraclidse,  each  one  the  son  of  his  predecessor,
are  said  to  have  followed  Agron  on  the  throne,  their  combined  reigns  giving  a

'  ^SCHYLCS,  Eedov...  Fragments  1-3,  ia  AHRENa-DiDOX's  edition,  p.  178.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  epecimea  in  the  Cabinet  des  Miclailles.  It  is  a  bronze  coin
from  PrymneBsos  in  Plirygia,  belonging  to  tlie  imperial  epoch.  The  cast  reproducad  above  wag
kindly  lent  to  me  by  M.  Babelon.

'  Cf.  what  has  been  said  as  to  this  migration  of  the  Tyrseni,  in  The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,
p.  587.

'  Herodotus,  I.  vii. ;  as  to  the  Assyrian  origin  of  these  personages,  cf.  Fr.  Lenormant,  Les
Antiquity  de  la  Troade,  pt.  1,  pp.  68,  69,  whence  the  theory  has  passed  on  to  D'Arbois  de  Jubain-
viLLE,  Les  Premiers  Habitants  de  V Europe,  '2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  120,  121,  27i-277 ;  to  Fekrot  and
Chipiez,  Uistoire  de  I'Art  dans  I'Antiquitg,  vol.  v.  p.  245;  to  Schobekt,  Geschichle  der  KSnige  von
Lydien.  pp.  7,  8 ;  and  to  Eadet,  La  Lijdie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  66.  67  ;  while
Sayce  (_The  Ancient  Empires  of  the  East,  vol.  i.  p.  427)  is  rather  inclined  to  look  on  them  as  a
survival  of  the  Hittite  dominion  in  Asia  Minor.  We  havo  here  probably  merely  a  genealogy  which
was  fabricated  bit  by  bit  at  a  period  when  a  vague  memory  of  the  relations  kept  up  by  Gyges  and
Ardys  with  Assur-bani-pal  and  the  court  of  Assyria  still  existed.


THE  KINGDOM   OF  LYDIA.


337


total  of  five  hundred  years. ^  Most  of  these  princes,  whether  Atyadse  or  Heraclidse,
have  for  us  not  even  a  shadowy  existence,  and  what  we  know  of  the  remainder
is  of  a  purely  fabulous  nature.  For  instance,  Kambles  is  reported  to  have
possessed  such  a  monstrous  appetite,  that  he  devoured  his  own  wife  one
night,  while  asleep.'-  The  concubine  of  Meles,  again,  is  said  to  have  brought
forth  a  lion,  and  the  oracle  of  Telmessos  predicted  that  the  town  of  Sardes


THE    STEEP    BANKS    Of    THE    IIALY3    FAILED    TO    ARREST    THEM.^

would  be  rendered  impregnable  if  the  animal  were  led  round  the  city  walls ;
this  was  done,  except  on  the  side  of  the  citadel  facing  Mount  Traolus,  which
was  considered  unapproachable,  but  it  was  by  that  very  j^ath  that  the  Persians
subsequently  entered  the  town.*     Alkimos,  we  are  told,  accumulated  immense

'  Herodotus,  I.  vii.  The  number  is  a  purely  conveutional  one,  and  GutschmiJ  has  shown  how
it  originated.  The  computation  at  first  comprised  the  complete  series  of  22  Heraclids  and  5
Mermnadee,  estimated  reasonably  at  4  kings  to  a  century,  i.e.  27  x  2'>  =  675  years,  from  the  taking
of  Sardes  to  the  supposed  accession  of  Agron.  As  it  was  known  from  other  sources  tliat  the  5
Mermnad,"©  bad  reigneil  170  years,  these  were  subtracted  from  the  07.5,  to  obtain  the  duration  of  the
Heraclidas  alone,  and  by  this  means  were  obtained  the  505  years  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (Schudekt,
Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Lydicn,  p.  8;  Gutschiiid,  Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  ii.  pp.  -174,  475).

^  Xanthls  of  Ltdia,  Fragm.  14,  In  MCller-Didot,  Fragmenla  Hist.  Grasc,  vol.  i.  pp.  38,  39.
Another  version,  related  by  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  refers  the  story  to  the  time  of  lardanos,  a
contemporary  of  Hercules  (Hekod.,  I.  vii.) :  it  shows  that  the  Lydiau  chronographers  cousidered
Kambles  or  Kamblitas  as  being  one  of  the  last  of  the  Atyad  kings  {Fragm.  28,  in  MCller-Didot,
Fragm.  Hut.  Grmc,  vol.  iii.  p.  372,  note  4  ;  ScHunEPwT,  Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Lijdien,  p.  5).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  A.  Boissier,  En  Cappadoce,  pp.  16,  17.  The
road  leading  from  Angora  to  Yuzgat  crosses  tbe  river  not  far  from  the  site  shown  here,  near  the  spot
where  the  ancient  road  crossed.

'  Herodotus,  I.  Ixxxiv.


338  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

treasures,  and  under  his  rule  his  subjects  enjoyed  unequalled  prosperity  for
fourteen  years.'  It  is  possible  that  the  story  of  the  expedition  despatched
into  Palestine  by  a  certain  Akiamos,  which  ended  in  the  foundation  of  Ascalon,
is  merely  a  feeble  echo  of  the  raids  in  Syri<m  and  Egyptian  waters  made  by
the  Tyrseni  and  Sardinians  in  the  thirteenth  century  b.c.^  The  spread  of  the
Phrygians,  and  the  subsequent  progress  of  Greek  colonisation,  must  have  cur-
tailed the  possessions  of  the  Heraclidae  from  the  eleventh  to  the  ninth  centuries,
but  the  material  condition  of  the  people  does  not  appear  to  have  suffered  by
this  diminution  of  territory.  When  they  had  once  firmly  planted  themselves
in  the  ports  along  the  Asianic  littoral — at  Kyme,  at  Pliocaia,  at  Smyrna,  at
Clazomena;,  at  Colophon,  at  E^ihesus,  at  Magnesia,  at  Miletus — the  iEolians  and
the  lonians  lost  no  time  in  reaping  the  advantages  which  this  position,  at  the
western  extremities  of  the  great  high-road  through  Asia  Minor,  secured  to  them.
They  overran  all  the  Lydian  settlements  in  Phrygia — Sardes,  Leontocephalos,
Pessinus,  Gordiaeon,  and  Ancyra.  The  steep  banks  and  the  tortuous  course  of
the  Halys  failed  to  arrest  them  ;  and  they  pushed  forward  beyond  the  mysterious
regions  peopled  by  the  White  Syrians,  where  the  ancient  civilisation  of  Asia
Minor  still  held  its  sway.  The  search  for  precious  metals  mainly  drew  them  on —
the  gold  and  silver,  the  copper,  bronze,  and  above  all  iron,  which  the  Chalybes
found  in  their  mountains,  and  which  were  conveyed  by  caravans  from  the
regions  of  the  Caucasus  to  the  sacred  towns  of  Teiria  and  Pteria.^  The
friendly  relations  into  which  they  entered  with  the  natives  on  these  journeys
resulted  before  long  in  barter  and  intermarriage,  though  their  influence  made
itself  felt  in  different  ways,  according  to  the  character  of  the  people  on  whom
it  was  brought  to  bear.^  They  gave  as  a  legacy  to  Phrygia  one  of  their
alphabets,  that  of  Kyme,  which  soon  banished  the  old  Hittite  syllabary
from  the  monuments,^  and  they  borrowed  in   exchange   Phrygian   customs,

'  Xanthds  uf  Lydu,  Fragm.  10,  in  MCller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec,  vol.  i.  p.  38;  cf.  Nicolas
OF  Damascus,  Fragm.  4'J,  in  Mj'lleb-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  382.

^  Xasthcs  (.)F  Lydia,  Fragm.  23,  in  Mvller-Didot,  op.  cil.,  vol.  i.  p.  43  ;  cf.  Nicolas  of  Damascus,
Fragm.  26,  in  BIuller-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  372.  The  correction  of  Akiamos  into  Alkimos  and
theii  identification  one  with  another  is  unjustifiable,  as  has  been  lately  pointed  out  by  Schueebt,  Gesch.
der  Konige  von  Lydien,  p.  3.  Fragment  25  of  Nicolas  of  Damascus  (Muller-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.
p.  372),  which  mentions  the  town  of  Ncrabos,  the  Nirabu  of  the  Egyptian  texts  (cf.  Struggle  of
the  Natio7is,  p.  142,  note  ti),  belonged  to  the  account  of  this  campaign,  and  it  may  serve  to  indicate
the  pretended  itinerary  of  the  Lydian  expedition.

'  The  site  of  Pteria  has  been  fixed  at  Boghaz-keui  by  Texier,  an  identification  which  has  been
generally  adopted ;  tf.  Pebrot  and  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I'Art  datis  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  p.  596,  et  seq.
Euyuk  is  very  probably,  as  Kadet  conjectures  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermjiades,
p.  27,  note  3).  Teiria,  a  town  of  the  Leucosyrians,  mentioned  by  Hecatseus  of  Miletus  in  his  work
{Fragm.  194,  in  MOlleb-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  p.  13).

'  For  all  these  facts,  which  want  of  space  obliges  me  to  curtail,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the
valuable  work  of  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  pp.  63-111.

'  This  is  Ramsay's  hypothesis  in  the  Athemeum,  1884,  pp.  864,  865,  and  A  Study  of  Phrygian  Art
in  the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  vol.  x.  pp.  186-189.


THE   CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  LTDIAN  KINGDOM.


339


musical  instruments,  traditions,  and  religious  orgies.  A  Midas  sought  in
marriage  Hermodike,  the  daughter  of  Agamemnon  the  Kymfean,^  while  another
Midas,  who  had  consulted  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  presented  to  the  god  the
chryselephantine  throne  on  which  he  was  wont  to  sit  when  he  dispensed
justice.'-^  This  interchange  of  amenities  and  these  alliances,  however,  had  a
merely  superficial  effect,  and  in  no  way  modified  the  temperament  and  life  of


VIEW   OYER   TUE    PLAIN  OP   SARDES.^

the  people  in  inner  Asia  Minor.  They  remained  a  robust,  hardworking  race,
attached  to  their  fields  and  woods,  loutish  and  slow  of  understanding,  unskilled
in  war,  and  not  apt  in  defending  themselves  in  spite  of  their  natural  bravery.
The  Lydians,  on  the  contrary,  submitted  readily  to  foreign  influence,  and  the
Greek  leaven  introduced  among  them  became  the  germ  of  a  new  civilisation,
which  occupied  an  intermediate  place  between  that  of  the  Greek  and  that  of  the
Oriental  world.*  About  the  first  half  of  the  eighth  century  B.C.  the  Lydians  had
become  organised  into  a  confederation  of  several  tribes,  governed  by  hereditary
chiefs,  who  were  again  in  their  turn  subject  to  the  Heraclidaj  occupying  Sardes.^

'  Heracudes  of  Pon'tus,  Constitutions,  xi.  §  3,  in  Muller-Didi it,  Frag.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  216 ;
d'.  Pollux,  Onomasticon,  ix.  83,  where  the  wife  is  called  Demodike.  The  striking  of  the  earliest  Kymeean
coins  is  attributed  to  her,  which  would  oblige  us  to  put  her  at  the  eud  of  the  eighth  or  the  beginning
of  the  seventh  century.     Her  husband  must  be  one  of  the  last  sovereigns  bearing  the  name  Midas.

*  Herodotus,  I.  xiv.  ^  Drawn  by  Boudier  from  a  photograph.

*  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Hist,  de  I' Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  p.  253,  et  seq.,  and  particularly
Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  pp.  86-111,  260,  et  seq.

'  Gelzer  was  the  first,  to  my  knowledge,  to  state  that  Lydia  was  a  feudal  state,  and  he  defined  its
constitution  (^Das  Zeitalter  des  Gijijes,  in  the  Jtheiniscltes  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  520-524)  ;
Kadet  (op.  cit.,  pp.  90,  91)  refuses  to  recognise  it  as  feudal  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term,  and  he  prefers
to  see  in  it  a  confederation  of  states  under  the  authority  of  a  single  prince.


340


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


THE    AXE    BOKNE   liY    Z£CS
LABRACNDOS.'


This  town  rose  in  terraces  on  tiie  lower  slopes  of  a  detached   spur  of  the
Tmolus  running  in   the  direction  of  the  Hermos,  and  was  crowned  by    the
citadel,  within  which  were  included  the  royal  palace,  the  treasury,  and  the
arsenals.     It  was  surrounded  by  an  immense  plain,  bounded  on  the  south  by
a  curve  of  the  Tmolus,  and  on  the  west  by  the  distant  mountains  of  Phrygia
Katakekaumene.    The  Ma^onians  still  claimed  primacy  over  the  entire  race,  and
the  reigning  family  was  chosen  from  among  their  nobles.^     The  king,  who  was
supposed  to  be  descended  from  the  gods,  bore,  as  the  insignia  of  his  rank,  a
double-headed  axe,  the  emblem  of  his  divine  ancestors.     The  Greeks  of  later
times  said  that  the  axe  was  that  of  their  Heracles,  which  was  wrested  by  him
from  the  Amazon  Hippolyta,  and  given  to  Omphalc.-*
The  king  was  the  supreme  head  of  the  priesthood,  as
also  of  the  vassal  chiefs  and  of  the  army,  but  he  had
as  a  subordinate   a   "  companion "   who   could   replace
him  when  occasion  demanded,-'  and  he  was  assisted  in
tlie  exercise  of  his  functions  by  the  counsel  of  "Friends,"
and  further  still  in  extraordinary  circumstances  by  the
citizens  of  the  capital  assembled  in  the  public  square.
This   intervention   of  the  voice   of  the   jiopulace   was
a  thing  unknown  in  the  East,  and  had  j)robably  been  introduced  in  isnitation
of  customs  observed  among  the  Greeks  of  ^olia  or  Ionia;  it  was  an  important
political   factor,  and   might    possibly  lead   to   an   outbreak   or  a   revolution.
Outside  the  pale  of  Sardes  and  the  province  of  Mseonia,  the  bulk  of  Lydian
territory  was  distributed   among  a  very  numerous  body  of  landowners,  who
were  particularly  proud  of  their  noble  desceiit.      Many  of  these  country  mag-
nates held  extensive  fiefs,  and  had  in  their  pay  small  armies,  which  rendered
tbem  almost  independent,  and  the  only  way  for  the  sovereign  to  succeed  in
ruling  them  was  to  conciliate  them  at  all  hazards,  and  to  keep  them  in  perpetual
enmity  with  their  fellows.     Two  of  tliese  rival  families  vied  with  each  other
in  their  eftbrts  to  secure  the  royal  favour;  that  of  the  Tylonidse  and  that  of
the  MermnadjB,  the  principal  domain  of  which  latter  lay  at  Teira,  in  tlie  valley
of  the  Cayster,  though  they  had  also  otlier  possessions  at  Dascylion,  in  Helles-
pontine  Phrygia.^     The  head  sometimes  of  one  and  sometimes  of  the  other

'  Cf.  Eadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  57-60.

-  PuiTAiiCH,  Quiest.  Gr.,  §  4S,  Didoi'a  ed.,  Mornjia,  vol.  i.  p.  371.  Gelzer  sees  in  the  legend  about  the
axe  related  by  Plutarch,  a  reminiscence  of  a  primitive  gynocracy  (^Das  ZeitaUer  des  Gijges,  iu  the
Rheinisches  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  517,  518).  The  axe  is  the  emblem  of  the  goti  of  war,  and,  as
such,  belongs  to  llie  king:  the  coins  of  Mylasa  exhibit  it  held  by  Zeus  Labraundos  (Barclay  Head,
Historia  Nummoruin,  pp.  528,  529).

^  Gelzer,  op.  cit.,  iu  Rhnnisches  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  526,  527,  and  Radet,  op.  cit.,  pp.  88, 89.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  me'dailles.

^  Gei.zer,  o/j.  cil.,  in  the  Rheinischen  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  523,  524 ;  the  name  of  the
■  Lydian  appanage,  written  "  Teira "  on  the  coins,  is  spelt  Tyrrha  or  Tyrrhos  in  literary  sources
(Radet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  p.  16,  note  1).


THE  LAST  OF   THE  HERACLID^  AND    THE   MERMNAD^.  341

family  would  fill  that  post  of  "companion  "  which  placed  all  the  resources  of
the  kingdom  at  the  disposal  of  the  occupant.

The  first  of  the  Mermnadae  of  whom  we  get  a  glimpse  is  Daskylos,  son  of
Gyges,  who  about  the  year  740  was  "  companion  "  during  the  declining  years  of
Ardys,  over  whom  he  exercised  such  influence  that  Adyattes,  the  heir  to  the
throne,  took  umbrage  at  it,  and  caused  him  to  be  secretly  assassinated,  wliere-
upon  his  widow,  fearing  for  her  own  safety,  hastily  fled  into  Phrygia,  of  which
district  she  was  a  native.  On  hearing  of  the  crime,  Ardys,  trembling  with  anger,
convoked  the  Assembly,  and  as  his  advanced  age  rendered  walking  diflicult,  he
caused  himself  to  be  carried  to  the  public  square  in  a  litter.  Having  reached
the  place,  he  laid  the  assassins  under  a  curse,  and  gave  permission  to  any  who
could  find  them  to  kill  them ;  he  then  returned  to  his  palace,  where  he  died  a
few  years  later,  about  730  B.C.  Adyattes  took  the  name  of  Meles  on  ascending
the  throne,'  and  at  first  reigned  haj^pily,  but  his  father's  curse  weighed  ujjon
him,  and  before  long  began  to  take  efi'ect.  Lydia  having  been  laid' waste  by
a  famine,  the  oracle  declared  that,  before  appeasing  the  gods,  the  king  must
expiate  the  murder  of  the  Mermnad  noble,  by  making  every  atonement  in  his
power,  if  need  be  by  an  exile  of  three  years'  duration.  Meles  submitted  to
the  divine  decree.  He  sought  out  the  widow  of  his  victim,  and  learning  that
during  her  flight  she  had  given  birth  to  a  son,  called,  like  his  father,  Daskylos,
he  sent  to  entreat  the  young  man  to  repair  immediately  to  Sardes,  that  he
might  make  amends  for  the  murder ;  the  youth,  however,  alleged  that  he  was  as
yet  unborn  at  the  hour  of  his  father's  death,  and  therefore  not  entitled  to  be  a
party  to  an  arrangement  which  did  not  personally  affect  liim,  and  refused  to
return  to  ids  own  country.  Having  failed  in  this  attemj^t,  Meles  entrusted  the
regency  of  his  kingdom  to  Sadyattes,  son  of  Kadys,  one  of  the  Tylonidae,  who
probably  had  already  filled  the  post  of  companion  to  the  king  for  some  time
past,  and  set  out  for  Babylon.  When  the  three  years  had  elapsed,  Sadyattes
faithfully  handed  over  to  him  the  reins  of  government  and  resumed  the  second
place.-  Myrsos  succeeded  Meles  about  716,^  and  his  accession  immediately
became  the  cause  of  uneasiness  to  the  younger  Daskylos,  who  felt  that  he  was
no  longer  safe  from  the  intrigues  of  the  Heraclidae ;  he  therefore  quitted  Phrygia

'  Gelzeu,  Dris  ZeAlalter  des  Gi/ijes,  iu  the  Tiheinisches Museum,  1S8II,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  524,  525,  and  after
him  ScHi  r.EUT,  Gesch.  dtr  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  22,  23,  still  distinguish  this  Adyattes  or  Alyattes  from
Meles ;  Kadet  seems  to  have  shown  clearly  that  Adyattes  or  Alyattes  and  Meles  are  two  names  of  one
and  the  same  person,  the  first  being  the  sacred  and  the  second  the  family  name  {La  Lydie  et  le  Monde
Gre.c,  pp.  77,  78).

*  Nicolas  op  Damascus,  Fiagm.  49,  in  MCller-Didot,  Fragin.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  382,  383,
after  Xautlms  of  I^ydia.

'  The  lists  of  Eusebiua  give  3(j  years  to  Ardys,  14  years  to  Meles  or  Adyattes,  12  years  to  Myrsos,
and  17 years  to  Candaules(C7t/-0)jicor«Hi  Lihriduo,ed.  Schcene,  vol.  i.  cols  G7-G9,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  7(1-82);
that  ia  to  say,  if  we  place  the  accession  of  Gyges  in  t)87,  the  dates  of  the  reign  of  Candaules  are  704-
C87,  of  that  of  Jlyrsos  71t!-704,  of  that  of  Bleles  7oO-71G,  of  that  of  Ardys  I.  700-730.  Gelzer,  op.  cit.,
in  the  Rheinimhe)  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  524,  525,  thinks  that  the  double  names  each  represent
a  different  king;  Radet,  op.  cit.,  p.  79,  adheres  to  the  four  generations  of  Eusebius.


342  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

and  settled  beyond  the  Halys  among  the  White  Syrians,  one  of  whom  he  took
in  marriage,  and  had  by  her  a  son,  whom  he  called  Gyges,  after  his  ancestor.^
The  Lydian  chronicles  which  have  come  down  to  us  make  no  mention  of  him,
after  tlie  birth  of  this  child,  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century.  We  know,
however,  from  other  sources,  thiit  the  country  in  which  he  took  refuge  liad  for
some  time  past  been  ravaged  by  enemies  coming  from  the  Caucasus,  known  to  us
as  the  Cimmerians.^  Previous  to  this  period  these  had  been  an  almost  mythical
race  in  the  eyes  of  the  civilised  races  of  the  Oriental  world.  They  imagined
them  as  living  in  a  perpetual  mist  on  the  confines  of  the  universe :  "  Never
does  bright  Helios  look  upon  them  with  his  rays,  neither  when  he  rises  towards

the  starry  heaven,  nor  when  he
rFTFrrcBj^p:::  turns  back  from  heaven  towards

■^    the  earth,   but   a   baleful    night
spreads  itself  over  these  miserable
^^^  mortals."  ^       Fabulous     animals,

'  '('-'k  such  as  griffins  with  lions' bodies,

>'^^'.)  having  the  neck  and  cars  of  a  fox,

.,_  Vr^.^iij^-^'S^^-^^'  and   the  wings  and   beak   of  an

.  eajrle,  wandered  over  their  plains,

A  CONFLICT  WITH  TWO  GBIFFLNS.*  O      '  r  '

and  sometimes  attacked  them ;
the  inhabitants  were  forced  to  defend  themselves  with  axes,  and  did  not
always  emerge  victorious  from  these  terrible  conflicts.  The  few  merchants
who  had  ventured  to  penetrate  into  their  country  had  returned  from  their
travels  with  less  fanciful  notions  concerning  the  nature  of  the  regions
frequented  by  them,  but  little  continued  to  be  known  of  them,  until  an  un-
foreseen occurrence  obliged  them  to  quit  their  remote  steppes.  The  Scythians,
driven  from  the  plains  of  the  laxartes  by  an  influx  of  the  Massagetae,  were
urged  forwards  in  a  westerly  direction  beyond  the  Volga  and  the  Don,  and  so

'  Nicolas  of  Damasoos,  Fragm.  49,  in  Mlller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  G^nec,  vol.  iii.  p.  383.

'  I  ■would  gladly  have  treated  at  length  the  subject  of  the  Cimmerians  with  its  accompanying  develop-
ments, but  lack  of  space  prevents  me  from  doing  more  than  summing  up  here  the  position  I  have  taken.
Most  modem  critics  have  rejected  that  part  of  the  tradition  preserved  by  Herodotus  which  refers  to
the  itinerary  of  the  Cimmerians,  and  have  confused  the  Cimmerian  invasion  with  that  of  the  Thraeian
tribes.  I  think  that  there  is  reason  to  give  weight  to  Herodotus'  statement,  and  to  distinguish  care-
fully between  two  series  of  events:  (1)  a  movement  of  peoples  coming  from  Europe  into  Asia,  by
the  routes  that  Herodotus  indicates,  about  the  latter  half  of  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  who  would  be
more  especially  the  Cimmerians;  (2)  a  movement  of  peoples  coming  from  Europe  into  Asia  by  the
Thraeian  Bosphorus,  aud  among  whom  there  was  perhaps,  side  by  side  with  the  Treres,  a  remn.ant
of  Cimmerian  tribes  who  had  been  ousted  by  the  Scythians.  The  two  streams  would  have  had  their
confluence  in  the  heart  of  Asia  Minor,  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  century.

'  Odyssey,  xi.  14-19.  It  is  this  passage  which  Ephorus  applies  to  the  Cimmerians  of  his  own  time
who  were  established  in  the  Crimea,  and  which  accounts  for  his  saying  that  they  were  a  race  of  miners,
living  perpetually  underground  (Ephorus,  Frag.  45,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fray.  Hist.  Gnec,  vul.  i.  p.  245).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  reliefs  on  the  crown  of  the  Great  Blinitza;  cf.  the
Comptes  rendus  de  la  Commission  Impgriale  Arch€ologique,  1865,  pi.  i.  3.


TBE   CIMMERIANS  AND    THE   TSERES  IN  ASIA.


343


SCYTHIANS  ARMED   FOR   WAR.'


great  was  the  terror  inspired  by  the  mere  report  of  their  approach,  that  the
Cimmerians  decided  to  quit  their  own  territory.  A  tradition  current  in
Asia  three  centuries  later,  told  how  their  kings  had  counselled  them  to
make  a  stand  against  the  invaders ;  the  people,  however,  having  refused  to
listen  to  their  advice,  their  rulers  and  those  who  were  loyal  to  them  fell  by
each  other's  hands,  and  their  burial-place  was  still  shown  near  the  banks
of  the  Tyras.  Some  of  their  tribes  took  refuge  in  the  Cbersonesus  Taurica,
but  the  greater  number  pushed  forward  beyond  the  Maeotic  marshes ;
a  body  of  Scythians  followed  in  their  track,  and  the  united  horde  pressed
onwards  till  they  entered  Asia  Minor,  keeping  to  the  shores  of  the  Black
Sea.^  This  heterogeneous
mass  of  people  came  into
conflict  first  with  Urartu ;
then  turning  obliquely  in
a  south-easterly  direction,
their  advance-guard  fell
upon  the  Mannai.  But
they  were  repulsed  bv
Sargon's  generals  ;  the
check  thus  administered
forced  them  to  fall  back  speedily  upon  other  countries  less  vigorously
defended.  The  Scythians,  therefore,  settled  themselves  in  the  eastern  basin
of  the  Araxes,  on  the  frontiers  of  Urartu  and  the  Mannai,  where  they  formed
themselves  into  a  kind  of  marauding  community,  perpetually  quarrelling
with  their  neighbours.^  Tlie  Cimmerians  took  their  way  westwards,  and
established  themselves  upon  the  upper  waters  of  the  Araxes,  the  Euphrates,
the  Halys,  and  the  Thermodon,*  greatly  to  the  vexation  of  the  rulers  of  Urartu.

'  Herodotus,  IV.  xi.,  xii.  Tlie  version  of  Aj-istsBas  of  Procoanesus,  as  given  by  Herodotus  (IV.
xiii.)  and  by  Uamastc-s  of  Sigsea  (Mvller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  ii.  p.  65),  attributes  a  more
complex  origin  to  this  migration,  i.e.  tliat  the  Arimaspes  bad  driven  the  Issedoniana  before  them,
and  that  the  latter  had  in  turn  driven  the  Scythians  hack  on  the  Cimmerians.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  reliefs  on  the  silver  vase  of  Kul-Oba.

'  Wiuckler  {Allorientalische  Forsckungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  187.  ISS)  was  the  iirst  to  show  that  the
Scythians  of  the  tradition  preserved  by  Herodotus  must  have  been  the  Asbguzai  or  Ishkuzai  of  the
cuneiform  documents.  The  original  name  must  have  been  Skuza,  Shkuza,  with  a  sound  in  the  second
syllable  that  the  Greeks  have  rendered  by  th,  SKvOat,  and  the  Assyrians  by  z :  the  initial  vowel  has  been
added,  according  to  a  well-known  rule,  to  facilitate  the  pronunciation  of  the  combination  SK,  shk.  An
oracle  of  the  time  of  Esarhaddon  shows  that  they  occupied  one  of  the  districts  really  belonging  to  the
Blamiai  (Knudtzojj,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  SonnengotI,  p.  130):  and  it  is  probably  they  who  are
mentioned  in  a  passage  of  Jei:  li.  27,  where  the  traditional  reading  Anhchenaz  should  be  replaced
by  that  of  Ashkuz  (Sayce,  Tlie  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of  Van,  in  J.  R.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  394,  078  :
cf.  Fk.  Lenokmant,  Lea  Orig.  de  I'Hist.,  vol.  iii.  p.  229,  note  6 ;  Fk.  Delitzscb,  in  Lihri  Daniel,  Ezra,
Ifehemialt,  ed.  Bjer,  1SS2,  p.  ix. ;  Knudtzon,  op.  cit.,  p.  131 ;  Winxkler,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  292, 491,  note  2).

'  It  is  doubtless  to  these  events  that  the  tradition  preserved  by  Pompeius  Trogus,  which  is  known  to
us  through  his  abbreviator  Justin  (ii.  4,  §  1),  or  through  the  compilers  of  a  later  period  (Orosics,  i.  15  ;
^Ethicts  Ister,  v.  G8).  refers,  concerning  the  two  Scythian  princes  Ylinus  and  Scolopitus:  they  seem
to  have  settled  along  the  coast,  on  the  banks  of  the  Thermodon  and  in  the  district  of  Themiscjra.


344  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT   ITS  ZENITH.

They  subsequently  felt  their  way  along  tiie  valleys  of  the  Anti-Taurus,  but
finding  them  held  by  Assyrian  troops,  they  turned  their  steps  towards  the
country  of  the  White  Syrians,  seized  Sinope,  where  the  Greeks  had  recently
founded  a  colony,^  and  bore  down  upon  Phrygia.  It  would  appear  that  they
were  joined  in  these  regions  by  other  hordes  from  Thrace  which  had  crossed  the
Bosphorus  a  few  years  earlier,  and  anaong  whom  the  ancient  historians  particu-
larly make  mention  of  the  Treres ; "  the  results  of  the  Scythian  invasion  had
probably  been  felt  by  all  the  tribes  on  the  banks  of  the  Dnieper,  and  had  been
the  means  of  forcing  them  in  the  direction  of  the  Danube  and  the  Balkans,
whence  they  drove  before  them,  as  they  went,  the  inhabitants  of  the  Thracian
peninsula  across  into  Asia  Minor.  It  was  about  the  year  750  B.C.  that  the
Cimmerians  had  been  forced  to  quit  their  first  home,  and  towards  720  that
they  came  into  contact  with  the  empires  of  the  East ;  the  Treres  had  crossed
the  Bosphorus  about  710,  and  the  meeting  of  the  two  streams  of  immigration
may  be  placed  in  the  opening  years  of  the  seventh  century.^  The  combined
hordes  did  not  at  once  attack  Phrygia  itself,  but  spread  themselves  along  the
coast,  from  the  mouths  of  the  Ehyndakos  to  those  of  Halys,  constituting  a  sort
of  maritime  confederation  of  which  Heraclea  and  Sinope  were  the  chief  towns.*
This  confederation  must  not  be  regarded  as  a  regularly  constituted  state,  but
rather  as  a  vast  encampment  in  which  the  warriors  could  leave  their  families  and
their  spoil  in  safety ;  they  issued  from  it  nearly  every  year  to  spread  themselves
over  the  neighbouring  provinces,  sometimes  in  one  direction,  sometimes  in
another.^  The  ancient  sanctuaries  of  Pteria  and  the  treasures  they  contained
excited  their  cupidity,  but  they  were  not  well  enough  equipped  to  undertake  the
siege  of  a  strongly  fortified  place,  and  for  want  of  anything  better  were  content
to  hold  it  to  ransom.  The  bulk  of  the  indigenous  population  lived  even  then  in
those  subterranean  dwellings  so  difficult  of  access,  which  are  still  used  as  habita-
tions by  the  tribes  on  the  banks  of  the  Halys,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  helped

'  Herodotds,  IV.  xii. ;  Soymnus  op  Chios,  Orhis  Descriptio,  941-952,  in  Muller-Didot,  Geographi
Grieci  Minores,  vol.  i.  p.  236.

"  Strabo  says  decisively  that  tlie  Treres  were  both  Cimmerians  (Tpripuv  .  .  .  Kifi/iepiKoiJ  eflraus.
XIV.  i.  §  40,  p.  017)  and  Thracians  (Tpi/pes,  koI  oItoi  QpaKes,  XIII.  i.  §  S,  p.  oS6);  elsewhere  he  makes
the  Treres  synonymous  with  the  Cimmerians  {Kii^iiepiot,  oti  koI  Tp^|pas  ofofidCovai,  I.  iii.  §22,  p.  Gl).
The  Treres  were  probably  the  predominating  tribe  among  the  people  which  had  come  into  Asia  on
that  bide.

'  Gelzer  (Dos  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Bhein!sches  Museum,  1875,  vol.  xxx  pp.  256-264)  tliinks
tiiat  the  invasion  by  the  Bosphorus  took  place  about  705,  and  Radet  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au
temps  des  Mernmades,  pp.  125,  145,  175)  about  708;  aud  their  reckoning  seems  to  me  to  be  so  likely
to  be  correct,  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  place  the  arrival  of  the  Treres  in  Asia  about  the  time  they
have  both  indicated — roughly  speaking,  about  710  B.C.

^  For  Sinope,  cf.  what  is  said  above,  p.  344,  note  1 ;  Arrian,  in  a  passage  of  his  Bithi/nica,  speaks  of
their  dwelling  beyond  the  Sangarioj,  in  the  country  of  the  Mariandynians,  where  several  of  their  bands
had  been  poisoned  by  eating  hemlock  {Fragm.  47,  in  Mr llek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gr;ic.,  vol.  iii.  p.  595).

'  The  nature  of  their  empire  was  defined  very  exactly  by  Fiskret,  Memoire  sur  les  Cimnteriens,  in
the  Miinoires  de  VAcademie  des  Inscriptions,  1745,  vol.  six.  p.  609 ;  cf.  Fi;.  Lenokm.\xt,  Les  Oriijines  de
Vllisloire,  vol.  ii.  pp.  355,  356 ;  Radet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  175, 176.


THE  MUBDER    OF  SENNACBERID.


345


to  swell  the  marandiug  troops  of  the  new-comers.  In  the  declining  years  of
Sennacherib,  it  would  appear  that  the  Ninevite  provinces  possessed  an  irre-
sistible attraction  for  these  various  peoples.  The  fame  of  the  wealth  accumulated
in  the  regions  bej'ond  the  Taurus  and  the  Euphrates,  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,
provoked  their  cupidity  beyond  all  bounds,  and  the  time  was  at  hand  when  the
fear  alone  of  the  Assyrian  armies  would  no  longer  avail  to  hold  them  in  check.
The  last  years  of  Sennacherib  had  been  embittered  by  the  intrigues  which


.-"!«?*»■


i.>..ii


INHABITED  CAVES  ON  THE  BANKS  OF  THE  UM.YS.'

usually  gathered  around  a  monarch  enfeebled  by  age  and  incapable  of  bearing  the
cares  of  government  with  his  former  vigour.  A  fierce  rivalry  existed  between
those  of  his  sens  who  aspired  to  the  throne,  each  of  whom  possessed  his  follow-
ing of  partisans,  botli  at  court  and  among  the  people,  who  were  ready  to
support  him,  if  need  be  even  with  the  sword.  One  of  these  princes,  probably
the  eldest  of  the  king's  remaining  sons,^  named  Assur-akhc-iddin,  called  bv  us
Esarhaddon,  had  already  been  nominated  his  successor,  and  had  received  tiie
officialinvestiture  of  the  Babylonian  kingdom  under  the  name  of  Assur-etilmu-
kin-pal.^      The  catastrojjhe  of  080  had  not  resulted  in  bringing  about   the

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  courteously  seut  by  Alfred  Boissier.

'  The  eldest  was  perhaps  that  Assur-nadiu-shumu  who  reigned  in  Babylon,  and  who  was  taken
prisoner  to  Elam  by  King  Khalludush;  cf.  what  is  said  of  this  prince  in  pp.  29U.  303  of  this  volume.

'  The  idea  of  an  enthronisation  at  Babylon  in  the  lifetime  of  Sennacherib,  put  forward  by  tlie
earlier  Assyriologists,  Menant  (Anutiles  des  rois  d'Assijrie,  p.  238),  Budge  {The  Ilialory  of  Esar-
haddon,  p.  2),  Pim-hes  (Un  Babylonian  Art  as  illustrated  hij  M.  H.  Itassam's  Discoveries,  in  the
ProceefZingsof  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archie  jl  igy,  1883-188i,  vol.  vi.  pp.  14,  15,  and  in  the  Transactions,
vol.  viii.  pp.  353,  354),  based  on  an  inscription  on  a  lion's  head  discovered  at  Babylon  (cf.  the
drawing  of  this  object  at  the  heading  of  chap,  vi.,  p.  535,  Dawn  of  Cirilization),  has  been  adopted
and  confirmed  by  Winckler  (Studien  und   Beilriige   zur  Bob.-ass.  Gesck.,  in  Zeit.  Jiir  Assyriologie,


346  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

ruin  of  Babylon,  as  Sennacherib  and  bis  ministers  had  hoped.  The  temples,  it
is  true,  had  been  desecrated  and  demolished,  the  palaces  and  public  buildings
razed  to  the  ground,and  the  ramparts  thrown  down,but, in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the
city  had  been  set  on  fire  by  the  conquerors,  the  quarters  inhabited  by  the  lower
classes  still  remained  standing,and  those  of  the  inhabitants  who  had  escaped  being
carried  away  captive,  together  with  such  as  had  taken  refuge  in  the  surrounding
country  or  had  hidden  themselves  in  neighbouring  cities,  had  gradually  re-
turned to  their  desolated  homes.  They  cleared  the  streets,  repaired  the  damage
inflicted  during  the  siege,  and  before  long  the  city,  which  was  believed  to  be
hopelessly  destroyed,  rose  once  more  with  the  vigour,  if  not  with  the  wealth,
which  it  had  enjoyed  before  its  downfall.  The  motlier  of  Esarhaddou  was  a
Babylonian,  by  name  Naki'a ;  ^  and  as  soon  as  her  son  came  into  possession  of  his
inheritance,  an  impulse  of  filial  piety  moved  him  to  restore  to  his  mother's  city  its
former  rank  of  capital.  Animated  by  the  strong  religious  feeling  which  formed
the  groundwork  of  his  character,  Esarhaddon  had  begun  his  reign  by  restoring
the  sanctuaries  which  had  been  the  cradle  of  the  Assyrian  religion,  and  his
intentions,  thus  revealed  at  the  very  outset,  had  won  for  him  the  sympathy  of
the  Babylonians ;  ^  this,  indeed,  was  excited  sooner  than  he  expected,  and
perhaps  helped  to  secure  to  him  his  throne.  During  his  absence  from  Nineveh,
a  widespread  plot  had  been  formed  in  that  city,  and  on  the  20th  day  of
Tebeth,  681,  at  the  hour  when  Sennacherib  was  praying  before  the  image  of
his  god,  two  of  his  sons,  Sharezer  and  Adarmalik  (Adrammelech),  assassinated
their  father  at  the  foot  of  the  altar.^    One  half  of  the  army  proclaimed  Sharezer

vol.  ii.  pp.  306-308;  Uniersuchungen  zur  Altorient.  Geseh.,  p.  11,  n.  1 ;  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  p.  133;
Altorient.  Fonchungen,  vol.  i.  p.  418,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56,  57).  It  was  doubtless  on  this  occasion  that
Esarhaddon  received  as  a  present  from  his  father  the  objects  mentioned  in  the  document  wliich  Sayce
{^fill  nf  Sennacherib  King  of  Assyria,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  i.  p.  136)  and  Budge  {Uisiory
of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  14,  15)  have  called,  without  sufficient  reason,  the  Will  of  Sennacherib  (Winckler,
Altorient.  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  55-57).

'  WiNCKLEB,  Allorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  p.  189.

^  Fragment  S  1079,  in  the  British  Museum,  quoted  by  Winckler  {op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56, 57),  seems
to  show  clearly  that  the  restoration  of  the  temples  was  begun  even  in  the  lifetime  of  Sennacherib.

'  We  possess  three  dift'erent  accounts  of  the  murder  of  Sennacherib :  1.  In  the  Babylonian  Chronicle
of  Pinches  (col.  iii.  11.  34-36 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Bahylonische  Chronik  B,  in  Schrader,  Keilinschriftliche
Bibliothek,  vol.  il.  pp.  280-283).  2.  In  the  Bible  (2  Kings  xix.  36,  37 ;  cf.  ha.  xxxvii.  37,  38 ;
2  Citron,  xxxii.  21).  3.  In  Berosus  (Fragm.  12,  in  MCller-Didot,  Fragm.  Eist.  Grsec,  vol.  ii.  p.  504).
The  biblical  account  alone  mentions  both  murderers ;  the  Chronicle  and  Berosus  speak  of  only  one,
and  their  testimony  seems  to  prevail  with  several  historians  (Hommel,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und
Assyriens,  pp.  688,  689 ;  Winckler,  Sludien  und  BeilrSge  zur  Bahylonisch-assyrischen  Geschichte,  in
the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  392-396,  and  Allorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  p.  59).
I  believe  thut  the  silence  of  the  Chronicle  and  of  Berosus  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  Sharezer  was
chief  in  the  conspiracy,  and  the  one  among  the  sons  who  aspired  to  the  kingdom:  the  second
murderer  merely  acted  for  his  brother,  and  consequently  had  no  more  right  to  be  mentioned  by  uame
than  those  accomplices  not  of  the  blood-royal  who  shared  in  the  murder.  The  name  Sharezer  is
usually  considered  as  an  abbreviation  of  the  Assyrian  name  Nergal-sliaruzur  (Tiele,  Babylonisch-
assj/rinche  Geschichte,  p.  325),  or  Assur-sharuzur  (Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  688).  Winckler
now  thinks  that  he  sees  in  it  a  corruption  of  Sharitir,  abbreviated  from  Sharitir-assur,  which  he  finds
as  a  royal  name  on  a  fragment  in  the  British  Museum;  he  proposes  to  recognise  in  this  Sharitir-assur,
Sharezer  enthroned  after  his  father's  death  {Allorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  58, 59 ;  cf.  pp.  6-8).


THE  DEFEAT  OF  SHAREZER.  347

king;  the  northern  provinces  espoused  his  cause;  and  Esarhaddon  must  for
the  moment  have  lost  all  hope  of  the  succession.  His  father's  tragic  fate  over-
whelmed him  with  fear  and  grief;  he  rent  his  clothes,  groaned  and  lamented  like
a  lion  roaring,  and  could  be  comforted  only  by  the  oracles  pronounced  by  the
priests  of  Babylon.  An  assurance  that  the  gods  favoured  his  cause  reached
him  even  from  Assyria,  and  Nineveh,  after  a  few  weeks  of  vacillation,  acknow-
ledged him  as  its  sovereign,  the  rebellion  being  mercilessly  crushed  on  the
2nd  of  Adar.^  Although  this  was  a  considerable  advantage  to  Esarhaddon's
cause,  it  could  not  be  considered  as  decisive,  since  the  provinces  of  the
Euphrates  still  declared  for  Sharezer ;  the  gods,  therefore,  once  more  inter-
vened. Ishtar  of  Arbela  had  long  been  considered  as  the  recognised  patroness
and  oracle  of  the  dynasty.  Whether  it  were  a  question  of  a  foreign  expedition
or  a  rebellion  at  home,  of  a  threatened  plague  or  invasion,  of  a  marriage  or  an
alliance  with  some  powerful  neighbour,  the  ruling  sovereign  would  invariably
have  recourse  to  her,  always  with  the  same  formula,  to  demand  counsel  of  her
for  the  conduct  of  affairs  in  hand,  and  the  replies  which  she  vouchsafed  in
various  ways  were  taken  into  consideration  ;  her  will,  as  expressed  by  the
mouth  of  her  ministers,  would  hasten,  suspend,  or  modify  the  decisions  of  the
king.  Esarhaddon  did  not  neglect  to  consult  the  goddess,  as  well  as  Assur
and  Sin,  Shamash,  Bel,  Nebo,  and  Nergal  ;  and  their  words,  transcribed
upon  a  tablet  of  clay,  induced  him  to  act  without  further  delay :  "  Go,  do
not  hesitate,  for  we  march  with  thee  and  we  will  cast  down  thine  enemies ! "
Thus  encouraged,  he  made  straight  for  the  scene  of  danger  without  passing
through  Nineveh,  so  as  to  prevent  Sharezer  and  his  party  having  time  to  recover.
His  biographers  depict  Esarhaddon  hurrying  forward,  often  a  day  or  more  in
advance  of  his  battalions,  without  once  turning  to  see  who  followed  him,  and
without  waiting  to  allow  the  horses  of  his  baggage-waggons  to  be  unharnessed
or  permitting  his  servants  to  pitch  his  tent;  he  rested  merely  for  a  few
moments  on  the  bare  ground,  indifferent  to  the  cold  -and  nocturnal  frosts  of  tlie
month  of  Sebat.  It  woul'd  appear  as  if  Sharezer  had  placed  his  hopes  on  the
Cimmerians,  and  had  expected  their  chiefs  to  come  to  the  rescue.  This
hypothesis  seems  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  decisive  battle  took  place
beyond  the  Euphrates  and  the  Taurus,  in  the  country  of  Khanigalbat.     Esar-

'  The  broken  Cylinder  of  Esarhaddon,  col.  i.  11.  1-2G :  cf.  Budge,  The  Bislory  of  Esarhaddon,
pp.  20-23 ;  WiNCKLER,  Die  Imchrift  des  (lerbrochenen)  Prismas  B,  in  Schradee,  Keiiinschri/tliche
BiUiothvl;  vol.  ii.  pp.  H0-H3.  Tlie  Bible  aloue  tells  us  that  Sharezer  retired  to  Urartu  (2  Kings
xi.x.  37).  To  explain  tlie  plan  of  this  campaign,  it  is  usually  supposed  that  at  the  time  of  his  father's
death  Esarhaddon  was  either  beyond  Mount  Taurus  or  else  on  the  Armenian  frontier  (Tiele,
Babylomsch-ansijrische  Geschichte.  pp.  309,  32-1,  325,  SU,  345 ;  Hommel,  Geschiehte  Babijlouieiis  luid
Assyriens,  p.  C89) ;  the  sequence  of  the  dates  in  the  Bitlylonian  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iii.  11. 3-1-38,
compels  me  to  revert  to  the  opinion,  as  Winckler  lias  already  done  {Untermchungen  zur  AUorienlaUschen
Geschichte.  p.  10,  note  1 ;  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  258,  259),  that  Esarhaddon  marched
from  Babylon  against  the  rebels,  and  pursued  them  as  far  as  Mount  Taurus,  and  beyond  it  to  Khani-
galbat (Budge,  The  Eistory  of  Esarhaddon,  p.  3).


348  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

haddon  attributed  his  success  to  Ishtar,  the  goddess  of  bravery  and  of  combat ;
slie  alone  had  broken  the  weapons  of  the  rebels,  she  alone  had  brought
confusion  into  their  lines,  and  had  inclined  the  hearts  of  the  survivors  to
submit.  They  cried  aloud,  "  This  is  our  king  !  "  and  Sharezer  thereupon  fled
into  Armenia.'  The  war  had  been  brought  to  a  close  with  such  rapidity  that
even  the  most  unsettled  of  the  Assyrian  subjects  and  vassals  had  not  had
time  to  take  advantage  of  it  for  their  own  purposes ;  the  Kalda  on  the
Persian  Gulf,  and  the  Sidonians  on  the  j\Iediterranean,  were  the  only  two
peoples  who  had  openly  revolted,  and  were  preparing  to  enter  on  a  struggle  to
preserve  their  independence  thus  once  more  regained.  Yet  the  events  of  the
preceding  months  had  shaken  the  power  of  Nineveh  more  seriously  than  we
should  at  first  suppose.  For  the  first  time  since  the  accession  of  Tiglath-
pileser  III.  the  almost  inevitable  troubles  which  accompany  the  change  of  a
sovereign  bad  led  to  an  open  war.  The  vast  army  of  Sargon  and  Sennacherib  had
been  split  up,  and  the  two  fiictious  into  which  it  was  divided,  commanded  as
they  were  by  able  generals  and  composed  of  troops  accustomed  to  conquer,
must  have  suftered  more  keenly  in  an  engagement  with  each  other  than  in  the
course  of  an  ordinary  campaign  against  a  common  enemy.  One  part  at  least
of  the  military  staff"  had  become  disorganised  ;  regiments  had  been  decimated,
and  considerable  contingents  were  required  to  fill  the  vacancies  in  the  ranks.
The  male  population  of  Assyria,  suddenly  called  on  to  furnish  the  necessary  effec-
tive force,  could  not  supply  the  demand  without  drawing  too  great  a  proportion
of  men  from  the  country  ;  and  one  of  those  crises  of  exhaustion  was  imminent
which  come  upon  a  nation  after  an  undue  strain,  often  causing  its  downfall  in  the
midst  of  its  success,  and  yielding  it  an  easy  prey  to  the  wiles  of  its  adversaries.^

'  Babylonian  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iii.  1.  38 ;  of.  Schbader,  Keilinschri/tliche  Sibliothek,  vol.  ii.
pp.  282,  283,  and  Knudtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sojuiengotf,  p.  69,  note  2,  where  the  correction
of  the  18th  (?)  of  Adar  for  the  ISth  of  Sivan  is  pointed  out  for  the  passage  in  the  Chronicle  of  Pinches.
The  date  of  the  accession  of  Esarhaddon  was  fixed  in  various  ways  by  the  Assyrians :  some,
reckoning  the  reign  from  the  death  of  Sennacherib,  made  it  begin  under  the  eponymous  year  of
Nabu-akh-ishshish  (Canon  I.,  col.  V.,  in  Scbhadek,  KeilinschriftlicheBibliothel!,  vol.  i.  p.  207),  that  is  in
081 ;  others,  dating  it  from  the  day  of  the  coronation,  made  it  commence  in  the  eponymous  year  of
Bananu  {Tablet  K  TO,  in  the  British  Museum,  in  G.  Smith,  The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  p.  92).

'  The  information  we  possess  concerning  Esarhaddon  is  gathered  from:  1.  Tlie  Inscription  of
Cylinders  A,  B,  C,  the  second  of  the  three  better  known  as  the  Brohen  Cylinder.  They  have  been  published
by  I.AYARD,  Inscriptions  in  the  Cuneiform  Charjcler,  pis.  20-29.  54-58;  by  H.  RawlissON,  Cun.  Ins.
W.  As.,  vol.  i.  |ils.  45-47.  and  vol.  iii.  pis.  15,  10 ;  by  Abel  and  Winckleb,  Keilschrifttexte,  pis.  25,  26 ;
then  translated  into  French  by  Oppeet,  Les  Inscriptions  des  Sargonides,  pp.  53-00,  and  by  Menant.
Annates  des  Bois  d'Assyrie,  pp.  240-247 ;  into  English  at  various  times  by  Fox  Talbot,  Inscription
of  Esarhaddon  and  The  Second  Inscription,  in  Records  of  the  Past,  let  ser.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  102-124 ;  then  by
K.  F.  H.ARPER,  Cylinder  A  of  the  Esarhaddon  Inscription.?,  transliterated  and  translated,  with  Textual
Notes,  from  the  Original  Copy  in  the  British  Museum ;  into  German,  Cylinders  A-C  by  L.  Abel,  Die
Inschrlft  der  Prismen  A  und  C,  and  by  Wincklek,  Die  Jnschrlft  des  (^ztrbroclienen)  Prismas  B,  in
ScHRADER,  Keilinschri/tliche  Bibliotheh;  vol.  ii.  pp.  124-151.  These  texts  contain  a  summary  of  the
king's  wars,  in  which  the  subject-matter  is  arranged  geographically,  net  chronologically :  they  cease
with  the  eponymy  of  Akhazilu,  i.e.  the  year  673.  2.  Some  mutilated  fragments  of  the  AnnaU,  published
and  translated  for  the  first  time  by  Bo.scawen,  Historical  Inscription  of  Esarhaddon,  in  the  Transactions
of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  vol.  Iv.  pp.  84-97.    3.  The  Black  Stone  of  Aberdeen,  on  whicli


CAMPAIGNS  AGAIXST  THE  KALDA.  349

Esarhaddon  was  personally  inclined  for  peace,  and  as  soon  as  he  was
established  on  the  throne  he  gave  orders  that  the  bnilding  works,  which  had
been  suspended  during  the  late  troubles,  should  be  resumed  and  actively  pushed
forward ;  ^  but  the  unfortunate  disturbances  of  the  times  did  not  permit  of  his
pursuing  his  favourite  occupation  without  interruption,  and,  like  those  of  his
warlike  predecessors,  his  life  was  passed  almost  entirely  on  the  field  of  battle.
Babylon,  grateful  for  what  he  had  done  for  her,  tendered  him  an  unbroken
fidelity  throughout  the  stormy  episodes  of  his  reign,  and  showed  her  devotion
to  him  by  an  unwavering  obedience.  The  Kalda  received  no  support  from  that
quarter,  and  were  obliged  to  bear  the  whole  burden  of  the  war  which  they  had
provoked.  Their  chief,  Nabu-ziru-kinish-lishir,  who  had  been  placed  over  them
by  Sennacherib,  now  harassed  the  cities  of  Karduniash,  and  Ningal-sbumiddin,
the  prefect  of  Uru,  demanded  immediate  help  from  Assyria.  Esarhaddon  at
once  despatched  such  a  considerable  force  that  the  Kaldu  chief  did  not
venture  to  meet  it  in  the  open  field,  and  after  a  few  unimportant  skirmishes
he  gave  up  the  struggle,  and  took  refuge  in  Elam.  Khumban-khaldash
had  died  there  in  680,  a  few  months  before  the  murder  of  Sennacherib,
and  his  sou,  a  second  Khumban-khaldash,  had  succeeded  him ;  '^  this
prince  appears  either  to  have  shared  the  peaceful  tastes  of  his  brother-king
of  Assyria,  or  more  probably  did  not  feel  himself  sufficiently  secure  of  his  throne
to  risk  the  chance  of  coming  into  collision  with  his  neighbour.  He  caused
Nabu-ziru-kinisli-lishir  to  be  slain,  and  Naid-marduk,  the  other  son  of
Merodach-baladan,  who  had  shared  his  brotlier's  flight,  was  so  terrified  at  his

the  account  of  the  rebuilding  of  Babylon  is  given,  and  which  was  published  by  H.  Eawlixson,  Ouii.
Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pis.  49,  50,  and  translated  into  French  by  OrrEKT,  Expedition  de  Me'sopotamie ,
vol.  i.  p.  180,  et  seq.,  and  again  by  Menant,  Annales  des  Jiois  d'Assyrie,  p.  248,  and  Bahylone  et  hi
CItahUe,  pp.  167,168;  into  German  by  Winckler,  Inschri/t  des  sogenannten  schicurzen  Steins,  in
ScHRADER,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothel<,  vol.  ii.  pp.  120-125.  4.  17(6  Stele  of  Zindjirli,  published  by  Von
LuscHAN,  Aiisgrabungen  in  Seiidschirli,  vol.  i.  pp.  11-20,  and  pis.  i.-iv.,  translated  into  German  with  a
commentary  by  Schradeb,  Insclirift  Asarliaddon's,  in  the  same  work,  pp.  29-43.  5.  The  consultations
of  the  god  Shamash  by  Esarhaddon  in  different  circumstances  of  his  reign,  collected  by  J.  A.  Ksudtzox,
Assi/riscke  Geliete  an  den  Sonnengott  fiir  Stunt  und  Konigliclies  Haus  aus  der  Zeit  Atarhaddons  iiiid
Aisurbaiiipals,  vol.  ii.  pp.  72-264.  6.  A  considerable  number  of  small  inscriptions,  some  of  which  are
enumerated  and  described  in  Bezold,  Kurzgefassler  Veherblick  iiber  die  Babijlomsch-atsijrische
Litteratm;  pp.  106,  107,  and  some  tablets  published  in  various  places  whicli  1  will  mention  if
necessary  when  I  have  occasion  to  use  them.  The  classification  of  the  events  of  this  reign  presents
serious  ilifiiculties,  which  have  been  partly  overcome  by  passages  in  the  Babylonian  Clironicle  of
Firichs  (col.  iii.  11.  28-48,  col.  iv.  11.  1-32);  cf.  Tiele,  BubyloniscU-assyrisclie  Gi-icliichte,  pp.  341-351,
ill  which  most  of  the  proposed  (chronological)  arrangements  have  been  permanently  accepted.
The  principal  monuments  of  the  reign  have  been  classified,  transcribed,  translated,  and  commented
on  by  Bi  DGE,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  son  of  Sennacherib,  King  of  Assyria,  B.C.  (iSl-dtiS,  1880;
this  work,  though  antiquated  by  reason  of  new  discoveries,  is  still  useful  for  reference.  The  texts
relating  to  the  buildings  have  been  collected  and  translated,  with  comments  by  Meissneb  and  Ko.<t,
Die  Bauinsr.hriften  Asarhaddons,  in  the  Beitriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  189-362.

'  For  the  date  of  the  decree  for  the  rebuilding  of  Babylon,  cf.  Meissner  and  Host,  Die  Bauin-
echriften  Asarhaddons,  in  tlie  Beitriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  277,  278.

-  Babylonian  Clironicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iii.  11.  30-33;  cf.  Winckler,  Babylonische  Chronilc  U.  in
Schradeb,  Keilinschriftliche  Bihliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  280,  281.


I


350  THE  POWER   OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

murder  that  he  at  once  sought  refuge  in  Nineveh ;  lie  was  reinstated  in  his

paternal  domain  on  condition  of  paying  a  tribute,  and,  faithful  to  his  oath  of

allegiance,  he  thenceforward  came  yearly  in  person  to  bring  his  dues  and  pay

homage  to  his  sovereign  (679).^    The  Kalda  rising  had,  in  short,  been  little  more

than  a  skirmish,  and  the  chastisement  of  the  Sidonians  would  have  involved

neither  time  nor  trouble,  had  not  the  desultory  movements  of  the  barbarians

obliged  the  Assyrians  to  concentrate  their  troops  on  several  points  which  were

threatened  on  their  northern  frontier.     The  Cimmerians  and  the  Scythians

bad  not  suffered  themselves  to  be  disconcerted  by  the  rapidity  with  which  the

fate  of  Sharezer  had  been  decided,  and  after  a  moment's  hesitation  they  had  again

set  out  in  various  directions  on  their  work  of  conquest,  believing,  no  doubt,  that

they  would  meet  with  a  less  vigorous  resistance  after  so  serious  an  upheaval

at  Nineveh.     The  Cimmerians  appear  to  have  been  the  first  to  have  provoked

hostilities ;  ^  their  king  Tiushpa,''  who  ruled  over  their  territory  on  the  Black  Sea,

ejected  the  Assyrian  garrisons  placed  on  the  Cappadocian  frontier,  and  his

presence  in  that  quarter  aroused  all  the  insubordinate  elements  still  remaining

in  the  Cilician  valleys.     Esarhaddon  brought  him  to  a  stand  ou  the  confines

of  the  plain  of  Saros,  defeated  him  in  Khubushua,*  and  drove  the  remains

of  the  horde  back  across  the  Halys.^     Having  thus  averted  the  Cimmerian

'  The  date  and  the  plan  of  the  campaign  are  given  by  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iii.
11.  39-42 ;  the  details  are  taken  from  the  Brolien  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  11.  1-26  (Wixckler,  Die  Itischrifl
des  zerbrochenen  Prismas  B,  in  Schr.vdeb,  Keilinscliriftliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  142-145,  completed
by  the  document  published  in  Winckler,  AUoriintalisrhe  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  522,  523),  and  from
Cylinders  A-C,  col.  ii.  11.  32-41 ;  cf.  Budge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  26-31.

=  The  campaign  against  the  Cimmerians  is  usually  placed  in  671(-678  (Hommel,  Geschichte
Babyloniens  mid  Assyriens,  p.  721 ;  Winckleb.  Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  120 ;
EosT,  Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  87),  in  accordance  with  the  mutilated
passage  in  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iii.  1.  58,  col.  iv.  U.  1-2,  where  Winckler  has
restored  the  reading  Gimirri  {Studien  und  Beitriige,  in  Zeit.  fiir  Assyr.,  vol.  ii.  p.  305) ;  Knudtzon
alone  has  east  doubts  on  the  legitimacy  of  this  rendering  {Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  p.  69).

'  The  name  Teushpa,  Tiushpa,  has  all  along  been  compared  with  that  of  Teispes,  in  Old  Persian
Chaishpis;  cf.  Jcsti,  Kranisches  Namenbnch,  p.  152.

'  Several  Assyriologists.have  thought  that  Kbubushna  might  be  an  error  for  Khubushkhia,  and
have  sought  the  seat  of  war  ou  the  eastern  frontier  of  Assyria  (Tiele,  Babylvnisch-assyrische
Geschichte,  p.  334,  note  4;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  721):  iu  reality  the
context  shows  that  the  place  under  discussion  is  a  district  in  Asia  Minor,  identified  with  Kamisene  by
Gelzer  {Kappadohien  und  seine  Bewohner,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1875,  p.  17,  note  2),  but  left  unidentified
by  most  authorities  (Sohr.4der.  Keilinschriften  und  Geschichtsforschung,  p.  520 ;  Fk.  Lenobmant,  Les
Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.  p.  341 ;  Halevy,  Becherches  Bibliques,  pp.  329, 330 ;  Ed.  Meyek,  Geschichte
dcs  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  546 ;  Wi.vccler,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  268).  Jensen  has
shown  that  the  name  is  met  with  as  early  as  the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (^Aimals,  1.  154),
where  we  should  read  Khubishna,  and  he  places  the  country  in  Xorthern  Syria,  or  perhaps  further
north  in  the  western  part  of  Taurus  (Hittiter  und  Armenier,  pp.  115,  116).  The  determinative  proves
that  there  was  a  town  of  this  name  as  well  as  a  district,  and  this  consideration  encourages  me  to
recognise  in  Khubushna  or  Khubishna  the  town  of  Kabissos-Kabessos,  the  Sis  of  the  kingdom  of
Lesser  Armenia  (Ramsay,  The  Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  386,  451).

'  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  ii.  11.  6-9,  and  the  Brohen  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  1-2;  cf.  Schbadee,
Keilinschrijtliche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  128,  129,  144,  145,  and  Wixcklek,  Altorient.  Forschungen,
vol.  i.  p.  523.  Rest  (^Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  90)  puts  the  campaign  against
Tiushpa  after  the  Scythian  attack,  which  will  be  treated  on  pp.  353,  354  of  the  present  work.


WAB    WITH   THE   TRIBES   OF  CILIGIA   AGAINST  SIDON.  351

danger,  he  was  able,  without  much  difficulty,  to  bring  the  rebels  of  the  western
provinces  into  subjection.^  His  troops  thrust  back  the  Cilicians  and  Duha
into  the  rugged  fastnesses  of  the  Taurus,  and  razed  to  the  ground  one  and
twenty  of  their  strongholds,  besides  burning  numberless  villages  and  carry-
ing the  inhabitants  away  captive.^  The  people  of  Parnaki,  in  the  bend
of  the  Euphrates  between  Tel-Assur  and  the  sources  of  the  Balikh,  had  taken
up  arms  on  hearing  of  the  brief  successes  of  Tiushpa,  but  were  pitilessly  crushed
by  Esarhaddon.'  The  sheikh  of  Arzani,  in  the  extreme  south  of  Syria,  close
to  the  brook  of  Egypt,  had  made  depredations  on  the  Assyrian  frontier,  but  he
was  seized  by  the  nearest  governor  and  sent  in  chains  to  Nineveh.  A  cage
was  built  for  him  at  the  gate  of  the  city,  and  he  was  exposed  in  it  to  the  jeers
of  the  populace,  in  company  with  the  bears,  dogs,  and  boars  which  the
Ninevites  were  in  the  habit  of  keeping  confined  there.^  It  would  appear  that
Esarhaddon  set  himself  to  come  to  a  final  reckoning  with  Sidon  and  Phoenicia,
the  revolt  of  which  had  irritated  him  all  the  more,  in  that  it  showed  an
inexcusable  ingratitude  towards  his  family.  For  it  was  Sennacherib  who,  in
order  to  break  the  power  of  Elulai,  had  not  only  rescued  Sidon  from  the
dominion  of  Tyre,  but  had  enriched  it  with  the  spoils  taken  from  its  former
rulers,  and  had  raised  it  to  the  first  rank  among  the  Phoenician  cities.^
Ethbaal  in  his  lifetime  had  never  been  wanting  in  gratitude,  but  his  successor,
Abdimilkot,  forgetful  of  recent  services,  had  chafed  at  the  burden  of  a  foreign
yoke,  and  had  recklessly  thrown  it  off  as  soon  as  an  occasion  presented  itself.
He  had  thought  to  strengthen  himself  by  securing  the  help  of  a  certain
Sanduarri,  who  possessed  the  two  fortresses  of  Kundu  and  Sizu,  in  the  Cilician
mountains ;  ^  but  neither  this  alliance  nor  tlie  insular  position  of  his  capital

'  These  expeditions  are  not  dated  in  any  of  the  documents  that  deal  with  them :  the  fact  that
they  are  mentioned  along  with  the  war  against  Tiushpa  and  Sidon  makes  me  inclined  to  consider
them  as  being  a  result  of  the  Cimmerian  invasion.  They  were,  strictly  speaking,  the  quelling  of
revolts  caused  by  the  presence  of  the  Cimmerians  in  that  part  of  the  empire.

'  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  ii.  11.  10-21,  and  Inscription  of  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  3-12;  cf.
ScHEADEK,  Keilingchri/tliche  BiUiothek,  vol.  li.  pp.  128,  129,  144,  145,  and  Budge,  Tlie  History  of
Esarhaddon,  pp.  42-45.  The  Duua  or  Duha  of  this  campaign,  who  are  designated  as  neighbours  of
the  Tabal,  lived  in  the  Anti-taurus :  the  name  of  the  town,  Tyana,  Tuana,  is  possibly  composed  of  their
name  and  of  the  sufiBx  -na,  which  is  met  with  in  Asianic  languages  (Keetschmbb,  Einleitmig  in  die
Gesehichte  der  Griechischen  Si^iraclie,  p.  319).

'  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  ii.  11.  22-25,  and  Inscription  of  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.   13-15;   cf.
ScHRADER,  Keilinschriftliche  Bi!)liotheJi,  vol.  ii.  pp.  128,  129,  144,  145,  and  Bddge,  Tlie  History  of
Esarhaddon,  pp.  44,  45,     On  the  probable  situation  of  Barnaki  or  Parnaki, — Lenormant  at  first  read
ilfasnaJ:/ and  identified  it  with  theMossyncekse  (^Leltris  Assyrioloijiqiies,  vol.  i.  p.  77), — cf.  Winceler
Bericht  iiher  die  Tliontafeln  von  Tell-el-Amarna,  pp.  15,  16,  and  Gesch.  Bab.  und  4ss.,  pp.  269, 334-33(;.

*  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  i.  11.  55,  56,  col.  ii.  U.  1-5  ;  cf  Budge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  40-43,
and  ScHRADER,  Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  120-129.  For  the  site  of  Arzani  and  the  river  of  Musri,  cf.
WixoKLER,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  35, 338, 527, 528,  and  Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.  p.  11.

'  On  this  subject  cf.  above,  pp.  287,  288  of  the  present  volume.

°  Some  Assyriologists  have  proposed  to  locate  these  two  towns  in  Cilicia  (Delattke,  L'Asie
Oceidentale  dans  les  inscriptions  assyriemies,  pp.  SO,  81 ;  Winckler,  Gesehichte  Bahyloiiiens  und
Assyriens,  p.  67) ;  others  place  them  in  the  Lebanon,  Kundi  being  identified  with  the  modern  village  of
Ain-Kundiya  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Wo  lag  dasParadiesf  p.  283;  Tiele, Bahyhnisch-assyrische  Gesehichte,


352  WE  POWER   OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

was  able  to  safeguard  him,  when  once  the  necessity  for  stemming  the  tide  of

the  Cimmerian  influx  was  over,  and  the  whole  of  the  Assyrian  force  was  free

to  be  brought  ogainst  him.     Abdimilkot  attempted  to  escape  by  sea  before

the  last  attack,  but  he  was  certainly  taken  prisoner,  though  the  circumstances

are  unrecorded,  and  Sanduarri  fell  into  the  enemy's  hands  a  short  time  after.

The  suppression  of  the  rebellion  was  as  vindictive  as  the  ingratitude  which

prompted  it  was  heinous.     Sidon  was  given  up  to  the  soldiery  and  then  burnt,

while  opposite  to  the  ruins  of  the  island  city  the  Assyrians  built  a  fortress  on

the   mainland,   which   they  called   Kar-Esarhaddon.'      The   other  princes  of

Phoenicia  and  Syria  were  hastily  convoked,  and  were  witnesses  of  the  vengeance

wreaked  on  the  city,  as  well  as  of  the  installation  of  the  governor  to  whom  the

new  province  was  entrusted.     They  could  thus  see  what  fate  awaited  them  in

the  event  of  their  showing  any  disposition  to  rebel,  and  the  majority  of  them

were  not  slow  to  profit  by  the  lesson.     The  spoil  was  carried  back  in  triumph

to  Nineveh,  and  comprised,   besides  the  two  kings   and    their   families,  the

remains  of  their  court  and  people,  and  the  countless  riches  which  the  commerce

of  the  world  had  brought  into  the  great  ports  of  the  Mediterranean— ebony,

ivory,  gold  and  silver,  purple,  i)recious  woods,  household  furniture,  and  objects

of  value  from  all  parts  in  such  quantities  that  it  was  long  before  the  treasury

at  Nineveh  needed  any  replenishing.^

The  reverses   of    the   Cimmerians   did    not   serve   as   a   warning   to   the

Scythians.     Settled  on  the  borders  of  Manna,  partly,  no  doubt,  on  the  territory

formerly    dependent  on  that   state,^  they  secretly  incited   the   inhabitants  to

revolt,  and  to  join  in  the  raids  which  they  made  on  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Zab,

and  they  would  even  have  urged  their  horses  up  to  the  very  walls  of  Nineveh

had  the  occasion  presented  itself.     Esarhaddou,  warned  of  their  intrigues  by  the

spies  which  he  sent  among  them,  could  not  bring  himself  either  to  anticipate

their  attack  or  to  assume  the  offensive,  but  anxiously  consulted  the  gods  with

pp.  315,  34G,  with  certain  reservations).  The  name  of  Kundu  so  nearly  recalls  that  of  Kuinda,  the
ancient  fort  mentioned  by  Strabo  (XIV.  v.  §  10,  p.  671),  to  tlie  north  of  Anchialc,  between  Tarsus
and  Anaz.irbus,  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  identify  them,  and  to  place  Kundu  in  Cilicia.

'  On  tlie  site  of  Kar-Esarhaddon,  ef.  the  researches  of  Winckleb,  Alttestamentalische  Forschumjen ,
pp.  111-113,  and  AUorientalifche  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  440,411,  551-553.  Tlie  town  is  mentioned
in  tablet  K  2711  in  the  British  Museum,  published  by  Meissxeb  and  Kost,  Die  Bauinsckriflen
Asarhaddom,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriohgie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  264,  265,  1.  20.

-  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  i.  11.  10-54,  and  Itneription  of  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  i.  11.  27-30 :  cf.
Budge.  The  History  of  Esarhaddou,  pp.  32-41 ;  Schradeb,  Keilinschriftliehe  Bihliotheh,  vol.  ii.pp,  124-
127,  144, 145.  The  importance  of  the  event  and  the  amount  of  the  spoil  captured  are  apparent,  if  we
notice  that  Esarhaddou  does  not  usually  record  the  booty  taken  after  each  campaign ;  he  does  so  only
when  the  number  of  objects  and  of  prisoners  tak<n  from  the  enemy  is  extraordinary.  The  Babylonian
Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iv.  11.  1-8,  places  the  capture  of  Sidon  in  the  second,  and  the  death  of
Abdimilkot  in  tlie  fiftli  year  of  his  reign.  Hence  Winckler  has  concluded  that  Abdimilkot  held
out  for  fully  two  years  after  the  loss  of  Sidon.  Tiie  general  tenor  of  the  account,  as  given  by  the
inscriptioiis.  seems  to  me  to  be  that  the  capture  of  the  king  followed  closely  on  the  fall  of  the  lown  :
Abdimilkot  and  Sanduarri  probably  spent  the  years  between  679  and  676  in  prison.

^  One  of  the  oracles  of  Shamash  speaks  of  the  captives  as  dwelling  in  a  canton  of  the  Mannai
(KNUDT70.S,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonneiigolt,  p.  130).


THE  INCURSIONS    OF   THE  SCYTHIANS  AND    THE  MANNAI.      353

regard  to  them  :  "  0  Shamash,"  he  wrote  to  the  Sun-god,  "  great  lord,  thou  whom
I  question,  answer  me  in  sincerity  !  From  this  day  forth,  the  22nd  day  of  this
month  of  Simanu,  until  the  21st  day  of  the  month  of  Duzu  of  this  year,
during  these  thirty  days  and  thirty  nights,  a  time  has  been  foreordained  favour-
able to  the  work  of  prophecy.  In  this  time  thus  foreordained,  the  hordes  of
the  Scythians  who  inhabit  a  district  of  the  Mannai,  and  who  have  crossed  the
Mannian  frontier, — will  they  succeed  in  their  undertaking  ?  Will  they  emerge
from  the  passes  of  Khubushkia  at  the  towns  of  Kliarrania  and  Anisuskia;  will
they  ravage  the  borders  of  Assyria  and  steal  great  booty,  immense  spoil  ?  that
doth  thy  high  divinity  know.  Is  it  a  decree,  and  in  the  mouth  of  thy  high
divinity,  0  Shamash,  great  lord,  ordained  and  promulgated  ?  He  who  sees,  shall
he  see  it ;  he  who  hears,  shall  he  hear  it  ?  "  ^  The  god  comforted  his  faithful
servant,  but  there  was  a  brief  delay  before  his  answer  threw  light  on  the  future,
and  the  king's  questions  were  constantly  renewed  as  fresh  couriers  brought  in
further  information.  In  678  B.C.  the  Scythians  determined  to  try  their  fortune,
and  their  king,  Ishpakai,^  took  the  field,  followed  by  the  Mannai.  He  was  de-
feated and  driven  back  to  the  north  of  Lake  Uruiniah,  the  Mannai  were  reduced
to  subjection,  and  Assyria  once  more  breathed  freely.*  The  victory,  however,
was  not  a  final  one,  and  affairs  soon  assumed  as  threatening  an  aspect  as  before.
The  Scythian  tribes  came  on  the  scene,  one  after  another,  and  allied  themselves
to  the  various  peoples  subject  either  directly  or  indirectly  to  Nineveh.*  On  one
occasion  it  was  Kashtariti,  the  regent  of  Karkashshi,'  who  wrote  to  Mamitiarshu,
one  of  the  Median  princes,  to  induce  him  to  make  common  cause  with  himself

'  Knudtzon,  Assyrisvhe  Geheie  an  den  Sonnencjott,  pp.  129-132.  The  town  of  Auisuskia  is  not
mentioned  elsewhere,  but  Ivharrania  is  met  with  in  the  account  of  the  thirty-first  campaign  of
Shalmaueser  III.  (Obelul;  1.  181)  with  Kharrana  as  its  variant.

'  This  king's  name  seems  to  be  of  Iranian  origin.  Justi  (IranUches  Namenbuch,  pp.  46,  143)  lias
connected  it  with  the  name  Aspakos,  which  is  read  in  a  Greek  inscription  of  the  Cimmerian
Bosphorus  (Latyschef,  InscrijMones  antiqum  oris  sejjtentrionalis  Ponti  Eiixini,  vol.  ii.  p.  261);  both
forms  have  been  connected  witli  tlie  Sanskrit  Afvaka.  I  question  whether  we  sliould  not  rather  see
in  it  a  derivative  of  the  Median  SiraKa,  dog,  as  in  the  female  name  Spako  (Hekodotos,  I.  ex.).

^  Cylinders  A,  C.  col.  ii.  11.  27-31,  and  Inscription  du  Prisiiie  hrts€,  col.  iii.  II.  16-18,  in  Schrader,
Keilinsohriflliche  Bihliotlielc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  12S,  129,  146.  147;  for  the  explanation  of  these  events,  see
WiNCKLER,  Altorientalischi-  Forschunrjen,  vol.  i.  pp.  486,  487.

*  This  subdivision  of  the  horde  into  several  bodies  seems  to  be  indicated,  as  Winckler  has
observed  {AltorientaliscJu-  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  487),  by  the  number  of  different  royal  names  among
the  Scythians  which  are  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  documents.

'  Karkashshi  had  been  identified  with  Karkathiokertha  or  Karkasiokertha  in  Armenia,  by  Hale'vy
{Journal  Asiatiqtte,  vol.  xv.  1880,  pp.  .130,  531),  who  later  on  withdrew  this  interpretation  (Becherches
Bihliqties,  pp.  321,  325):  the  site  is  unknown,  but  the  list  of  Median  princes  subdued  by  Sargon
(Winckler,  Vie  Keihcliriftlexlte  Sargons,  vol.  ii.  pi.  44  B)  shows  that  it  was  situated  in  Media.
Kialishashshu  is  very  probably  the  same  as  Kishisim  or  Kishisu,  the  town  which  Sargon  subdued,
and  which  he  called  Kar-nergal  or  Kar-ninib  {Inscriijtion  des  Fastcs,  11.  511,  60,  Inscription  of  the
Pavement  of  the  Gates,  iv.  1.  16;  Stele  of  Larnaha,  col.  i.  1.  30;  cf.  AVincklek,  Die  Keilschriftlexte
Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  108,  109,  146,  147,  176,  177),  and  which  is  mentioned  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Parsuash,  Karalla,  Kharkhar,  Media,  and  EUipi  (cf.  the  illustration  above,  p.  241  of  the  present  work).
I  think  that  it  would  be  in  the  basin  of  the  Gave — Rud ;  Billerbeck  places  it  at  the  ruins  of  Siama,
in  the  tapper  valley  of  the  Lesser  Zab  {Das  Sandschalc  Suleimania,  pp.  97,  98).

2   A


354  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITB.

in  attacking  the  fortress  of  Kishshashshu  on  the  eastern  border  of  the  empire.^
At  another  time  we  find  the  same  chief  plotting  with  the  Mannai  and  the
Saparda  to  raid  the  town  of  Kilmau,  and  Esarhaddon  implores  the  god  to  show
him  how  the  place  may  be  saved  from  their  machinations.^  He  opens  negotiations
in  order  to  gain  time,  but  the  barbarity  of  his  adversary  is  sxich  that  he  fears  for
his  envoy's  safety,  and  speculates  whether  he  may  not  have  been  put  to  death.^
The  situation  would  indeed  have  become  critical  if  Kashtariti  had  succeeded
in  bringing  against  Assyria  a  combined  force  of  Medes,  Scythians,  Mannai,
and  Cimmerians,  together  with  Urartu  and  its  king,  Rusas  III. ;  but,  fortunately,
petty  hatreds  made  the  combination  of  these  various  elements  an  impossibility,
and  they  were  unable  to  arrive  at  even  a  temporary  understanding.  Tlie
Scythians  themselves  were  not  united  as  to  the  best  course  to  be  pursued,  and
while  some  endeavoured  to  show  their  hostility  by  every  imaginable  outrage
and  annoyance,  others,  on  the  contrary,  desired  to  enter  into  friendly  relations
with  Assyria.  Esarhaddon  received  on  one  occasion  an  embassy  from  Bar-
tatua,*  one  of  their  kings,  who  humbly  begged  the  hand  of  a  lady  of  the  blood-
royal,  swearing  to  make  a  lasting  friendship  with  him  if  Esarhaddon  would
consent  to  the  marriage.  It  was  hard  for  a  child  brought  up  in  the  harem,
amid  the  luxury  and  comfort  of  a  civilised  court,  to  be  handed  over  to  a  semi-
barbarous  spouse ;  but  state  policy  even  in  those  days  was  exacting,  and  more
than  one  princess  of  the  line  of  Sargon  had  thus  sacrificed  herself  by  an  alliance
which  was  to  the  interest  of  her  own  people.^     What  troubled  Esarhaddon  was

'  Prayers  Nos.  1,  2,  ia  Kxcdtzos,  Assyrische  Gehete  an  den  Sonnengotl,  pp.  72-82.     These  tablets,

the  first  of  the  series  to  be  made  known,  were  attributed  by  Sajce  (Jiahrjlonian  Literature,
pp.  20,  70,  et  seq.)  and  by  Boscawen  {Babylonian  dated  Tablets  and  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy,  in  the
Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archaeology,  vol.  vi.  pp.  21,  22, 107,  lOS)  to  a  second  Esarhaddon,
who  would  have  reigned  after  Assur-bani-pal :  Kashtariti  would  have  been  none  other  than  Cyaxares,
the  destroyer  of  the  Assyrian  empire.  This  opinion  was  adopted  and  for  a  long  while  maintained
by  many  Assyriologists  and  historians  (Schkadek,  Keilinschriften  und  GeschiclUsforschung,  pp.  51S-
521;  Fk.  Lenokmast,  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.  pp.  350-355;  Halevy,  Becherches  Bibliques,
pp.  319-325,  334,  313),  but  was  rejected  by  many  others  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  IT'o  lag  das  Parodies?
p.  245;  Ed.  Meyee,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  463,  464;  Tiele,  Babylonisch-assi/rische
Geschichte,  pp.  334,  335;  Hommel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  72 1-724),  and  is  now
finally  set  aside,  and  the  latest  authors  agree  in  seeing  in  the  Esarhaddon  of  these  tablets  Esarhaddon,
son  of  Sennacherib  (Kxcdtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengotl,  pp.  67-71 ;  WraoKLEB,  Unter-
suchu7igen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  120,  and  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  486,  et
seq. ;  RosT,  Untersuchnngen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  87,  et  seq.).

'  Prayer  No.  11,  in  Ksudtzos,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  92-96.  The  people  of
Saparda,  called  by  the  Persians  Sparda,  have  been  with  good  reason  identified  by  Fr.  Lenor-
mant  {Lettres  Assyriologiques,  vol.  i.  pp.  46,  47 ;  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.  pp.  352,  353),  and  after
him  hy  SchiSiiei  {Keilinschriften  und  Gesohichtsforschung,  pp.  116-119;  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das
Alte  Testament,  1SS3,  pp.  445-447),  with  the  Sepharad  of  the  prophet  Obadiah  (ver.  20) :  the  Assyrian
texts  show  that  this  country  should  be  placed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Mauuai  and  of  the  Medes.

'  Prayers  Kos.  9,  10,  in  Kstdtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  90-92.

'  Bariatua  is,  according  to  Winckler's  ingenious  observation,  the  Protothyes  of  Herodotus  {I.  ciii.),
the  father  of  Madyes,  with  whom  we  shall  deal  below,  pp.  472,  480  of  this  volume.  [The  name  should
more  probably  be  read  Masta-tua. — Ed.]

'  Sargon  had  in  like  manner  given  one  of  bis  daughters  in  marriage  to  Ambaris,  King  of  Tabal,
in  order  to  attach  him  to  the  Assyrian  cause  {Annals,  1.  172;  Pastes,  1.  30;  of.  'Winckleb,  Die
Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,  vol.  i.  pp.  30,  31,  102,  103),  but  without  permanent  success ;  cf.  supra,  p.  251.


EXPEDITIONS  AGAINST  THE  MEDES.  355

not  the  thought  of  sacrificing  a  sister  or  a  daughter,  but  a  misgiving  that  the
sacrifice  would  not  produce  the  desired  result,  and  in  his  difficulty  he  once  more
had  recourse  to  Shamash.  "  If  Esarhaddon,  King  of  Assyria,  grants  a  daughter
of  the  blood  (royal)  to  Bartatua,  the  King  of  the  Iskuza,  who  has  sent  an  em-
bassy to  him  to  ask  a  wife,  will  Bartatua,  King  of  the  Iskuza,  act  loyally  towards
Esarhaddon,  King  of  Assyria  ?  will  he  honestly  and  faithfully  enter  into  friendly
engagements  with  Esarhaddon,  King  of  Assyria  ?  will  he  observe  the  conditions
(made  by)  Esarhaddon,  King  of  Assyria  ?  will  he  fulfil  them  punctually  ?  that  thy
high  divinity  knoweth.  His  promises,  in  a  decree  and  in  the  mouth  of  thy  high
divinity,  0  Shamash,  great  lord,  are  they  decreed,  promulgated  ?  "  ^  It  is  not
recorded  what  came  of  these  negotiations,  nor  whether  the  god  granted  the
hand  of  the  princess  to  her  barbarian  suitor.  All  we  know  is,  that  the  incursions
and  intrigues  of  the  Scythians  continued  to  be  a  perpetual  source  of  trouble  to
the  Medes,  and  roused  them  either  to  rebel  against  Assyria  or  to  claim  the
protection  of  its  sovereign.  Esarhaddon,  in  the  course  of  his  reign,  was  more
than  once  compelled  to  interfere  in  order  to  ensure  peace  and  quietness  to  the
provinces  on  the  table-land  of  Iran,  which  Sargon  had  conquered  and  which
Sennacherib  had  retained.^  He  had  first  to  carry  his  arms  to  the  extreme  edge
of  the  desert,  into  the  rugged  country  of  Patusharra,  lying  at  the  foot  of
Demavend,  rich  in  lapis-lazuli,  and  as  yet  untrodden  by  any  king  of  Assyria.*
Having  reached  his  destination,  he  captured  two  petty  kings,  Eparna  and  Shitir-
parna,*  and  exiled  them  to  Assyria,  together  with  their  people,  their  thorough-
bred horses,  and  their  two-humped  camels, — in  fine,  all  the  possessions  of  their
subjects.^     Shortly  after  this,  three  other  Median  chiefs,  hitherto  intractable —

'  Prayer  No.  29,  in  Kncdtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonneiigott,  pp.  lld-12'A.

'  Several  recent  historians  (Delattre,  Le  Peuple  et  VEmpire  des  Medes,  pp.  116-125,  and
WiNCKLER,  Vntersachungen  zur  Altorientaluchen  Geschiclde,  p.  87)  allege  that  Sennacherib  did  not
keep  the  territories  that  Sargon  had  conquered,  and  that  the  Assyrian  frontier  became  contracted  on
that  side ;  whereas  the  general  testimony  of  the  known  texts  seems  to  me  to  prove  the  contrary,
namely,  that  he  preserved  nearly  all  the  territory  annexed  by  his  father,  and  that  Esarhaddon  was
far  from  diminishing  this  inheritance.  If  these  two  kings  mention  only  insignificant  deeds  of  arms
in  the  western  region,  it  is  becan^e  the  population,  exhausted  by  the  wars  of  the  two  preceding
reigns,  easily  recognised  the  Xinevite  supremacy,  and  paid  tribute  to  the  Ass}T:ian  governors,  with
sufficient  regularity  to  prevent  any  important  military  expedition  against  them.

^  The  country  of  Patusharra  has  been  identified  by  Leuormant  {Leitres  Assyriologiques,  vol.  i.
pp.  66,  69)  with  that  of  the  Patiachorians — UaTenrxopeis — mentioned  by  Strabo  (XV.  iii.  §  1,
p.  727)  in  Persia  proper,  who  would  have  lived  further  north,  not  far  from  Demavend ;  cf.  Hommel,
Geschiclde  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p.  724;  Tiele,  Babylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  p.  348.
Sachau  (^Glossen  zu  der  historischen  Iiuchriften  Assyrischer  KSnige,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  xi.  pp.  54-57)  calls  attention  to  the  existence  of  a  mountain  chain  Patashwar-gar  or  Padishwar-^ir
in  front  of  Choarene,  and  he  places  the  country  of  Patusharra  between  Demavend  and  the  desert.

'  Lenormant  (^Lettres  Assyriologiquee,  vol.  i.  pp.  66,  67)  sees  in  Epama  and  Shitirparna  a  transcript
of  the  Iranian  names  Vifarna  and  Chithrafarna  (cf.  Jdsti,  Iranischea  Namenbuch,  pp.  141,  164);  as
against  the  first  of  these  identifications,  cf.  Kost,  Untersiichungen  zur  AUorieniaUschen  Geschichte,
p.  Ill,  n.  2.

*  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  iv.  11.  8-18,  and  Inscription  of  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  3-9,  in
ScHRADER,  KeilimchriftUche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  132, 133, 146,  147 ;  cf.  Bcdge,  History  of  Esarhaddon,
pp.  66-69,  and  RosT,  Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  pp.  87,  88.


356  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

Uppis  of  Partakka,  Zanasana  of  Partukka,\I\amatea  of  Urakazabarna — came  to
Nineveh  to  present  the  king  with  horses  and  hxpis-lazuli,  the  best  of  everything
they  possessed,  and  piteously  entreated  him  to  forgive  their  misdeeds.     They
represented  that  the  whole  of  Media  was  torn  asunder  by  countless  strifes,  prinee
against  prinee,  city  against  city,  and  an  iron  will  was  needed  to  bring  the  more
turbulent  elements  to  order.    Esarhaddon  lent  a  favourable  ear  to  their  prayers  ;
he  undertook  to  protect  them  on  condition  of  their  paying  an  annual  tribute,  and
he  put  tliem  under  the  protection  of  the  Assyrian  governors  who  were  nearest
to  their  territory.^      Kharkhar,  securely  entrenched  behind  its  triple  ramparts,
assumed  the  position  of  capital  to  these  Iranian  marches.     It  is  difficult  to
determine  the  precise  dates  of  these  various  events  ;  we  learn  merely  that  they
took  place  before  073,  and  we  surmise  that  they  must  have  occurred  between  the
second  and  sixteenth  year  of  the  king's  reign.^     The  outcome  of  them  was  a
distinct   gain   to   Assyria,   ia   the   acquisition   of  several  new   vassals.      The
recently  foimded  kingdom  of  Ecbatana  lacked  as  yet  the  prestige  which  would
have   enabled  it  to  hold  its  own  against  Nineveli ;    besides  which,  Deiokes,
the  contemporary  ruler  assigned  to  it  by  tradition,  was  of  too  complaisant  a
nature  to  seek  occasions  of  quarrel.^     The  Scythians,  after  having  declared
their  warlike  intentions,  seem  to  have  come  to  a  more  peaceable  frame  of  mind,
and  to  have  curried  favour  with  Nineveh ;   but  the  rulers  of  the  capital  kept
a  strict  watch  upon  them,  since  their  numbers,  their  intrepid    character,  and

'  Partakka  and  Partukka  seem  to  be  two  different  adaptations  of  the  name  Paraituka  (Fn.
Lenokmant,  Ltitres  Assyriologiques,  vol.  i.  p.  67),  the  ParsetSikenc  of  the  Greek  geographers;  Tiele
(^Biihi/loiiiscli-afsyiifche  Geschickte,  p.  348)  thinks  of  Parthyene.  I  think  that  these  two  names
designate  the  northern  districts  of  ParsBtakene,  the  present  Ashnakhor  or  the  countiy  near  to  it.

"  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  iv.  11.  19-37,  in  Sohhader,  Keilinscliriftliche  ISibliotheJt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  132-135 ;
cf  Bddge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  08-73,  and  Rost,  Vntersuclmngen  zur  Altorientalischen
Geschichte,  pp.  88,  89.

^  The  facts  relating  to  the  submission  of  Patusharra  and  of  Partukka  are  contained  in  Cylinder  A,
dated  from  the  eponymous  year  of  Akhazilu,  in  673.  Moreover,  the  version  which  this  document
contains  seems  to  have  been  made  up  of  two  pieces  placed  one  at  tlie  end  of  the  other :  the  first  an
account  of  events  which  occurred  during  an  earlier  period  of  the  reign,  and  in  which  the  exploits  are
classified  in  geographical  order,  from  Sidon  in  the  west  (col.  i.  1.  10,  et  seq.)  to  the  Arabs  bordering
on  Chaldfea  in  the  east  (col.  ii.  1.  55,  et  seq.);  and  the  second  consisting  of  additional  campaigns
carried  out  after  the  completion  of  tlie  former — wliich  is  proved  by  the  place  which  these  exploits
occupy,  out  of  their  normal  position  in  the  geographical  series — and  making  mention  of  Patusharra
and  Partukka  (col.  iv.  11.  8-37),  as  well  as  of  Belikisha  (col.  iii.  11.  52-GO,  col.  iv.  11.  1-7).  The  editor
of  the  Broken  Cylinder  has  tried  to  combine  these  latter  elements  with  the  former  in  the  order  adopted
by  the  original  narrator.  As  far  as  can  be  seen  iu  what  is  left  of  tlie  columns,  he  has  placed,  after
the  Chaldsean  events  (col.  iii.  11.  19-28),  the  facts  concerning  Partukka  (col.  iv.,  where  lines  1,  2  in  the
present  state  of  the  cylinder  contain  fragments  which  fit  iu  to  the  end  of  the  account  jireserved  in
A-C,  col.  iv.  11.  19-39),  then  those  concerning  Patusharra  (col.  iv.  11.  3-9),  and  finally  the  campaign
against  Bazu  (col.  iv.  11.  10-26),  the  extreme  limit  of  Esarhaddon's  activity  in  the  south.  Know-
ing that  the  campaign  in  the  desert  and  the  death  of  Abdimilkot  took  place  in  676  {Bahylonian
Chronicle  of  Pinches,  col.  iv.  11.  5-8),  and  that  we  find  them  already  alluded  to  in  the  first  part  of
the  narrative,  as  well  as  the  events  of  675  relating  to  the  revolt  of  Dakkuri,  we  may  conclude
that  the  submission  of  Patusharra  and  that  of  Partukka  occurred  in  674,  or  at  latest  in  the
beginning  of  673.

*  Cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  324-328.


REBUILDING    OF  BABYLON.


357


instinct  for  rapine  made  them  formidable  enemies — the  most  dangerous,  indeed,
that  the  empire  had  encountered  on  its  north-eastern  frontier  for  nearly
a  century.

This  policy  of  armed  surveillance,  which  proved  so  successful  in  these  regions,
was  also  carefully  maintained  by  Esarhaddon  on  his  south-eastern  border  against
Assyria's  traditional  enemy,  the  King  of  Susa.  Babylon,  far  from  exhibiting  any
restlessness  at  her  present  position,  showed  her  gratitude  for  the  favours  which
her  suzerain  had  showered  upon  her  by  resigning  herself  to  become  the  ally  of
Assyria.    She  regarded  her  late  disaster  as  the  punishment  inflicted  by  Marduk


THE  TOWK   OP   KHARKHAR   WITH    ITS    TRIPLE    RAMPART.'

for  her  revolts  against  Sargon  and  Sennacherib.  The  god  had  let  loose  the  powers
of  evil  against  iier,  and  the  Arakhtu,  overflowing  among  the  ruins,  liad  swept
them  utterly  away  ;  indeed,  for  the  space  of  ten  years,  destruction  and  deso-
lation seemed  to  have  taken  the  place  of  her  former  wealth  of  temples  and
palaces.  In  the  eleventh  year,  the  divine  wrath  was  suddenly  appeased.  No
sooner  had  Esarhaddon  mounted  the  throne,  than  he  entreated  Shamash,
Ramman,  and  even  Marduk  himself,  to  reveal  to  him  their  will  with  regard
to  the  city ;  whereupon  tlie  omens,  interpreted  by  the  seer-:,  commanded  him
to  rebuild  Babylon  and  to  raise  again  the  temple  of  E-sagilla.  For  this
purpose  he  brought  together  all  the  captives  taken  in  war  that  he  had  at  his
disposal,  and  employed  them  in  digging  out  clay  and  in  brick-making;  he  then
prepared  the  foundations,  upon  which  he  poured  libations  of  oil,  honey,  palm-
wine,  and  other  wines  of  various  kinds;  he  himself  took  the  mason's  hod,  and  witli
tools  of  ebony,  cypress  wood,  and  oak,  moulded  a  brick  for  the  new  sanctuary.  The
work  was,  indeed,  a  gigantic  undertaking,  and  demanded  years  of  uninterrupted

'   Drawn  by  FaucliLr-Gudin,  from  Flandiri,  in  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninioe,  pi.  55.


358  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYBIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

labour,  but  Esarliaddon  pushed  it  forward,  sparing  neither  gold,  silver,  costly
stone,  rare  woods,  or  plates  of  enamel  in  its  embellishment.  He  began  to
rebuild  at  the  same  time  all  the  other  temples  and  the  two  city  walls — Imgurbel
and  Nimittibel ;  to  clear  and  make  good  the  canals  which  supplied  the  place
with  water,  and  to  replant  the  sacred  groves  and  the  gardens  of  the  palace.
The  inhabitants  were  encouraged  to  come  back  to  their  homes,  and  those  who
had  been  dispersed  among  distant  provinces  were  supplied  with  clothes  and  food
for  their  return  journey,  besides  having  their  patrimony  restored  to  them.^  This
rebuilding  of  the  ancient  city  certainly  displeased  and  no  doubt  alarmed  her
two  former  rivals,  the  Kalda  and  Elam,  who  had  hoped  one  day  to  wrest  her
heritage  from  Assyria.  Elam  concealed  its  ill-feeling,  but  the  Kalda  of  Bit-
Dakkuri  had  invaded  the  almost  deserted  territory,  and  appropriated  the  lands
which  had  belonged  to  the  noble  families  of  Babylon,  Borslppa,  and  Sippara.
When  the  latter,  therefore,  returned  from  exile,  and,  having  been  reinsti-
tuted  in  their  rights,  attempted  to  resume  possession  of  their  property,  the
usurpers  peremptorily  refused  to  relinquish  it.  Esarhaddou  was  obliged  to
interfere  to  ensure  its  restoration,  and  as  their  king,  Shamash-ibni,  was  not
inclined  to  comply  with  the  order,  Esarhaddon  removed  him  from  the  throne,
and  substituted  in  his  place  a  certain  Nabushallim,  son  of  Belesys,  who  showed
more  deference  to  the  suzerain's  wishes.^  It  is  possible  that  about  this  time
the  Kalda  may  have  received  some  support  from  the  Aramaeans  of  the  desert
and  the  Arab  tribes  encamped  between  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  Syria,
or,  on  the  otiier  hand,  the  latter  may  have  roused  the  wrath  of  Assyria  by  in-
roads of  a  more  than  usually  audacious  character.  However  this  may  be,  in
676  Esarhaddon  resolved  to  invade  their  desert  territory,  and  to  inflict  such
reprisals  as  would  force  them  thenceforward  to  respect  the  neiglibouring  border
provinces.  His  first  relations  with  them  had  been  of  a  courteous  and  friendly
nature.  Hazael  of  Adumu,  one  of  the  sheikhs  of  Kedar,  defeated  by  Sennacherib
towards  the  end  of  his  reign,^  had  taken  the  opportunity  of  the  annual
tribute  to  come  to  Nineveh  with  considerable  presents,  and  to  implore  the
restoration  of  the  statues  of  his  gods.  Esarhaddon  had  caused  these  battered
idols  to  be  cleaned  and  repaired,  had  engraved  upon  them  an  inscription  in
praise  of  Assur,  and  had  further  married  the  suppliant  sheikh  to  a  woman  of
the  royal  harem,  named  Tabua.  In  consideration  of  this,  he  had  imposed
upon  the  Arab  a  supplementary  tribute  of  sixty-five  camels,  and  had  restored

'  The  whole  of  this  account  is  taken  from  inscriptions  published  and  translated  by  Meissner  and
ROST,  Die  Bauinschriften  Asarhaddons.  in  the  Seiirage  zur  Aseyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  218-269.

'  Ci/Unders  A,  C,  col.  ii.  11.  42-54,  and  Inscription  of  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  19-28,  in
ScHBADER,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  128-131,  146,  147;  cf.  Bcdge,  Tlie  History  of
Esarhaddon,  pp.  48-51.

^  Cf.  what  is  said  of  this  prince  on  p.  323,  supra.


SUBMISSION  OF  THE  NORTHERN  ARABS.  359

to  him  his  idols.  All  this  took  place,  no  doubt,  soon  after  the  king's  accession.
A  few  years  later,  on  the  death  of  Hazael,  his  son  Yauta  ^  solicited  investiture,
but  a  competitor  for  the  chieftaincy,  a  man  of  unknown  origin,  named  Uahab,
treacherously  incited  the  Arabs  to  rebel,  and  threatened  to  overthrow  him.
Esarhaddon  caused  Uahab  to  be  seized,  and  exposed  him  in  chains  at  the  gate
of  Nineveh;  but,  in  consideration  of  this  service  to  the  Arabs,  he  augmented  the
tribute  which  already  weighed  upon  the  people  by  a  further  demand  for  ten  gold
minas,  one  thousand  precious  stones,  fifty  camels,  and  a  thousand  measures  of
spicery.^  The  repression  of  these  Arabs  of  Kedar  thus  confirmed  Esarhaddon's
supremacy  over  the  extreme  northern  region  of  Arabia,  between  Damascus  and
Sippara  or  Babylon ;  but  in  a  more  southerly  direction,  in  the  wadys  which
unite  Lower  Chaldsea  to  the  districts  of  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea,  there
still  remained  several  rich  and  warlike  states — among  others,  Bazu,^  whose  rulers
had  never  done  homage  to  the  sovereigns  of  either  Assyria  or  Karduniash.  To
carry  hostilities  into  the  heart  of  their  country  was  a  bold  and  even  hazardous
undertaking  ;  it  could  be  reached  only  by  traversing  miles  of  arid  and  rocky
plains,  exposed  to  the  rays  of  a  burning  sun,  vast  extents  of  swamps  and  boggy
pasture  land,  desolate  wastes  infested  with  serpents  and  scorpions,  and  a  moun-
tain range  of  blackish  lava  known  as  Khazu.  It  would  have  been  folly  to
risk  a  march  with  the  heavy  Assyrian  infantry  in  the  face  of  such  obstacles.
Esarhaddou  probably  selected  for  the  purpose  a  force  composed  of  cavalry,
chariots,  and  lightly  equipped  foot-soldiers,  and  despatched  them  with  orders
to  reach  the  Jauf  by  forced  marches  through  the  Wady  Hauran.  The
Arabs,  who  were  totally  unprepared  for  such   a  movement,  had  not  time  to

•  The  name  of  Hazael's  son  is  written  Yalu  in  Cylinder  A,  and  Yata  in  Winckler'3  fragment
{AUorientalische  Forschungen,  vol,  i.  pp.  527,  1.  6),  and  we  may  conclude  from  theae  two  variants  that
the  original  form  was  Yatailu,  which  would  give  us  a  name  often  found  in  Himyaritio  inscriptions ;
this  Yauta  has  been  confounded  with  the  individual  whom  we  shall  find  called  Uaite  and  Yauta  in  the
reign  of  Assur-bani-pal,  and  of  whom  we  shall  treat  below,  on  pp.  417  and  430,  431.

^  Oylinden  A,  C,  col.  li.  11.  53-58,  col.  iii.  11.  1-24,  in  Schkader,  KeilinschriftUche  BibliotheJt,
vol.  ii.  pp.  130,  131 ;  cf.  Budge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  54-59.  The  account  of  these  facts  is
no  longer  found  in  the  Brohen_  Cylinder;  it  was  probably  chronicled  on  one  of  the  ends — now
destroyed— of  the  columns.  For  a  mutilated  version  in  which  the  story  of  Uahab  is  told,  cf.
WiNCKLER,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  527-529,  532-534.

^  The  Bazu  of  this  text  is  certainly  the  Buz  which  the  Hebrew  books  name  among  the  children
of  Nahor  (Gen.  xxil  21 ;  Jer.  sxv.  23).  The  early  Assyriologists  identified  Khazu  with  Uz,  the
son  of  Nahor  (H.  Rawlinson,  in  the  Journ.  B.  As.  Soc.,  1864,  vol.  i.  pp.  238,  239 ;  Norkis,  Assyrian
Dictionary,  p.  412  ;  Fiszi,  Bicerche per  lo  Studio  dell'  Antichiia  Assira,  pp.  396,  397);  Delitzsch  (Tfo
lag  das  Parodies  ?  p.  307)  compares  the  name  with  that  of  Hazo  (Huz),  the  fifth  son  of  Nahor  (Gen.
xxii.  22),  and  his  opinion  is  admitted  by  most  scholars  (Sohrader,  Die  Eeilinschriften  und  das  Alte
Testament,  1883,  p.  141 ;  Tiele,  Babylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  p.  349).  For  the  site  of  these
countries  I  have  followed  the  ideas  of  Delattre,  who  identifies  them  with  the  oases  of  Jauf  and
Meskakeh,  in  the  centre  of  Northern  Arabia  {L'Asie  Occidentale  dans  les  inscriptions  assyriennes,
pp.  137,  138).  The  Assyrians  must  have  set  out  by  the  Wady  Hauran  or  by  one  of  the  wadys  near
to  Babylon,  and  have  returned  by  a  more  southern  wady.  Glaser  makes  them  pass  through  the
southern  Nejed  (Shizze  der  Geschichte  und  der  Geographic  Arabiens,  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  265),  and  Wiuckler
adopts  his  conclusions  {Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  p  266).


360


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYSTA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


collect  their  forces;  eight  of  their  chiefs  were  taken  by  surprise  and  killed
one  after  another — among  them  Kisu  of  Khaldili,  Agbaru  of  Ilpiati,  Mansaku
of  Magalani, — and  also  some  reigning  queens.  La,  the  King  of  Yadi,  at  first
took  refuge  in  the  mountains,  but  afterwards  gave  himself  up  to  the  enemy,
and  journeyed  as  far  as  Nineveh  to  prostrate  himself  at  Esarhaddon's  feet,  who
restored  to  him  his  gods  and  his  crown,  on  the  usual  condition  of  paying  tribute.^
A  vassal  occupying  a  country  so  remote  and  so  difficult  of  access  could  not  be

supposed  to  preserve  an  unbroken  fidelity
towards  his  suzerain,  but  he  no  longer
ventured  to  plunder  the  caravans  which
passed  through  his  territory,  and  that  in
reality  was  all  that  was  expected  of  hi  in.

Esarhaddon  thus  pursued  a  prudent
and  unadventurous  policy  in  the  northern
and  eastern  portions  of  his  empire,  main-
taining a  watchful  attitude  towards  the
Cimmerians  and  Scythians  in  the  north,
carrying  on  short  defensive  campaigns
among  the  Medes  in  the  east,  preserving
peace  with  Elam,  and  making  occasional
flying  raids  in  the  south,  rather  from  the
necessity  for  repressing  troublesome  border
This  policy  must  have  been
due  to  a  presentiment  of  danger  from  tlie  side  of  Egypt,  or  to  the  inception  of  a
great  scheme  for  attacking  the  reigning  Pharaoh.  After  tiie  defeat  of  his  generals
at  Altaku,^  Shabitoku  had  made  no  further  attempt  to  take  the  offensive  ;  his
authority  over  the  feudal  nobility  of  Egypt  Wiis  so  widely  acknowledged  that  it
causes  us  no  surprise  to  meet  with  his  cartouches  on  more  than  one  ruin  between
Thebes  and  Memphis,*  but  his  closing  years  were  marred  by  misfortune.  There
was  then  living  at  Napata  a  certain  Taharqa,  one  of  those  scions  of  the  solar  race
who  enjoyed  the  title  of  "  Koyal  brothers,"  and  from  among  whom  Amon  of  the
Holy  Mountain  was  wont  to  choose  his  representative  to  reign  over  the  land  of

'  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  iii.  11.  25-52,  and  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  iv.  11.  10-20,  in  Schbadeb,  Keilius.
BiUiotUelc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  130-133,  H6-U9.

=  Drawn  by  F.iueher-Gudin,  from  Lepsius,  DenltmuUr,  iii.  301,  Xo.  81;  cf.  Rosellini,  Montimenti
Storici,  pi.  12,  No.  48.

'  Cf.  mipru,  pp.  288,  289.

*  His  name  or  monuments  of  his  erection  have  been  discovered  at  Karnak  (Champollion,  Monu-
ments de  VEgijptc  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  ii.  p.  2G5,  et  seq. ;  Rosellini,  op.  cit.,  pi.  cli.  No.  5 ;  Lepsius,
Denlimiiler,  v.  3,  4),  at  Luxor  (Daressv,  Notice  explicative  des  ruines  da  temple  de  Louxor,  p.  55),  iu
the  temple  of  Phtah  at  Memphis  (Mariette,  Monuments  Dirers,  pi.  29  e,  1-3)  in  the  Serapeum
(Mariette,  Notice  sur  les  soixante-quatre  Apis,  in  the  Bulletin  arch^ologique  de  I'Ath^meum  Franfais,
185G,  p.  52;  cf  the  Sirapeum  de  Memphis,  vol.  i.  p.  27).


SUABITOKU,    KIN.,    i -V    Ijivri.-'

fribes  than  with  any  idea  of  permanent  conquest


EGYPTIAN  AFFAIRS — TAHABQA.


361


Ethiopia  whenever  the  throne  became  vacant.^  It  does  not  appear  that  the
father  of  Taharqa  ever  held  the  highest  rank ;  it  was  from  his  mother,
Akaluka,  that  he  inherited  his  pretensions  to  the  crown,  and  through  her
probably  that  he  traced  his  descent  from  the  family  of  the  high  priests.^
Tradition  asserts  that  he  did  not  gain  the  regal   power  without  a  struggle ;


1  "i-^]    ^  ^


rn-n  A'ra


II    1


i^


L^j--


s^;.^:.-.i-".5;o,:..


TAHAUQA    AND    HIS    IJLEEN    DIKAUITAMAKU.-


having  been  proclaimed  king  ia  Ethiopia  at  the  age  of  twenty,  as  the  result  of
some  revolution,  he  is  said  to  have  marched  against  Shabitoku,  and,  coming
up  with  him  in  the  Delta,  to  have  defeated  him,  taken  him  prisoner,  and  put
him  to  deatli.*  These  events  took  place  about  G93  B.C.,''  and  Taliarqa  employed
the  opening  years  of  his-reign  in  consolidating  his  authority  over  the  double

•  For  Ethiopian  "Eoyal  brothers,"  see  supra,  p.  170.

'  E.  DE  Roi'GE,  Elude  sur  quelques  monumeuts  dii  regne  de  Tahraka.  ia  tlie  M^lmujes  d'Arche'oIonie
Egyplienne  et  Assijrienne,  vol.  i.  p.  12.  The  name  of  the  queen,  somewhat  mutilated  on  the  mouumeijts,
appears  to  have  been  .Vkaluka.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  coloured  plate  in  Lepsius,  DenJmiiiler,  v.  5.

'  Eusebius,  who  cites  the  fact,  had  his  information  from  a  trustworthy  Greek  source  (Unger.
Manetlio,  p.  251),  perhaps  from  Manetho  himself  (MiJLLEii-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Historicorum  GnKcorum.
vol.  ii.  p.  593).  The  inscription  of  Tanis  seems  to  say  that  Taharqa  was  twenty  years  old  at  the
lime  of  his  revolt  (E.  de  Eocge,  op.  cit.,  pp.  16-22,  Bircu  ;  On  Some  Monuments  of  the  Reign  of
Tirhalcah,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pp.  194,  198,  and  Inscription  of
Tirhalcah,  in  the  Zeitsclirift.  1880,  p.  23).

=  Most  of  the  lists  of  kings  taken  from  Manetho  assign  twelve  years  to  the  reign  of  Sebiklios ;
one  alone,  that  of  Africanus,  assigns  him  fourteen  years  (Manetho,  in  MOller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.
Grssc,  vol.  ii.  p.  593).


362  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

kingdom.  He  married  the  widow  of  Sabaco,  Queen  Dikaliitamanii,  and  thus
assumed  the  guardianship  of  Tanuatamanu,  her  son  by  her  first  husband,  and
this  marriage  secured  him  supreme  authority  in  Ethiopia.^  That  he  regarded
Egypt  as  a  conquered  country  can  no  longer  be  doubted,  seeing  that  he  inserted
its  name  on  his  monuments  among  those  of  the  nations  which  he  had  vanquished.^
.  He  nevertheless  felt  obliged  to  treat  it  with  consideration ;  he  respected  the
rights  of  the  feudal  princes,  and  behaved  himself  in  every  way  like  a  Pharaoh
of  the  old  royal  line.  He  summoned  his  mother  from  Napata,  where  he  had
left  her,  and  after  proclaiming  her  regent  of  the  South  and  the  North,  he
associated  her  with  himself  in  the  rejoicings  at  his  coronation.  This  ceremony,
celebrated  at  Tanis  with  the  usages  customary  in  the  Delta,^  was  repeated  at
Karnak  in  accordance  with  the  Theban  ritual,  and  a  chapel  erected  shortly
afterwards  on  the  northern  quay  of  the  great  sacred  lake  has  preserved  to  us
the  memory  of  it.*  Akaluka,  installed  with  the  rank  and  prerogatives  of  the
"  Divine  Spouse  "  of  Amon,  presented  her  son  to  the  deity,  who  bestowed  upon
him  through  his  priests  dominion  over  the  whole  world.  She  bent  the  bow,
and  let  fly  the  arrows  towards  the  four  cardinal  points,  v.-hich  she  thereby
symbolically  delivered  to  him  as  wounded  prisoners ;  the  king,  on  his
part,  hurled  against  them  bullets  of  stone,  and  by  this  attack  figuratively
accomplished  their  defeat.^  His  wars  in  Africa  were  crowned  with  a  certain
meed  of  success,^  and  his  achievements  in  this  quarter  won  for  him  in  after-

'  The  text  of  Cylinder  A  of  Assur-bani-pal  (col.  ii.  1.  53),  and  that  of  several  other  documents
(K  22S  and  K  2675,  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  29,  47),  only  mentioned  that  Tanuata-
manu was  the  "  son  of  his  wife,"  which  Oppert  interpreted  to  mean  son  of  Taharqa  himself  (itfifmoiVe
sur  les  rapports  de  V&gypte  et  de  I'Assyrie  dans  V Antiquity,  p.  lOi),  while  others  see  in  him  a  son  of
Kashto,  a  brother  of  Amenertaa  (Hincks,  The  Assyrian  Sacliing  of  Tliehes,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1866,  p.  2),
or  a  son  of  Shabitoku  (G.  Smith,  Egyptian  Campaigns  of  Esarhaddon  and  Assurbanipal,  in  the
Zeitschrift,  1868,  p.  96).  Eassam's  Cylinder,  No.  1  (col.  ii.  1.  22)  gives  the  variant,  Tandamane,  son
of  Sabaco,  as  was  observed  for  the  first  time  by  G.  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  318,  327.

-  Bbugsch,  Reiseherichte  aus  ^gypten,  p.  300 ;  the  parallel  scene,  where  the  name  of  Egypt  was
found,  has  been  usurped  by  Nectanebo.

^  The  stele  of  Tanis,  whose  fragments  were  discovered  by  Marietta  and  Petrie,  seems  to  refer  to
these  coronation  festivities  at  Tanis;  cf.  the  translations  of  it  given  by  E.  de  Eouge'  (_Etude  sur
quelques  monuments  du  regne  de  Tahraka,  in  the  Mdanges  dArchiblogie  Egyplienne,  vol.  i.  pp.  21-23).
Birch  (On  Some  Monuments  of  the  Reign  of  Tirhakah,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
vol.  vii.  pp.  194-199),  and  Griffith  (Peteie,  Tanis,  vol.  ii.  pp.  29,  30,  pi.  ix.  No.  162).

*  The  scenes  and  inscriptions  in  this  chapel,  published  by  Prissb  d'Avennes,  Monuments  Egyptiens,
pis.  xxxi.-xxxiii.,  have  been  carefully  worked  out  by  E.  de  EonoE  only,  op.  cit.,  pp.  14-16.

'  PwssE  d'Avenxes,  op.  cit.,  pi.  xxxui. ;  cf.  E.  de  Eouge,  op.  cit.,  p.  15.

'  The  list  inscribed  on  the  base  of  the  statue  discovered  and  published  by  Mariette  (Karnak,
pi.  xlv.  a  2)  contains  a  large  number  of  names  belonging  to  Africa.  They  are  the  same  as  those  met
with  in  the  time  of  the  XVIII"'  dynasty,  and  were  probably  copied  from  some  monument  of  Eamses  II.,
who  had  himself  perhaps  borrowed  them  from  a  document  of  the  time  of  Thfitmosis  III.  (Maklette,
Karnak,  pp.  66,  67 ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Mgyptische  Geschichte,  p.  594).  A  bas-relief  at  Medinet-Habu
shows  him  to  us  in  the  act  of  smiting  a  group  of  tribes,  among  which  figure  the  Tepa,  Doshrit,  and
"  the  humbled  Kush "  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'^gypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  i.  pp.  319-321 ;
EosELLiNi,  Mojmmenti  Storici,  pi.  cl.  vol.  iv.  p.  182 ;  Lepsius,  Denkmdler,  v.  pi.  i.  c) ;  this  bas-relief
was  appropriated  later  on  by  Nectanebo.


TEE  BUILDINGS   OF   TAHARQA   IN  EGYPT.


363


time  so  much  popularity  among  the  Egyptians,  that  they  extolled   him   to
the  Greeks  as  one  of  their  most  illustrious  conquering  Pharaohs  ;  they  related


THE   COLCMN   OP  TAHARQA,   AT  KARNAK.'

that  he  had  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  in  the  west,  and  that
he  had  invaded  Europe  in  imitation  of  Sesostris.^  What  we  know  to  be  a  fact
is,  that  he  secured  to  the  valley  of  the  Nile  nearly  twenty  years  of  prosperity,

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato,  taken  in  1S86.

-  Stkabo,  I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61 ;  XV.  i.  §  6,  p.  687 :  the  latter  passage  is  taken  from  Megasthenes
(Fragm.  20,  in  Mtjlleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec.,  vol.  ii,  p.  416).


364


TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYPJA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.


and  recalled  the  glories  of  the  great  reigns  of  former  days,  if  not  by  his
victories,  at  least  by  the  excellence  of  his  administration  and  his  activity.  He
planned  the  erection  at  Karnak  ^  of  a  hypostyle  hall  in  front  of  the  pylons  of
Eamses  II.,  which  should  equal,  if  not  surpass,  that  of  Seti  I.^  The  columns
of  the  central  aisle  were  disposed  in  two  lines  of  six  pillars  each,  but  only  one  of


THE    IIEMISFEOS    OF    IIATHOE    AND    BISO,    AT    GEBEL-BAKKAL.^

these  now  remains  standing  in  its  original  place ;  its  height,  which  is  the  same
as  that  of  Seti's  columns,  is  nearly  sixty-nine  feet.  The  columns  of  the  side
aisles,  like  those  whicli  should  have  flanked  the  immense  colonnade  at  Luxor,
were  never  even  begun,  and  the  hall  of  Taharqa,  like  that  of  Seti  I.,  remains

'  Information  as  to  the  principal  portions  of  his  work  at  Karnak  may  be  found  in  Makiette,
Karnah,  pp.  10,  20,  note  2,  and  in  Wiedemann,  Mgyptigclie  GescMchte,  pp.  595,  596.

-  These  columns  have  been  looked  upon  as  triumphal  pillars,  designed  to  support  statues  or
divine  emblems  (Jollois  and  de  Villiers,  Description  du  palais  ite  Karnal:,  in  the  De/cription  dc
ViJgypte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  422-425;  E.  de  EouGii,  £tude  des  Monuments  du  Mafsif  de  Earnak,  in  the
Mdanges  d'Archeblogie  i^gyptienne,  vol.  i.  p.  67;  Steindorff  and  Baedeker,  Hgypten,  pp.  245,  246)-
Mariette  thinks  tliat  they  supported  ''  an  edifice  in  the  architectural  style  of  the  kiosk  at  Phihc  and
the  small  liypaithral  temple  on  the  roof  of  Deuderah"  (Karnal;  p.  19).  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  aroliitcct
intended  to  make  a  hypostyle  hall,  but  that  when  the  columns  were  erected,  he  perceived  that  the
groat  width  of  the  aisle  they  formed  would  render  the  strength  of  the  roof  very  doubtful,  and  so
renounced  the  execution  of  his  first  design.,

'  Prawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  lithograph  in  Caillaud,  Voyage  a  Miroe,  vol.  i.  pi.  Iviii.


BUILDINGS    OF   TAEARQA    IN  ETHIOPIA.


365


unfinished  to  this  day.^  He  bestowed  his  favour  on  Nubia  and  Ethiopia,
as  well  as  on  Egypt  proper;  even  Napata  owed  to  his  munificence  the
most  beautiful  portions  of  its  temples.  The  temple  of  Amon,  and  sub-
sequently that  of  MiU,  were  enlarged  by  him;^  and  he  decorated  their
ancient  halls  with  bas-reliefs,  representing  himself,  accompanied  by  his  mother
and  his  wife,  in  attitudes  of  adoration  before  the  deity.  The  style  of  the  carving
is  very  good,  and  the  hieroglyphics  would  not  disgrace  the  walls  of  the  Theban


ESTKANCE   TO   THE   HEMISPEUS    OF    lilSU    (UES),    AT    GEBEL-BAUKAL.'

temples.  The  Ethiopian  sculptors  and  painters  scrupulously  followed  the
traditions  of  the  mother-country,  and  only  a  few  insignificant  details  of  ethnic
type  or  costume  enable  us  to  detect  a  slight  difference  between  their  works  and
those  of  pure  Egyptian  art.  At  the  other  extremity  of  Napata,  on  the  western
side  of  the  Holy  Mountain,  Taharqa  excavated  in  the  cliff  a  rock-hewn  shrine,
which  he  dedicated  to  Hathor  and  Bisu  (Bes),  the  patron  of  jollity  and  happi-
ness, and  the  god  of  music  and  of  war.  Bisu,  who  was  at  first  relegated  to  the
lowest  rank  among  the  crowd  of  genii  adored  by  the  people,  had  gradually
risen  to  the  highest  place  in  the  hierarchy  of  the  gods,  and  his  images  pre-
dominated in  chapels  destined  to  represent  the  cradle  of  the  infant  gods,  and

'  For  this  colonnade  at  Luxor,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  379.

-  Caillaud,  Voyage  a  Mgroi,  vol.  i.  pis.  Ixiv.-lxvi.,  and  vol.  lii.  pp.  218-225;  Lepsius,  DenkmdleT,
V.  5-13.  The  cartouches  of  Taharqa  were  recognised  in  this  edifice  from  the  outset  by  ChampoUion
(Note  in  Bulletin  des  Annonces,  1824),  and  led  him  to  attribute  the  erection  of  the  building  to
this  prince.

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  lithograph  in  Caillaud,  Voyage  a  Md'roe',  vol.  i.  pi.  Ixxiv. ;
dravfinga  of  these  pillars  are  reproduced  in  Lepsr'S,  Denhmdler,  v.  6  a-h.


366  TEE  POWER   OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

the  sacred  spots  where  goddesses  gave  birth  to  their  divine  offspring.  The
portico  erected  in  front  of  the  pylon  had  a  central  avenue  of  pillars,  against
which  stood  monstrous  and  grinning  statues  of  Bis{l,  his  hands  on  his  hips,  and
his  head  crowned  with  a  large  bunch  of  lotus-flowers  and  plumes.  Two  rows
of  cohimns  with  Hathor-headed  capitals  flanked  the  central  aisle,  which  led  to
a  hall  supported  by  massive  columns,  also  with  Hathor  capitals,  and  beyond  it
again  lay  the  actual  shrine  similarly  excavated  in  the  rocky  hill ;  two  statues
of  Bisii,  standing  erect  against  their  supporting  columns,  kept  guard  over  the
entrance,  and  their  fantastic  forms,  dimly  discernible  in  the  gloom,  must  have
appeared  in  ancient  times  to  have  prohibited  the  vulgar
throng  from  approaching  the  innermost  sanctuary.  Half
of  the  roof  has  fallen  in  since  the  building  was  deserted,
and  a  broad  beam  of  light  falling  through  the  aperture
thus  made  reveals  the  hideous  grotesqueness  of  the  statues
to  all  comers.^

The  portraits  of  Taharqa  rej)resent  him  with  a  strong,
square-shaped  head,  with  full  cheeks,  vigorous  mouth,  and
determined  chin,  such  as  belong  to  a  man  well  suited  to
deal  with  that  troubled  epoch,  and  the  knowledge  we  as
yet  possess  of  his  conflict  with  Assyria  fully  confirms  the
character  exhibited  by  his  portrait  statues.  We  may  surmise  that,  when  once
absolute  master  of  Egypt,  he  must  have  cast  his  eyes  beyond  the  isthmus,  and
considered  how  he  might  turn  to  his  own  advantage  the  secret  grudge  borne
by  the  Syrians  against  their  suzerain  at  Nineveh,  but  up  to  the  present  time
we  possess  no  indications  as  to  the  policy  he  pursued  in  Palestine.  We
may  safely  assume,  however,  that  it  gave  umbrage  to  the  Assyrians,  and
that  Esarhaddon  resolved  to  put  an  end  once  for  all  to  the  uneasiness  it
caused  him.  More  than  half  a  century  had  elapsed  since  the  day  when  the
kings  of  Syria,  alarmed  at  the  earliest  victories  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  had
conceived  the  idea  of  pitting  their  former  conquerors  against  those  of  the
day,  and  had  solicited  help  from  the  Pharaohs  against  Assyria.^  None  of
the  sovereigns  to  whom  they  turned  bad  refused  to  listen  to  their  appeals,
or  failed  to  promise  subsidies  and  reinforcements ;  but  these  engagements,
however  definite,  had  for  the  most  part  been  left  unfulfilled,  and  when  an
occasion  for  their  execution  had  occurred,  the  Egyptian  armies  had  merely

•  Cailla'jd,  Voyage  a  M^rof,  vol.  ii.  pp.  212-215.  The  plan  ia  given  in  Oaillaud,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.
pi.  Ixviii.

-  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  cast  of  the  fragment  preserved  at  Gizeh ;  cf.  Maspebo,  Guide
du  Visiteur  au  Musfe  de  Boulaq.  p.  63,  No.  101.

'  Of.  supra,  pp.  180-182.


THE   SYRIAN  POLICY   OF   TAEARQA.  367

appeared  on  the  fields  of  battle  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat :  they  had  not  prevented
the  subjugation  of  Damascus,  Israel,  Tyre,  the  Philistines,  nor,  indeed,  of  any  of
the  princes  or  people  who  trusted  to  their  renown  ;  yet,  notwithstanding  these
numerous  disappointments,  the  prestige  of  the  Egyptians  was  still  so  great
that  insubordinate  or  rebel  states  invariably  looked  to  them  for  support  and
entreated  their  help.  The  Assyrian  generals  had  learnt  by  experience  to  meet
them  unmoved,  being  well  aware  that  the  Egyptian  army  was  inferior  to  their
own  in  organisation,  and  used  antiquated  weapons  and  methods  of  warfare;
they  were  also  well  aware  that  the  Egyptian  and  even  the  Ethiopian  soldiery
had  never  been  able  successfully  to  withstand  a  determined  attack  by  the
Assyrian  battalions,  and  that  when  once  the  desert  which  protected  Egypt  had
been  crossed,  she  would,  like  Babylon,  fall  an  easy  prey  to  their  arms.  It  would
merely  be  necessary  to  guard  against  the  possible  danger  of  opposition  being
offered  to  the  passage  of  the  invading  host  by  the  Idumsean  and  Arab  tribes
sparsely  scattered  over  the  country  between  the  Nile  and  the  Gulf  of  Akabah,
as  their  hostility  would  be  a  cause  of  serious  uneasiness.  An  expedition,
sent  against  Milukhkha^  in  675  B.C.,  had  taught  the  inhabitants  to  respect
the  power  of  Assyria;  but  the  campaign  had  not  been  brought  to  a  satis-
factory conclusion,  for  the  King  of  Elam,  Khumban-khaldash  II.,  seeing  his
rival  occupied  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  his  empire,  fell  unexpectedly  upon
Babylon,  and  pushing  forward  as  far  as  Sippara,  laid  waste  the  surrounding
country ;  and  his  hateful  presence  even  prevented  the  god  Shamash  from
making  his  annual  progress  outside  the  walls  of  the  city.  The  people  of  Bit-
Dakkuri  seem  to  have  plucked  up  courage  at  his  approach,  and  invaded  the
neighbouring  territory,  probably  that  of  Borsippa.  Esarhaddon  was  absent  on
a  distant  expedition,  and  the  garrisons  scattered  over  the  province  were  not
sufficiently  strong  in  numbers  to  risk  a  pitched  battle :  Khumban-khaldash,
therefore,  marched  back  with  his  booty  to  Susa  entirely  unmolested.  He  died
suddenly  in  his  palace  a  few  days  after  his  return,  and  was  succeeded  by  his
brother,  Urtaku,  who  was  too  intent  upon  seating  himself  securely  on  the  throne
to  send  his  troops  on  a  second  raid  in  the  following  year.-  Esarhaddon  deferred
his  revenge  to  a  more  convenient  season,  and  utilised  the  respite  fate  had
accorded  him  on  the  Elamite  border  to  hasten  his  attack  on  Egypt  (673  b.c.).-^

'  The  name  of  Milukhkha,  first  applied  to  the  countries  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Persian  Gulf
(cf.  Dawn  of  CioiUzation,  p.  564,  note  3,  and  p.  000),  had  been  transferred  to  the  western  coasts  of
Arabia,  as  well  as  that  of  Magan.

'  Finches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iv.  11.  9-15;  cf.  Wincklek,  Bahjlonische  Chronik  B,  in
SoHRADER,  Keilins.  Bihl,  vol.  ii.  pp.  282-288.  This  is  the  only  document  recording  these  events,
and  it  gives  them  in  great  confusion ;  I  have  endeavoured  to  point  out  the  bond  which  unites  tliem.

'  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iv.  1. 16 ;  cf.  Winckler,  op.  cit,  pp.  284,  285.  Kimdtzou  {Aasij-
rische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  vol.  i.  p.  59)  has  established  the  reading  "  the  Assyrians  were  defeated,"
■ — diku, — instead  of  "the  Assyrians  came," — illiku, — as  read  by  the  first  editors  of  this  passage.


368  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

The  expedition  was  a  failure,  and  Taharqa  was  greatly  elated  at  having  issued
with  honour  from  this  trial  of  strength.  As  most  of  the  countries  over  which
his  enemy  exercised  his  supremacy  were  those  which  had  been  ruled  by  his
Theban  ancestors  iu  days  gone  by,  Taharqa  engraved  on  the  base  of  his  statue
a  list  of  nations  and  towns  copied  from  one  of  the  monuments  of  Kamses  II.
The  Khilti,  Carchemish,  Mitanni,  Arvad — in  short,  a  dozen  peoples  already
extinct  or  in  their  decline,  and  whose  names  were  merely  perpetuated  in  the
stereotyped  official  lists, — were  enumerated  in  the  list  of  his  vanquished  foes
side  by  side  with  Assyria.^  It  was  a  mere  piece  of  bravado,  for  never,  even
when  victorious,  did  he  set  foot  on  Syrian  soil ;  but  all  the  same  the  victory
had  caused  the  invading  host  to  retire,  and  the  fame  of  this  exploit,  spreading
throughout  Asia,  was  not  without  its  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants.
The  island  of  Tyre  had  never  officially  recognised  the  Assyrian  suzerainty.
The  Tyrians  had  lived  in  peace  since  the  defeat  of  Elulai,  and  had  maintained
constant  commercial  relations  with  the  continent  without  interfering  in  active
politics :  they  had,  perhaps,  even  been  permitted  to  establish  some  settlements
on  the  coast  of  the  mainland.  Their  king,  Baal,  now  deemed  tlie  moment
a  propitious  one  for  coming  forward  and  recovering  his  lost  territory,  and
since  the  Greek  princes  of  Cyprus  had  ranged  themselves  under  the  hegemony
of  Assyria,  he  thought  he  could  best  counterbalance  their  iafluence  by  seeking
support  from  Egypt,  whose  ancient  greatness  was  apparently  reviving.  He
therefore  concluded  an  alliance  with  Taharqa,"  and  it  would  be  no  cause  for
astonishment  if  we  should  one  day  discover  that  Judah  had  followed  his  example.
Hezekiah  had  devoted  his  declining  years  to  religious  reformation,  and  the
organisation  of  his  kingdom  under  the  guidance  of  Isaiah  or  the  group  of  prophets
of  which  Isaiah  was  the  leader.  Judah  had  increased  in  population,  and  had
quickly  recovered  its  prosperity  ;  when  Hezekiah  died,  about  686  b.c.,^  it  had
entirely  regained  its  former  vigour,  but  the  memory  of  the  disasters  of  701  was
still  sufficiently  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  people  to  prevent  the  change  of  sove-
reign being  followed  by  a  change  of  policy.  Manasseh,  who  succeeded  his  father,
though  he  did  not  walk,  as  Hezekiah  had  done,  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,'*
at  least  remained  loyal  to  his  Assyrian  masters.  It  is,  however,  asserted  that
he  afterwards  rebelled,  though  his  reason  for  doing  so  is  not  explained,  and
that  he  was  carried  captive  to  Babylon  as  a  punishment  for  this  crime  :  he

'  Mamette,  Earnak,  pi.  45  a,  and  pp.  66,  G7.

'  The  alliance  of  Baal  with  Taharqa  is  mentioned  in  the  fragment  of  the  Amiah,  reproduced  by
Budge  (r/i-;  History  of  Eiurhaddon,  pp.  lltJ,  117,  1.  12),  under  the  date  of  year  X.,  and  the  name  Baal
is  still  decipherable  amid  the  defaced  lines  which  coutained  the  account  of  events  which  took  place
before  that  year  (pp.  114,  115,  1.  2).  I  think  we  may  reasonably  assign  the  first  understauding
between  the  two  sovereigns,  either  to  the  actual  year  of  the  first  campaign  or  to  the  following  year,  and
this  is  the  present  opinion  of  "Winckler  {Allorientalitche  Forechuiigen,  vol.  i.  pp.  520,  520).

'  For  the  dates  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  cf.  supra,  pp.  236,  284.

*  2  Kings  xxi.  1,  2 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxili.  1,  2.


DISTURBANCES    ON   THE  FRONTIERS    OF  ELAM  AND    OF   URARTU.     369

succeeded,  nevertheless,  in  regaining  favour,  and  was  reinstated  at  Jerusalem  on
condition  of  not  repeating  his  offence.  If  this  statement  is  true,  as  I  believe
it  to  be,  it  was  probably  after  the  Egyptian  campaign  of  673  b.c.^  that  his  con-
spiracy with  Baal  took  place.  The  Assyrian  governors  of  the  neighbouring
provinces  easily  crushed  these  attempts  at  independence,  but,  the  islands  of
Tyre  being  secure  from  attack,  they  were  obliged  to  be  content  with  establishing
a  series  of  redoubts  along  the  coast,  and  with  prohibiting  the  Tyrians  from
having  access  to  the  mainland.-

The  promptitude  of  their  action  quenched  the  hopes  of  the  Egyptian  party
and  prevented  the  spread  of  the  revolt.  Esarhaddon  was,  nevertheless,  obliged
to  put  off  the  fulfilment  of  his  schemes  longer  than  he  desired  :  complications
arose  on  his  northern  frontiers,  near  the  sources  of  the  Tigris,  which  distracted
his  attention  from  the  intrigues  taking  place  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  Urartu,
hard  pressed  by  the  Cimmerians  and  Scythians,  had  lived  for  a  quarter  of  a
century  in  a  condition  of  sullen  peace  with  Assyria,  and  its  kings  avoided  any-
thing which  could  bring  them  into  conflict  with  their  hereditary  rival.  Argistis
II.  had  been  succeeded  by  one  of  his  sons,  Eusas  II.,  and  both  of  them  had  been
more  intent  upon  strengthening  their  kingdom  than  on  extending  its  area  ;
they  had  rebuilt  their  capital,  Dhuspas,  on  a  magaificent  scale,  and  from  the
security  of  their  rocky  home  they  watched  the  course  of  events  without  taking
any  part  in  it,  unless  forced  to  do  so  by  circumstances.^  Andaria,  chief  of
Lubdi,  one  of  the  remote  mountain  districts,  so  difficult  of  access  that  it  always
retained  its  independence  in  spite  of  frequent  attacks,  had  seized  Shupria,  a
province  which  had  been  from  very  early  times  subject  to  the  sovereigns  of
Nineveh,  and  was  the  first  to  be  colonised  by  them.*     The  inhabitants,  forgetful

'  The  fact  of  Manasseh's  captivity  is  only  known  to  us  from  tlie  testimony  of  2  Chron,  xxsiii.
10-13,  and  moat  modern  critics  consider  it  apocryphal  (Stade,  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.
pp.  639,  040).  The  moral  development  which  accompanies  the  narrative,  and  the  conversion  which
follows  it,  are  certainly  later  additions,  but  I  think,  witli  Hale'vy  {Melanges  de  Critique  et  d'Bistoire
relalifs  aux  peuples  Sifmitiques,  pp.  30,  37),  that  the  story  may  have  some  foundation  in  fact ;  we
shall  see  later  on  (infra,  p.  386)  that  Necho  I.,  King  of  Sais,  was  taken  prisoner,  led  into  captivity,
and  received  again  into  favour  in.  the  same  way  as  Mauasseh  is  said  to  have  been.  The  exile  to
Babylon,  which  at  one  time  appeared  to  demonstrate  the  unauthenticity  of  the  passage,  would  be
rather  in  favour  of  its  authenticity,  as  G.  Smith  had  already  remarked  (The  Assyrian  Epouym
Canon,  pp.  165,  166).  Esarhaddon  was  King  of  Babylon  during  the  whole  of  his  reign,  and  the
great  works  which  ho  executed  in  that  city  obliged  him,  we  know,  to  transport  thither  a  large
proportion  of  tlie  prisoners  whom  he  brought  back  from  his  wars.

-  WiNCKLEK,  Altorientalisehe  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  525,  526,  assigns  the  opening  of  the  blockade
to  this  date ;  I  had  independently  arrived  at  the  same  oouclusion,  when  Winckler  himself  pushed  back
the  date  for  the  commencement  of  operations  to  675  e.g.  (Gesch.  Bab.  und  Assyr.,  p.  335),  and  Landau
brought  it  down  to  670  B.C.  (Beiirage  zur  AUertumskunde  des  Orients,  pp.  11,  12).

'  For  the  order  and  succession  of  the  kings  of  Urartu  at  this  epoch,  I  have  followed  the  ideas  set
forth  by  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ein  neuer  Berrscher  mn  Chaldia,  in  the  ZeitschriJ't  fiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  ix.  pp.  82-99,  339-360.

*  For  these  colonies,  .cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  608,  note  2.  The  name  is  there  given  under
the  form  Ruri,  the  inaccuracy  of  which  was  shown  at  the  very  time  that  work  began  to  appear ;  cf.
supra,  p.  20,  note  i,

2    B


370  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITE.

of  their  origin,  had  yielded  voluntarily  to  Andaria;  but  this  prince,  after
receiving  their  homage,  was  seized  with  alarm  at  his  own  audacity.  He
endeavoured  to  strengthen  his  position  by  an  alliance  with  the  Cimmerians,^
and  the  spirit  of  insubordination  which  he  aroused  spread  beyond  the  Euphrates ;
Mugallu  of  ^lilid,  a  king  of  the  Tabal,  resorted  to  such  violent  measures  that
Esarhaddon  was  alarmed  lest  the  wild  mountaineers  of  the  Taurus  should  pour
down  upon  the  plain  of  Kui  and  lay  it  waste.^  The  danger  would  indeed  have
been  serious  had  all  these  tribes  risen  simultaneously ;  but  the  Cimmerians  were
detained  in  Asia  Minor  by  their  own  concerns,^  and  Mugallu,  when  he  saw  the
Assyrian  troops  being  concentrated  to  bring  him  to  reason,  remained  quiet.*  The
extension  of  Lubdi  was  not  likely  to  meet  with  favour  in  the  eyes  of  Rusas ;  he  did
not  respond  to  the  advances  made  to  him,^  and  Esarliaddon  opened  his  campaign
against  the  rebels  without  having  to  dread  the  intervention  of  Urartu.  Andaria,
besieged  in  his  capital  of  Ubbumi,^  laid  aside  his  royal  robes,  and,  assuming  the
ragged  garments  of  a  slave,  appeared  upon  the  ramparts  and  pleaded  for  mercy
in  a  voice  choked  with  tears:  "Shupria,  the  country  which  has  sinned  against
thee,  will  yield  to  thee  of  her  own  accord ;  place  thy  officers  over  her,  she  will
vow  obedience  to  thee ;  impose  on  her  a  ransom  and  an  annual  tribute  for  ever.
I  am  a  robber,  and  for  the  crime  I  have  committed  I  will  make  amends
fifty-fold."  Esarhaddon  would  listen  to  no  terms  before  a  breach  had  been
effected  in  the  city  walls.  This  done,  he  pardoned  the  prince  who  had  taken
refuge  in  the  citadel,  but  resumed  possession  of  Shupria :  its  inhabitants  were
mercilessly  punished,  being  condemned  to  slavery,  and  their  lands  and  goods
divided  among  new  colonists.  Many  Urartians  were  numbered  among  the
captives :  these  Esarhaddon  separated  from  the  rest,  and  sent  back  to  Rusas  as
a  reward  for  his  having  remained  neutral.  All  this  had  barely  occupied  the
space  of  one  month,  the  month  of  Tebet.     The  firstfruits  of  the  spoil  reserved

'  This  seems,  indeed,  to  be  proved  by  a  tablet  in  which  Esarhaddon,  addressing  the  god  Shamash,
asks  him  if  the  Cimmerians  or  Urartians  will  unite  with  a  certain  prince  who  can  be  no  other  than
the  King  of  Shupria  (Knudtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  149-153;  of.  Wln'CKLER,
AUorient.  Fonch.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  51).

-  I  should  like  to  refer  to  this  date  the  oracular  "consultations,"  Nos.  55,  56,  57,  58,  which  belong
to  the  reigu  of  Esarhaddon,  as  Knudtzon  (op.  cit.,  pp.  158-165)  has  pointed  out;  cf.  Winckleb,  op.
cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  125,  et  seq.

'  It  was  about  this  time  they  were  dealing  the  death-blow  to  the  kingdom  of  Phrygia ;  cf.  infra,
pp.  391,  392.

'  This  concentration  of  Assyrian  troops  is  the  subject  of  oracular  "  consultation,"  No.  56  (Knudtzon,
op.  cit.,  pp.  160-163).  Mugallu  shut  himself  up  in  one  of  his  strongholds  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  it,
and  it  seems  as  if  the  affair  went  no  further,  for  we  find  him  still  King  of  Tabal  some  years  later,
under  Assur-bani-pal ;  cf.  infra,  p.  3S7.

*  That  Esarhaddon  dreaded  the  formation  of  an  alliance  between  Eusas  and  the  chiefs  of  Lubdi
and  Shupria.  follows  from  oracle  No.  48  in  Knudtzon,  op.  cit.,  p.  150,  rev.,  1.  6,  et  seq.,  where  the
name  Eusas  must  be  restored,  as  the  editor  has  clearly  seen  (op.  cit.,  p.  152);  cf.  Winokier,  AUorient.
Fortcli.,  vol.  ii.  p.  52,  where  he  raises  some  objections  to  this  restoration.

'  The  town  is  named  Bumu  in  Knudtzon,  op.  cit.,  No.  48,  obv.,  1.  9,  p.  150.


FIEST  INVASION   OF  EOYFT.  371

for  Uruk  had  already  reached  that  town  by  the  month  Kislev/  and  the  year
was  not  so  far  advanced  as  to  i-ender  further  undertakings  impossible,  when
the  death  of  the  queen,  on  the  5th  Adar,  suspended  all  warlike  enterprises.^
The  last  months  of  the  year  were  given  up  to  mourning,  and  the  whole  of
671  B.C.  passed  without  further  action.  The  Ethiopian  king  was  emboldened
by  this  inactivity  on  the  part  of  his  foe  to  renew  his  intrigues  with  Syria  with
redoubled  energy  ;  at  one  moment,  indeed,  the  Philistines  of  Ashkelon,  secretly
instigated,  seemed  on  the  point  of  revolt.^  They  held  themselves,  however,  in
check,  and  Esarhaddon,  reassured  as  to  their  attitude,  entered  into  negotiations
with  the  sheikhs  of  the  Arab  tribes,  and  purchased  their  assistance  to  cross
the  desert  of  Sinai.  He  bade  them  assemble  at  Eaphia,  at  the  western
extremity  of  Palestine,  each  chief  bringing  all  the  camels  he  could  command,
and  as  many  skins  of  water  as  their  beasts  could  carry :  this  precaution,  a
wise  one  at  any  time,  might  secure  the  safety  of  the  army  in  case  Taharqa  should
have  filled  up  the  wells  which  marked  the  stages  in  the  caravan  route.*  When
all  was  ready,  Esarhaddon  consulted  the  oracle  of  Shamash,  and,  on  receiving  a
favorable  reply  from  the  god,  left  Nineveh  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  Nisao,
670  B.C.,  to  join  the  invading  army  in  Syria.^  He  made  a  detour  in  order  to  inspect
the  lines  of  forts  which  his  generals  had  established  along  the  coast  opposite
Tyre,  and  strengthened  their  garrisons  to  prevent  Baal  from  creating  a  diversion
in  the  rear  of  his  base  of  operations ;  he  then  proceeded  southwards  to  the

'  Finches'  Bab.  Chron.,  col.  iv.  1.  22 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Die  Bah.  Chron.  B,  in  Sohkadek,  Keil.  Bill.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  284,  285.  Winckler  thinks  that  in  1.  21  of  tliis  document  the  name  of  >fineveh  should  be
substituted  for  that  of  Uruk  (Alt.  Forsch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  46,  note  1),  but  I  do  not  see  the  necessity  for  this.
The  Babylonian  chronicler  naturally  reported  the  events  connected  with  the  towns  of  his  own  land,
and  the  arrival  of  a  portion  of  the  booty,  the  ofl'ering  of  the  king  to  the  temple  in  Uruk,  touched  him
more  nearly  tban  the  arrival  of  the  wliole  amount  of  the  spoil  at  Nineveh  would  have  done.

-  All  these  facts  are  revealed  to  us  by  tlie  great  tablet  in  the  British  Museum,  the  fragments  of
which  were  first  published  and  translated  by  Winckler,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  27-52 ;  cf.
vol.  i.  pp.  529-532.  The  date  is  fixed  by  a  passage  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle  (col.  iv.  11.  19-
21 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Die  Babylonische  Chronik  B,  iu  Schkadek,  Keilins.  Bihliotheh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284,  285),
where  it  is  stated  that  in  the  eighth  year,  in  the  month  of  Tebet,  the  king  conquered  the  land  of
Shupriza  :  Shupriza  is  certainly  an  error  of  the  Babylonian  scribe  for  Shupria  (Knudtzon,  Assyrische
Gehete  an  den  Sonnengott,  p.  152  ;  Winckler,  Alt.  Forsch.,  vol.  ii.  p.  40).  In  the  fragment  of  the  Annals
there  occurs,  immediately  before  the  second  expedition  into  Egypt,  a  much  mutilated  account  which
seems  to  be  that  of  the  campaign  against  Shupria  ;  cf.  Bcdoe,  Hist,  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  114,  115.

'  Ashkelon  is  mentioned  in  two  of  the  prayers  (Nos.  70,  71)  in  which  Esarhaddon  consults
Shamash  on  the  subject  of  his  intended  campaign  in  Egypt  (Knudtzon,  op.  cit.,  pp.  178-181);  he
seems  to  fear  lest  that  city  and  the  Bedawiu  of  the  Idumsean  desert  should  espouse  the  cause  of  the
King  of  Ethiopia.

'  This  information  is  furnished  by  the  fragment  of  the  Annals,  rev.,  11.  1,  2  ;  cf.  Budge,  op.  cit.,
pp.  118,119;  Winckler,  Vntersuchungen  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  p.  98,  and  Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.
p.  6.  The  Assyrian  text  introduces  this  into  the  narrative  in  sucli  a  manner  that  it  would  appear
as  if  these  negotiations  were  carried  on  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  campaign ;  it  is,  however,
more  probable  that  they  were  concluded  beforehand,  as  occurred  later  on,  in  the  time  of  Cambyses,
when  the  Persians  invaded  Egypt  (Hi;kodotos,  III.  iv.-ix.).

^  Knudtzon,  op.  cit.,  pp.  174-181,  where  it  is  shown  that  the  published  texts  refer  to  the  second
Egyptian  campaign  of  Esarhaddon,  The  reply  of  the  god  is  not  easy  to  interpret,  but  it  was
certainly  favourable,  since  the  expedition  took  place.


372  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

neighbourhood  of  Aphek,  in  the  territory  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon.'  Tlie  news
which  there  met  him  must  doubtless  have  informed  him  that  the  Bedawin  had
been  won  over  in  the  interval  by  the  emissaries  of  Taharqa,  and  that  he  would
run  great  risk  by  proceeding  with  his  campaign  before  bringing  them  back  to
a.sense  of  their  duty.  On  leaving  Aphek"  he  consequently  turned  southwards,
and  plunged  into  the  heart  of  the  desert,  as  if  he  had  renounced  all  designs
upon  Egypt  for  that  season,  and  was  bent  only  on  restoring  order  in  Milukhkha
and  Magan  before  advancing  further.  For  six  weeks  lie  marched  in  short
stages,  without  other  water  than  the  supply  borne,  in  accordance  with  his
commands,  by  the  Arab  camels,  passing  through  tracts  of  desert  infested
by  strange  birds  and  double-headed  serpents ;  ^  when  he  had  at  length  dis-
persed the  bands  which  had  endeavoured  to  oppose  his  advance,  he  suddenly
turned  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  and,  following  the  dry  bed  of  the  torrent
of  Muzur,  at  length  reached  Eaphia.^  From  thence  he  did  not  select  the
usual  route,  which  follows  the  coast-line  and  leads  to  Pelusium,  a  place  which
he  may  have  feared  was  too  well  defended,  but  he  again  pressed  forward  across
the  sands  of  the  desert,  and  in  the  first  days  of  Tammuz  reached  the  cultivated
land  of  the  Delta  by  way  of  the  Wady  Tumilat.  The  frontier  garrisons,
defeated  on  the  3rd  of  Tammuz  near  Ishkhupri/'  retreated  in  good  order.
Taharqa,  hastening  to  their  succour,  disputed  the  ground  inch  by  inch,  and
engaged  the  invaders  in  several  conflicts,  two  at  least  of  which,  fought  on  the
16th  and  18th  of  Tammuz,  were  regular  pitched  battles,  but  in  every  case  the
Assyrian  tactics  triumphed  in  spite  of  the  dashing  onslaught  of  the  Eg3'ptians  ;

'  Annah,  obv,,  1.  10;  cf.  Budge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  116,  117,  and  Winckler,
Musri,  Meluhlia,  Main,  i.  p.  6.

'  The  defaced  name  of  the  country  in  which  this  Aphek  was  situated  was  read  as  Samirina  and
translated  "Samaria"  by  the  first  editor  (Boscawen",  Hietorical  Inscripiion  of  Esarhaddon,  in  the
Transactions  of  tlie  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  85,  87,  93).  This  interpretation  has  been  adopted
by  most  liistorians  (Tiele,  Balylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,  pp.  338,  350,  note  1 ;  Delitzsch,  Wo
lag  das  Paradies  ?  pp.  178, 179,  2SG,  287  ;  Delattre,  L'Asie  Occid.  dans  les  Inserip.  Assyr.,  pp.  90,  91),
who  have  seen  in  Aphek  the  town  of  this  name  belonging  to  the  western  portion  of  Manasseh.
Budge  read  it  Samina  (Hist,  of  Esarhaddon.  pp.  118,  119,  1.  16),  and  this  reading,  verified  by  Craig,
gave  Winckler  the  idea  of  identifying  Samina  or  Siraina  with  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  and  Aphelv  with
the  Aphekah  (Josh.  xv.  53)  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  (Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.  pp.  8,  9).

^  Cf.  the  winged  serpents  from  Arabia  whose  bones  were  shown  to  Herodotus  in  Heliopolis
(II.  Ixxv. ;  cf  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Such,  pp.  318,  319).

*  Winckler  (op.  cit.,  i.  p.  8,  et  seq.)  has  fully  explained  the  general  plan  of  the  campaign.  I  do
not  clearly  imderstand,  from  his  explanation,  if  he  has  noticed  that  the  enumeration  of  days  spent
on  the  march  and  of  districts  traversed  falls  naturally  into  two  divisions :  a  first  itinerary  of  30
kashhu-kakkar  (obv.,  11. 16-18,  and  rev.,  11. 1-11),  which  apparently  gives  the  stuges  of  the  journey  from
Aphek  to  Raphia;  a  second  itinerary  of  40  kashbu-kakkar,  piohahly  from  Eaplda  to  Ishkhupri.  All
this  narrative  must  remain  obscure  until  a  well-preserved  copy  of  this  part  of  the  Annah  is  discovered.

f  The  text  on  the  stele  at  Zinjirli  (Schradeb,  Inschrift  Asarliaddon's,  in  Ldsouan,  Ausgrabmigen
in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pp.  40, 41)  gives  a  total  of  fifteen  days'  march  from  Ishkhupri  to  Slemphis,  while
Pinches'  Bahyl.  Chron.,  col.  iv.  pp.  24-26.  indicates  three  battles  as  having  been  fought  on  the  3rd,
16th,  and  ISth  of  Tummuz,  and  the  taking  of  Memphis  as  occurring  on  the  22nd  of  the  same  month.
If  fifteen  days  is  precisely  accurate  for  the  length  of  march,  Esarhaddon  would  have  reached  Ishkhupri
about  the  27th  of  Sivan.


OEOANISATION  OF  EGYPT  AS  AN  ASSTEIAN  PBOVINCE.       373

Memphis  succumbed  on  the  22nd,  after  an  assault  lasting  merely  a  few  hours,
and  was  mercilessly  sacked.  The  Ethiopian  king,  with  his  army  decimated
and  exhausted,  gave  up  the  struggle,  and  beat  a  hasty  retreat  soiithwards.
The  attack  had  been  made  with  such  rapidity  that  he  had  had  no  time  to
remove  his  court  from  the  "  palace  of  the  White  Wall "  to  the  Said ;  the
queen,  therefore,  together  with  other  women  of  less  exalted  rank,  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  conqueror,  besides  the  crown-prince,  Ushana-horu,  several  younger
sons  and  daughters,  and  such  of  the  children  of  Sabaco  and  Shabitoku  as


SOUTHERN  PBOMONTOKY  AT  THE  MOUTH  OF  TUE  NAUK-EL-KELB. '

resided  at  court.  But  the  victory  had  cost  the  Assyrians  dearly,  and
the  enemy  still  appeared  to  them  so  formidable  that  Esarhaddon  prudently
abstained  from  pursuing  him  up  the  Nile  valley.  He  favourably  received
those  feudal  lords  and  petty  kings  who  presented  themselves  to  pay  him
homage,  and  confirmed  them  in  possession  of  their  fiefs,  but  he  placed  over
them  Assyrian  governors  and  imposed  new  official  names  on  their  cities ;  thus
Athribis  was  ofScialiy  called  Limir-pateshi-assur,  and  other  cities  received  the
names  Assur-makan-tishkul,  Bit-marduk-sha-assur-taru,  Shaimuk-assur.  He
further  imposed  on  them  a  heavy  annual  tribute  of  more  than  six  talents  of
gold  and  sis  hundred  talents  of  silver,  besides  robes  and  woven  stuffs,  wine,
skins,  horses,  sheep,  and  asses  ;  and  having  accomplished  this,  he  retraced  his
steps  towards  the  north-east  with  immense  booty  and  innumerable  convoys  of
prisoners."     The   complete   defeat   of  the   Ethiopian   power   filled    not   only

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  recently  brought  back  by  Lortet.

"  The  chronology  of  this  campaign  is  furniahed  by  Pinches'  Bab.   Chron.,  col.  iv.  11.  23-28  (cf.
WiNCKLEK,  Die  Babylonische  Chronih  B,  in  Schbader,  Keilim.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  281,  285) ;  the


374


TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.


Esarhaddon  himself  but  all  Asia  with  astonishment.  His  return  to  Nineveh
was  a  triumphal  progress;  travelling  through  Syria  by  short  stages,  he
paraded  his  captives  and  trophies  before  the  peoples  and  princes  who  had  so
long  relied  on  the  invincible  power  of  the  Pharaoh.    Esarhaddon's  predecessors

had  more  than  once  inscribed

■'''"■'       ^     ■■■■■■■  :-^  J     the  record  of  their  campaigns

(»i  the  rocks  of  the  Nahr-el-
Kelb,  beside  the  bas-relief
engraved  there  by  Ramses
11.,^  and  it  had  been  no  small
gratification  to  their  pride
thus  to  place  tliemselves  on
a  footing  of  equality  with
one  of  the  most  illustrious
heroes  of  the  ancient  Egyp-
tian empire.  The  footpath
which  skirts  the  southern
bank  of  tlie  river,  and  turning
to  the  south  is  contiuued
along  the  seashore,  was  bor-
dered by  the  great  stelae  in
which,  one  after  anothei',
they  bad  thought  to  im-
mortalise their  glory ;  fol-
lowing their  example,  Esar-
haddon was  in  like  manner
pleased  to  celebrate  his
prowess,  and  exhibit  the
ancient  lords  of  the  world  subjugated  to  his  will.^  He  erected  numerous
triumphal  monuments  along  his  route,  and  the  stele  which  was  discovered  at
one  of  the  gates  of  Zinjirli  is,  doubtless,  but  an  example  of  those  which  he

details  are  given  in  the  fragment  of  the  Annals  first  translated  by  G.  Smith  (TAe  Assyrian  Eponym
Canon,  pp.  141-143:  cf.  Budge,  Hist,  of  Esarhaddon,  pp.  114-123;  Wincklek,  Untersuchungen  zur
Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  97-99,  and  Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.  p.  5,  et  seq.),  as  well  :is  in  the  inscription  of
Zinjirli  (!?CHnADEi!,  Inschri/t  Asarhaddon's  Konigs  von  Assyrien,  in  XiVicSA'S,  Ausgrab.  in  Sendschirli,
vol.  i.  pp.  30-43;  cf  Wincklek,  XJntersuch.  zur  Altor.  Gesch.,  pp.  99,  100),  and  in  the  fragments  of  a
cylinder  of  Esarhaddon,  which  have  been  published  by  AViKCKLER.MZdw/ent  Forsch.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21-23.

•  For  the  stelas  of  Kamses  II.,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  27S,  note  1,  389,  427 ;  for  the  stelse
of  Assyrian  kings,  cf  ibid.,  p.  367,  and  supra,  p.  41,  note  2.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  brought  back  by  Lortet.

'  A  translation  of  this  inscription  from  the  cast  in  the  British  IMuseum  is  to  be  found  in  G.  Smith,
The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  pp.  167-1G9;  cf.  Boscawen,  The  Monuments  and  Inscriptions  on  the
Eoclcs  at  the  Nahr-el-Kelb,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  8oc.,_\oI.  vii.  pp.  345-;i49.


STELE   OP   ESARHADDON   AT   THE   NAHR-EL-KELB.'


RESULTS    OF  THE  EGYPTIAN   GAMPAIQN.


375


erected  in  other  important  cities.  He  is  represented  on  the  Zinjirli  stele  stand-
ing erect,  while  at  his  feet  are  two  kneeling  prisoners,  whom  he  is  holding  by  a
bridle  of  cord  fastened  to  metal  rings  passed  through  their  lips  ;  these  figures
represent  Baal  of  Tyre  and  Taharqa  of  Napata,  the  latter  with  the  urseus  on  his
forehead.^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  these  kings
were  safe  beyond  his  reach,  one  surrounded
by  the  sea,  the  other  above  the  cataracts,  and
the  people  were  well  aware  that  they  did
not  form  part  of  the  band  of  prisoners  which
defiled  before  their  eyes  ;  but  they  were  accus-
tomed to  the  vain  and  extravagant  boastings
of  their  conquerors,  and  these  very  exaggera-
tions enabled  tliem  to  understand  more  fully
the  extent  of  the  victory.  Esarhaddon
thenceforward  styled  himself  King  of  Egypt,
King  of  the  Kings  of  Egypt,  of  the  Said
and  of  Kush,^  so  great  was  his  pride  at
having  trampled  underfoot  the  land  of  the
Delta.  And,  in  fact,  Egypt  had,  for  a
century,  been  the  only  one  of  the  ancient
Eastern  states  which  had  always  eluded
the  grasp  of  Assyria.  The  Elamites  had
endured  disastrous  defeats,  which  had  cost
them  some  of  their  provinces  ;  the  Urartians
had  been  driven  back  into  their  mountains,
and  no  longer  attempted  to  emerge  from
them ;  Babylon  had  nearly  been  annihilated
in  her  struggles  for  independence ;  while  the
Khati,  the  Phoenicians,  Damascus,  and  Israel  had  been  absorbed  one  after  another
in  the  gradual  extension  of  Ninevite  supremacy.  Egypt,  although  she  had  had
a  hand  in  all  their  wars  and  revolutions,  had  never  herself  paid  the  penalty  of

'  Inscription  on  one  of  the  tiles  of  tlie  palace  of  Esarhaddon  at  Nimroud,  published  in  Latard,
Inter,  in  the  Cuneiform  Character,  pi.  19  a  •  cf.  Oppert,  Expedition  de  M^sopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  334  ;
Menant,  Annates  des  rois  d'Assyrie,  p.  240;  Sohrader,  Keilins.  Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  150-15:!.
Contrary  to  the  generally  admitted  opinion,  Wiiioliler  considers  that,  by  Muzur,  Esarhaddon
designates  in  this  inscription  Arabia,  not  Egypt  {Musri,  Meluhha,  Main,  i.  pp.  13,  14).

'  H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Lis.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  48,  No.  5;  ef.  Oppert,  Mgmoire  snr  les  rapports  de
I'Egypte  et  de  I'Assyrie  dans  V Antiquity,  pp.  40-43,  where  the  name  Paturisi  of  the  Assyrian  text  is
for  the  first  time  compared  with  the  biblical  Pathros  {Isa.  xi.  11 ;  Jer.  xliv.  1,  15;  Ezek.  xxx.  14),  and
interpreted,  after  E.  de  Rouge',  by  the  Egyptian  Pa-to-risi,  the  land  of  the  South,  the  Thebaid,  tliu
present  Said.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original,  which  is  preserved  in  tlie  Berlin
Museum;  cf.  Luschan,  Ausgrahungen  in  Sendschirli,  vol.  i.  pi.  i.


STELE  OP    ZINJIKU.'


376  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

her  intrigues,  and  even  when  she  had  sometimes  risked  her  troops  on  the
battle-fields  of  Palestine,  her  disasters  had  not  cost  her  more  than  the  loss  of
a  certain  number  of  men :  having  once  retired  to  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  no  one
had  dared  to  follow,  and  the  idea  had  gained  credence  among  her  enemies
as  well  as  among  her  friends  that  Egypt  was  effectually  protected  by  the
desert  from  every  attack.  The  victory  of  Esarhaddon  proved  that  she  was  no
more  invulnerable  than  the  other  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  that  before  a
bold  advance  the  obstacles,  placed  by  nature  in  the  path  of  an  invader,  dis-
appeared; the  protecting  desert  had  been  crossed,  the  archers  and  chariots
of  Egypt  had  fled  before  the  Assyrian  cavalry  and  pike  men,  her  cities  had
endured  the  ignominy  and  misery  of  being  taken  by  storm,  and  the  wives  and
daughters  of  her  Pharaohs  had  been  carried  off  into  servitude  in  common  with
the  numerous  princesses  of  Elam  and  Syria  of  that  day.  Esarhaddon  filled  his
palaces  with  furniture  and  woven  stuffs,  with  vases  of  precious  metal  and
sculptured  ivories,  with  glass  ornaments  and  statuettes  looted  from  Memphis :
his  workers  in  marble  took  inspiration  from  the  sphinxes  of  Egypt  to  modify
the  winged,  human-headed  lions  upon  which  the  columns  of  their  palaces
rested,  and  the  plans  of  his  architects  became  more  comprehensive  at  the  mere
announcement  of  such  a  vast  amount  of  spoil.  The  palace  they  had  begun  to
build  at  Nineveh,  on  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  edifice,  already  surpassed  all
previous  architectural  efforts.  The  alabaster  quarries  of  the  Assyrian  mountains
and  the  forests  of  Phcenicia  had  alike  been  put  under  contribution  to  face  the
walls  of  its  state  apartments;  twenty-two  chiefs  of  the  country  of  the  Khati,
of  Phcenicia,  and  of  the  Mediterranean  littoral — among  them  the  Greek  kings
of  Cyprus — had  vied  with  one  auother  in  supplying  Esarhaddon  with  great
beams  of  pine,  cedar,  and  cypress  for  its  construction.^  The  ceilings  were  of
cedar  supported  by  pillars  of  cypress-wood  encircled  by  silver  and  iron  ;  stone
lions  and  bulls  stood  on  either  side  of  the  gates,  and  the  doors  were  made  of
cedar  and  cypress,  incrusted  or  overlaid  with  iron,  silver,  and  ivory.-  The
treasures  of  Egypt  enabled  Esarhaddon  to  complete  this  palace  and  begin
a  new  one  at  Calah,  where  the  buildings  erected  somewhat  hurriedly  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.  had  already  fallen  into  ruin.  Some  of  the  slabs  on  which
the  latter  conqueror  had  engraved  his  Annals,  and  recounted  the  principal
episodes  of  his  campaigns,  were  removed  and  transferred  to  the  site  selected  by
Esarhaddon,  and  one  of  the  surfaces  of  each  was  pared  down  in  order  to  receive

'  Inscriptions  on  Cylinders  A,  C,  col.  v.  11.  11-26;  cf.  Abel,  Die  Inschrift  der  Prismen  A  und  C,
in  ScHRADER,  Keilins.  Bibliothelt,  vol.  ii.  jjp.  136-187.  The  list  of  names  of  these  kings  is  found  in
the  Inscription  on  the  Broken  Cylinder,  col.  v.  11.  13-26;  cf.  Budge,  The  History  of  Esarhaddon.
pp.  100-103.

^  For  the  inscriptions  relating  to  works  executed  in  the  palace  of  Nineveh,  cf.  Meissnee  and
EosT,  Die  Bauimchriften  Asarhaddons,  in  the  BeitrUge  sur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  196-205, 210-215.


THE  INTRIGUES   OF  RIVAL    CLAIMANTS   TO    THE   THRONE.       .177


new  pictures  and  fresh  inscriptions.  They  had,  however,  hardly  been  placed
in  the  stonemason's  hands  when  the  work  was  interrupted.^  It  may  have  been
that  EsarhaddoQ  had  to  suspend  all  his  operations  while  putting  down  some
conspiracy.  At  any  rate,  we  know  that  in  669  B.C.  many  high  personages  of  his
court  were  seized  and  executed.^  The  question  of  the  succession  to  the  throne
was  still  undecided ;  Sinidinabal,
the  son  whom  Esarhaddon  had
previously  designated  as  his  heir
presumptive,  was  dead,^  and  the
people  feared  lest  he  should  choose
from  among  his  other  sons  some
prince  who  had  not  their  interests
at  heart.  The  king's  affection  for
Babylon  had  certainly  aroused
jealousy  and  anxiety  among  his
Assyrian  subjects,  and  perhap>
some  further  tokens  of  pre-
ference made  them  uneasy
lest  he  should  select  Sha-
mash-shumukin,^  one  of  his
children  who  manifested  the
same  tendencies,  and  who
was,  moreover,  the  son  of  a
Babylonian  wife.^  Most  of
the  nobles  who  had  been  led
to  join  tbe  conspiracy  paid
for  their  indiscretion  with  their  heads,  but  their  opposition  gave  the  sovereign

'  The  date  of  the  building  of  the  palace  at  Calah  is  furnished  by  tlie  inscriptions,  in  which  Esar-
haddon assumes  the  title  of  King  of  Egypt ;  cf.  JIeissn'er  and  EosT,  Die  Bouimchri/teyi  Amrhaddom,
in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie.  vol.  iii.  pp.  191-194,  206,  207.

-  Pinclies'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iv.  1.  29  ;  of  Winckler,  Bahylonisclie  Cltronik  B,  in  Schrader,
Keil.  Bill,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284,  285.

^  This  personage  was  at  first  identified  with  Assur-bani-pal  by  G.  Smith  (Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,
p.  324),  and  the  identification  was  accepted  by  many  Assyriologists,  but  Knudtzon  (Assyr.
Gehete  an  den  Sonnengott,  Xo.  107,  pp.  218-221),  in  publishing  the  oracle  relating  fo  him,  has  shown
that  f^inidinabal  was  i)robably  a  son  of  Esarhaddon,  who  died  before  his  father.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  alabaster  sculpture  reproduced  by  Latard,  The  Monuments  of
Nineveh,  vol.  i.  pi.  95,  1.

'  The  name  of  this  prince,  which  has  been  read  very  differently  at  different  times,  was  for  the
first  time  accurately  deciphered  by  Fr.  Delitzsch  (cf.  Schrader,  Zur  Kritik  der  historischen  Angahen
des  Alexander  Polyhielor  und  Abydenus,  in  the  Berichte  of  the  Academy  of  Saxony,  18S0,  p.  2,  note  3) ;
it  was  transcribed  2ao(^8ol;'xl^'os  and  Sammughes  by  the  chronologists  of  the  Hellenistic  period.  Tlie
history  of  the  decipherment,  and  of  the  interpretation  given  to  these  diverse  forms,  is  very  clearly
set  forth  in  Lehmasn,  Schamaechschuynuliin,  pp.  6-16.

*  Shamash-shumukin  speaks  of  Babylon  as  "  the  place  where  his  mother  was  born."      Lehmanu


ASSYRIAN   SPHINX  IN   EGYPTIAN   STYLE   SUPPORTING
THE  BASE   OP  A  COLUMN.*


378  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

cause  for  reflectiou,  and  decided  him  to  modify  his  schemes.  Couviuced  that
it  was  impossible  to  unite  Babylon  and  Nineveh  permanently  under  the  same
ruler,  he  reluctantly  decided  to  divide  his  kingdom  into  two  parts — Assyria,  the
strongest  portion,  falling  naturally  to  his  eldest  son,  Assur-bani-pal,  while
Babylonia  was  assigned  to  Shamash-shumukiu,  on  condition  of  his  paying
homao'e  to  his  brother  as  suzerain.^  The  best  method  to  ensure  his  wishes  beiner
carried  into  eflect  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  their  fulfilment  while  he  was
still  alive ;  and  rebellions  which  broke  out  about  this  time  beyond  the  isthmus
afforded  a  good  opportunity  for  so  doing.

Egypt  was  at  this  period  divided  into  twenty  states  of  various  dimensions,
very  nearly  the  same  as  had  existed  a  century  before,  when  Pioukhi  had,  for
the  first  time,  brought  the  whole  country  under  Ethiopian  rule.^  In  the  south,
the  extensive  Thebau  province  occupied  both  sides  of  the  river  from  Assuan
to  Thinis  and  Khemmis.  It  was  nominally  governed  by  Amenertas  or  her
daughter,  Shapenuapit,  but  the  administration  was,  as  usual,  entrusted  to  a
member  of  the  priestly  college,  at  that  time  to  Montumihait,  Count  of  Thebes,
and  fourth  prophet  of  Amon.^  The  four  principalities  of  Thinis,  Siut,
Hermopolis,  and  Heracleopolis  separated  it  from  the  small  kingdom  of
Memphis  and  Sais,  and  each  of  the  regions  of  the  Delta  was  divided  into  one
or  two  fiefs,  according  to  the  number  and  importance  of  the  towns  it  contained.
In  the  south,  Thebes  was  too  directly  under  the  influence  of  Ethiopia  to  be
able  to  exercise  an  independent  policy  with  regard  to  the  rest  of  the  country.
In  the  north,  two  families  contested  the  supremacy  more  or  less  openly.  One
of  them,  whose  hereditary  domains  included  the  Arabian,  and  parts  of  the

(Schamaschschumuldn,  part  2,  pp.  6,  7,  :!3,  34)  traualates  this  "the  place  where  my  mother  gave  me
birth"  (cf.  Jensen-,  Inschrifteii  Schamaschschiimuhin's,  in  Schbadek,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  198, 199);
I  have  adopted  the  interpretation  given  by  Wincklek,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  417.  Lehmann  had,
however,  proved  convincingly  that  Shamash-shumukiu  had  a  Babylonian  mother,  viz.  the  queen
whose  death  is  noticed  in  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle  (cf.  supra,  p.  371),  and  that  he  was  born
in  Babylon  (Schamasclischumulcin,  part  1,  pp.  30-32).

'  Winckler  considers  that  Assur-bani-pal  was  the  leader  of  the  conspiracy,  and  that  he  obliged
his  father  to  recognise  him  as  heir  to  the  crown  of  Assyria  {Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  415-418),
iind  to  associate  him  on  the  throne.

^  Cf.  supra,  pp.  lUO-166.  Tlie  list  of  the  principalities  in  the  time  of  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-
bani-pal  is  found  on  the  cylinders  of  Assur-bani-pal  (G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  20-22),
and  was  first  commeuted  on  by  Oppert  (Mgmoire  sur  les  rapports  de  I'Egypte  et  de  VAssyrie,  pp.  89-
1 14),  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  E.  de  Rouge'.  It  has  been  studied  several  times  since  then  by
Haigh  (JTo  the  Editor,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1868,  pp.  82,  83  ;  Assyro-jEgyptiaca,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1871,
pp.  112-117),  by  Brugsch  (Bemerhungen  zu  den  AssyT0-.3Sgyptiaca,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1872,  pp.
29,  30;  Geseli.  Mgyptens,  pp.  720-722),  by  Wiedemann  (Mgyptische  Gesch.,  pp.  591,  592),  and  by
Steindorft"  {Die  Keilschriftliche  Wiedergabe  dgyptischer  Eigennamen,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie,
vol.  i.  pp.  344-361,  593-612).

'  The  Assyrian  name  of  this  personage,  spelt  first  Mantimiankhi  by  Oppert  {op.  cit.,  p.  Ill),  has
been  more  accurately  transcribed  Mantimikhi  by  Steindorfl'  (op.  cit,  vol.  i.  pp.  354-356).  The
identification  with  the  Montumihait  of  the  Theban  documents,  proposed  by  E.  de  Eouge  {Etude  sur
quelques  monuments  du  rcgne  de  Tahraka,  in  the  Melanges  d'Arch€ol.  Egypt,  et  Assyr.,  vol.  i.  p.  20),
is  now  generally  adopted.


THE  REVOLT   OF  EGYPT.  379

surrounding  nomes,  was  then  represented  by  a  certain  Pakruru.^  He  had  united
under  his  banner  the  numerous  petty  chiefs  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  Delta,  the
heirs  of  the  ancient  dynasties  of  Tanis  and  Bubastis,  and  his  energy  or  ability
must  have  made  a  good  impression  on  the  minds  of  his  contemporaries,  for  they
handed  down  his  memory  to  their  successors,  who  soon  metamorphosed  him
into  a  popular  legendary  hero,  famed  both  for  his  valour  and  wisdom.  The
nobles  of  the  western  nomes  acknowledged  as  their  overlords  the  regents  of
Sais,  the  descendants  of  that  Bocchoris  who  had  for  a  short  while  brought  the
whole  valley  of  the  Nile  under  his  sway.  Sabaco,  having  put  his  rival  to
death,  had  installed  in  his  hereditary  domains  an  Ethiopian  named  Ammeris,
but  this  Ammeris  had  disappeared  from  the  scene  about  the  same  time  as  his
patron,  in  704  B.C.,  and  after  him  three  princes  at  least  had  succeeded  to  the
throne,  namely,  Stephinates,  Nekhepsos,  and  Necho.^  Stephinates  bad  died  about
680  B.C.,  without  accomjalishing  anything  which  was  worth  recording.  Nekhepsos
had  had  no  greater  opportunities  of  distinguishing  himself  than  had  fallen  to
the  lot  of  his  father,  and  yet  legends  grew  up  round  his  name  as  round  that
of  Pakruru :  he  was  reputed  to  have  been  a  great  soothsayer,  astrologist,  and
magician,  and  medical  treatises  were  ascribed  to  him,  and  almanacs  much
esteemed  by  the  superstitious  in  the  Eoman  period.''  Necho  had  already
occupied  the  throne  for  three  or  four  years  when  the  invasion  of  670  B.C.
delivered  him  from  the  Ethiopian  supremacy.  He  is  represented  as  beino-
brave,  energetic,  and  enterprising,  ready  to  hazard  everything  in  order  to  attain
the  object  towards  which  the  ambition  of  his  ancestors  had  been  tending  for  a
century  past,  namely,  to  restore  unity  to  the  ancient  kingdom  under  the  rule

'  Pakruru  plays  the  principal  part  in  the  "  Adventure  of  a  Breastplate  "  discovered  and
published  by  Krall  (^Ein  neuer  Hiatorischer  Bomaii  in  Demotischer  Scfiri/t,  in  the  Mitiheilungen  aus
(ier  Samndungen  der  Papyrus  Erzherzog  Painer,  vol.  iii.  pp.  19-80)  ;  for  the  interpretation  to  be  given
to  tlie  incidents  of  the  romance,  and  the  date  to  be  assigned  to  its  action,  cf  Maspeso,  Un  Nouveau
Conte  Egyptien,  in  the  Journal  des  Savants,  1897,  pp.  619-6.59,  717-731.

-  The  lists  of  Eusebius  give  the  series  Ammeres,  Stephinates,  Nekhepsos,  Necho  I.  (Manetho.
in  MtJLi.EK-DiDOT,  Fragmenta  Huloricorum  Grsecorum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  593,  594),  but  Lepsius  dis-
placed Ammeres  and  identified  -him  with  the  queen  Amenertas  (Konigsbuch,  p.  88  ;  cf.  Wiedemann,
^gyptische  Gesch.,  p.  590) ;  others  have  thought  to  recognise  in  him  Miamun  Pionkbi,  or  Tanuatamanu.
the  successor  of  Taharqa  (Lauth,  Die  Piarichi-Stele,  in  the  Sitztmgsherichte  of  the  Academy  of
Sciences  at  Munich,  1SG9,  vol.  i.  pp.  29-32,  and  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Bavaria,  vol.  i.  p.  307,  et  seq.  ;
Alls  ^gypten's  Vorzeit,  pp.  442,  443 ;  Ed.  Meyer.  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  478).  He  must,
however,  be  left  in  this  place  in  the  list  (Winckler,  Untersuch.  zur  AUorient.  Gesch.,  p.  107,  note  1),
and  we  may  perhaps  consider  him  as  the  founder  of  the  XXVI"'  dynasty  (Sch^feb,  Eiii  Portrait
PsammetichsL,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  xxxiii.  pp.  117, 118).  If  the  number  of  seoen  years  for  the  reign
of  Stephinates  is  adopted,  we  must  suppose  either  that  Manetho  passed  over  the  name  of  a  prince  at  the
beginning  of  the  XXVI"'  dynasty,  or  that  Ammeris  was  only  enthroned  at  Memphis  after  the  death
of  Sabaco;  but  the  lists  of  the  Syncellus  and  of  Sothis  assign  27  years  to  the  reign  of  Stephinates.

'  The  astrological  works  of  Nekhepsos  are  cited,  among  others,  by  Pliny,  H.  Nat.,  II.  xxi.,  VIII.
xlix.,  I.,  and  it  is  probably  he  wliom  a  Greek  papyrus  of  the  Salt  Collection  mentioas  under  the  name
of  Nekheus.  Wiedemann  objected  to  the  identification  of  the  astrologer  with  the  King  Nekhepsos
(Gesch.  ^gyptens  von  Psammitich  I.  bis  auf  Alexander  den  Grossen,  pp.  156,  157,  and  JSgyptisclie
Gesch.,  pp.  600,  601),  which  Lauth  vigorously  insisted  on  {Konig  Nechepsos.  Pelosiris  uud  die  Tria-
contueteris,  in  the  Sitzungsberichte  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Munich,  1875,  vol.  ii.).


380  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

of  the  house  of  Sais.  The  extent  of  his  realm,  and,  above  all,  the  possession
of  Memphis,  gave  him  a  real  superiority,  and  Esarhaddon  did  not  hesitate
to  esteem  him  above  his  competitors ;  the  Ninevite  scribes  placed  him  in  the
first  rank,  and  he  heads  the  list  of  the  Egyptian  vassals.  He  soon  had  an
opportunity  of  proving  his  devotion  to  his  foreign  suzerain.  Taharqa  did
not  quietly  accept  his  defeat,  and  Egypt  looked  to  him  to  be  revenged  on
the  Assyrian  as  soon  as  he  should  have  reorganised  his  army.  He  once  more,
accordingly,  took  the  field  in  the  middle  of  669  B.C. ;  the  barons  of  the  Said
rallied  to  his  standard  without  hesitation,  and  he  soon  re-entered  the  "  White
"\^  all,"  but  there  his  advance  was  arrested.  Necbo  and  the  neighbouring  chiefs
of  the  Delta,  held  in  check  by  the  presence  of  Semitic  garrisons,  did  not  venture
to  proclaim  themselves  on  his  side,  and  awaited  under  arms  the  arrival  of
Assyrian  reinforcements.^  Esarhaddon,  in  spite  of  failing  health,  assumed
command  of  the  troops,  and  before  leaving  home  carried  out  the  project  to
which  the  conspiracy  of  the  preceding  year  had  given  rise ;  he  assigned  the
government  of  Babylon  to  Shamash-shumukin,  and  solemnly  designated
Assur-bani-pal  as  the  heir  to  Assyria  proper,  and  to  the  suzerainty  over  the
whole  empire.^  On  the  12th  of  lyyar,  668  B.C.,  on  the  day  of  the  feast  of  Gula,
he  presented  their  new  lord  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  Assyria,  both  small  and
great,  who  had  assembled  to  be  present  at  the  ceremony,  which  ended  in  the
installation  of  the  prince  in  the  palace  of  Bitriduti,*  reserved  for  the  heirs-
apparent.  A  few  weeks  later  Esarhaddon  set  out  for  Egypt,  but  his  malady
became  more  serious  on  the  journey,  and  he  died  on  the  10th  of  Arakhsamna,  in
the  twelfth  year  of  his  reign.^     When  we  endeavour  to  conjure  up  his  image

'  Atinals  of  Assur-bani-pal.  col.  i.  11.  52-63;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  5-17, 36,  37;
Jensen,  Inschriften  Aschurhanipal's,  iu  Schradeb,  Keil.  Bihh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  15S,  159.  The  first  Egyptian
campaign  of  Assur-bani-pal  is  also  the  last  campaign  of  Esarhaddon,  and  Assur-bani-pal  appropriated
all  the  earlier  incidents  of  it,  some  of  which  belong  to  the  sole  reign  of  his  father,  and  some  to  the
few  weeks  in  which  he  shared  the  throne  with  him ;  for  this,  cf.  Winckleb,  Altorieut.  Forseh.,  vol.  i.
pp.  477-181.

"  The  association  of  Assur-bani-pal  with  his  father  on  the  throne  was  pointed  out  by  G.  Smith,
(^Egyptian  Campaigns  of  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-bani-pal,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1868,  pp.  94,  95 ;
Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  p.  14;  Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  416,  417),  who  thought  he  could  fix  the  date
about  673  B.C.,  three  or  four  years  before  the  death  of  Esarhaddon  ^Assyrian  Eponym  Canoti
pp.  163-165).  Tiele  showed  that  Assur-bani-pal  was  then  only  made  viceroy,  and  assigned  his
association  in  the  sovereignty  to  the  year  671  or  670  B.C.,  about  the  time  of  the  second  Egyptian
campaign  (Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  351,  369-371),  while  Hommel  brought  it  down  to  669  (_Gesch.  Bab.
und  Ass.,  p.  694).  "Winckler  has,  with  much  reason,  placed  the  date  in  668  B.C.  {Gescli.  Babyloniens
und  .Sgypteni,  p.  272,  and  Altorient.  Forseh.,  vol.  i.  pp.  415-418).  The  Assyrian  documents  do  not
mention  the  coronation  of  Shamash-shumuMn,  for  Assur-baui-pal  afterwards  afl'ected  to  consider  his
brother  a  mere  viceroy,  appointed  by  himself  after  the  death  of  his  father  Esarhaddon  ;  but  an
examination  of  all  the  circumstances  has  shown  that  the  enthronement  of  Shamash-shumukin  at
Babylon  was  on  a  par  with  that  of  Assur-bani-pal  at  Nineveh,  and  that  both  osved  their  elevation  to
their  father  (E.  Meyer,  Gesch.  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  477;  Lehmann,  Schamaschschumukin,  p.  33,
et  seq.;  AVinckler,  Gesch.  Bah.  und  Ass.,  pp.  133,  134,  272).
•  '  Annals  of  Assur-bani-pal,  col.  i.  11.  11-24.

'  Finches'  Babylonian   Chronicle,   col.   iv.  30,   31 ;    cf.  Wisckleb,   Bahylonische   Chronik  B,  iu


ACCESSION   OF  ASSUR-BANI-PAL   AND   SHAMASH-SHOMUEIN.      381

before  us,  we  fancy  we  are  right  in  surmising  that  he  was  not  cast  in  the
ordinary  mould  of  Assyrian  monarchs.  The  history  of  his  campaigns  shows  that
he  was  as  active  and  resolute  as  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.,  but  he
did  not  add  to  these  good  qualities  their  inflexible  harshness  towards  their
subjects,  nor  their  brutal  treatment  of  conquered  foes.  Circumstances  in  which
they  would  have  shown  themselves  merciless,  he  seized  upon  as  occasions  for
clemency,  and  if  massacres  and  executions  are  recorded  among  the  events  of  his
reign,  at  least  he  does  not  class  them  among  the  most  important :  the  records
of  his  wars  do  not  continually  speak  of  rebels  flayed  alive,  kings  impaled  before
the  gates  of  their  cities,  and  whole  populations  decimated  by  fire  and  sword.
Of  all  the  Assyrian  conquerors,  he  is  almost  the  only  one  for  whom  the  historian
can  feel  any  regard,  or  from  the  study  of  whose  reign  he  passes  on  with
regret  to  pursue  that  of  others  in  due  course.

As  soon  as  Esarhaddon  had  passed  away,  the  separation  of  the  two  parts  of
the  empire  which  he  had  planned  was  effected  almost  automatically  :  Assur-
bani-pal  proclaimed  himself  King  of  Assyria,  and  Shamash-shumukin,  in  like
manner,  King  of  Babylon.  One  fact,  which  seems  insignificant  enough  to  us
when  we  read  it  in  the  Annals,  but  was  decisive  in  the  eyes  of  their  contem-
poraries, sanctioned  the  transformation  thus  accomplished  :  Bel  and  the  gods
of  Accad  quitted  Assur  in  the  month  of  lyyar  and  returned  to  their  resting-
place  in  Babylon.  The  restoration  of  the  images  to  their  own  country  became
necessary  as  soon  as  it  was  decided  to  have  a  king  in  Karduuiash,  even  though
he  were  an  Assyrian.  To  enable  him  to  exercise  legitimate  authority,  he  must
have  celebrated  the  rites  and  "  taken  the  hands  of  Bel,"  but  it  was  a  question
whether  this  obligation  could  be  fulfilled  if  Bel  remained  a  prisoner  in  the  neigh-
bouring capital.  Assur-bani-pal  believed  for  a  moment  that  this  difficulty  could
be  obviated,  and  consulted  Shamash  on  this  delicate  question :  "Shamash-shumu-
kin, the  son  of  Esarhaddon,  the  King  of  Assyria,  can  he  in  this  year  take  the  hands
of  Bel,  the  mighty  lord  Marduk,  in  this  very  city,  and  then  go  to  Babylon  with
the  favour  of  Bel !  If  that  would  be  pleasing  to  thy  great  divinity  and  to  the
mighty  lord  Marduk,  thy  great  divinity  must  know  it."  ^  The  reply  was  not
favourable,  and  Shamash  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  Bel  could  not  act  as  a
sovereign  lord  while  still  languishing  in  prison  in  a  city  which  was  not  his  own.
Assur-bani-pal  had  to  resign  himself  to  the  release  of  his  captive,  and  he  did  it

SoHRADER,  Kdl.  Bihl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284.  285.     Ai-akhsamna  corresponds  to  the  .Jewish  Marcheswan,  and
to  our  month  of  May.

'  Knidtzon",  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  267-269.  Kaudtzon  has  shown  that  the
city  mentioned  in  the  text  was  Assur ;  the  consultation  of  the  oracle  must,  therefore,  be  interpreted
in  the  fashion  I  have  indicated,  and  the  obedience  accorded  by  Assur-bani-pal  to  Shamash,  in  spite
of  liis  instinctive  objection  to  this  impolitic  proceeding,  shows  hosv  powerfid  the  oracles  were  at
this  epoch.


382


TEE  POWER    OF  ASSTEIA   AT  ITS   ZENITH.


with  a  good  grace.'  He  proceeded  in  pomp  to  the  temple  of  Assur,  where  Marduk
was  shut  up,  and  humbly  entreated  the  exiled  deity  to  vouchsafe  to  return  to
his  own  country.  "  Think  on  Babylon,  which  thou  didst  bring  to  nought  in
the  rage  of  thy  heart,  and  turn  thy  face  towards  the  temple  of  E-sagilla,  the
lofty  seat  of  thy  divinity  !  Eevisit  thy  city  which  thou  hast  forsaken  to
inhabit  a  place  which  is  not  worthy  of  thee,  and  do  thou  thyself,  0  Marduk,

lord  of  the  gods,  give  the  command  to
return  to  Babylon."  ^  The  statue  set  out
on  its  journey,  and  was  escorted  by  a
solemn  procession  headed  by  the  two
kings.*  The  gods,  by  one  accord,  came
forth  from  their  cities  and  saluted  the
traveller  as  he  passed  by — Beltis  of
Agade,  Nebo  of  Borsippa,  Shamash  of
Sippara,  and  Nirgal.  At  length  he
reached  his  beloved  city,  and  entered
E-sagilla  in  the  midst  of  an  immense
tlirong  of  people.  The  kings  headed  the
cortege,  and  the  delighted  multitude
joined  their  two  names  with  that  of  the
god  in  their  acclamations :  it  was  a  day
never  to  be  forgotten.  Assur-bani-pal,
in  his  capacity  of  suzerain,  opened  the
sacred  edifice,  and  then  presented  his
brother,  who  thereupon  "  took  the  hands
of  Bel."  A  quarter  of  a  century  had
not  passed  since  the  victorious  Sennacherib  had,  as  he  thought,  inflicted  a
mortal  blow  on  the  one  power  which  stood  in  the  way  of  Assyria's  supremacy  in
Western  Asia ;  already,  in  spite  of  his  efforts,  the  city  had  sprung  up  from
its  ruins  as  vigorous  as  ever,  and  his  son  and  grandsons  had  felt  themselves
irresistibly   drawn   to  resuscitate  that   which  their  ancestors   had  desired    to


ASSUR-BANI-PAL    AS   A    BEARER   OF    OFFERINGS.*


'  Pinches^  Babylonian  Chron.,  col.  iv.  34-30 ;  cf.  Winckler,  Bahyl.  Clironilc  B,  in  Schrader,  Keil
Bihl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  284,  285.  For  the  significance  of  the  ceremony  in  which  the  king  took  the  hands
of  Bel,  cf.  Daren  of  Civilization,  p.  705 :  for  the  return  of  the  gods  and  the  date  of  the  event,  cf.
Lehmans,  Schamaschschumukin,  i.  p.  43  i.,  38,  et  seq.

'  Tablet  K  2050-K  2694  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  ii.  11.  26-33.  iu  Lehmann,  op.  cit.,  pi.  sxxvii.,
and  ii.  pp.  24-27.

'  The  substance  of  this  account  is  taken  from  Tablet  K  3050-K  2694,  whose  value  has  bfieu  first
shown  by  Lehmann,  op.  cit.,  i.  pp.  43-5ti,  where  all  the  questions  touching  the  accession  of  Shamash-
shumukin  have  been  discussed  at  length.  For  the  relative  position  of  the  two  sovereigns,  cf.,  lastly,
AViNCKLER,  AUurient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  415-418.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  in  Lehmann,  Schamaschschumukin,  L,  Frontispiece.


SEPARATION   OF   THE   TWO   KINGDOMS,   AND    WAR    WITH  KIRBIT.  ;>83


annihilate  irrevocably.     Babylon  had  rebuilt  her  palaces,  her  walls,  and  her

temples ;  she  had  received  back  her  gods  without  a  war,  and  almost  without

any  agitation,  by  the  mere  force  of  the  prestige  she  exercised  over  all  around

her,  and  even  over  her  conquerors.      As  a  matter  of  fact,  she  had  not  regained

her  former  position,  and  was  still  depressed  and  enfeebled  by  the  blow  which  had

laid  her  low ;  in  addition  to  this,  her  king  was  an  Assyrian,  and  a  vassal  of

Assyria,^  but  nevertheless  he  was  her  own  king,

and  hers  alone.    Her  independence  was  already

half  regained.    Shamash-shumukin  established

his  court  at  Babylon,  and  applied  himself  from

the  outset  to  restore,  as  far  as  he  was  able,

the  material  and  moral  forces  of  his  kingdom.

Assur-bani-pal,    on    his    side,    met    with    no

opposition   from    his    subjects,   but   prudence

cautioned    him    not   to   estrange   them ;    the

troubles  of  the  preceding  year  were  perhaps

not  so  completely  suppressed   as   to   prevent

the  chiefs  who  had  escaped  punishment  from

being  encouraged  by  the  change  of  sovereign

to  renew  their  intrigues.     The  king,  therefore,

remained  in  Nineveh  to  inaugurate  his  rule,

and  confided    to    his   generals  the  charge  of

conducting   the   expeditions  which   had   been

undertaken  during  his  father's  lifetime.^     One

of  these  undertakings  was  unimportant.  Tandai

of  Kirbit,  a  petty  chief,  was  continually  engaged

in  harassing  the  inhabitants  of  Yamutbal ;  he

bore  down  upon  them  every  year,  and,  after  dealing  a  blow,  retreated  to  his

hiding-place  in  the  mountains.     He  was  attacked  in  his  stronghold,  and  carried

'  Finches'  Babylonian  Chron.,.  co!.  iv.  1.  38  ;  cf.  Winckleb,  BaJ).  Chron.  B,  in  Schradek,  Keilin-
schri/tliche  Bibliothel:  ii.  pp.  284,  285.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  pliotograpU  in  Lehmann,  SchamaschschumuMn,  i.,  Frontispiece.

'  The  documents  relating  to  tlie  reign  of  Aesur-bani-pal  are  so  numerous  that  I  cannot  here  give
the  bibliography  of  even  the  chief  ones.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  indicating  tlie  two  collections  in
which  the  most  important  of  those  which  relate  to  the  actual  history  are  brought  together  and
partially  classified:  G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurhanipal,  in  Svo,  1871,  and  Samuel  Alden  .Smith,
Die  KeiUchri/ttexte  Amrianipals,  KSnigs  von  Assyrien  (678-62G  v.  Chr.)  nach  dcm  selbtl  in  London
cnpierlen  Grundtext  mit  Transcription,  Uebersetzimg,  Kommentar  und  vollstdndirjcm  Olossar,  in  8vo,
Leipzig,  1887-1889,  besides  the  selected  texts  transcribed  and  translated  by  Jensen,  Inschriften
AschurbanipaVs,  in  Sohrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  152-269.  In  these  documents  the  facts  are
arranged  in  geographical  order,  not  by  the  dates  of  the  successive  expeditions,  and  the  chronological
order  of  the  campaigns  is  all  the  more  difficult  to  determine  accurately,  as  Pinches'  Babylonian
Chronicle  fails  us  after  tlie  beginning  of  this  reign,  immediately  alter  the  mention  of  tlie  above-
mentioned  war  witli  Kirbit.    Even  the  Eponym  Canon  is  only  accurate  down  to  60(5  B.C. ;  in  that  year


SHAMASH-SHUMUKIN    AS   A    BEAKER
OF  OFFEltlNGS."


384  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

away  captive  with  all  his  people  into  Egypt,  at  the  furthest  extremity  of  the
empire,  to  serve  in  Assyrian  garrisons  in  the  midst  of  the  fellaliin.^

Meanwhile,  the  army  which  EsarhadJon  had  been  leading  against  Taharqa
pursued  its  course  under  command  of  the  Tartan.'-  Syria  received  it  submis-
sively, and  the  twenty-two  kings  who  still  possessed  a  shadow  of  autonomy  in
the  country  sent  assurances  of  their  devotion  to  the  new  monarch:  even
Yakinlu,  King  of  Arvad,  who  had  aroused  suspicion  by  frequent  acts  of  insub-
ordination,* thought  twice  before  rebelling  against  his  terrible  suzerain,  and
joined  tlie  rest  in  paying  both  homage  and  tribute.  Cyprus  and  also  Phoenicia
remained  faithful  to  their  allegiance,  and,  what  was  of  still  more  consequence,
the  states  which  lay  nearest  to  Egypt — Philistia,  Judah,  Moab,  and  Ammou  ;
the  Assyrians  were  thus  able  to  push  forward  to  the  Delta  without  losing
time  in  repressing  rebellious  along  their  route.  The  Ethiopians  had  entrenched
themselves  at  Karbaniti ; '  they  were,  however,  once  more  defeated,  and  left

there  is  a  break,  and  although  wo  possess  for  the  succeeding  period  more  than  forty  names  of
eponyms,  their  classification  is  not  at  present  absolutely  certain  (G.  Smith,  History  of  Aasurbanipal,
pp.  320,  321,  and  the  Astyrinn  Eponym  Canon,  pp.  67-71).  The  first  to  succeed  in  disentangling  the
chaos  of  dates  and  criticise  the  documents  was  Tiele,  Bab.-aasyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  36(j-370,  386-389,  399.
400,  and  his  views  are  those  which  I  have  generally  adopted;  a  certain  number  of  new  combinations
have  been  suggested  and  sometimes  demonstrated  by  Winckleb,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  i.,  ii.,  to  which  I
shall  duly  refer  as  occasion  offers.  The  inscriptions  relating  to  the  reign  of  Shamash-shumukin
have  been  collected,  translated,  and  commented  on  with  much  care  by  Lehmann,  Schamaschschumu-
kin,  Ednig  con  Bahylonien,  66S-643  v.  Chr.,  Inschriflliches  Material  iiher  den  Beginn  seiner  Segierung,
grossentheils  zum  ersten  Male  Jierausgegebsn,  uhersetzt  und  erldutert,  in  -Ito,  1892;  cf  Jensen,  Inschr.
Schamnsclischumiildn's,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.  part  1,  pp.  191-207.  For  the  editions,
translations,  and  commentaries  published  before  1866,  see  Bezold,  Kurzge/aister  Ueberblick  iiber  dit
Babylonisch-assyrisclie  Literatur,  pp.  108-121.

'  Pinches'  Babylonian  Chronicle,  col.  iv.  1.  37 ;  Winckler,  Bab.  Chron.  B,  in  Schrader,  Keil.
Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  2S1,  285.  The  expedition  against  Kirbit  is  omitted  in  curtain  documents,  such  as
Cylinder  A  of  the  Brit.  Mus.;  it  is  inserted  in  the  others  in  the  fourth  place,  between  the  wars  in
Asia  Minor  and  tlie  campaign  against  the  Maanai  (G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  79-88).
The  place  assigned  to  it  in  the  Bab.  Chron.,  quite  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign,  is  confirmed  by  a
fragment  of  a  tablet  quoted  by  Winckler,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  474-477.  Perhaps  it  was
carried  out  by  a  Babylonian  army ;  though  Assur-baui-pal  claimed  the  glory  of  it,  by  reason  of  his
suzerainty  over  Karduniash.

=  The  text  of  Tablet  K  2S75-K  223  of  the  Brit.  Mas.,  ubv.,  11.  11-13  (G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assur-
banipal, p.  38),  states  distinctly  that  the  Tartan  commanded  the  first  army.  For  the  identity  of  this
expedition  with  the  last  of  those  conducted  by  Esarhaddon,  cf.  supra,  p.  380,  note  1.

'  Assur-bani-pal,  acting  in  the  name  of  his  father,  Esarliaddon,  King  of  Assyria,  had  consulted
Shamash  on  the  desirability  of  sending  troops  against  Arvad  :  the  prince  of  this  city  is  called  Ikkalu
(Kntjdtzon,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  170-172),  which  is  a  variant  of  Yakinlu.
Winckler  concluded  that  the  campaign  against  Arvad,  which  will  be  mentioned  later  on  (infra,
p.  3S7),  took  place  before  668  B.C.,  in  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon  (Altorient.  Forsih.,  vol.  i.  pp.  477,  478).
It  seems  to  me  more  natural  to  pl.ice  it  on  the  return  from  Egypt,  when  the  people  of  Arvad  were
demoralised  by  the  defeat  of  the  Pharaoh  whose  alliance  they  had  hoped  for.

*  I  had  compared  Karbaniti  with  the  Qarbina  mentioned  in  the  Great  Harris  Papyrus  (cf.
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  456).  and  this  identification  was  accepted  by  Brugsch  (Geschichte
Mgyptens,  pp.  18S,  189,  717,  718),  and  subsequently  by  most  Egyptologists,  even  after  Brugsch  him-
self recognised  in  Qarbina  the  name  of  Canopus  or  a  town  near  Canopus  {Dictionnaire  Gdbgraphique,
pp.  654,  655).  It  has  been  contested  by  Steindorft"  (Die  Keilschriftliche  Wiedergube  JEgyptischer
Eigennamen,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  595,  596),  and,  in  fact,  Karbaniti  could  not
be  identified  with  Canopus,  any  more  than  the  Qarbina  of  the  Harris  Papyrus  :  its  site  must  he
looked  for  in  the  eastern  or  central  part  of  the  Delta.


THE   SECOND   DEFEAT   OF   TAEARQA.  385

so  many  of  theii-  soldiers  dead  upon  the  field,  that  Taharqa  had  not  sufficient
troops  left  to  defend  Memphis.     He  retreated  upon  Thebes,  where  he  strongly
fortified  himself;  but  the  Tartan  had  not  suffered  less  than  his  adversary,  and
he  would  have  been  unable  to  pursue  him,  had  not  reinforcements  promptly
reached  him.     The  Rabshakeh,  who  had  been  despatched  from  Nineveh  with
some  Assyrian  troops,  had  summoned  to  his  aid  the  principal  Syrian  feudal  chiefs,
who,  stimulated  by  the  news  of  the  victories  achieved  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,
placed  themselves  unreservedly  at  his  disposal.     He  ordered  their  vessels  to
proceed  along  the  coast  as  far  as  the  Delta,  where  he  purposed  to  collect  a  iieet
to  ascend  the  river,  while  their  troops  augmented  the  force  already  under  his
command.^    The  two  Assyrian  generals,  the  Tartan  and  the  Rabshakeh,  quitted
Memphis,  probably  in  the  early  part  of  667  B.C.,  and,  cautiously  advancing
southwards,  covered  the  distance  separating  the  two  Egyptian  capitals  in  a
steady  march  of  forty  days.     When  the  Assyrians  had  advanced  well  up  the
valley,  the  princes  of  the  Delta  thought  the  opportunity  had  arrived  to  cut
them  oif  by  a  single  bold  stroke.     They  therefore  opened  cautious  negotiations
with  the  Ethiopian  king,  and  proposed  an  arrangement  which  should  secure
their  independence :  "  We  will  divide  the  country  between  us,  and  neither  of  us
shall  exercise  authority  over  the  other."     However  secretly  these  negotiations
were  conducted,  they  were  certain  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Assyrian
generals  :  the  couriers  were  intercepted ;  and  discovering  from  the  despatches
the  extent  of  the  danger,  the  Assyrians  seized  as  many  of  the  leadei-s  of  the
league  as  they  could.     As  a  warning  they  sacked  Sais,  Mendes,  and  Tauis,
demolishing  the  fortifications,  and  flaying  or  impaling  the  principal  citizens
before  their  city  gates ;  they  then  sent  two  of  the  intriguing  chiefs,  Necho
and  Sharludari  of  Pelusium,  bound  hand  and  foot  with  chains,  to  Nineveh.
Pakruru,  of  the  Arabian  nome,  managed,  however,  to  escape  them.     Taharqa.
thus  bereft  of  his  allies,  was  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  repel  the  invader :
he  fled  to  Ethiopia,  abandoning  Thebes  to  its  fate.     The  city  was  ransomed
by    despoiling    the    temple    of   Amon    of   half   its    treasures :    Montumihait
transferred   his    allegiance    unhesitatingly  to   Assur-bani-pal,  and  the  whole
of  Egypt  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  first  cataract  once   more   became
Assyrian  territory.^     The  victory  was  so  complete  that  Assur-bani-pal  thouo-ht

•  The  despatch  of  reinforcements  under  command  of  the  Rabshakeh  is  expressly  mentioned  in
K  2675-K  218,  obv.,  11.  25-99 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Asmrhanipal,  pp.  40,  41.

^  Tiele  has  shown  (Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  372)  that  the  only  account  of  an  authentic  character
which  we  possess  of  the  first  Egyptian  war  of  Assur-bani-pal,  is  that  which  is  written  on  tablets
K  2675-K  22S  of  the  British  Museum.  The  cfBcial  version  on  the  Cylinders  has  confused  the  or.ler
of  events,  and  has  sometimes  attributed  to  the  king  himself  the  actions  of  his  generals.  Winckler
has  completed  Tiele's  work  on  certain  points,  and  has  better  indicated  the  chronological  sequence  of
events  (Jfntersuchungen  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  101-106,  and  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  47S-4S3)
but  his  scepticism  has  perhaps  led  him  rather  too  far  :  I  have,  as  a  rule,  kept  closer  to  the  Assyrian

2  c


386


TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.


he  might  without  risk  show  clemency  to  his  prisoners.  He  summoned  them
to  his  presence,  and  there,  instead  of  putting  out  their  eyes  or  subjecting  them
to  some  horrible  form  of  torture,  he  received  them  back  into  favour,  and  con-
firmed Necho  in  the  possession  of  all  the  honours  which  Esarhaddon  had  con-
ceded to  him.  He  clothed  him  in  a  mantle  of  honour,  and  bestowed  on  him  a
straight-bladed  sword  with  an  iron  scabbard  ornamented  with  gold,  engraved  with


MOSTCMIHilT,   PEIKCE  OP   THEBES.'


his  names  and  titles,  besides  rings,  gold  bracelets,  chariots,  horses,  and  mules  ;
in  short,  all  the  appurtenances  of  royalty.  Not  content  with  restoring  to  him
the  cities  of  Sais  and  Memphis,  he  granted  him  the  fief  of  Athribis  for  his
eldest  son,  Psammetichus.  iloreover,  he  neglected  no  measure  likely  to  show
his  supremacy.  Athribis  received  the  new  name  of  Limir-patesi-assur,  may  the
high  priest  of  Assur  be  glorious,  and  Sais  that  of  Kar-bel-matati,  the  fortress
of  the  lord  of  the  countries.  Psammetichus  was  called  Nebo-shezib-anni,  Neho,
deliver  me,  and  residents  were  installed  at  liis  court  and  that  of  his  fatlier,  who

texts  than  lie  has  done.  For  the  whole  number  of  monuments  referring  to  this  campaign,  see  6.
Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  15-23,  30-44  ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschriftiexte  Asurbanipals,
vol.  i.  pp.  4-1 1 ;  and  Jenses,  Inschri/ten  Aschurhanipal's,  in  Schradeb,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  15S-1G7,
236,  237.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograph  by  Miss  Benson,  published  in  the  Eeeueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  XX. ;  of.  Benson  and  Gourlat,  The  Temple  of  Mnt  in  Asher,  pi.  xxiv.  It  is  not  cjuite  certain  that
this  statue  represents  Jlontumihait,  as  tlie  inscription  is  wanting :  the  circumstances  of  the  discovery
however,  render  it  very  probable  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  261,  262).


RECONSTITUTION  OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  PROVINCE.


387


were  entrusted  with  the  surveillance  of  their  conduct,  and  the  task  of  keeping
them  to  the  path  of  duty :  Necho,  thus  well  guarded,  thenceforward  never
faltered  in  his  allegiance.^

The  subjection  of  Egypt  reacted  on  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  Of  the  only
two  states  still  existing  along  the  Phoenician  seaboard,  one,  namely  Tyre,  had
been  in  revolt  for  many  years,  and  the  other,  Arvad,  showed  symptoms  of  dis-
affection. Esarhaddon,  from  lack  of  a  sufficient  fleet,  had  never  been  able
to  subdue  the  former,  but  he  had  interrupted  the  communications  of  the  island
with  the  mainland,  and  the  blockade,  wliich  was  constantly  increasing  in
strictness,  had  already  lasted  for  four
years.-  On  receipt  of  the  news  from
Egypt,  Baal  realised  that  further  resist-
ance was  hopeless ;  he  therefore  delivered
up  to  the  victor  his  heir-apparent,  Yahi-
melek,  and  one  of  his  daughters,  together
with  other  hostages,  besides  silver,  gold,
and  wood,  and  intreated  for  pardon.
Assur-bani-pal  left  him  in  j^ossession  of
his  kingdom  on  condition  of  paying  the
regular  tribute,^  but  Yakinlu,  the  King  of
Arvad,  met  with  harsher  treatment.  In
vain  did  he  give  up  his  sons,  his  daughters,
and  all  his  treasures ;  his  intractability
had  worn  out  the  patience  of  his  suzerain  :
he  was  carried  away  captive  to  Nineveh,  and  replaced  by  Azibaal,  his  eldest
son.^  Two  chiefs  of  the  Taurus — Mugallu  of  Tabal,  who  had  given  trouble  to
Esarhaddon  in  the  last  years  of  his  life,"  and  Sanda-sarme  of  Cilicia —
purchased  immunity  from  the  punishment  due  for  various  acts  of  brigandage,
by  gifts  of  horses,  and  by  handing  over  each  of  them  a  daughter,  richly

'  K  2675-K  228,  obr.,  II.  51-65;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Asmrhanipal,  pp.  44-47.  For  later
versions  of  the  same  events,  see  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  27-29  ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschri/ltexte  Asurhani-
pals,  vol.  i.  pp.  12,  13;  .Jensen,  Imchrifien  Aschurhanipal's,  in  Schkader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  166,  167.

-  Cf.  supra,  p.  369.  Assur-bani-pal  recounts  the  events  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  as  if  they
had  been  ordered  and  carriediout  directly  by  himself  or  his  generals  {Gijliiulers  A-B,  col.  ii.  11.  84-88  ;
cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  58, 59) ;  the  constructions  necessary  for  the  blockade  were  begun  some  years
previously  by  his  father,  Esarhaddon  (Winckler,  Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  524-526 ;  vol.  ii.
pp.  69,  70).

=  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  58-60,  68,  69;  S.  Alden  Smith,  op.  <:it.,  pp.  14-17;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in
Sohkader,  op.  cit.,  pp.  168-171.

*  Drawn  by  Fauclier-Gudin,  from  a  bas-relief  in  the  British  Museum.

'  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  60,  61,  69-71 ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  lG-19 ;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in
SOHRADER,  op.  cit.,  pp.  170-173.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  370.


PSASIMETIOHUS  I.'


388  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

dowered,  to  the  Larem  of  the  king  at  Nineveh.*     But  these  were  incidents
of    slight    moment,   and    their   very    insignificance    proves   how  completely
resigned   to   foreign    domination    the    nations   of    the    Mediterranean    coast
had   now  become.     Vassal   kings,    princes,   cities,   peasants   of    the  plain  or
shepherds  of  the   mountains,  all   who  were  subject  directly  or  indirectly  to
Assyria,  had  almost  ceased  to  imagine  that  a  change  of  sovereign  afforded  them
any   chance  of  regaining    their   independence.     They   no   longer   considered
themselves  the  subjects  of  a  conqueror  whoso  death  might  free  them  from
allegiance;    they  realised  that  they  were  the  subjects  of  an   empire  whose
power  did  not  depend   on   the  genius   or   incapacity   of   one  man,   but   was
maintained  from  age  to  age  in  virtue  of  the  prestige  it  had  attained,  whatever
might  be  the  qualities  of  the  reigning  sovereign.     The  other  independent  states
had  at  length  come  to  the  same  conclusion,  and  the  news  of  the  accession  of  a
fresh  Assyrian  king  no  longer  awakened  among  them  hopes  of  conquest  or,  at  all
events,  of  booty ;    such  an  occasion  was  regarded  as  a  suitable  opportunity
for  strengthening  the  bonds  of  neighbourly  feeling  or  conciliatory  friendship
which  united  them  to  Assyria,  by  sending  an  embassy  to  congratulate  the  new
sovereign.     One  of  these  embassies,  which  arrived  about  667  B.C.,  caused  much
excitement  at  the  court  of  Nineveh,  and  greatly  flattered  the  vanity  of  the  king.
Eeports  brought  back  by  sailors  or  the  chiefs  of  caravans  had  revealed  the
existence  of  a  kingdom  of  Lydia  in  the  extreme  west  of  Asia  Minor,  at  the  place
of  embarcation  for  crossing  the  sea.^    It  was  known  to  be  celebrated  for  its  gold
and  its  horses,  but  no  direct  relations  between  the  two  courts  had  ever  been
established,  and  the  Lydian  kings  had  hitherto  affected  to  ignore  the  existence
of  Assyria.    A  revolution  had  broken  out  in  this  province  a  quarter  of  a  century
previously,  which  had  placed  on  the  throne  of  the  Heraclidae  that  family  of  the
Mermnadse  whose  previous  history  had  been  so  tragic.^    Dascylus,  who  had  made
his  home  for  a  long  time  among  the  White  Syrians,  had  no  intention  of  abandon-
ing his  adopted  country,  when  one  day,  about  the  year  698  B.C.,  a  messenger
arrived  bidding  him  repair  to  Sardes  without  delay.^    His  uncle  Ardys,  prince  of
Tyrrha,  having  no  children,  had  applied  to  Sadyattes,  beseeching  him  to  revoke
the  sentence  of  banishment  passed  on  his  nephew.    "  My  house  is  desolate,"  said
he,  "and  all  my  kinsfolk  are  dead;  and  furthermore,  Dascylus  and  his  house  have

'  G.  Smith,  Hitt.  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  61,  62,  69,  70,  75 ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschrifttexle
Asurhanipals,  pp.  16,  17;  Jensen,  Inschriften  AschurhanipaV s,  in  Schradek,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  170-173.  The  oracular  consultatiou.  No.  55,  attributed  by  Knudtzon  to  the  time  of  Esarhaddon
QAssyi:  Gehete  an  den  Sonnengott,  pp.  15157-S),  more  probably  refers  to  the  period  of  Assur-bani-pal
(WiKCKiER,  Altorient.  Forscli.,  vol.  ii.  p.  127).

-  It  is  called  nayu  ska  nibirti  tamlim  (Eassam  Cylinder,  col.  ii.  1.  95),  "  the  country  of  the  crossing
of  the  sea,"  or  more  concisely,  "  the  country  this  side  the  sea."  Cf.  for  the  explanation  of  this  text,
Gelzee,  Das  Zeiialter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Eheinisclies  Museum,  1875,  vol.  xxx.  p.  221,  note  4.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  341,  342.
Radet,  La  Lijdie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  pj).  143-145,  has  shown  this  date  to  be  very  probable.


AFFAIRS  IN  ASIA   MINOS.  389

already  been  pardoned  by  thine  ancestors."  Sadyattes  consented,  but  Dascylus,
preferring  not  to  return,  sent  his  son  Gyges,  then  about  eighteen  years  of  age,
in  Lis  stead.  Gyges  was  a  tall  and  very  beautiful  youth,  and  showed  unusual
skill  as  a  charioteer  and  in  the  use  of  weapons,  so  that  his  renown  soon  spread
throughout  the  country.  Sadyattes  desired  to  see  him,  and  being  captivated
by  his  bold  demeanour,  enrolled  him  in  his  bodyguard,  loaded  him  with
presents,  and  took  him  into  his  entire  confidence.  Gyges  was  clever  enough
to  utilise  the  king's  favour  in  order  to  enlarge  his  domains  and  increase  his
riches,  and  thus  win  partisans  among  the  people  and  the  body  of  "  Friends."
Carian  mercenaries  at  that  time  formed  one  of  the  most  vigorous  and  best  dis-
ciplined contingents  in  the  armies  of  the  period.^  The  Carians  were,  above  all,
a  military  race,  and  are  said  to  have  brought  the  shield  and  helmet  to  their
highest  perfection  ;  '-^  at  Sardes  they  formed  the  garrison  of  the  citadel,  and  their
captains  were  in  high  favour  with  the  king.  Gyges  formed  a  fast  friendship  with
Arselis  of  Mylasa,  one  of  the  chief  of  these  officers,  and  thus  made  sure  of  the
support  of  the  garrison,  and  of  the  possibility  of  recruiting  a  corps  among  the
Carian  elans  who  remained  in  their  own  country.^  He  thus  incurred  the  bitter
jealousy  of  the  Tylonida,  whose  chief,  Lixos,  was  ready  to  adopt  any  measures
which  might  damage  his  rival,  even  going  so  far  as  to  simulate  madness  and  run
through  the  streets  of  Sardes  crying  out  that  Gyges,  the  son  of  Dascylus,  was
about  to  assassinate  the  king ;  but  this  stratagem  did  not  succeed  any  better
than  his  other  treacherous  devices.  Meanwhile  Sadyattes  had  sought  the  hand
of  Toudo,*  daughter  of  Arnossos  of  Mysia,  and  sent  his  favourite  to  receive  his
afBanced  bride  at  the  hand  of  her  father.  Gyges  fell  in  love  with  her  on  the
journey,  and  tried  in  vain  to  win  her  favour.  She  repulsed  his  advances  with
indignation,  and  on  the  very  night  of  her  marriage  complained  to  her  husband
of  the  insult  which  had  been  offered  her.  Sadyattes  swore  that  he  would
avenge  her  on  the  morrow;  but  Gyges,  warned  by  a  servant,  slew  the  king
before  daybreak.  Immediately  after  thus  assassinating  his  sovereign,  Gyges
called  together  the  "  Friends,"  and  ridding  himself  of  those  who  were  hostile
to  him,  induced  the  others  by  bribes  to  further  his  designs ;  then  descending  to
the  place  of  public  assembly,  he  summoned  the  people  to  a  conclave.  After  a
long  and  stormy  debate,  it  was  decided  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  which,

'  Arcbilochus  of  Paros,  a  contemporary  of  Gyges,  mentions  the  Carian  mercenaries,  Koi  Sii
eViVoupos  &<m  Kip  icfK\Ti(Tofiai  (Bergk,  Poeta'  Lijrici  Grseoi,  Tol.  i.  p.  690,  Fragm.  21),  and  later  on
Ephorus  said  of  tliem,  that  they  had  beeu  the  first  to  sell  their  services  to  strangers  (Fragm.  23,  in
MtLLER-DmoT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graic,  vol.  i.  p.  239).

'  For  the  weapons  of  the  Carian  mercenaries,  of.  Herodotus,  I.  ccxsi.,  II.  clii.,  and  Polt.enus
Stratagems,  vii.  3.

"  The  connection  between  Arselis  and  Gyges  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch,  Qussstlones  Grxae,  §  45,
in  the  Moralia,  ed.  Didot,  vol.  i.  pp.  371,  372.

'  It  is  not  certain  whether  the  name  is  Toudo  or  Trydo  ;  I  have  followed  the  spelling  of  5If  ller.
Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  p.  384,  note  54.


390  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   Al    ITS  ZENITH.

corrupted  by  the  gold  from  the  Pactolus,  enjoined  on  the  Lydians  to  recognise
Gyges  as  their  king.  He  married  Toudo,  and  by  thus  espousing  the  widow  of  the
Heraclid  sovereign,  obtained  some  show  of  right  to  the  crown ;  but  the  decision
of  the  oracle  was  not  universally  acceptable,  and  war  broke  out,  in  which
Gyges  was  victorious,  thanks  to  the  bravery  of  his  Carian  mercenaries.*

His  career  soon  served  as  the  fabric  on  which  the  popular  imagination
was  continually  working  fresh  embroiderie?.  He  was  reported  at  the  outset  to
have  been  of  base  extraction,  a  mere  soldier  of  fortune,  who  had  raised  him-
self by  degrees  to  the  highest  posts  and  had  finally  supplanted  his  patron.
Herodotus,  following  the  poet  Archiloehus  of  Paros,  relates  how  the  last
of  the  Heraclidae,  whom  he  calls  by  his  private  name  of  Kandaules,  and  not
his  official  name  of  Sadyattes,^  forcibly  insisted  on  exposing  to  the  admiration
of  Gyges  the  naked  beauty  of  his  wife ;  the  queen,  thus  outraged,  called  upon
the  favourite  to  avenge  the  insult  to  her  modesty  by  the  blood  of  her
husband,  and  then  bestowed  on  him  her  hand,  together  with  the  crown.^  Plato
made  this  story  the  groundwork  of  a  most  fantastic  tale.  Gyges,  according  to
him,  was  originally  a  shepherd,  who,  after  a  terrible  storm,  noticed  a  fissure  in
the  ground,  into  which  he  crept ;  there  he  discovered  an  enormous  bronze
horse,  half  broken,  and  in  its  side  the  corpse  of  a  giant  with  a  gold  ring  on  his
finger.  Chance  revealed  to  him  that  this  ring  rendered  its  wearer  invisible  :
he  set  out  for  the  court  in  quest  of  adventures,  seduced  the  queen,  murdered
the  king  and  seized  his  crown,  accomplishing  all  this  by  virtue  of  his  talisman.*
According  to  a  third  legend,  his  crime  and  exaltation  had  been  presaged  by  a
wondrous  prodigy.  Two  eagles  of  supernatural  size  had  alighted  on  the  roof  of
Toudo's  room  while  she  was  still  dwelling  in  her  father's  house,  and  the  sooth-
sayers who  were  consulted  prognosticated  that  the  princess  would  be  the  wife  of
two  kings  in  a  single  night ;  and,  in  fact,  Gyges,  having  stabbed  Sadyattes  when

•  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  49,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Fragm.  IIM,  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  383-385,
who  slavishly  copies  Xanthus  the  Lydian;  cf.  Schubert,  Gesehichte  der  Kiinige  von  Lydien,pp.  24-35,
and  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  pp.  124-139.  Tlie  date  of  this  revolution  has  been  fixed  at
587  B.C.  by  Gelzer,  Das  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Elieinisches  Museum,  1875,  vol.  x.'cx.  pp.  230-256.

-  For  the  connection  of  the  two  names  applied  to  the  same  person,  cf.  Eadet,  op.  oil.,  pp.  70,  77,
124.  Schubert  (pp.  cit..  pp.  31-34)  considers  that  the  names  Sadyattes  and  Kandaules  beloug  to  two
distinct  persons.  Ivandaules,  according  to  him,  was  probably  a  second  son  of  Myrsos,  who,  after  tlie
murder  of  Sadyattes,  disputed  the  possession  of  the  crown  with  Gyges  ;  in  this  case  he  was  killed  in
battle  by  the  Carian  commander,  Arselis,  as  related  by  Plutarch  {Qu;est.  Griec,  §  45),  and  Gyges  was
not  really  king  till  after  the  death  of  Kandaules.

'  Herodotus,  I.  viii.-xiv.  The  improbability  of  the  account  given  by  Herodotus  was  demonstrated
in  the  last  century  by  Freret,  Eecherches  sur  la  Chronologie  de  Vllistoire  de  Lydie,  in  the  Me'm<iires
de  I'Acadg'inie  des  Inscriptions,  1725,  vol.  v.  p.  282;  cf.  Gelzer,  Das  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Rhein-
isches  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  515,  518,  et  seq.,  where  are  collected  examples  of  similar  legends
attached  to  tlie  names  of  several  historical  characters — Sargon  of  Agade  (of.  Dawn  of  Civilization,
pp.  597,  598),  Cyrus,  Arsaces  the  Parthian,  and  others.

*  Plato,  Republic,  Bk.  II.  iii.,  ed.  Didot,  vol.  ii.  pp.  23. 24 ;  cf.  Cicero,  De  Officiis,  iii.  9.  This  version
is  curious,  because  itl^as  preserved  for  us  one  of  the  earliest  examples  of  a  ring  which  renders  its  wearer
invisible  ;  it  is  well  known  how  frequently  such  a  talisman  appears  in  Oriental  tales  of  a  later  period.


QYOES  AND   BIS    WABS  AGAINST   THE   CIMMERIANS.


391


his  marriage  was  but  just  consummated,  forced  Toudo  to  become  his  wife  on  the
spot  without  waiting  for  the  morrow.'  Other  stories  were  current,  in  which  the
events  were  related  with  less  of  the  miraculous  element,  and  which  attributed
the  success  of  Gyges  to  the  unbounded  fidelity  shown  him  by  the  Carian
Arselis.-  In  whatever  manner  it  was  brought  about,  his  accession  marked  the
opening  of  a  new  era  for  Lydia.  The  country  had  always  beea  noted  for  its
valiant  and  warlike  inhabitants,  but  the  Heraclida;  had  not  expended  its
abundant  resources  on  foreign  conquest,  and  none  of  the  surrounding  peoples
suspected  that  it  could  again  become  the  seat  of  a  brilliant  empire  as  ia
fabulous  times.^  Gyges
endeavoured  to  awaken
the  military  instincts
of  his  subjects.  If  he
were  not  actually  the
first  to  organise  that
admirable  cavalry  corps
which  for  nearly  a  cen-
tury proved  itself  in-
vincible on  the  field  of
battle,  at  least  he  en-
larged and  disciplined
it,  giving  it  cohesion
and  daring ;  and  it  was  well  he  did  so,  for  a  formidable  danger  already  menaced
his  newly  acquired  kingdom.  The  Cimmerians  and  Treres,  so  long  as  they  did
not  act  in  concert,  had  been  unable  to  overcome  the  resistance  offered  by  the
Phrygians ;  their  raids,  annually  renewed,  had  never  resulted  in  more  than  the
destruction  of  a  city  or  the  pillaging  of  an  ill-defended  district.  But  from  690  to
680  B.C.  the  Cimmerians,  held  in  check  by  the  bold  front  displayed  by  Sennacherib
and  Esarhaddon,  had  at  last  broken  away  from  the  seductions  of  the  east,  and
poured  down  in  force  on  the  centre  of  the  peninsula.  King  Midas,  after  an  heroic
defence,  at  length  gave  way  before  their  overwhelming  numbers,  and,  rather  than
fall  alive  into  the  hands  of  the  barbarians,  poisoned  himself  by  drinking  the  blood
of  a  bull  (676  e.g.).**     The  flower  of  his  nobility  perished  with  him,  and  the

'  Xanthus  of  Lydia,  according  to  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  49,  iu  Muller-Didot,  Fragm,
Hint.  Gnec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  381,  385.

'  Plctarcu,  Quiest.  Grxc,  §  45.  For  the  authenticity  of  this  narrative,  of.  Gelzeb,  Das  Zeitalter
Gyges,  in  the  liheinisches  Museum,  1880,  vol.  xxxv.  p.  528;  Schdbekt,  Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Lijdicn,
pp.  31-34;  Kadet,  La  Lydie  e.t  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  133,  134.

'  For  this  first  Lydian  empire,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  3G4,  587,  and  swpra,  pp.  336-338.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  Lydian  bas-relief  found  in  one  of  the  tombs  at  Bin-Tepe,  and
now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.

'  Stbabo,  I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61.     The  date  of  670  B.C.  has  been  borrowed  from  Julius   Africanus


LYDIAN    HUKSEMl.X.


392  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

people  of  lower  rank  who  survived  were  so  terrified  by  the  invasion,  that  they
seemed  in  one  day  to  lose  entirely  the  brave  and  energetic  character  which  had
hitherto  been  their  safeguard.  The  Cimmerians  seized  town  after  town  ;  ^  they
descended  from  the  basin  of  the  Sangarios  into  that  of  the  Rhyndakos ;  they
laid  waste  the  Troad,  and,  about  070  B.C.,  they  established  themselves  securely
in  the  stronghold  of  Antandros,  opposite  the  magnificent  jiEolian  island  of
Lesbos,  and  ere  long  their  advanced  posts  were  face  to  face  on  all  sides  with
the  outposts  of  Lydia.^  Gyges  resolutely  held  his  own,  and  successfully
repulsed  them ;  but  the  struggle  was  too  unequal  between  their  vast  hordes,
recruited  incessantly  from  their  reserves  in  Thrace  or  the  Caucasus,  and  his
scanty  battalions  of  Lydians,  Carians,  and  Greeks.  Unaided,  he  had  no  chance
of  reopening  the  great  royal  highway,  which  the  fall  of  the  Phrygian  monarchy
had  laid  at  the  mercy  of  the  barbarians  along  the  whole  of  its  middle  course,
and  yet  he  was  aware  that  a  cessation  of  the  trafBc  which  passed  between  the
Euphrates  and  the  Hermos  was  likely  to  lead  in  a  short  time  to  the  decay  of
his  kingdom.  If  the  numerous  merchants  who  were  wont  to  follow  this  ancient
traditional  route  were  once  allowed  to  desert  it  and  turn  aside  to  one  of  the  coast-
roads  which  might  replace  it — either  that  of  the  Pontus  in  the  north  or  of  the
Mediterranean  in  the  south — they  might  not  be  willing  to  return  to  it  even
when  again  opened  to  traffic,  and  Lydia  would  lose  for  ever  one  of  her  richest
sources  of  revenue.^  We  may  well  conceive  that  G-yges,  whose  fortune  and  very
existence  was  thus  in  jeopardy,  would  seek  assistance  against  these  barbarians  from
the  sovereign  whose  interests  appeared  identical  with  his  own.  The  renown  of
the  Assyrian  empire  had  penetrated  far  into  the  west ;  the  Achasans  of  Cyprus
who  were  its  subjects,  the  Greek  colonists  of  Cilicia,  and  the  sailors  whom  the
exigencies  of  the  coast-trade  brought  to  Syrian  ports,  must  all  have  testified  to
its  splendour;  and  the  fame  of  its  conquests  over  tlie  Tabal  and  the  peoples  on
the  Halys  had  spread  abroad  more  than  once  during  the  previous  century,  and

by  the  Christian  chronologists  of  the  Byzautiae  period  ;  these  latter  made  tlie  fall  of  the  Phrygian
kiufdom  coincide  with  the  reign  uf  Amon  in  Judwa,  and  tliis  date  is  accepted  by  mo3t  modern
historians  (Gelzek.  Das  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  BheiniscUes  Mweuin,  1875,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  252,  253,
257,  261-263;  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  dee  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  545,  oie,  vol.  ii.  pp.455,  456;  Radet,  La
Lydie  et  le  Monde  Gree  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  176).

'  One  fact  alone,  probably  taken  from  the  Lydiaca  of  Xanthus,  is  known  to  us  concerning  their
operations  in  Phrygia,  namely,  the  taking  of  Syassos  and  the  capture  of  enormous  stores  of  corn  which
were  laid  up  in  the  silos  in  that  city ;  cf.  Stephen  op  Byzantium,  s.v  'S.vaffo-os.

'  Aristotle,  Constitutions,  Fragm.  190,  in  JVIullek-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Qrsscormn,
vol.  ii.  p.  162,  TavTT)v  wvo/j.d(rdai  Kal  Ki/j-ixspiSa  Ki/j./j.eplui'  ivomouvTwi'  ^Karhv  €ttj;  cf.  Pliny,  H.  Nat.,
V.  32,  §  2.

^  Radet  deserves  credit  for  being  the  first  to  point  out  the  economic  reasons  which  necessarily  led
Gyges  to  make  his  attempt  at  forming  an  alliance  with  Assur-bani-pal  (op.  cit,  p.  177).  He  has  thus
definitely  dismissed  the  objections  which  some  recent  critics,  especially  Gutschmid,  had  raised  against
the  authenticity  of  this  episode  in  order  to  defend  classic  tradition  and  diminish  the  authority  of  the
Assyrian  texts  {Neue  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  des  Alien  Orients,  pp.  x.,  xi.).


QTGES  SENDS  AN  EMBASSY  TO   NINEVEH.  393

had  reached  as  far  as  the  western  extremity  of  the  peninsula  of  Asia  Minor,  by
means  of  the  merchants  of  Sardes  or  Ionia.  The  Cimmerians  had  harassed
Assyria,  and  still  continued  to  be  a  source  of  anxiety  to  her  rulers ;  Gyges  judged
that  participation  in  a  common  liatred  or  danger  would  predispose  the  king  in
his  favour,  and  a  dream  furnished  him  with  a  pretext  for  notifying  to  the  court
of  Nineveh  his  desire  to  enter  into  friendly  relations  with  it.  He  dreamed  that  a
god,  undoubtedly  Assur,  had  appeared  to  him  in  the  night,  and  commanded  him
to  prostrate  himself  at  the  feet  of  Assur-bani-pal :  "  In  his  name  thou  shalt  over-
come thine  enemies."  The  next  morning  he  despatched  horsemen  to  the  great
king,  but  when  the  leader  of  the  embassy  reached  the  frontier  and  met  the
Assyrians  for  the  first  time,  they  asked  him,  "  Who,  then,  art  thou,  brother,  thou
from  whose  land  no  courier  has  as  yet  visited  our  country  ?  "  The  languao-e
he  spoke  was  unknown  to  them;  they  only  gathered  that  he  desired  to  be  con-
ducted into  the  presence  of  the  king,  and  consequently  sent  him  on  to  Nineveh
under  good  escort.  There  the  same  obstacle  presented  itself,  for  none  of  the
official  interpreters  at  the  court  knew  the  Lydiaa  tongue ;  however,  an  inter-
preter was  at  length  discovered,  who  translated  the  story  of  the  dream  as  best
he  could.i  Assur-baui-pal  joyfully  accepted  the  homage  offered  to  him  from
such  a  far-off  land,  and  from  thenceforward  some  sort  of  alliance  existed  between
Assyria  and  Lydia — an  alliance  of  a  very  Platonic  order,  from  which  Gyges  at
least  derived  no  sensible  advantage.  Some  troops  sent  into  the  country  of  the
White  Syrians  may  have  disquieted  the  Cimmerians,  and,  by  causing  a  diver-
sion in  their  rear,  procured  a  respite  for  Lydia  ;  but  the  caravan  route  across
Asia  Minor  was  only  of  secondary  importance  to  the  prosperity  of  Nineveh
and  the  Syrian  provinces,  since  the  Phoenician  navy  provided  sufficient  outlets
for  their  trade  in  the  west.  Assur-bani-pal  lavished  friendly  speeches  on  the
Lydians,  but  left  them  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  attack  alone,  and  devoutly
thanked  Assur  for  the  security  which  their  determined  courage  procured  for
the  western  frontier  of  his  empire.^

The  Cimmerian  peril  being,  for  the  present  at  least,  averted,  there  no  longer
remained  any  foe  to  trouble  the  peace  of  the  empire  on  the  northern  or  eastern

'  The  detailed  account  of  the  events  concerning  the  arrival  of  the  ambassador  is  known
to  us  only  from  Cylinder  E  of  the  British  Museum,  11.  1-11,  published  by  G.  Smith,  History  of
Asmrbanipal,  pp.  7ti,  77;  cf.  Jensen,  Inschriften  Aschurbimipal's,  in  Sohk.ider,  Keilimchriftliclie
Bibliothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  172,  173.

-  The  embassy  sent  by  Gyges  is  mentioned  in  K  2675,  rev.,  11. 13-21  (G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  73-75),
and  with  some  variations  in  Cylinder  B,  col.  ii.  11.  8G-93  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  71,  72);  the  other  documents
in  which  it  is  mentioned,  mostly  connect  with  it  the  story  of  tlie  death  of  Gyges  aud  the  victory  of
Ardys  over  the  Cimmerians  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  1)4-68 ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  D/e  Keilschrifltezte  Asurbanipals,
vol.  i.  pp.  18-21;  Jensen,  Inschriften  Aschurbanipal's,  in  Schkader,  Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek.
vol.  ii.  pp.  172-177),  that  is  to  say,  with  events  much  posterior  to  these  first  communications  between
Lydia  and  Assyria.


394  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

frontier,  Urartu,  the  JIannai,  and  the  Medes  liaving  now  ceased  to  be  formid-
able. Urartu,  incessantly  exposed  to  the  ravages  of  the  barbarians,  had  drawn
closer  and  closei-  to  Assyria ;  and  though  not  actually  descending  to  the  point  of
owning  its  rival's  superiority  in  order  to  obtain  succour  against  these  terrible
foes,  it  yet  carefully  avoided  all  pretexts  for  war,  and  persistently  maintained
friendly  relations  with  its  powerful  neighbour.  Its  kings,  Rusas  II.  and  his
successor  Erimenas,  no  longer  meditated  feats  of  arms  and  successful  raids,  but
devoted  themselves  to  building  their  city  walls,  erecting  palaces  and  temples,
and  planning  pleasant  retreats  in  the  mountain  fastnesses,  where  they  lived
surrounded  by  gardens  planted  at  great  cost,  watered  by  streams  brought
thither  from  distant  springs.^  The  Mannai  submitted  without  a  murmur  to
their  Assyrian  governors,  and  the  Medes,  kept  in  check  by  the  garrisons  of  Parsua
and  Kharkhar,  seemed  to  have  laid  aside  much  of  their  fierce  and  turbulent
disposition.  Esarhaddon  had  endeavoured  to  conciliate  the  good  will  of  Elam
by  a  signal  service.  He  had  supplied  its  inhabitants  with  corn,  wine,  and
provisions  of  all  sorts  during  a  famine  which  had  afflicted  the  country  about
670  B.C. ;  nor  had  his  good  will  ended  there.  He  refused  to  bring  into  servi-
tude those  Elamite  subjects  who  had  taken  refuge  with  their  families  on  Assyrian
territory  to  escape  the  scourge,  although  the  rights  of  nations  authorised  him
so  to  do,  but  having  nourished  them  as  long  as  the  dearth  lasted,  he  then  sent
them  back  to  their  fellow-citizens.  Urtaku  of  Elam  had  thencefcrward  main-
tained a  kind  of  sullen  neutrality,  entering  only  into  secret  conspiracies  against
the  Babylonian  prefects  on  the  Tigris.  The  Aramteans  in  the  valleys  of  the  Ulai,
indeed,  were  restless,  and  several  of  their  chiefs,  Bel-ikisha  of  the  Gambula,  and
Nabo-shumirish,  plotted  in  secret  with  Marduk-shumibni,  the  Elamite  general
in  command  on  the  fi'ontier.^  But  no  hint  of  this  had  yet  transpired,  and  peace
apparently  reigned  there  as  elsewhere.  Never  had  the  empire  been  so  respected  ;
never  had  it  united  so  many  diverse  nations  under  one  sceptre — Egyptians,
Syrians,  tribes  of  the  Taurus,  and  the  mountain  districts  round  the  Tigris  and
Euphrates,  Mannai,  Medes,  Babylonians,  and  Arabs ;  never,  moreover,  had  it
possessed  greater  resources  wherewith  to  compel  obedience  from  the  provinces
or  defend  them  against  foreign  attack.  Doubtless  the  population  of  Assyria
proper,  and  the  ancient  districts  whose  contingents  formed  the  nucleus  of  the

'  For  tlie  succession  of  the  kings  of  Urartu  at  this  epoch,  see  Belck  and  Lehmann,  Ein  neuer
Serrsclter  von  Khaldia,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyrloloyie,  1894,  vol.  is.  pp.  82-99,  .339-360.  For  the
foundation  or  restoration  of  the  city  and  gardens  of  Toprak-Kaleh  by  Kusas  11.  and  III.,cf.,  besides  the
memoir  mentioned  above,  Belck  and  Lehhann,  Ueher  neuer  aufgefundenen  Armenischen  Keiliiischriften,
in  the  Zeitschrift  Jiir  Ethnolocjie,  1892, pp.  144-147 ;  Weitere  Ergebuisse, in  the  Verhaudluiigeii  der  Berliner
antliropologischer  Geselhchaft,  1892,  p.  486  ;  Cltaldische  Nova,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1893,  pp.  223, 224,
and  Chaldische  Forschungen,  in  the  Verhandlungen,  1895,  pp.  595-601.

»  G.  Smith,  Eistory  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  100-102,  108,  109.


FRESH   TROUBLES  IN  EGYPT.


395


army,  were  still  suffering  from  the  results  of  the  civil  war  which  had  broken  out
more  than  fifteen  years  before,  after  the  assassination  of  Sennacherib ;  ^  but
under  the  easy  rule  ofEsarhaddon  the  natural  increase  of  population,  unchecked
by  any  extraordinary  call  for  recruits,  must  have  almost  repaired  their  losses.
The  Egyptian  campaigns,  partially  carried  out  by  Syrian  auxiliaries,  had  not
sensibly  retarded  this  progress,  and,  provided  that  peace  were  maintained  for
some  years  longer,  the  time  seemed  at  hand  when  the  king,  having  repaired  his
losses,  could  call  upon  the  nation  to  make  fresh  efforts  in  offensive  or  defensive
warfare,  without  the  risk  of  seeing  his  people  melt  and  disappear  before  his  eyes.
It  seems,  indeed,  as  if  Assur-bani-pal,  either  by  policy  or  natural  disposition,
was  inclined  for  peace.  But  this  did  not  preclude,
when  occasion  demanded,  his  directing  his  forces
and  fighting  in  person  like  any  other  Assyrian
monarch ;  he,  however,  preferred  repose,  and  when
circumstances  forced  war  upon  him,  he  willingly
delegated  the  conduct  of  the  array  to  his  generals.
He  would  probably  have  renounced  possession  of
Egypt  if  he  could  have  done  so  with  safety  and
such  a  course  would  not  have  been  without  wisdom,
the  retention  of  this  newly  acquired  province  being
difficult  and  costly.  Not  to  speak  of  differences
in  language,  religion,  and  manners,  which  would
prevent  it  from  ever  becoming  assimilated  to  Assyria
as  Damascus,  Hamath,  and  Samaria,  and  most  of  the  Asiatic  states  had
been,  it  was  merely  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  empire  by  the  thin
chain  of  rocks,  desert,  and  marshes  stretching  between  the  Eed  Sea  and  the
Jlediterranean.  A  revolt  of  the  cities  of  the  Philistines,  or  of  one  of  the
Idumtean  sheikhs,  would  have  sufficed  to  isolate  it,  aud,  communications  once
interrupted,  the  safety  of  the  numerous  Assyrian  officers  aud  garrisons  would  be
seriously  jeopardised,  all  of  whom  must  be  maintained  there  if  the  country
was  to  be  permanently  retained.  The  inclination  to  meddle  in  the  affairs  of
Syria  always  displayed  by  the  Pharaohs,  aud  tlieir  obsolete  claims  to  rule  the
whole  country  as  far  as  the  Euphrates,  did  not  allow  of  their  autonomy  beiug
restored  to  them  at  the  risk  of  the  immediate  renewal  of  their  iutrigues  with
Tyre  or  Judah,  and  the  fomenting  of  serious  rebellions  among  the  vassal  princes
of  Palestine.     On  the  other  hand,  Egypt  was  by  its  natural  position  so  detached


ASSUR-BANI-PAL.'


'  Cf.  supra,  p.  348.

'  Diawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  from  Kouyunjik  preserved  in  the  British
Museum.


396  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

from  the  rest  of  the  empire  that  it  was  certain  to  escape  from  the  influence  of
Nineveh  as  soon  as  the  pressure  of  circumstances  obliged  the  suzerain  to  relax
his  efforts  to  keep  it  in  subjection.  Besides  this,  Ethiopia  lay  behind  Egypt,
almost  inaccessible  in  the  fabled  realms  of  the  south,  always  ready  to  provoke
conspiracies  or  renew  hostilities  when  the  occasion  offered.  Montumihait  had
already  returned  to  Thebes  on  tlie  retreat  of  the  Assyrian  battalions,  and  though
Taharqa,  rendered  inactive,  as  it  was  said,  by  a  dream  which  bade  him  remain  at
Napata,^  had  not  reappeared  north  of  the  cataract,  he  had  sent  Tanuatamanu,  the
son  of  his  wife  by  Sabaco,  to  administer  the  province  in  his  name.'^  Taharqa
died  shortly  after  (666  b.c.),  and  his  stepson  was  preparing  to  leave  Thebes  in
order  to  be  solemnly  crowned  at  Gebel  Barkal,  when  he  saw  one  night  in  a
dream  two  serpents,  one  on  his  right  hand,  the  other  on  his  left.  The  sooth-
sayers whom  he  consulted  on  the  matter  prognosticated  for  him  a  successful
career :  "  Thou  boldest  the  south  countries ;  seize  thou  those  of  the  north,  and
let  the  crowns  of  the  two  regions  gleam  upon  thy  brow !  "  He  proceeded  at  once
to  present  himself  before  his  divine  father  Amon  of  Napata,  and,  encountering
no  opposition  from  the  Ethiopian  priests  or  nobles,  he  was  able  to  fulfil  the
prediction  almost  immediately  after  his  coronation.^  The  Said  hailed  his  return
with  joy,  and  the  inhabitants,  massed  upon  either  bank  of  the  river,  acclaimed
him  as  he  glided  past  them  on  his  boat  :  "  Go  in  peace !  mayest  thou  have
peace !  Eestore  life  to  Egypt !  Eebuild  the  ruined  temples,  set  up  once  more
the  statues  and  emblems  of  the  deities !  Re-establish  the  endowments  raised
to  the  gods  and  goddesses,  even  the  offerings  to  the  dead !  Restore  the  priest
to  his  place,  that  he  may  minister  at  all  the  rites ! "

The  Assyrian  officials  and  the  princes  of  the  north,  with  Necho  at  their
head,  were  drawn  up  beneath  the  walls  of  Memphis  to  defy  him.  He  overcame
them,  however,  captured  the  city,  and  pushed  on  into  the  Delta  in  pursuit  of  the
retreating  foe.      Necho  either  fell  in  a  skirmish,  or  was  taken  prisoner  and

'  The  legend  quoted  by  Herodotus  (II.  clii.,  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  543,  544)
relates  that  Sabaco,  having  slain  Necho  I.,  the  father  of  Psammetichus,  evacuated  Egypt  which  he
had  conquered,  and  retired  to  Ethiopia  in  obedience  to  a  dream.  The  name  of  Sabaco  was  very
probably  substituted  for  that  of  Taharqa  iu  the  tradition  preserved  in  Sais  and  Memphis,  echoes  of
which  reached  the  Greek  historian  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  e.g.

'  It  appears,  from  the  Stele  of  the  Dream,  II.  3-7,  that  Tanuatamanu  was  in  the  Thebaid
at  the  time  of  his  accession  to  the  throne  (Maspeeo,  Melanges  de  Mythologie  et  d' Archiblogie
Sgyptiermes,  vol.  iii.  p.  9 ;  ScHa;FER,  Zur  Erhldrung  der  Traumstele,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxxv.
p.  69).

3  Steindorff  (KeUechnftliche  Wiedergdbe  dgyptischer  Eigennamen,  in  the  Beitrage  fiir  Assyriologie,
vol.  i.  pp.  358, 359)  thinks  that  Tanuatamanu  had  been  ofBcially  associated  with  himself  on  tlie  throne
by  Taharqa,  and  Scbtefer  (op  Ci<.,pp.  (JT,  G8)  supposes  that  the  dream  dates  from  the  first  year  of  their
joint  reign.  The  presence  of  Tanuatamanu  beside  Taharqa,  in  the  small  Thebau  temple,  the  bas-
reliefs  of  which  were  published  Ijy  Maeiette,  Monuments  Divers,  pis.  79-85,  does  not  necessarily  prove
that  the  two  kings  reigned  conjointly  :  it  may  equally  well  indicate  that  the  one  accomplished  the
work  commenced  by  the  other.


TANUATAMANU  RECONQUERS  EGYPT.


397


put  to  death :  his  son  Psammetichus  escaped  to  Syria,^  but  the  lemainiDg
princes  shut  themselves  up,  each  in  his  own  stronghold,  to  await  reinforcements
from  Asia,  and  a  series  of  tedious  and  interminable  sieges  began.  Impatient  at
this  dilatory  method  of  warfare,  Tanuatamanu  at  length  fell  back  on  Memphis,


KING   TANUATA3IA-NU    IN    ADOIiATION    BEFORE    THE    GODS    OF   THEBES.'

and  there  opened  negotiations  in  the  hope  of  securing  at  least  a  nominal  sub-
mission, which  might  enable  him  to  withdraw  from  the  affair  with  honour.
The  princes  of  the  east  received  his  overtures  favourably,  and  consented  to
prostrate  themselves  before  him  at  the  White  Wall  under  the  auspices  of
Pakruru.  "  Grant  us  the  breath  of  life,  for  he  who  acknowledges  thee  not
cannot  live,  and  we  will  be  thy  vassals,  as  thou  didst  declare  at  the  be"innin"-

'  Herodotus,  II.  clii.,  who  appears  to  have  been  well  informed  on  this  point :  it  is  certain  that  the
name  of  Neeho  I.  disappears  from  the  Assyrian  records  directly  after  the  accession  of  Tanuatamanu.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  after  a  photograph  by  Legrain,  taken  in  the  small  temple  at  Thebes  ;  ef.
Mamette,  Monuments  Divers,  pi.  8G.


398  THE  POWER    OF  ASSTBIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

on  the  day  in  which  thou  becamest  king!  "  The  heart  of  his  Majesty  was  filled
with  joy  when  he  heard  this  discourse :  he  bestowed  upon  them  in  abundance
bread,  beer,  and  all  manner  of  good  things.  After  sojourning  some  days  at  the
court  of  Pliaraoh  their  lord,  they  said  to  him,  "  Why  stay  we  here,  0  prince
our  master?"  His  Majesty  replied,  "Wherefore?"  They  answered  then,
"  Graciously  permit  us  to  return  to  our  own  cities,  that  we  may  give  commands
to  our  subjects,  and  may  bring  thee  our  tribute  offerings  ! "  They  returned  ere
long,  bringing  the  promised  gifts,  and  the  king  withdrew  to  Napata  loaded
with  spoil.^  The  Delta  proper  at  once  ceased  to  obey  him,  but  Blemphis,  as
well  as  Thebes,  still  acknowledged  his  sway  for  some  two  or  three  years  longer.'-^
It  was  neither  indolence  nor  fear  which  had  kept  Assur-bani-pal  from  marching
to  the  succour  of  his  subjects  as  soon  as  the  movement  under  Tanuatamanu
became  manifest,  but  serious  complications  had  arisen  in  the  south-east  which
had  for  the  moment  obliged  him  to  leave  Egypt  to  itself.  Elam  had  at  last  laid
aside  the  mask,  and  Urtaku,  yielding  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Aramaean  sheikhs,
who  were  urged  on  by  Marduk-shumibni,"  had  crossed  the  Tigris.  Shamash-
shumuldn,  thus  taken  unawares,  could  only  shut  himself  up  in  Babylon,  and  in
all  haste  send  information  of  his  plight  to  his  brother  and  suzerain.  Assur-bani-
pal,  preoccupied  with  the  events  taking  place  on  the  Nile,  was  for  a  moment
in  doubt  whether  this  incursion  was  merely  a  passing  raid  or  the  opening  of
a  serious  war,  but  the  reports  of  his  scouts  soon  left  no  doubt  as  to  the  gravity
of  the  danger  :  "  The  Elamite,  like  a  swarm  of  grasshoppers,  covers  the  fields,
he  covers  Accad  ;  against  Babylon  he  has  pitched  his  camp  and  drawn  out  his
lines."  The  city  was  too  strong  to  be  taken  by  storm.  The  Assyrians  hastened
to  relieve  it,  and  threatened  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  aggressors  :  the  latter,
therefore,  gave  up  the  siege,  and  returned  to  their  own  country,  but  their
demeanour  was  still  so  undaunted  that  Assur-bani-pal  did  not  cross  the  frontier
in  pursuit  of  them  (665  B.C.).     He  doubtless  fully  expected  that  they  would

'  Mariette,  Monuments  Divers,  pis.  7,  S,  and  p.  2  :  cf.  Maspero,  Melanges  de  Mythologie  et  d'Arch^o-
logie Egyptiennes.  vol.  iii.  pp.  5-18,217-223;  Bbugsch,  GeschicMe.-Egi/ptens,p^.  707-715;  and  Soh.epeb,
Zur  Erkldrung  der  Trammtde,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  xxsv.  pp.  67-70.  Tanuatamanu  was  at  first
identified  by  Haigh  {To  the  Editor,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1S6S,  pp.  80-83)  with  the  person  whose  name
Assyriologists  read  as  TJrdamani,  but  the  impossibility  of  recognising  the  name  Tanuatamanu  in
Urdamani  decided  E.  de  'Rouge  {Etude  sur  queJquea  monuments  du  regne  du  Tahraka,  in  the  Melanges,
vol.  i.  pp.  89-91),  and  subsequently  others  (Maspero,  Eistoire  des  peuples  de  I'Orient,  4th  edit.,  pp.
459,  526-528),  to  admit  an  Urdamani  different  from  Tanuatamanu.  The  discovery  of  the  right
reading  of  the  name  Tandamanu  by  Steindorff  {Die  KeiUehriftUche  Wiedergabe  dgyptischer  Eigen-
namen,  in  the  Beilrage  zur  Assi/riologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  356-359)  has  bauished  all  doubts,  and  it  is  now
uuiversally  admitted  that  tlie  person  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  documents  is  identical  with  the  kino-
who  erected  the  Stele  of  the  Dream  at  Gebel  Barkal.

'  A  monument  still  exists  which  was  dedicated  at  Thebes  in  the  third  year  of  Tanuatamanu  :  it
was  first  brought  to  notice  by  Chamiiolliou  {MonumetUs  de  VEgijpte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  ccclix.),  and  is
now  preserved  in  the  Berlin  Museum  {Eru^'S,  Aus/iihrlicJies  Verzeichnisi,  pp.  169,  170,  No.  2096),  with
another  undated  document  of  the  same  king  (.Id.,  ibid.,  p.  170,  No.  2097).

'  For  these  sheikhs,  cf.  supra,  pp.  358,  367.


INVASION   OF  KAEDUNIASH  BY   TAMMARITU.  399

soon  return  in  larger  numbers,  and  perhaps  his  fear  would  not  have  proved  un-
founded had  not  fate  suddenly  deprived  them  of  all  their  leaders.  Bel-ikisha
was  killed  in  hunting  by  a  wild  boar,  Nabu-shuuiirish  was  struck  down  by
dropsy,  and  Marduk-shumibni  perished  in  a  mysterious  manner.  Finally
Urtaku  succumbed  to  an  attack  of  apoplexy,  and  the  year  which  had  been  so
fatal  to  his  allies  proved  not  less  so  to  himself  (664  B.c.).^  It  now  seemed  as  if
Assur-bani-pal  might  breathe  freely,  and  inflict  his  long-deferred  vengeance  on
Tanuatamanu,  but  the  death  of  Urtaku  did  not  remove  all  causes  of  uneasiness.
Peace  was  not  yet  concluded,  and  it  depended  on  the  new  King  of  Elam
whether  hostilities  would  be  renewed.  Fortunately  for  the  Assyrians,  the
transmission  of  power  had  rarely  taken  place  at  Susa  for  a  century  past  with-
out a  disturbance,  and  Urtaku  himself  had  gained  the  throne  by  usurpation,
possibly  accompanied  by  murder.  As  he  had  treated  his  elder  brother
Khumban-khaldash  and  the  children  of  the  latter,  so  did  his  younger  brother
Tammaritu  now  treat  his  sons.  Tammaritu  was  "  a  devil "  incarnate,  whose
whole  thoughts  were  of  murder  and  rapine ;  at  least,  this  was  tlie  idea
formed  of  him  by  his  Assyrian  contemporaries,  who  declared  that  he  desired  to
put  to  death  the  sons  of  his  two  predecessors  out  of  sheer  cruelty.  But  we  do
not  need  a  very  vivid  imagination  to  believe  that  these  princes  were  anxious  to
dethrone  him,  and  that  in  endeavouring  to  rid  himself  of  them  lie  was  merely
forestalling  their  secret  plots.  They  escaped  his  murderous  designs,  however,
and  fled  to  Assyria, — Khumban-igash,  Khumban-appa,  and  Tammaritu,  sons  of
Urtaku,  and  Kuduru  and  Parru,  sons  of  Khumban-khaldash,  followed  by  sixty
other  princes  of  royal  blood,  together  with  archers  and  servants — forming,  in  fact,
a  small  army  of  Elamites.  Assur-bani-pal  received  them  with  honour,  for  their
defection  furnished  him  with  a  powerful  weapon  against  the  usurper  :  by
succouring  them  he  could  rouse  half  Elam  and  involve  it  in  civil  war,  in  which
the  pretenders  would  soon  exhaust  their  resources.  It  was  now  a  favourable
moment  to  renew  hostilities  in  Egypt,  while  Tammaritu,  still  insecure  on  his
throne,  would  not  venture  -to  provoke  a  conflict.^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Tanua-
tamanu did  not  risk  the  defence  of  Memphis,  but  concentrated  his  forces  at
Thebes.     Once  more  the  Assyrian  generals  ascended  the  Nile,  and,  after  a

'  fi.  SanTH,  Hidury  of  Assurhanijml,  pp.  100-109;  Jensen,  Inschriften  Aschurbanipal's,  in  Schbadkr,
Keilinschri/tliche  Bibliolhek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  241-247.

-  The  time  of  the  war  against  Urtaku  and  the  expeJition  against  Tanuatamanu  is  indicated  by  a
passage  in  a  cylinder  as  yet  unedited  (Rassam  281  of  the  British  Museum),  quoted  by  Winckler,
Allorient.  Forschunijt^n,  vol.  i.  p.  478,  note  2.  There  we  read  that  the  invasion  of  Urtaku  took  place
at  the  moment  when  Tanuatamanu  ascended  the  throne.  These  preliminary  ditflculties  with  Elam
would  thus  have  coincided  with  the  two  years  which  elapsed  between  the  accession  of  Tunuatamanu
and  his  conquest  of  Memphis,  up  to  the  third  year  mentioned  in  the  Berlin  inscription  (for  this
inscription,  cf.  supra,  p.  398,  note  2) ;  the  testimony  of  the  Egyptian  monuments  would  thus  be  in
almost  complete  accord  with  the  Assyrian  documents  on  this  point.


400  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

voyage  lasting  six  weeks,  at  length  reached  the  suburbs  of  the  great  city.
Tanuatamanu  had  fled  towards  Kipkip,  leaving  Thebes  at  the  mercy  of  the
invaders.  It  was  given  up  to  pillage,  its  population  was  carried  off  into
slavery,  and  its  temples  and  palaces  were  despoiled  of  their  treasures — gold,
silver,  metals,  and  precious  stones,  broidered  and  richly  dyed  stuffs,  and
horses  of  the  royal  stud.  Two  of  the  obelisks  which  adorned  the  temple  of
Amon  were  taken  down  from  their  pedestals  and  placed  on  rafts  to  be  trans-
ported to  Nineveh,  and  we  shall  perhaps  unearth  them  some  day  from  its  ruins.
This  work  of  reprisal  accomplished,  the  conquerors  made  their  way  northwards,
and  the  bulk  of  the  army  recrossed  the  isthmus :  Ethiopiau  rule  had  ceased
north  of  the  cataract,  and  Egypt  settled  down  once  more
under  the  Assyrian  yoke  (663-662  Ti.c.)}

Impoverished  and  decayed  as  Thebes  had  now  long
since  become,  the  nations  whom  she  had  afflicted  so  sorely
in  the  days  of  her  glory  had  retained  for  her  feelings  of
respect  and  almost  of  awe  :  the  rumour  of  her  fall,  spread
through  the  Eastern  world,  filled  them  with  astonishment
AssyniAN  HELMET  FOUND  aud  pity.  The  Hebrews  saw  in  it  the  chastisement  inflicted
by  their  God  on  the  tyrant  who  had  oppressed  their
ancestors,  and  their  prophets  used  it  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  their
contemporaries  the  vanity  of  human  prosperity.  Half  a  century  later,
when  Nineveh,  menaced  in  her  turn,  was  desperately  arming  herself  to
repel  the  barbarians,  Nahum  the  Elkoshite  demanded  of  her,  amid  his  fierce
denunciations,  whether  she  vaunted  herself  to  be  better  than  "  No-amon  (city
of  Amon),  that  was  situate  among  the  rivers,  that  had  the  waters  round  about
her ;  whose  rampart  was  the  sea,  and  her  wall  was  of  the  sea  ?  Ethiopia  and
Egypt  were  her  strength,  and  it  was  infinite.  Put  and  Lubim  (Libya  and  the
Nubians)  came  to  her  succour.  Yet  was  she  carried  away,  she  went  into
captivity :  her  young  children  also  were  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  all  the
streets :  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  honourable  men,  and  all  her  great  men  were
bound  in  chains."  ^     Assur-bani-pal,  lord  of  Egypt  and  conqueror  of  Ethiopia,

'  The  account  of  the  campaign  against  Tanuatamanu  is  found  on  Tablet  K  267S,  obv.,  11.  70-74,
rev.,  11.  1-5,  in  G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  55-57  ;  for  variant  renderings,  cf  G.  Smith,
op.  cit,  pp.  52-55;  S.  Aldex  Smith,  Die  Keilscliri/ttexte  Asurhanipals,  vol.  i.  pp.  12-16;  Jensen,
Inschriften  AscliurbanipaV s,  in  Schkader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  16G-1C9.  The  dates  which  I  have
adopted  follow  from  the  date  of  666  B.C.  given  for  the  death  of  Taharqa  aud  the  accession  of  Psam-
metichus  I.  The  expedition  against  Thebes  must  have  taken  place  at  the  end  of  the  third  or
beginning  of  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tanuatamanu,  shortly  after  the  inscription  of  the
third  year,  and  was  engraved  (for  this  inscription,  cf.  supra,  p.  398,  note  2)  either  in  663  or  662  B.C.
at  the  latest.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  by  Petkie,  Six  Temples  at  Thebes,  pi.  xxi.

'  Nahum  iii.  8-10.


THE  SECOND    EGYPTIAN   CAMPAIGN  AND    THE  SACK   OF   THEBES.    401


might  reasonably  consider  himself  invincible  ;  it  would  have  been  well  for  the
princes  who  trembled  at  the  name  of  Assur-bani-pal,  if  they  bad  taken  this
lesson  to  heart,  and  had  learned  from  the  downfall  of  Tanuatamanu  what  fate
awaited  them  in  the  event  of  their  daring  to  arouse  the  wrath  of  Assyria  by
any  kind  of  intrigue.  Unfortunately,  many  of  them  either  failed  to  see  the
warning  or  refused  to  profit  by  it.  The  Mannai  had  quickly  recovered  from
the  defeat  inflicted  on  tbem  by  Esarhaddon/  and  their  king,  Akhsheri,  in
spite  of  his  advancing
years,  believed  that  his
own  energy  and  resources
were  sufficient  to  warrant
him  in  anticipating  a
speedy  revenge.  Perhaps
a  further  insight  into  the
real  character  of  Assur-
bani-pal  may  have  in-
duced him  to  venture
on  hostilities.  For  the
king's  contemporaries  had
begun  to  realise  that,  be-
neath his  a  pparent  bravery
and  ostentation,  he  was
by  nature  indolent,  im-
patient of  restraint,  and  fond  of  ease  and  luxury.  Wlieu  not  absorbed  in
the  routine  of  the  court  and  the  pleasures  of  the  harem,  he  spent  his
leisure  in  hunting  on  the  Mesopotamian  plains,  or  in  the  extensive  parks
which  had  been  laid  out  by  himself  or  his  predecessors  in  the  vicinity  of
their  summer  palaces.  Urus-stalking  had  become  merely  a  memory  of  the
past :  these  animals  had  been  so  persistently  hunted  for  centuries  that  the
species  had  almost  become  extinct ;  solitary  specimens  only  were  occasionally
met  with  in  remote  parts  of  the  forest  or  in  out-of-the-way  marshes.  The  wild
ass  was  still  to  be  found  in  large  numbers,  as  well  as  the  goat,  the  ostrich,  and
small  game,*  but  the  lion  was  now  rarely  met  with,  and  the  beaters  were
no  lono-er  sure  of  finding  him  in  his  ancient  haunts.  Specimens  had  to  be
sought  by  the  royal  gamekeepers  in  the  provinces,  and  when  successfully
trapped  were  forthwith  despatched  to  one  or  other  of  the  king's  country  seats.

'  For  the  defeat  of  the  Mannai  in  the  reign  of  Esarhadilon,  cf.  supra,  pp.  352-354.

'-'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  photograph  taken  from  the  original  in  the  British  Mueeiim  ;
cf.  Place,  Ninive  et  I'Assyrie,  vol.  iii.  pi.  50.

'  The  representation  of  a  wild-asB  hunt,  reproduced  in  The  Dawn  of  CieiUzatlvn,  p,  559,  belongs  to
the  reign  of  Assur-bani-pal.

2    D


A    LIuN    ISSUING   FUOM    ITS    CAGE."


402  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS   ZENITH.

The  beast  was  often  kept  for  several  days  in  a  cage  while  preparations  were
made  for  a  fete,  at  which  he  was  destined  to  form  one  of  the  chief  attrac-
tions, and  when  the  time  came  he  was  taken  to  the  appointed  place  and
let  loose  ;  the  sovereign  pursued  him  either  in  a  chariot  or  on  horseback,  and
did  not  desist  from  the  chase  till  he  had  pierced  his  quarry  with  arrows  or  lance.
Frequently  the  beast  would  be  turned  loose  in  the  park,  and  left  there  till
accustomed  to  his  surroundings,  so  that  later  on  he  might  be  run  down  under
conditions  somewhat  resembling  his  native  freedom.  Assur-bani-pal  did  not
shun  a  personal  encounter  with  an  infuriated  lion ;  he  displayed  in  this
hazardous  sport  a  bravery  and  skill  which  rivalled  that  of  his  ancestors,  and  he
never  relegated  to  another  the  task  of  leading  the  attack  or  dealing  the  final
death-blow.  This,  however,  was  not  the  case  when  it  was  a  question  of  starting
on  some  warlike  expedition ;  he  would  then  leave  to  his  Tartans,  or  to  the
Rabshakeh,  or  to  some  other  chosen  ofScer,  the  entire  conduct  of  all  operations.^
This  did  not  preclude  the  king  from  taking  an  interest  in  what  was  passing
beyond  the  frontier,  nor  did  he  fail  in  his  performance  of  the  various  religious
duties  which  custom  imposed  on  an  Assyrian  sovereign  :  he  consulted  the
oracles  of  Shamash  or  Ishtar,  he  offered  sacrifices,  he  fasted  and  humbled
himself  in  the  temples  to  obtain  the  success  of  his  troops,  and  when  they
returned  laden  with  spoil  from  the  campaign,  he  attributed  their  victories  no
less  to  his  prayers  than  to  their  courage  or  to  the  skill  of  their  leaders.  His
generals,  thoroughly  equipped  for  their  task,  and  well  supported  by  their  troops,
had  no  need  of  the  royal  presence  to  ensure  their  triumph  over  any  foe  they
might  encounter ;  indeed,  in  the  absence  of  the  king  they  experienced  a  liberty
of  action  and  boldness  in  pressing  their  victories  to  the  uttermost  which  they
would  not  have  enjoyed  had  he  been  in  command.  Foreigners,  accustomed  to
see  the  sovereigns  of  Nineveh  conduct  their  armies  in  person,  as  long  as  they
were  not  incapacitated  by  age,  thought  that  the  indolence  of  Assur-bani-pal
was  the  unconscious  expression  of  weariness  or  of  his  feeble  control  of  the  empire,
and  Akhsheri  determined  to  be  one  of  the  first  to  take  advantage  of  it.  Events
proved  that  he  was  mistaken  in  his  calculations.  No  sooner  had  his  intentions
become  known,  than  a  division  of  Assyrian  troops  appeared  on  his  frontier,  and
prepared  to  attack  him.  Resolving  to  take  the  initiative,  he  fell  one  night  un-
expectedly upon  the  Assyrian  camp,  but  fortune  declared  against  him :  he  was
driven  back,  and  his  broken  ranks  were  closely  pursued  for  a  distance  of  twenty-
three  miles.  Eight  of  his  strongholds  fell  one  after  the  other,  and  he  was  at  length
forced  to  abandon  his  capital  of  Izirtu,  and  flee  precipitately  to  his  fortress  of

'  We  have  seen,  for  example,  that  after  the  death  of  Esarhaddon,  the  Egyptian  campaign  was
conducted  by  one  of  the  Tartans  and  the  Rabshakeh  (of.  supra,  pp.  3S4,  3S5) ;  for  the  campaign
against  Tiumman,  and  the  reasons  which  hindered  the  king  from  conducting  it  in  person,  see  infra,
p.  405.


DISTURBANCES  AMONG    TEE  MANNAI  AND    TEE  MEDES.         403

Adrana  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains.  Even  there  he  did  not  find  the  security-
he  desired,  for  the  conqueror  pursued  him  thither,  methodically  devastating  by
the  way  the  districts  through  which  he  passed :  he  carried  off  everything — men,
slaves,  and  herds  of  cattle — and  he  never  retired  from  a  city  or  village  without
previously  setting  it  on  fire.  Paddir,  Arsiyanish,  and  Eristiana  were  thus  laid
waste,  after  which  the  Assyrians  returned  to  their  camp,  having  re-established  the
authority  of  their  master  over  several  districts  which  had  been  lost  to  them  for
some  generations  previously.  Akhsheri  had  shown  no  sign  of  yielding,  but  his
people,  weary  of  a  hopeless  resistance,  put  him  to  death,  and  hurling  his  corpse
over  the  wall  of  Adrana,  proclaimed  his  son  Ualli  as  king.  The  new  sovereign
hastened  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Assyrians  on  reasonable  terms  :  he  gave
up  his  eldest  son,  Erisinni,  and  one  of  his  daughters  as  hostages,  and  promised  to
pay  the  former  tribute  augmented  by  an  annual  present  of  thirty  horses  ;  ^  j^eace
was  not  again  disturbed  on  this  side  except  by  some  unimportant  skirmishes.
In  one  of  these,  a  Median  chieftain,  named  Biriz-khadri,  made  an  alliance
with  two  princes  of  the  people  of  the  Sakhi,  Sarati,  and  Parikhia,  sons  of  Gagu,'^
to  ravage  the  marches  of  the  Greater  Zab ;  but  their  territory  was  raided  in
return,  and  they  themselves  taken  ^jrisoners.'^  A  little  later,  Andaria,  prince  of
Lubdi,  forgetful  of  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  aged  Esai-haddon,*  made
a  night  attack  on  the  towns  of  Kullimir  and  Ubbumi:  the  inhabitants
armed  in  haste,  and  he  was  not  only  defeated,  but  was  taken  captive,  and  his
head  cut  off  to  be  sent  to  Nineveh.'     The  garrisons  and  military  colonies  aloug

'  G.  Smith.  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  84-99 ;  S.  Aldex  SjnxH,  Die  KeiUchrifttexte  Asurhanipals,
vol.  i.  pp.  20-23  ;  Jensen,  Inschri/ten  Aschurbanijxirs,  in  Sohkader,  Keil.  Bibh,  vol.  ii.  pp.  176-179,
240-213.  As  Tiele  has  shown  (Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  374),  the  narrative  of  Cylinder  B,  col.  iii.
11.  16-102  (G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  89-97),  is  the  most  authentic  account  of  this  campaign  extant.  The
others  are  abridged,  and  the  castle  in  which  Akhsheri  took  refuge  is  called  in  them  Ishtattu  instead  of
Adrana.    The  exact  date  of  the  expedition  is  still  unknown.

-  The  name  of  Biriz-khadri  has  an  Iranian  appearance.  The  first  element  Biriz  recalls  the  Zend
bereza,  berez,  "  tall,  large ; "  the  second,  which  appears  in  the  names  Bisi-khadir  and  Khali-khadri
{Annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  33,  43,  ed.  EosT,  pp.  S-11),  is  of  uncertain  derivation,  and  has  been
connected  with  atar.  "  fire  "  (Tiele,  Bab.-assyr,  Gesch.,  p.  3GI,  note  4),  or  with  Ichicathra,  "  brilliance  "
(KosT,  TJntersuchungen  zur  AUorient.  Gesch..  p.  90,  note  2).  Gagu,  which  is  found  as  the  name  of  a
people  (Gagati)  in  the  Tel-el-Amarna  tablets  (Bezold  and  Bcdge,  The  Tell  el  Amarna  Tablets  in  t)ie
Brit.  Mus.,  No.  i.  1.  38),  has  been  identified  from  the  first  with  the  name  of  Gog,  prince  of  Kosh,
Meshech,  and  Tubal  {Ezek.  xxxviii.  2,  3  ;  xxxix.  1 :  cf.  Fk.  Lenormant,  Les  Origines  de  I'Bistoire,
vol.  ii.  pp.  461-466 ;  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.^  p.  99  ;  Schrader,  Keil.  und  Geschichtsforschung,  p.  1,59,  note  ;
TDeutzsch,  Wo  lag  das  Paradies?  p.  247;  Tiele,  Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  361,  note  41;  Hommel,  Gesch.
Bab.  und  Ass.,  p.  727;  EosT,  op.  cit.,  p.  91,  note  1).  The  name  of  the  country  of  Sakhi,  which  has
not  been  met  with  elsewhere,  has  been  compared  with  that  of  the  Sacje,  which  seems  to  have  existed
not  only  in  the  name  of  the  province  of  Sakasene  mentioned  by  the  classical  geographers  (Str.^bo,  XI.
viii.  §  4,  pp.  509,  511),  but  in  that  of  Shake  known  to  the  old  Armenian  geographers  (Jcsxi,  Iranisches
Namenbuch,  p.  243);  the  country  itself,  however,  as  it  seems  to  me.  cannot  be  sought  in  the  direction
of  Sakasene,  and  consequently  the  proposed  identification  cannot  hold  good.  ;

^  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  97,  9S ;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  Ii.  pp.  17S-1S1 ;  this
campaign  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Raseam  Cylinder,  nor  is  the  skirmish  of  .\ndaria.

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  369,  370.

'  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  97-99;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in  Schrader,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  ISO,  181.


404  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS   ZENITH.

the  north-east  frontier  were  constantly  required  to  be  on  the  alert ;  but  they
usually  had  sufficient  available  resources  to  meet  any  emergency,  and  the
enemies  who  molested  them  were  rarely  dangerous  enough  to  necessitate  the
mobilisation  of  a  regular  army.

This  was  not  the  case,  however,  in  the  south-west,  where  Tiumman,  counting

on  the  military  strength  of  Elam,  made  continual  hostile  demonstrations.     He

was  scarcely  settled  on  his  throne  before  he  hastened  to  form  alliances  with

those  Aramaean  states  which  had  so  often  invoked  the  aid  of  his  predecessors

against  the  ancestors  of  Assur-bani-pal.'     The    Kalda  rejected  his  proposals,

as  did  most  of  the  tribes  of  the  littoral ;  but   the   Gambula  yielded   to  his

solicitations,  and  their  king,  Dananu,  son  of  Bel-ikisha,  entered  into  an  offensive

and  defensive  alliance  witii  Elam.     Their  defection  left  the  eastern  frontier  of

Karduniash  unprotected,  and,  by  opening  to  the  Elamite  the  fords  of  the  Tigris,

permitted  him  to  advance  on  Babylon  unhindered  by  any  serious  obstacle.     As

soon  as  the  compact  was  sealed,  Tiumman  massed  his  battalions  on  the  middle

course  of  the  Uknu,  and,  before  crossing  the  frontier,  sent  two  of  his  generals,

the  Susian  Khumba-dara  and  the  Chaldaean  Nabu-damiq,  as  the  bearers  of  an

insolent  ultimatum  to  the  court  of  Nineveh  :  he  offered  the  king  the  choice

between  immediate  hostilities,  or  the  extradition  of  the  sons  of  Urtaku  and

Khumban-khaldash,  as    well  as  of  their   partisans  who  had  taken  refuge  in

Assyria.^     To   surrender   the   exiles   would   have  been  an  open  confession  of

inferiority,  and   such   a   humiliating   acknowledgment  of  weakness   promptly

reported  throughout  the  Eastern  world  might  shortly  have  excited  a  general

revolt :  hence  Assur-bani-pal  disdainfully  rejected  the  proposal  of  the  Elamite

sovereign,  which  had  been  made  rather  as  a  matter  of  form  than  witli  any  hope

of  its  acceptance,  but  the  issue  of  a  serious  war  with  Susa  was  so  uncertain  that

his  refusal  was  accompanied  with  serious  misgivings.    It  needed  many  favourable

omens  from  the  gods  to  encourage  him  to  believe  in  his  future  success.     The

moon-god  Sin  was  the  first  to  utter  his  prediction :  he  suffered  eclipse  in  the

month  of  Tammuz,  and  for  three  successive  days,  at  nightfall,  showed  himself

in  the  sky  surrounded  by  strange  appearances  which  heralded  the  death  of  a  king

in  Elam,  and  foretold  calamity  to  that  country.     Then  Assur  and  Ishtar  struck

Tiumman  with  violent  convulsions  ;  they  caused  his  lips  and  eyes  to  be  horribly

distorted,  but  he  despised  their  warning,  and  as  soon  as  his  seizure  had  passed,

set  out  to  assume  command  of  his  army.     The  news  of  his  action  reached

Nineveh  in  the  month  of  Ab,  on  the  morning  of  the  solemn  festival  of  Ishtar.

'  For  the  contests  waged  by  the  united  forces  of  Elamites  and  Aramseaus  against  Sargon,
.Sennacherib,  and  Esarhaddon,  of  sMj^ra,  pp.  222-225,  230-232,  254-257,  274-27U,  295,  296,  299-307,
349,  350,  358.

=  Cf.  svpra,  p.  399.


TEE    WAR  AGAINST   TIVMMAN.  405

Assur-bani-pal  was  at  Arbela,  celebrating  the  rites  in  honour  of  the  goddess,
when  the  messenger  appeared  before  him  and  repeated,  together  with  the  terms
of  the  declaration  of  war,  the  scornful  words  which  Tiumman  had  uttered  against
him  and  his  patroness :  "  Tiiis  prince  whose  wits  have  been  crazed  by  Ishtar —
I  will  let  him  escape  no  more,  when  once  I  have  gone  forth  and  measured  my
strength  against  him  ! "  This  blasphemy  filled  the  Assyrian  king  with  horror.
That  very  evening  he  betook  himself  to  the  sanctuary,  and  there,  prostrate
before  the  image  of  the  goddess,  he  poured  forth  prayers  mingled  with  tears  :
"  Lady  of  Arbela,  I  am  Assur-bani-pal,  King  of  Assyria,  the  creature  of  thy  hands,
the  oifspring  of  a  father  whom  thou  didst  create !  Behold  now,  this  Tiumman,
the  King  of  Elam,  who  despises  the  gods  of  Assyria,  hath  sent  forth  his  host
and  prepared  himself  for  the  conflict ;  he  hath  called  for  his  arms  to  rusli  to
attack  Assyria.  Do  thou,  0  archer  of  the  gods,  like  a  bolt  falling  in  the
midst  of  the  battle,  overtbrow  him,  and  let  loose  upon  him  a  tempest,  and
an  evil  wind !  "  ^  Ishtar  heard  his  prayer,  and  her  voice  sounded  through
the  gloom  :  "  Fear  not,"  said  she,  comforting  him :  "  since  thou  hast  raised
thy  hands  to  me  in  supplication,  and  thine  eyes  are  bedewed  with  tears,
I  grant  thee  a  boon  !  "  Towards  tlie  end  of  that  night,  a  seer  slept  in  the
temple  and  was  visited  by  a  dream.  Ishtar  of  Arbela  appeared  to  him,  with  a
quiver  on  either  side,  a  bow  in  one  hand  and  a  drawn  sword  in  the  other.  She
advanced  towards  the  king,  and  spoke  to  him  as  if  she  had  been  his  mother :
"  Make  war  boldly !  whichever  way  thou  turnest  thy  countenance,  there  will  I
go ! "  And  the  king  replied  to  her,  "  Where  thou  goest,  will  I  go  with  thee,
sovereign  lady !  "  But  she  answered,  "  Stay  thou  here.  Dwell  in  this  home  of
Nebo,  eat  thy  food  and  drink  thy  wine,  listen  to  joyful  songs  and  honour  my
divinity,  until  I  have  gone  and  accomplished  this  work.  Let  not  thy  countenance
grow  pale,  nor  thy  feet  fail  under  thee,  and  expose  not  thyself  to  the  danger
of  battle."  "  And  then,  0  king,"  added  the  seei',  "  she  hid  thee  in  her  bosom  as
a  mother,  and  protected  thy  image.  A  flame  shall  spring  forth  before  her,  and
shall  spread  abroad  to  destroy  thine  enemies:  against  Tiumman, King  of  Elam,
who  has  angered  her,  has  she  set  her  face ! "  Like  Minephtah  of  old,  in  tlie
days  of  the  Libyan  invasions  of  Egypt,^  Assur-bani-pal  allowed  himself  to  be
readily  convinced  by  the  decision  of  the  gods ;  he  did  not  quit  Arbela,  but  gave
orders  to  his  troops  to  proceed  to  the  front.  His  generals  opened  the  campaign
in  the  month  of  Elul,  and  directed  the  main  body  of  their  forces  against  the

'  The  discourse  is  somewhat  mutiluted  on  Cylinder  B,  col.  v.  11.  aO-4C,  which  alone  has  preserved
this  text  (G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  119-123 ;  Jensen,  Inschr.  A^churbanipal's,  iu
8CHKADER,  Eeil.  Bihl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  250,  251 ;  cf.  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keihchr.  Asurbanipals,  vol.  iii.
pp.  11-17).     I  have  given  the  general  sense  of  the  passage  rather  than  an  actual  translation.

'  For  the  dream  of  Miuephtah  and  tbe  order  he  received  not  to  be  present  at  the  battle  against
the  Libyans,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  434.


406


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


fortress  of  Duiihi,  at  the  point  on  the  frontier  nearest  to  Susa.  Tiummau  was
not  expecting  such  a  prompt  and  direct  attack  :  he  had  reckoned  doubtless  on
uniting  his  forces  with  those  of  Dunanu  with  a  view  to  invading  Karduniash,
and  suddenly  realised  that  his  adversary  had  forestalled  him  and  was  advancing
on  the  heart  of  his  empire.     He  slowly  withdrew  his  advanced  guard,  and  con-


is^.-


^■^v^


mm


-•i » '.t


\i


f


<•//


^.


=e^;


^^^-1


•sT


'mi


^^


i


IIl.M    UULAK;    UI=    Bl'W    '.VlIU    .V    LLuW    OF    His    SWOIU-1.    AKLi    GlVUj    HDISELF    LT    Tu    THE

EXECUTIONER.'

centrated  his  forces  round  the  town  of  Tulliz,  a  few  leagues  on  this  side  of  Susa,
and  there  awaited  the  enemy's  attack.^

His  position  was  a  strong  one,  flanked  on  the  right  by  a  wood  and  on  the
left  by  the  Ulai,  while  the  flower  of  the  Elamite  nobility  was  ranged  around
him.  The  equipment  of  his  soldiers  was  simpler  than  that  of  the  enemy :  con-
sisting of  a  low  helmet,  devoid  of  any  crest,  but  furnished  with  a  large  pendant
tress  of  horsehair  to  shade  the  neck ;  a  shield  of  moderate  dimensions ;  a  small
bow,  which,  however,  was  quite  as  deadly  a  weapon  as  that  of  the  Assyrians,
when  wielded  by  skilful  hands;  a  lance,  a  mace,  and  a  dagger.  He  had  only  a
small  body  of  cavalry,  but  the  chariotry  formed  an  important  force,  and  presented

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  from  the  origioal  in  the  British  Museum ;  cf.
Layard,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pis.  45,  46.  The  translation  of  the  iuscriptiuu  is  given  in
G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipul,  pp.  143,  144.

-  The  site  of  Tulliz  is  unknown.  Billeibeck  considers,  and  with  reason,  I  think,  that  the
battle  took  place  to  the  south  of  t^usa,  on  the  river  Shavur,  which  would  correspond  to  the
Ulai,  on  the  lowest  spurs  of  the  ridge  of  hills  bordering  the  alluvial  plain  of  Susiana  (^Susa,  p.  174,
note  17).


\


408


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


several  original  features.  The  chariot  did  not  follow  the  classic  model,  rounded
in  front  and  open  at  the  back ;  it  was  a  kind  of  light  car,  consisting  of  a
square  footboard  placed  flat  on  the  axle  of  the  wheels,  and  furnished  with
triangular  side-pieces  on  two  sides  only,  the  vehicle  being  drawn  by  a  pair  of
horses.  Such  chariots  were  easier  to  manage,  better  adapted  for  rapid  motion,
and  must  have  been  more  convenient  for  a  reconnaissance  or  for  skirmishes  with
infantry  ;  but  when  thrown  iti  a  mass  against  the  heavy  chariotry  of  the  peoples
of  the  Euphrates,  they  were  far  too  slightly  built  to  overthrow  the  latter,
and  at  close  quarters  were  of  necessity  crushed  by  the  superior  weight  of  the


VUTAKU,    COUSIN    OF   TIUMMAN,    SURRENDERING    TO    AN    ASSYRIAN.'

adversary.  Tiumman  had  not  succeeded  in  collecting  all  his  forces  before  the  first
columns  of  the  Assyrian  army  advanced  to  engage  his  front  line,  but  as  he  was
expecting  reinforcements,  he  endeavoured  to  gain  time  by  despatching  Ituni,  one
of  his  generals,  with  orders  to  negotiate  a  truce.  The  Assyrian  commander,
suspecting  a  ruse,  would  not  listen  to  any  proposals,  but  ordered  the  envoy  to  be
decapitated  on  the  spot :  Ituni  broke  his  bow  with  a  blow  of  his  sword,  and  stoically
yielded  his  neck  to  the  executioner.^  The  issue  of  the  battle  was  for  a  long  time
undecided,  but  the  victory  finally  remained  with  the  heavy  regiments  of  Assyria.
The  left  wing  of  the  Susians,  driven  into  the  Ulai,  perished  by  drowning,  and
the  river  was  choked  with  the  corpses  of  men  and  horses,  and  the  debris  of  arms
and  broken  chariots.  The  right  wing  took  to  flight  under  cover  of  a  wood,  and
the  survivors  tried  to  reach  the  mountains.      Urtaku,  the  cousin  of  Tiumman.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  British  Museum;  of.  Layaed,  Moh.
of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  45.  The  translation  of  the  inscription  is  given  in  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbani-
pal,  pp.  144.  145.

■■^  Tablet  K  2674  of  the  British  Museum,  obv.,  11.  31-33,  in  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Eeilschrifttexte
Asurbanipah,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2,  5 ;  inscription  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  battle,  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,
pp.  145,  14(J.


THE  BATTLE   OF   TULLIZ.


409


was  wounded  by  an  arrow  ;  perceiving  an  Assyrian  soldier  coming  up  to  him,
he  told  him  who  he  was,  and  recommended  him  to  carry  his  head  to  the
general :  "  He  will  pay  you  handsomely  for  it,"  he  added.^  Tiumman  had  led
in  person  several  charges  of  his  body-guard ;  and  on  being  wounded,  his  son
Tammaritu  had  succeeded  in  rescuing  him  from  the  tliick  of  the  fight :  both
seated  together  in  a  chariot,  were  in  full  flight,  when  one  of  the  wheels
caught  against  a  tree  and  was  shattered,  the  shock  flinging  the  occupants
to  the  ground.'-    A  large  body  of  Assyrians  were  in  close  pursuit,  led  by  one


THE    LAST    ARROW   OF   TIU.MMAN    AND    HIS   SON.-"


of  the  exiled  Susian  princes,  a  second  Tammaritu,  son  of  Urtaku.  At  the  first
discharge  an  arrow  wounded  Tiumman  in  the  right  side,  and  brought  him
to  his  knee.  He  felt  that  all  was  over,  and  desiring  at  all  events  to  be
revenged,  he  pointed  out  the  deserter  prince  to  his  companion,  crying  indig-
nantly, "  Let  fly  at  him."  The  arrow  missed  its  mark,  and  a  flight  of  hostile
darts  stretched  the  young  man  on  the  ground  :  the  traitor  Tammaritu
dealt  the  son  his  death-blow  with  his  mace,  while  an  Assyrian  decapitated  the
father.*  The  corpses  were  left  on  the  field,  but  the  head  of  the  king,  after  being
taken  to  the  general  in  command,  was  carried  through  the  camp  on  one  of  the
chariots  captured  during  the  action,  and  was  eventually  sent  to  the  palace

'  Tahht  E  2674,  obv.,  11.  27-30.  in  S.  Aldes  Smith,  Die  Keihchrifttexte  Asurhanipals,  vol.  iii.
pp.  2-5;  inscription  from  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  battle,  in  6.  Smith,  History  of  Assurhanipal,
pp.  144,  145.

=  Tablet  K2674,  obv., II.  14-26 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  142, 143 ;  S.  Aluen  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  1,  4, 5.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  British  Museum;  cf  Latard,  Mon.  of
Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  4G.     The  translation  of  the  inscription  is  given  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  p.  143.

*  Inscriptions  from  one  of  the  bas-i  eliefs  of  the  battle,  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  143,  144.


410


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


of  Arbek  by  the  h;ind  of  a  well-mounted  courier.^  The  day  concluded  with  the
making  of  an  inventory  of  the  spoil,  and  by  an  enumeration  of  the  heads  of  the
slain :  prisoners  from  the  rank  and  file  were  beaten  to  death  according  to  custom,
and  several  of  the  principal  officers  bad  their  tongues  torn  out  or  were  flayed
alive.  The  news  of  the  disaster  was  brought  to  Susa  towards  evening  by
the  fugitives,  and  produced  a  revolution  in  the  city.  The  partisans  of  the  exiled
princes,  seizing  the  adherents  of  Tiumman,  put  them  in  chains,  and  delivered


:7^r^


J^'-Ssi^


^-<'i5^>'<  --t-^^  ->11'S^


EEATU  OF    TIIMU.^N    AND    HIS   SON.'


them  up  to  the  conqueror.  The  shattered  remnants  of  the  army  rallied  round
them,  and  a  throng  of  men  and  women  in  festal  garb  issued  forth  along  the
banks  of  the  Ulai  to  meet  the  Assyrians.  The  priests  and  sacred  singers  marched
to  the  sound  of  music,  marking  the  rhythm  with  their  feet,  and  filling  the  air  with
the  noise  of  their  harps  and  double  flutes,  while  behind  them  came  a  choir  of
children,  chanting  a  hymn  under  the  direction  of  the  consecrated  eunuchs.
The  Tartan  met  them,  and,  acting  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  Assur-
bani-pal,  presented  to  the  multitude  Khumban-igash,  the  eldest  son  of
TJrtaku,  as  their  king.^     The  people  joyfully  hailed  the  new  sovereign,  and  the

•  Inscription  on  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  of  the  battle,  in  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  p.  144.

*  Drawn  by  Bouilier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  British  Museum ;  cf.  La  yard,  Monu-
ments of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  46.  The  translation  of  the  inscription  is  given  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,
pp.  143,  144.

^  Inscription  on  one  of  the  bas-reliefa  of  the  battle,  in  G.  Smith,  Hid.  of  Assurhanipal,  p.  146.


-i?^
^


<3  n


412


TEE  POWER    OF  ASSTBIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.


Assyrians,  after  exacting  tribute  from  him  and  conferring  the  fief  of  Khaidalu
on  his  brother  Tammaritu,  withdrew,  leaving  to  the  new  princes  the  task  of
establishing  their  authority  outside  the  walls  of  Susa  and  Madaktu,  As  they
returned,  they  attacked  the  Gambula,  speedily  reducing  them  to  submission.
Dunanu,  besieged  in  his  stronghold  of  Shapibel,  surrendered  at  discretion,  and

was   carried    away   captive   with    all    his

family.    Thus  Assur-bani-pal  had  scrupu-

(-  ,        J,  -*       lously  obeyed  the  orders  of  Ishtar.    While

,.  'v^'  I     ^^^     ^**^       liis   jjenerals  were  winning   his  victories


^:^K''^


^:)^::^.


'^$^^^'  .    -^fi^t ^^^  -K^<^~n


THE    HEAD   OF    TlfMUAN    SENT   TO  KLNEVEH.'

he  had  been  eating  and  drinking,  hunting,  dallying  with  his  wives,  and  living
in  the  open  air.  He  was  taking  his  pleasure  with  the  queen  in  the  palace
garden  when  the  head  of  Tiumman  was  brought  to  him :  he  caused  it  to  be
suspended  from  the  branch  of  a  pine  tree  in  full  view  of  the  whole  court,  and
continued  his  banquet  to  the  sound  of  harps  and  singing.  Kusas  III.,  King  of
Urartu,  died  about  this  time,  and  his  successor,  Sharduris  III.,  thought  it
incumbent  on  him  to  announce  his  accession  at  Nineveh.  Assur-bani-pal
received  the  embassy  at  Arbela,  with  the  graciousness  befitting  a  suzerain
whom  a  faithful  vassal  honours  by  his  dutiful  homage,  and  in  order  to  impress

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  .a  photograph  taken  in  the  British  Museum ;  cf.  Layabd,  Monuments
of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  45.  The  chariot  speeding  along  at  a  gallop  in  the  topmost  series  of  pictures
carries  a  soldier  bearing  the  head  of  Tiumman  in  his  hand ;  behind  him,  under  a  teut,  scribes  are
registering  the  heads  wliich  are  brought  in.  In  tlie  two  lower  bas-reliefs  are  displayed  the  closing
scenes  of  the  battle.  Tlje  translation  of  the  inscription  is  given  in  G.  Smith,  Uintory  oj  Assurhani-
pal,  p.  144.


SIAM   SUBJECT   TO   ASSTBIA   FOB    THE  FJBST  TIME.


413


the  Urartians  still  further  with  an  idea  of  his  power,  he  showed  them  the  two
Elamite  delegates,  Khumba-dara  and  Nabu-damiq,  in  chains  at  his  feet.^  These
wretched  men  had  a  more  cruel  ordeal  yet  in  store  for  them  :  when  the  Assyrian
army  re-entered  Nineveh,  Assur-bani-pal  placed  them  on  the  route  along  which
the  cortege  had  to  pass,  and  made  them  realise  to  the  full  the  humiliation  of
their  country.  Dunanu  walked  at  the  head  of  the  band  of  captive  chiefs,  with
the  head  of  Tiumman,  taken  from  its  tree,  suspended  round  his  neck.  When
the  delegates  perceived  it,  they  gave  way  to  despair :  Khumba-dara  tore  out
his  beard  by  handfuls,  and  Nabu-damiq,  unsheathing  the  dagger  which  hung
from  his  belt,  plunged  it  into  his  own  breast.  The  triumphal  entry  was  followed
by  the  usual  tortures.     The  head  of  Tiummau  was  fixed  over  the  gate  of


ASSU1!-BANI-PAL   BANQUETING    WITH    HIS    QUEEN.'


Nineveh,  to  rot  before  the  eyes  of  the  multitude.  Dunanu  was  slowly  flayed
alive,  and  then  bled  like  a  lamb ;  his  brother  Shamgunu  had  his  throat  cut,
and  his  body  was  divided  into  pieces,  which  were  distributed  over  the  country  as
a  warning.  Even  the  dead  were  not  spared  :  the  bones  of  Nabu-shumirish  were
disinterred  and  transported  to  Assyria,  where  his  sons  were  forced  to  bray  them
in  a  mortar.^     We  may  estimate  the  extent  of  the  alarm  which  had  been  felt  at

'  G.  Smith,  Hid.  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  115,  110,  146,  147.  Belck  and  Lebmann  {Ein  neuer
Herrscher  von  Chaldia,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Aesyriologie,  vol.  ix.  pp.  342-345)  have  very  ingeniously
connected  the  embassy,  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  documents,  with  the  fact  of  the  accession  of  the
king  who  sent  it.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  Britisli  Museum.  The  head  of
Tiumman  hangs  on  the  second  tree  on  the  left-hand  side.

'  The  fullest  text  of  all  those  which  narrate  the  campaign  against  Tiumman  and  Dunanu  is  that
on  Cylinder  B  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  iy.  11.  82-95,  col.  v.  11.  1-104,  col.  vi.  11.  2-92,  published  and
translated  by  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  116-138;  ef.  Jensen,  Inscltr.  Aschurbanipal's,  in  Sghradeb,  Keil.
Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  246-259.  It  pretends,  as  usual,  that  the  king  led  the  army  in  person,  but  the  words
which  the  seer  places  in  the  mouth  of  Ishtar  (col.  v.  11.  63-70,  cf.  supra,  p.  405)  prove  that  the  king
remained  at  Arbela  by  divine  command,  and  the  inscription  on  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  (G.  Smith,  op.
cit.,  p.  146,  cf.  supra,  p.  413),  as  well  as  Tablet  K  2674  (G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  p.  140;  S.  Alden  Smith,
Die  Keilschr.  Asurbanipals,  vol.  iii.  pp.  2,  5),  mentions,  without  giving  his  name,  the  general  who
was  sent  against  Susa.     The  other  documents  relating  to  this  expedition  have  been  collected  in


414  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

Nineveh  by  the  outburst  of  brutal  joy  with  which  the  victory  was  hailed.  The
experience  of  the  past  showed  what  a  terrible  enemy  Assyria  had  in  Elam,  and
how  slight  was  tlie  chance  of  a  successful  issue  in  a  war  against  her.  Her  kings
had  often  invaded  Chaldtea,  and  had  more  than  once  brought  it  directlv  under
their  sway  ;  they  had  ravaged  its  cities  and  pillaged  its  temples,  and  the  sanctu-
aries of  Susa  were  filled  with  statues  of  the  gods  or  with  bas-reliefs  which  they
had  dedicated  after  their  campaigns  on  the  Euphrates.  Although  they  had  not
been  successful  against  Assyria  to  the  same  extent,  they  had  at  least  always
victoriously  repelled  her  attacks :  they  had  held  their  own  against  Sargon,  given
much  trouble  to  Sennacherib,  and  defied  the  power  of  Esarhaddon  with  impunity.
Never  till  now  had  an  Assyrian  army  gained  such  an  important  victory  over
Elam,  and  though  it  was  by  no  means  decisive,  we  can  easily  believe  that  Assur-
bani-pal  was  filled  with  pride  and  delight,  since  it  was  the  first  time  that  a  king
of  Nineveh  had  imposed  on  Elam  a  sovereign  of  his  own  choice.

Since  homage  was  voluntarily  rendered  him  by  the  rulers  of  foreign  nations,
Assur-bani-pal  doubtless  believed  that  he  might  exact  it  without  hesitation
from  the  vassal  princes  dependent  on  the  empire ;  and  not  from  the  weaker
only  like  those  who  were  still  to  be  found  in  Syria,  but  also  from  the
more  powerful,  not  excepting  the  lord  of  Karduniasli.  Shamash-shumukin
had  fully  risen  to  his  position  as  King  of  Babylon,  and  the  unbroken  peace
which  he  had  enjoyed  since  the  death  of  Urtaku  '  had  enabled  him  almost
to  complete  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  begun  under  Esarhaddon.  He
had  finished  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Babylon,  and  had  fortified  the
approaches  to  the  city,  thus  rendering  it  capable  of  withstanding  a  long
siege ;  ^  he  had  repaired  the  temple  of  Sippara,  which  had  never  recovered
from  the  Elamite  invasion ;  ^  and  while  unstintingly  lavishing  his  treasures  in
honour  of  the  gods  and  for  the  safety  of  his  capital,  he  watched  with  jealous
care  over  the  interests  of  his  subjects.  He  obtained  for  them  the  privilege  of
being  treated  on  the  same  footing  as  the  Assyrians  throughout  his  father's
ancestral  domains ;  they  consequently  enjoyed  the  right  of  trading  without
restriction  throughout  the  empire,  and  met  with  the  same  degree  of  protection
from  the  officials  of  Nineveh  as  from  the  magistrates  of  their  own  country.

G.  Smitb,  Sist.  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  110-114,  139-146,  and  in  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschri/ttexte
Asurhanipah,  vol.  i.  pp.  22-27 ;  cf.  .Jensen,  Inschriften  AachurhanipaT s,  in  Sohbaper,  Keil.  Bibl.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  180-183.  The  exact  date  of  this  war  is  unknown ;  it  may  be  approximately  given  as
655  B.C.

'  See  guiwa,  pp.  398,  399,  for  a  short  account  of  the  expedition  of  Urtaku  against  Babylon.

^  Cylindre  de  la  Bihliofheque  Nationale  a  Paris,  published  by  Lehmanx,  Schamaschschumttldn,
pi.  XXX.,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  27,  54,  ii.  p.  62.  Assur-bani-pal,  from  whom  this  cylinder  emanates,  claims  the
merit  of  these  works  himself.

"  Bilingual  Iiucription,\\-i^-^^ ;  London  Cylindcr,\\.  16-18;  cf.  Lehmann,  ScAama«cftsc/jum«Mn,
vol.  ii.  pp.  8,  9,  18,  19.


ASSTBIA'S   STRAINED   RELATIONS    WITH  CHALDMA.


415


Assur-bani-pal  bad  at  the  outset  furthered  the  wishes  of  his  brother  to  the
utmost  of  his  power :  he  had  granted  the  privileges  demanded,  and  whenever
a  Chaldfean  of  noble  birth  arrived  at  his  court,  he  received  him  with  special
marks  of  favour.^  The  two  states  enjoyed  a  nearly  absolute  equality  during  the
opening  years  of  his  reign,  and  though  the  will  of  Esarhaddon  had  made  Babylon
dependent  on  Assyria,  the  yoke  of  vassalage  was  far  from  heavy.  The  suzerain
reserved  to  himself  the  honour  of  dedicating  the  mighty  works  begun  by  his  father,
the  restoration  of  the  temple  of  Bel-Marduk  andof  the  double  wall  of  fortification;^
he  claimed,  in  his  inscriptions,  the  whole  merit  of  the  work,  but  he  none  the  less
respected  his  brother's  rights,  and  in  no  way  interfered  in  the  affairs  of  the  city


~^-T


^


^TT


TWU    ELAMITE    CHIEFS    FLAYEU    ALIVI.    AriLK    THE    LATTLL    Ul"     1  L  LLIZ.'

except  in  state  ceremonies  in  which  the  assertion  of  his  superior  rank  was  indis-
pensable. But  with  success  his  moderation  gradually  gave  place  to  arrogance.
In  proportion  as  his  military  renown  increased,  he  accentuated  his  supremacy,
and  accustomed  himself  to  treat  Babylon  more  and  more  as  a  vassal  state.^
After  the  conquest  of  Elam  his  infatuated  pride  knew  no  bounds,  and  the  little
consideration  he  still  retained  for  Shamash-shumukin  vanished  completely.  He
thenceforward  refused  to  regard  him  as  being  more  than  a  prefect  bearing  a
somewhat  higher  title    than  his  fellows,   a  viceroy  owing  his  crown,  not  to


'  Cylinder  A,  col.  iv.  11.  22-27;  cf.  G.  Smith,  nist.  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  153,  154;  liassam  Annals,
col.  iii.  II.  87-95 ;  cf.  S.  Aldes  Smith,  Die  Keils.  Asurhanipah,  vol.  i.  pp.  2G,  27 ;  .Jensen,  Inschr.
Aschurbanipal's,  in  .Sohradek,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  ISl,  185.

'  For  the  commencement  of  the  reatoration  of  the  temple  of  Marduk,  cf.  supra,  pp.  382,  383.

"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  British  Bluseum ;  cf.  Layard,  Monuments
of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  47.  The  translation  of  the  two  inscriptions  is  given  in  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of
Assurhanipal,  p.  148.  The  names  of  the  two  persons  under  torture  were  left  blank  on  the  original
monument.

'  Thus,  in  Tablet  K  891  of  the  British  Museum,  obv.,  11.  11-13,  lie  affects  to  enumerate  on  an  equal
footing  his  three  brothers,  Shamash-shumukin,  Assur-mukin-paliya,  and  Assur-etil-shame-uirziti-
balasu,  as  all  alike  invested  by  himself  with  important  charges;  the  first  with  the  kingdom  of
Karduniash,  the  other  two  with  important  offices  in  the  priesthood  (Lehmann,  Schamaschschmnukin,
vol.  ii.  pp.  20,  21 ;  cf.  for  other  analogous  facts.  Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  16-19).


416  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

the  will  of  their  oonimon  father,  but  to  the  friendship  of  his  brother,  and  liable
to  be  deprived  of  it  at  any  moment  through  the  caprice  of  the  sovereign.  He
affected  to  consider  all  tliat  took  place  at  Babylon  as  his  own  doing,  and  his
brother  as  being  merely  his  docile  instrument,  not  deserving  mention  any  more
tlian  the  ordinary  agents  who  carried  out  his  designs  ;  and  if,  indeed,  he  con-
descended to  mention  him,  it  was  witli  an  assumption  of  disdainful  superiority.
It  is  a  question  whether  Shamash-shumukin  at  this  juncture  believed  that
his  brother  was  meditating  a  design  to  snatch  the  reins  of  government  from
his  hand,  or  whether  he  merely  yielded  to  the  impulse  of  wounded  vanity  in
resolving  to  shake  off  a  yoke  which  had  become  intolerable.  Knowing  that  his
power  was  not  equal  to  that  of  Assur-bani-pal,  he  sought  to  enter  into  relations
with  foreign  allies  who  shared  the  same  fears,  or  nursed  a  similar  feeling  of
bitterness.  The  nobles  and  priests  of  the  ancient  Sumerian  and  Accadian
cities  were  already  on  his  side,  but  the  Aramaeans  had  shown  themselves  hostile
at  his  accession,  and  had  brought  down  on  him  the  forces  of  Elam.  He  found
means,  however,  to  conciliate  them,  together  with  the  tribes  which  dwelt  on  the
Tigris  and  the  Uknu,  as  well  as  those  of  the  lower  Euphrates  and  the  Arabian
desert.  He  won  over  to  his  projects  Nabu-belzikri,  the  chief  of  the  Kalda —
grandson  of  that  Merodach-baladan  who  had  cherished  invincible  hatred  ao-ainst
Sargon  and  Sennacherib — besides  the  lords  of  the  Bit-Dakkuri  and  Bit-
Amukkani,  and  the  sheikh  of  the  Pukudu.^  Khumban-igash  ought  to  have
remained  loyal  to  the  friend  to  whom  he  owed  his  kingdom,  but  he  chafed  at
the  patronage  of  Assyria,  and  Assur-bani-pal  had  just  formulated  a  demand  to
which  he,  not  unreasonably,  hesitated  to  accede.  The  archaic  statue  of  Nana,
stolen  from  Uruk  by  Kutur-nakhunta  sixteen  centuries  before,^  and  placed  by
that  prince  in  one  of  the  temples  of  Susa,  had  become  so  naturalised  in  its  new
abode  that  the  kings  of  Elam,  not  content  with  rendering  it  an  official  cult,  were
wont  to  send  presents  to  Babylonia,  to  the  image  which  had  replaced  it  in  its
original  sanctuary.^  Assur-bani-pal  now  required  Khumban-igash  to  give  back
the  original  statue,^  but  the  Elamite  could  not  obey  this  mandate  without  im-
perilling both  his  throne  and  his  person :  he  would  thereby  have  risked  incurring
the  displeasure  both  of  the  nobles,  whose  pride  would  have  suffered  at  the  loss
of  so  precious  a  trophy,  and  of  the  common  people,  who  would  have  thus  been
deprived  of  one  of  their  most  venerable  objects  of  devotion.     The  messengers

'  The  part  taken  by  the  Aramaeans  in  the  rebelliou  is  known  to  us  from  a  certain  number  of
despatches  from  Assyrian  governors,  which  were  first  deciphered  and  utilised  by  G.  Smith,  Ri»t.  of
Assurianipal,  pp.  201,  202.

'  For  this  statue,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  37.

^  Pinches,  Assyrian  Report  Tablets,  in  The  Records  of  the  Fast,  1st  ser.,  vol.  xi.  p.  76,  despatch  of
Nabu-ibashshi.

*  Tablet  K  2644  of  the  British  Museum,  quoted  first  by  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  200,  201.


THE   GREAT   COALITION  AGAINST  STRIA.  4l7

of  Shamash-shumukin,  arriving  at  the  moment  when  this  question  was  agitating
the  court  of  Susa,  found  the  way  already  prepared  for  a  mutual  understanding.
Besides,  they  held  in  their  hands  an  irresistible  ai'gument,  the  treasures  of  Bel-
Marduk  of  Babylon,  of  Nebo  of  Borsippa,  and  of  Nergal  of  Kuta,  which  had
been  confided  to  them  by  the  priests  with  a  view  to  purchasing,  if  necessary,
the  support  of  Elam.  Khumban-igash  thereupon  promised  to  send  a  detach-
ment of  troops  to  Karduniash,  and  to  invade  the  provinces  of  Assyria  the
moment  war  should  be  declared.  The  tribes  of  Guti  were  easily  won  over,  and
were  followed  by  the  kings  of  Phoenicia  and  the  Bedawin  of  Melukhkha,  and
perhaps  Egypt  itself  was  implicated  in  the  plot.^  The  Prince  of  Kedar,
Amuladdin,  undertook  to  effect  a  diversion  on  the  frontiers  of  Syria,  and  Uate,
son  of  Layali,  one  of  the  Arab  kings  who  had  paid  homage  to  Esarhaddon,  was
not  behindhand  in  furnishing  his  contingent  of  horsemen  and  wild  native
infantry."  The  coalition  already  extended  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean
and  the  Red  Sea  to  the  Persian  Gulf  before  Assur-bani-pal  became  aware  of  its
existence.

An  unforeseen  occurrence  suddenly  broke  in  upon  his  peace  and  revealed
the  extent  of  the  peril  which  threatened  him.^  Kudur,  the  Assyrian  prefect  of
Uruk,  learnt  from  Sin-tabni-uzur,  the  governor  of  Uru,  that  certain  emissaries
of  Shamash-shumukin  had  surreptitiously  entered  that  city  and  were  secretly
fomenting  rebellion  among  the  peoj^le.  Sin-tabni-uzur  himself  had  been
solicited  to  join  the  movement,  but  had  absolutely  refused  to  do  so,  and  con-
sidering himself  powerless  to  repress  the  disaffection  with  the  few  soldiers  at  his
disposal,  he  had  demanded  reinforcements.  Kudur  first  furnished  him  with  five
hundred  men  of  his  own  troops,  and  subsequently  sent  some  battalions  which  were
under  the  command  of  the  governors  of  Arrapklia  and  Amidi,  but  which  were,
for  some  unknown  reason,  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood.  It  would  appear
that  Sliamash-shumukin,  finding  his  projects  interfered  with  by  this  premature
exposure,  tried  to  counteract  its  effects  by  protestations  of  friendship  :  a  special
embassy  was  despatched  to  his  brother  to  renew  the  assurances  of  his  devotion,

'  Cylinder  B,  col.  yi.  11.  93-97,  col.  vli.  1.  1  ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  Eist.  of  Aseurhanipal,  pp.  170,  171.
For  the  preliminaries  of  this  war,  see  the  texts  collected  by  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  151-1.56,  loS,  169,
170,  171,  174,  175,  1S6-1S8,  and  by  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Asurhanipals,  vol.  i.
pp.  26-23  ;  cf.  Jensex,  Inschriften  Aschitrbanipal's,  in  Schrader,  Eeil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  182-187,
262-265.

2  Cylinder  A,  col.  vii.  11.  97-116  ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit,  pp.  256-258.

'  The  chronology  of  this  war  has  been  dettrmined  by  G.  Smith  from  the  dates  attached  to
the  documents  in  the  British  Museum,  which  give  the  names  of  three  limmi,  Assur-duruzur,
Zagabbu,  aud  Bel-kharran-shadua  :  these  he  assigned  respectively  to  the  years  650,  649,  and  648  B.C.
(pp.  cit.,  pp.  321,  322,  and  The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  pp.  95,  96).  Tiele  (Bal.-assyr.  Gesch.,  pp.
388,  389)  has  shown  that  these  three  limmi  must  be  assigned  to  the  years  (152-650  E.c,  and  his
opinion  lias  been  adopted  by  Lehmank,  Schamatchschani'iJiiii,  p.  6  ;  though  these  dates  seem  in  the
highest  degree  probable,  we  must  wait  before  we  can  consider  them  as  absolutely  certain  till  chance
restores  to  us  the  missing  parts  of  the  Canon.

2    E


418  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

and  he  thus  gained  the  time  necessary  to  complete  his  armaments.'  As  soon
as  he  felt  himself  fully  prepared,  he  gave  up  further  dissimulation,  and,  throwing
away  the  mask,  proclaimed  himself  independent  of  Assyria,  while  at  the  same
moment  Khumban-igash  despatched  his  army  to  the  frontier  and  declared  war  on
his  former  protector.  Assur-bani-pal  was  touched  to  the  quick  by  what  he  truly
considered  the  ingratitude  of  the  Babylonians.  "  As  for  the  children  of  Babylon,
I  had  set  them  upon  seats  of  honour,  I  had  clothed  them  in  robes  of  many  colours,
I  had  placed  rings  of  gold  upon  their  fingers ;  the  children  of  Babylon  had
been  established  in  Assyria,  and  were  admitted  into  my  presence.  But  Shamash-
shumukin,  the  false  brother,  he  has  not  observed  my  ordinances,  but  has  raised
against  me  the  peoples  of  Akkad,  the  Kalda,  the  Aramaeans,  the  peoples  of  the
country  of  the  sea,  from  Akabah  to  Bab-salimeti ! "  Nineveh  was  at  first  in  a
state  of  trepidation  at  this  unexpected  blow ;  the  sacred  oracles  gave  obscure
replies,  and  presaged  evil  four  times  out  of  five.  At  last,  one  day,  a  seer  slept
and  dreamed  a  dream,  in  which  he  saw  this  sentence  written  on  the  ground  in  the
temple  of  Sin :  "  All  those  who  are  meditating  evil  against  Assur-bani-pal,  King
of  Assyria,  and  who  are  preparing  themselves  to  fight  with  him,  I  will  inflict
on  them  a  terrible  death :  by  the  swift  sword,  by  flinging  them  into  fire,  by
famine  and  by  pestilence,  will  I  destroy  their  lives !  "  '^  The  courage  of  the
people  being  revived  by  this  prophecy,  Assur-bani-pal  issued  a  proclamation  to
the  Babylonians,  in  which  he  denounced  his  brother's  treason,  and  commanded
them  to  remain  quiet  as  they  valued  their  lives,^  and,  having  done  this,  he  boldly
assumed  the  offensive  (652  b.c.).^  The  only  real  danger  came  from  the  side  of
Elam;  this  state  alone  was  in  a  condition  to  oppose  him  with  as  numerous  and
determined  an  army  as  that  which  he  himself  could  put  into  the  field  ;  if  Elam
were  disabled,  it  would  be  impossible  for  Babylon  to  be  victorious,  and  its  fall
would  be  a  mere  question  of  time.  The  opening  of  the  campaign  was  a  dif3ficult
matter.  Khumban-igash,  having  sold  his  support  dearly,  had  at  all  events  spared
no  pains  to  satisfy  his  employer,  and  had  furnished  him  with  the  flower  of  his

'  Tablet  K  5457  of  the  Brituh  Museum,  utilised  by  G.  Smith,  Hift.  of  Assurbanipal,  p.  201 ;
Cylinder  A,  col.  iv.  11.  16-19,  and  Rassam  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  85, 86 :  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  152-154  ;
S.  Alden"  Smith,  Die  KeiUchr.  Asurhanipals,  vol.  i.  pp.  26,  27;  Jesses,  Inschr.  AgchurbanipaVs,  in
SCHRADEB,  Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  184,  185.

''  Tablet  K  4  of  the  British  Museum,  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  186,  187;  Cylinder  A  of  the  Brit.
Mus.,  col.  iv.  48,  49,  and  Rassam  Cylinder,  col.  iii.  11.  118-127:  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  157-159;
S.  Alden  Smith,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  28,  29;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in  Schrader,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.
186,  187.

'  Tablet  K  S4  of  the  British  Museum,  containing  the  proclamation  of  Assur-bani-pal  to  the
Babylonians,  discovered  and  utilised  by  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  p.  181.  published  in  H.  Eawlinson,  Cun.
Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  iv.  pi.  52,  No.  1.

*  The  proclamation  is  dated  in  the  eponymous  year  of  Assur-duruzur,  corresponding  to  652  B.C.
(TiKLE,  Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  30'J);  the  events  which  immediately  preceded  the  proclamation
ought,  very  probably,  to  be  assigned  to  the  same  year.


ELAM  DISABLED   BY  DOMESTIC  DISCORD.  419

nobility,  comprising  Undashi,  one  of  the  sons  of  Tiumman ;  Zazaz,  prefect  of
Billate;  Parru,  chief  of  Khilmu;  Attamitu,  commanding  the  archers;  and  Nesu,
commander-in  chief  of  his  forces.  In  order  to  induce  Undashi  to  serve  under  him,
he  had  not  hesitated  to  recall  to  his  memory  the  sad  fate  of  Tiumman :  "  Go,  and
avenge  upon  Assyria  the  murder  of  the  father  who  begat  thee !  "  ^  The  two
opposing  forces  continued  to  watch  one  another's  movements  without  any  serious
engagement  taking  place  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year  651  B.C. ;  though
the  Assyrians  won  some  slight  advantages,  killing  Attamitu  in  a  skirmish  -  and
sending  his  head  to  Nineveh,  some  serious  reverses  soon  counterbalanced  these
preliminary  successes.  Nabo-bel-shumi  had  arrived  on  the  scene  with  his
Aramaean  forces,  and  had  compelled  the  troops  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Uruk
and  Uru  to  lay  down  their  arms:  their  leaders,  including  Sin-tabni-uzar  himself,
had  been  forced  to  renounce  the  supremacy  of  Assyria,  and  had  been  enrolled  in
the  rebel  ranks.^  Operations  seemed  likely  to  be  indefinitely  prolonged,  and
Assur-bani-pal,  anxious  as  to  the  issue,  importunately  besought  the  gods
to  intervene  on  his  behalf,  when  discords  breaking  out  in  the  royal  family  of
Elam  caused  the  scales  of  fortune  once  more  to  turn  in  his  favour.  The  energy
with  which  Khumban-igash  had  entered  on  the  present  struggle  had  not
succeeded  in  effacing  the  disagreeable  impression  left  on  the  minds  of  the
majority  of  his  subjects,  by  the  fact  that  he  had  returned  to  his  country  in  the
chariots  of  the  stranger  and  had  been  enthroned  by  the  decree  of  an  Assyrian
general.  Tammaritu,  of  Khaidalu,  who  had  then  fought  at  his  side  in  the  ranks
of  the  invaders,  was  now  one  of  those  who  reproached  him  most  bitterly  for  his
conduct.  He  frankly  confessed  that  his  hand  had  cut  off  the  head  of  Tium-
man, but  denied  that  he  did  so  in  obedience  to  the  hereditary  enemies  of  his
country  :  he  had  but  avenged  his  personal  injuries,  whereas  Khumban-igash,
following  the  promptings  of  ambition,  had  kissed  the  ground  at  the  feet  of
a  slave  of  Assur-bani-pal  and  had  received  the  crown  as  a  recompense  for  his

'  Cylinder  B  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  vi.  11.  93-97,  and  col.  vii.  11.  1-22;  of.  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of
Assurbanipal,  pp.  170-173,  and  Jeksejj,  Inschr.  AschurhanipaVs,  in  Sohradek,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  262-205.

'  Cylinder  B  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  vii.  11.  23-29 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  p.  173.

^  The  official  accounts  say  nothing  of  the  intervention  of  Nabo-bel-shumi  at  this  juncture,  but
the  information  furnished  by  Tablet  K  159  in  the  British  Museum  (G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  1S3,  184>
makes  up  lor  their  silence.  The  objection  raised  by  Tiele  (Bah.-assyr.  Gesch.,  p.  389)  to  the  inter-
pretation given  by  G.  Smith  {Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  p.  188)  that  this  passage  cannot  refer  to
Assyrian  deserters,  falls  to  the  ground  if  one  admits  that  the  Assyrian  troops  led  into  Elam  at  a
subsequent  period  by  Xabo-bel-shumi  {Cylinder  C  of  the  British  Museum,  11.  88-94  ;  cf.  G.  Smith
op.  cit.,  pp.  178,  179),  and  which  will  be  referred  to  later  on  {infra,  p.  422),  were  none  other  than
the  garrisons  of  the  Lower  Euphrates  which  were  obliged  to  side  with  the  insurgents  in  e.jl  b.c.
The  two  despatches,  E  4G9G  and  K  2S  in  the  British  Museum,  which  refer  to  the  defection  of
Sin-tabni-uzur,  are  dated  the  8th  and  llth  Abu  in  the  eponymous  year  of  Zagubbu  (G.  Smith,  op.
cit.,  pp.  1S4,  185),  corresponding  to  the  year  651  B.C.,  as  indicated  by  Tiele  with  very  good  reason,
in  my  opinion  {Bah.-assyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  388,  389).


420  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITff.

baseness.'  Putting  his  rival  to  death,  Tammaritu  seized  the  throne,  and  in  order
to  prove  that  he  was  neither  consciously  nor  unconsciously  an  instrument  of
Ninevite  policy,  he  at  once  sent  reinforcements  to  the  help  of  Babylon  without
exacting  in  return  any  fresh  subsidy.  The  Assyrians,  taking  advantage  of  the
isolated  position  of  Shamash-shumukin,  had  pressed  forward  one  of  their  divisions
as  far  as  the  districts  on  the  sea  coast,  which  they  had  recovered  from  the  power
of  Nabo-bel-shumi,  and  had  placed  under  the  administration  of  Belibni,  a  person.
of  high  rank.^  The  arrival  of  the  Elamite  force  was  on  the  point  of  further
compromising  the  situation,  and  rekindling  the  flames  of  war  more  fiercely  than
ever,  when  a  second  revolution  broke  out,  which  shattered  for  ever  the  hopes
of  Shamash-shumukin.  Assur-bani-pal  naturally  looked  upon  this  event  as
the  result  of  his  supplications  and  sacrifices:  Assur  and  Ishtar,  in  answer  to
his  entreaties,  raised  up  Indabigash,  one  of  the  most  powerful  feudal  lords  of
the  kingdom  of  Susa,  and  incited  him  to  revolt.  Tammaritu  fled  to  the
marshes  which  bordered  the  Nar-marratum,  and  seizing  a  vessel,  put  out
to  sea  with  his  brothers,  his  cousins,  seventeen  princes  of  royal  blood,
and  eighty-four  faithful  followers :  the  ship,  driven  by  the  wind  on  to  the
Assyrian  shore,  foundered,  and  the  dethroned  monarch,  demoralised  by  sea-
sickness, would  have  perished  in  the  confusion  had  not  one  of  his  followers
taken  him  on  liis  back  and  carried  him  safely  to  land  across  the  mud.^  Belibni
sent  him  prisoner  to  Nineveh  with  all  his  suite,*  and  Assur-bani-pal,  after  allow-
ing him  to  humble  himself  before  him,  raised  him  from  the  ground,  embraced
him,  and  assigned  to  him  apartments  in  the  palace  and  a  train  of  attendants
befitting  the  dignity  which  lie  had  enjoyed  for  a  short  time  at  Susa.  Indabigash
was  too  fully  occupied  with  his  own  affairs  to  interfere  again  in  the  quarrel
between  the  two  brothers  :  his  country,  disorganised  by  the  successive  shocks  it
had  sustained,  had  need  of  repose,  for  some  years  at  least,  before  re-entering  the
lists,  except  at  a  disadvantage.  He  concluded  no  direct  treaty  with  the  Assyrian
king,  but  he  at  once  withdrew  the  troops  which  had  entered  Karduniash,  and
abstained  from  all  hostile  demonstrations  against  the  garrisons  of  the  border  pro-
vinces :  ^  for  the  moment,  indeed,  this  was  all  that  was  required  of  him  (G50  B.C.).

'  Cylinder  A  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  iv.  11.  74-80:  cf.  G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurhanipal,
pp.  159,  160  ;  Jensen,  Inschr.  AschurhanipaV s,  in  Schkadeb,  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  18S,  189.

'  Tablet  K  312  of  the  British  Museum,  utilised  for  the  first  time  by  G.  Smith,  op.  eit.,  pp.  189,
190,  and  dated  in  the  eponymous  year  of  Bel-kharran-shadua,  corresponding  to  the  year  650  B.C.
(TiELE,  Bab.-aisyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  381,  389).

^  All  the  details  of  the  war  of  Tammaritu  against  Khumban-igash,  his  defeat  by  Indabigash,  his
flight,  his  voyage,  his  arrival  on  the  Assyrian  coast,  were  illustrated  by  a  number  of  bas-reliefs,  the
inscriptions  of  which  have  been  preserved  for  us  on  Tablet  K  4457  of  Brit.  Mus.;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,
pp.  191-194.

*  Tablet  K  599  of  the  British  Museum  contains  the  despatch  in  which  Belibni  announces  the
arrival  of  Tammaritu  and  his  departure  for  Nineveh ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  196,  197.

^  For  tho  texts  relating  to  the  revolutions  in  Elam,  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  158-162,  170-176;
S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  AsurbanipaU,  vol.  i.  pp.  30-33;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in  Schbader,
op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  186-191.


422  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS   ZENITH.

Deprived  of  the  support  of  Elam,    Babylou   was   doomed   to  fall.       The
Aramaeans  deserted  her  cause,  and  Nabu-bel-shumi,  grandson  of  Merodach-
baladan,  despairing  of  ever  recovering  the  heritage  of  his  family,  withdrew  to
his  haunts  among  the  reed  beds  of  the  Ukuu,  taking  back  with  him  as  hostages
the  Assyrians  whom  he  had  forced  to  join  his  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  cam-
paign.'    Shamash-shumukin,  however,  was  not  disconcerted :  he  probably  hoped
that  his  distant  allies   might   yet  effect  a  diversion  in  his  favour,  and  thus
oblige  his  brother  to  withdraw  half  of  the  forces  employed  against  him.     Indeed,
after  the  blockade  had  already  begun,  a  band  of  Arabs  under  the  two  sheikhs
Abiyate  and  Aamu  forced  a  way  through  the  besieging  lines  and  entered  the
city.^    This  was  the  last  succour  which  reached  Babylon  from  without :  for  many
long  mouths  all  communication  between  her  citizens  and  the  outer  world  was
completely  cut  off.     The  Assyrians  laid  waste  the  surrounding  country  with
ruthless  and  systematic  cruelty,  burning  the  villages,  razing  to  the  ground
isolated  bouses,  destroying  the  trees,  breaking  down  the  dykes,  and  filling  up
the  canals.     The  year  649  B.C.  was  spent  in  useless  skirmishes ;  the  city  offered
an  energetic  and  obstinate  resistance,  and  as  the   walls  v.ere  thick  and   the
garrison  determined,  it  would  not  have  succumbed  had  not  the  supply  of  pro-
visions finally  failed.      Famine  raged  in  the  city,  and  the  inhabitants  devoured
even  their  own  children,  while  pestilence  spreading  among  them  mowed  them
down  by  thousands.     The  Arab  auxiliaries  at  tliis  juncture  deserted  the  cause
of  the  defenders,  and  their  sheikhs  surrendered  to  Assur-bani-pal,  who  received
and  pardoned  them ;  *  but  the  Babylonians  themselves,  knowing  that  they  could
expect  no  mercy,  held  out  some  time  longer :  at  length,  their  courage  and  their
strength  exhausted,  they  rose  against  their  chiefs,  whose  ambition  or  patriotic
pride  had  brought  them  to  such  a  pass,  and  determined  to  capitulate  on  any
terms.      Shamash-shumukin,  not  wishing  to  fall  alive  into   the  hands  of  his
brother,  shut  himself  up  in  his  palace,  and  there  immolated  himself  on  a  funeral
pyre  with  his  wives,  his  children,  his  slaves,  and  his  treasures  at  the  moment
when  his  conquerors  were  breaking  down  the  gates  and  penetrating  into  the
palace  precincts.*     The  city  presented  a  terrible  spectacle,  and  shocked  even

'  Cylinder  B  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  vii.  11.  7G-S1,  and  Cylinder  C,  11.  SS-93 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,
History  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  176-179.

'  Cylinder  A  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  viil.  11.  30-36;  cf.  G.  ISmith,  op.  cit..  pp.  262,  263.

*  Cylinder  A  of  the  British  Museum,  col.  viii.  11.  37-41 ;  cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  263,  264.  For  the
private  tests  which  prove  the  growing  misery  in  the  city,  and  the  portents  of  ill  omen  which  aifrighted
the  inhabitants,  cf.  Oppert,  Une  £clipse  lunaire  da  regne  de  Saosduchin,  roi  de  Bahylone,  in  the
Comptes  rendus  de  I'Acadfmie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Leltres,  1896.  vol.  ssv.  pp.  423-438,  602,  603.

•  G.  Smith  thought  that  the  Babylonians,  rendered  furious  by  their  sufferings,  had  seized
Shamash-shumukin  and  burnt  him  to  death  {Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  163,  203 ;  cf.  Tiele,  Bab.-
assyr.  Gesch..  p.  382).  It  is,  however,  certain  that  Shamash-shumukin  killed  himself,  according  to
the  Eastern  custom,  to  escape  the  tortures  which  awaited  him  if  he  fell  alive  into  the  hands  of  his
enemies.  The  memory  of  this  event,  transferred  by  thft  popular  imagination  to  Assur-bani-pal,
appears  in  the  concluding  portion  of  the  legendary  history  of  Sardanapalus.


DEATH  OF  SEAMASH-SEUMUKIN  AND  THE  CAPTURE  OF  BABYLON.    423

the  Assyrians,  accustomed  as  they  were  to  Iiorrors  of  this  sort.  Most  of
the  numerous  victims  to  pestilence  or  famine  lay  about  the  streets  or  in  the
public  squares,  a  prey  to  the  dogs  and  swine ;  such  of  the  inhabitants  and  of
the  soldiery  as  were  comparatively  strong  had  endeavoured  to  escape  into
the  country,  and  only  those  remained  who  had  not  sufficient  strength  left
to  drag  themselves  beyond  the  walls.  Assur-bani-pal  pursued  the  fugitives,
and,  having  captured  nearly  all  of  them,  vented  ou  them  the  full  fury  of  his
vengeance.  He  caused  the  tongues  of  the  soldiers  to  be  torn  out,  and  then  had
them  clubbed  to  death.  He  massacred  the  common  folk  in  front  of  the  great
winged  bulls  which  had  already  witnessed  a  similar  butchery  half  a  century
before,  under  his  grandfather  Sennacherib ;  ^  the  corpses  of  his  victims  remained
long  unburied,  a  prey  to  all  unclean  beasts  and  birds.  When  the  executioners
and  the  king  himself  were  weary  of  the  slaughter,  the  survivors  were  pardoned  ;
the  remains  of  the  victims  were  collected  and  piled  up  in  specified  places,  the
streets  were  cleansed,  and  the  temples,  purified  by  solemn  lustrations,  were
reopened  for  worship.'-'  Assur-bani-pal  proclaimed  himself  king  in  his  brother's
room  :  he  took  the  hands  of  Bel,  and,  according  to  custom,  his  Babylonian
subjects  gave  him  a  new  name,  that  of  Kandalanu,  by  which  he  was  hence-
forth known  among  them.^  Had  he  been  wise,  he  would  have  completed  the
work  begun  by  famine,  pestilence,  and  the  sword,  and,  far  from  creating  a  new
Babylon,  he  would  have  completed  the  destruction  of  the  ancient  city.  The
same  religious    veneration  which  had  disarmed  so  many  of  his  predecessors

•  Cf.  sujyra,  p.  SOS.

=  For  the  siege  of  Babylon,  cf.  the  texts  collected  by  G.  .Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  162-
170;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschr.  Asurbanipah,  vol.  i.  pp.  32-37;  Jensen,  Inschr.  Aschurbani-
pal's,  in  ScHRADER,  Keil.  Biil.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  190-105.  The  date  of  048-617  e.c.  for  the  taking  of
Babylon  and  the  death  of  Shamash-shumukin  is  corroborated  by  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy  and  the
fragments  of  Berosus,  both  of  which  attribute  twenty  or  twenty-one  years  to  the  reign  of  Saosdukhln
(Sammuglies).  Lehmann  points  out  a  document  dated  in  the  XX""  year  of  Shamash-shumukin,
which  confirms  the  exactitude  of  the  information  furnished  by  the  Greek  chronologists  {Schamasch-
shumuldH,  i.  p.  C).

'  The  Canon  of  Ptolemy  gives  as  the  successor  of  Saosdukhin  a  certain  Kineladan,  who  corre-
sponds to  Kandalanu,  whose  datehas  been  fixed  by  contemporary  documents  (Pinches,  Some  Recent
Discoveries,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1882-1SS3,  vol.  v.  p.  6).  The  identity  of
Kineladan  with  Assur-bani-pal  was  known  from  the  Greek  chronologists,  for  whereas  Ptolemy  puts
Kineladan  after  Saosdukhin,  the  fragments  of  Berosus  state  that  the  successor  of  Sammughes  was
his  brother;  that  is  to  say,  Sardanapalus  or  Assur-bani-pal.  This  identification  had  been  proposed
by  G.  Smith,  who  tried  to  find  the  origin  of  the  form  Kineladan  in  the  name  of  Sinidinabal,
which  seems  to  be  borne  by  Assur-bani-pal  in  Tablet  K  195  of  the  British  Museum  {Hist,  of  Assur-
banipal,  pp.  323,  324),  and  which  is  really  the  name  of  his  elder  brother  (cf  supra,  p.  377,  note  2) ;
it  found  numerous  supporters  as  soon  as  Pinches  had  discovered  the  tablets  dated  in  the  reign  of
Kandalanu,  and  Schrader  endeavoured  to  demonstrate  its  truth  in  a  special  memoir,  Kineladan  und
Asurbanipal  (Zeilschrift  fur  Keilforschung,  vol.  i.  pp.  222-232).  Oppert  combatted  the  arguments
of  Schrader  (^La  Vraie  Persomialiti et  les  dates  du  roi  Chinaladan  in  tlie  Revue  d'Assyriologie,  vol.  i.
pp.  1-11),  aud  he  has  affirmed  the  existence  of  two  distinct  kings  whenever  an  occasion  has  oft'ered,
but  the  majority  of  Assyriologists  and  historians  hold  that  Kandalanu  and  Assur-bani-pal  are  one
and  the  same  person  (Tiele,  Bab.-assyr.  Gesc/j.,  pp.  368,  309,  412-414  ;  Delitzsch  and  Mubdteh,
Gesch.  Bab.  und  Aes.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  230 ;  Winokler,  GescJi.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  135,  282,  289).


424  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

probably  withheld  him  from  giving  free  reiu  to  his  resentment,  and  not  daring
to  follow  the  example  of  Sennacherib,  he  fell  back  on  the  expedient  adopted  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  Sargon,  adhering  to  their  idea  of  two  capitals  for
two  distinct  states,  but  endeavouring  to  unite  in  his  own  person  the  two
irreconcilable  sovereignties  of  Marduk  and  Assur.  He  delegated  the  adminis-
tration of  Babylonian  affairs  to  Shamash-danani,  one  of  his  high  ofiScers  of
State,^  and  re-entered  Nineveh  with  an  amount  of  s[)oil  almost  equalling  that
taken  from  Egypt  after  the  sack  of  Thebes.  Kuta,  Sippara,  and  Borsippa,  the
vassal  states  of  Babylon,  which  had  shared  the  misfortune  of  their  mistress,  were,
like  her,  cleared  of  their  ruins,  rebuilt  and  repeopled,  and  were  placed  under
the  authority  of  Shamash-danani :  such  was  their  inherent  vitality  that  in  the
short  space  of  ten  or  a  dozen  years  they  had  repaired  their  losses  and  reattained
their  wonted  prosperity.  Soon  no  effect  of  their  disaster  remained  except  an
additional  incentive  for  hating  Nineveh,  and  a  determination  more  relentless
than  ever  not  to  spare  her  when  the  day  of  her  overthrow  should  come  and  they
should  have  her  in  their  power.

It  was  impossible  for  so  violent  and  so  prolonged  a  crisis  to  take  place  with-
out in  some  degree  injuring  the  prestige  of  the  empire.  Subjects  and  allies  of
long  standing  remained  loyal,  but  those  only  recently  subjugated  by  con-
quest, as  well  as  the  neighbouring  independent  kingdoms,  without  hesitation
threw,  off  the  yoke  of  suzerainty  or  of  obligatory  friendship  under  which  they
had  chafed.  Egypt  freed  herself  from  foreign  domination  as  soon  as  the
possibilities  of  war  with  Elam  had  shown  themselves,  and  it  was  Psammetichus
of  Sais,^  son  of  Necho,  one  of  the  princes  most  favoured  by  the  court  of  Nineveh,
who  set  on  foot  this  campaign  against  his  former  patron.  He  expelled  the
Assyrian  garrisons,  reduced  the  petty  native  princes  to  submission,  and  once
more  set  up  the  kingdom  of  the  Pharaohs  from  Elephantine  to  the  Syrian
desert,  without  Assur-bani-pal  having  been  able  to  spare  a  single  soldier  to
prevent  him,  or  to  bring  him  back  to  a  sense  of  his  duty.  The  details  of  his
proceedings  are  unknown  to  us:  we  learn  only  that  he  owed  his  success  to
mercenaries  imported  from  Asia  Minor,  and  the  Assyrian  chroniclers,  un-
accustomed to  discriminate  between  the  different  peoples  dwelling  on  the  shores
of  the  .^gean,  believed  that  these  auxiliaries  were  supplied  to  the  Pharaoh  by
the  only  sovereign  with  whom  they  had  had  any  dealings,  namely,  Gyges,  King
of  Lydia.^    That  Gyges  had  had  negotiations  with  Psammetichus  and  procured

'  This  Shamaah-danani,  who  was  limmu  in  644 bo. (G. Smith,  The  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon, p. 97 ;
TiELE,  Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  368,  369),  was  called  at  that  date  prefect  of  Akkad,  that  is  to  say,  of
Babylon  {Cylinder  A  of  the  British  Museum,  in  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  p.  316).  He
probably  entered  on  this  ofHee  immediately  after  the  taking  of  the  city.

'  Of.  what  is  said  of  Psammetichus,  supra,  p.  3S6.

'  For  what  we  know  of  the  auxiliarie.s  of  Psammetichus,  of.  infra,  pp.  487-498.     The  Assyrian


THE  REVOLT  OF  PSAMMETICHUS  AND   RUPTUSE    WITH  GT6ES.  425


assistance  for  him  has  not  yet  been  proved,  but  to  assert  that  he  was  incapable
of  conceiving  and  executing  such  a  design  is  quite  a  different  matter.     On
the  contrary,  all  the  information  we  possess  concerning  his  reign  shows  that
he  was  daring  in  his  political  undertakings,  and  anxious  to  court  alliances
with  the  most   distant   countries.     The  man  who  tried  to  draw  Assur-bani-
pal    into   a    joint    enterprise    against    the
Cimmerians  would  not  have  hesitated  to
ally  himself  with  Psammetichus  if  he  hoped
to  gain  the  least  profit  from  so  doing.    Con-
stant intercourse  by  sea  took  place  between
Ionia  or  Caria  and  Egypt,   and  no  event
of    any  importance    could    occur    in    the
Delta  without  being  promptly  reported  in
Ephesus  or  Miletus.^     Before  this  time  the
Heraclid   rulers   of  Sardes    had   lived   on
excellent  terms  with  most  of  the  .^Eolian
or   Ionian   colonies :    during    the    anxious
years  which  followed  his  accession  Gyges
went  still  further,  and  entered  into  direct
relations  with  the  nations  of  Greece  itself.
It  was    no    longer    to    the    gods    of  Asia,
to   Zeus   of  Telmissos,  that   he  addressed
himself  in  order  to   legitimatise  his  new
sovereignty,  but,  like   Midas   of  Phrygia,
he  applied  to  the  prophetic  god  of  Hellas,
to  the  Delphian    Apollo  and  his  priests.^
He   recompensed    them   lavishly   for   pro-
nouncing judgment  in  his  favour :  beside  the  silver  offerings  with  which  he
endowed  the  temple  at  Delphi,  he  presented  to  it  a  number  of  golden  vases,
and,  among  others,  six  craters  weighing  thirty  talents  each,  which,  placed  by
the  side  of  the  throne  of  Midas,  were  still  objects  of  admiration  in  the  treasury

texts  relating  to  the  intervention  of  Gyges  in  the  aftairs  of  Egypt  have  been  collected  by  G.
Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  66,  67;  S.  Alden  S^iith,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Asurhanipah,
vol.  i.  pp.  18-21 ;  Jensen,  Imchriften  Aschurhanipal's,  in  Sohrader,  Keilinschrl/tliche  Bibliotheh,
vol.  iL  pp.  174-177.  The  various  spellings  of  the  name  identified  by  Smith  with  that  of  Psam-
metichus, Pisliamilki,  and  Tushamilki,  at  first  called  forth  objections  from  Oppert  (Journal
Asiatique,  1872,  vol.  six.  p.  112):  all  doubts,  however,  seem  to  have  been  now  dissipated  (Steix-
DORFF,  Die  Keihchri/tliche  Wiedergahe  dgyptischer  Eigennamen,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assynologie,
vol.  i.  pp.  360,  361).

'  For  the  communications  between  Asia  Minor  and  the  shores  of  the  Delta,  cf.  infra,  pp.
496,  497.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.

^  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  3311.


PSAMMETICHUS   I."


426  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

of  the  Corinthians  in  the  time  of  Herodotus.^  To  these  he  added  at  various
times  such  valuable  gifts  that  the  Pythiau  priestess,  who  had  hitherto  been  poor,
was  in  later  times  accounted  to  have  owed  to  him  her  wealth.-  Having  made
sure  of  the  good  will  of  the  immortals,  Gyges  endeavoured  to  extend  his  influence
among  the  Greek  colonies  along  the  coast,  and  if  he  did  not  in  every  case  gain
a  footing  amongst  them,  his  failure  seems  to  have  been  due,  not  to  his  incapacity,
but  to  the  force  of  circumstances  or  to  the  ambiguous  position  which  he  happened
to  occupy  with  regard  to  these  colonies.  Ambition  naturally  incited  him  to
annex  them  and  make  them  into  Lydian  cities,  but  the  bold  disposition  of  their
inhabitants  and  their  impatience  of  constraint  never  allowed  any  foreign
rule  to  be  established  over  them  :  conquest,  to  be  permanent,  would  have  to  be
preceded  by  a  long  period  of  alliance  on  equal  terms,  and  of  discreet  patronage
which  might  insensibly  accustom  them  to  recognise  in  their  former  friend,  first
a  protector,  and  then  a  suzerain  imbued  with  respect  for  their  laws  and  consti-
tution. Gyges  endeavoured  to  conciliate  them  severally,  and  to  attach  them
to  himself  by  treaties  favourable  to  their  interests  or  flattering  to  their  vanity,
and  by  timely  and  generous  assistance  in  their  internecine  quarrels ;  and  thus,
secretly  fostering  their  mutual  jealousies,  he  was  able  to  reduce  some  by  force
of  arms  without  causing  too  much  offence  to  the  rest.^  He  took  Colophon,*  and
also,  after  several  fruitless  campaigns,  the  Magnesia  which  lay  near  Sardes,
Magnesia  of  Sipylos,  tradition  subsequently  adorning  this  fortunate  episode  in
his  history  with  various  amusing  anecdotes.  According  to  one  account  he  had  a
favourite  in  a  youtli  of  marvellous  beauty  called  Magnes,  whom  the  Magnesians,
as  an  act  of  defiance  to  Gyges,  had  mutilated  till  he  was  past  recognition ;  and  it
was  related  that  the  king  appealed  to  the  fortune  of  war  to  avenge  the  affront.^
By  a  bold  stroke  he  seized  the  lower  quarters  of  Smyrna,  but  was  unable  to
take  the  citadel,^  and  while  engaged  in  the  struggle  with  this  city,  he  entered
into  a  friendly  understanding  with  Ephesus  and  Miletus.  Ephesus,  situated  at
the  mouth  of  the  river  Cayster,  was  the  natural  port  of  Sardes,  the  market  in

'  Hebodotus,  I.  xiv.

-  Phanias  of  Eresos,  Fragm.  14,  in  MOller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  297.

^  The  policy  of  Gyges  and  his  successors  with  regard  to  the  Greek  colonies  has  been  described
with  much  sagacity  and,  I  think,  with  much  judgment  by  Radet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au
temps  des  3lermnade»,  pp.  ltJ9-17-l.

*  Herodotus,  I.  xv.  Grote  (Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  p.  208)  thought  that  he  captured  tlie  lower
town  of  Coloplion,  ri  Sittu,  not  the  citadel,  and  his  opinion  has  been  adopted  by  Max  Duncker
(^Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  5th  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  5S3,  note  2).  Schubert  (Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Lydien,
p.  3G)  thinks  that  he  took  both  town  and  citadel.

'  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  62,  in  Muller-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  39(j,  where  the  town
is  called  simply  Magnesia ;  it  was  evidently  the  Magnesia  near  8ardes,  Magnesia  ad  Sipylum
(Schubert,  op.  cit.,  p.  37;  Kadet,  op.  cit.,  p.  171).

°  Herodotus,  I.  xiv.,  mentions  this  war  without  entering  into  any  details.  We  know  from
Pausanias  (iv.  21,  §  3)  that  the  people  of  Smyrna  defended  tliemselves  bravely,  and  that  the  poet
Mimuermus  composed  au  elegy  on  this  episode  in  their  history  (ix.  19,  §  4).


THE    WARS   OF  GTGES    WITH  THE   GREEKS   OF   THE  LITTORAL.   427

which  the  gold  of  Lydia,  and  the  commodities  imported  from  the  East  by  the
caravans  which  traversed  the  royal  route,  might  be  exchanged  for  the  products
of  Hellas  and  of  the  countries  of  the  West  visited  by  the  Greek  mariners.  The
city  was  at  this  time  under  the  control  of  a  family  of  rich  shijiowners,  of  whom  the
head  was  called  Melas :  Gyges  gave  him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  by  this
union  gained  free  access  to  the  seaboard  for  himself  and  his  successors.^  The
reason  for  his  not  pushing  his  advantages  further  in  this  direction  is  not  hard
to  discover :  since  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Phrygia  had  left  his  eastern
frontier  unprotected,'-  the  attacks  of  the  Cimmerians  had  obliged  him  to
concentrate  his  forces  in  the  interior,  and  though  he  had  always  successfully
repulsed  them,  the  obstinacy  with  which  these  inroads  were  renewed  year  after
year  prevented  him  from  further  occupying  himself  with  the  Greek  cities.  He
had  carefully  fortified  his  vast  domains  iu  the  basin  of  the  Rhyndakos,  he  had
reconquered  the  Troad,  and  tiiough  he  had  been  unable  to  expel  the  barbarians
from  Adramyttium,  he  prevented  them  from  having  any  inland  communica-
tions. Miletus  rendered  vigorous  assistance  in  this  work  of  consolidating  his
power,  for  she  was  interested  in  maintaining  a  buffer  state  between  herself  and
the  marauders  who  had  already  robbed  her  of  Sinope ;  and  it  was  for  this  reason
that  Gyges,  after  mercilessly  harassing  her  at  the  beginning  of  his  reigu,^  now
preferred  to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  her.  He  had  given  the  Milesians  per-
mission to  establish  colonies  along  the  Hellespont  and  the  Propontid  at  the
principal  points  where  communication  took  place  between  Europe  and  Asia ;
Abydos,  Lampsacus,  Parium,  and  Cyzicus,  founded  successively  by  Milesian
admirals,  prevented  the  tribes  which  remained  in  Thrace  from  crossing  over  to
reinforce  their  kinsfolk  who  were  devastating  Phrygia.*

Gyges  had  hoped  that  his  act  of  deference  would  have  obtained  for  him  the
active  sujjport  of  Assur-bani-pal,  and  during  the  following  years  he  perse-
veringly  continued  at  intervals  to  send  envoys  to  Nineveh :  on  one  occasion
he  despatched  with  the  embassy  two  Cimmerian  chiefs  taken  in  battle,  and
whom  he  offered  in  tokea  of  homage  to  the  gods  of  Assyria.^  Experience,
however,  soon  convinced  him  that  his  expectations  were  vain  ;  the  Assyrians,  far
from  creating  a  diversion  in  his  favour,  were  careful  to  avoid  every  under-
taking which  might  draw  the  attention  of  the  barbarians  on  themselves.  As
soon  as  Gyges  fully  understood  their  policy,  he  broke  off  all  connection  with

'  ^LiAN,  VarisB  Historise,  lii.  2G ;  on  the  importance  of  Ephesus  for  the  kings  of  Lydia,  ef.  the
observations  of  Eadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermiiades,  pp.  31,  108,  172.
'  For  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Phrygia,  of.  supra,  pp.  391,  392.
^  Herodotus,  I.  xiv.

*  For  the  policy  followed  by  Gyges  towards  the  Milesian  colonics  on  the  Hellespont  and  the
Propontis,  cf.  R.\det,  op.  cit.,  pp.  172-175.

*  G.  Smith,  Mist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  Go,  66 ;  8.  Aldek  Smith,  Die  Keilschr.  Asurhanipah,
vol.  i.  pp.  IS,  19.


428  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

them,  and  thenceforth  relied  on  himself  alone  for  the  protection  of  his  interests.
The  disappointment  he  thus  experienced  probably  stirred  up  his  anger  against
Assyria,  and  if  he  actually  came  to  the  aid  of  Psammetichus,  the  desire  of
giving  expression  to  a  secret  feeling  of  rancour  no  doubt  contributed  to  his
decision.  Assur-bani-pal  deeply  resented  this  conduct,  but  Lydia  was  too
far  off  for  him  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  it  in  a  direct  manner,  and  he
could  only  beseech  the  gods  to  revenge  what  he  was  pleased  to  consider  as  base
ingratitude :  he  therefore  prayed  Assur  and  Ishtar  that  "  his  corpse  might  lie
outstretched  before  his  enemies,  and  his  bones  be  scattered  far  and  wide."  ^  A
certain  Tugdami  was  at  that  time  reigning  over  the  Cimmerians,  and  seems  to
have  given  to  their  hitherto  undisciplined  hordes  some  degree  of  cohesion  and
guidance.-  He  gathered  under  his  standard  not  only  the  Treres,  the  Thracian
kinsfolk  of  the  Cimmerians,  but  some  of  the  Asianic  tribes,  sucli  as  the
Lycians,^  who  were  beginning  to  feel  uneasy  at  the  growing  prosperity  of
Gyges,  and  let  them  loose  upon  their  Lydian  quarry.  Their  heavy  cavalry,
with  metal  helmets  and  long  steel  swords,  overran  the  peninsula  from  end  to
end,  treading  down  everything  under  their  horses'  hoofs.  Gyges  did  his  best
to  stand  up  against  the  storm,  but  his  lancers  quailed  beneath  the  shock  and
fled  in  confusion :  he  himself  j^erished  in  the  flight,  and  his  corpse  remained  in
the  enemy's  hands  (652  B.C.).*  The  whole  of  Lydia  was  mercilessly  ravaged,  and
the  lower  town  of  Sardes  was  taken  by  storm.^     Ardys,  who  had  succeeded  his

'  Cylinder  A  of  the  Brit.  Mm.,  col.  iii.  11.  30-32,  in  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurbanipal ,  pp.  66,  67 :
cf.  S.  AiDEy  Smith,  Die  Keilschr.  Asurbanipals,  vol.  i.  pp.  18-21  ;  Jensen,  Insclir.  AschurhanipaV s,
in  ScHRADEK,  Keil.  Bib}.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  176,  177.

-  The  name  Tugdami,  mentioned  in  tlie  hymn  published  by  Strong,  TJn  Texfe  in^dil  d' Asurhani-
pal,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1893,  vol.  1.  pp.  368,  375,  378,  has  been  identified  by  >*ayce,  in  the
Academy,  1S93,  p.  277,  with  the  Cimmerian  chief  mentioned  by  Strabo  (I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61)  under  the
name  of  Lygdamis :  the  received  reading  of  this  name  (AvySai^ii)  must  be  corrected  into  AvySams.
The  opinion  of  Sayce  has  been  adopted  by  other  Assyriologists  (Messerschmidt,  Die  Inschrift  der
Stele  Nabuua'id's,  p.  61 ;  'VVinckler,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  vol.  i.  p.  485,  note  3).  The
inscription  makes  Tugdami  a  king  of  the  Manda,  and  thus  overthrows  the  hypothesis  that  Lygdamis
or  Dygdamis  was  a  Lycian  chief  who  managed  to  discipline  the  barbarian  hordes  (Radet,  La
Lydie  et  U  Monde  Grec  uu  tempt  des  Mermnades,  pp.  180,  ISl).

'  The  alliance  of  the  Lycians  with  the  Cimmerians  and  Treres  is  known  from  the  evidence  of
Callisthenes  preserved  for  us  by  Strabo  (XIII.  iv.  §  8,  p.  627);  it  is  prob.able  that  many  of  the
marauding  tribes  of  the  Taurus — Isaurians,  Lycaonians,  and  Pamphylians — similarly  joined  the
Cimmerians.

*  Cylinder  A  of  the  Brit.  Mus.,  col.  iii.  11.  32-36,  in  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  p.  07  :  cf.  S.  Alden  Smith,
op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  20,  21 ;  Jensen,  op.  cit.,  in  Schbadeb,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  176,  177.  The  date
652  B.C.  given  for  the  death  of  Gyges  is  gathered  from  the  facts  collected  and  discussed  by  Gelzer.
Dai  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Rheinisches  Museum,  1875,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  250-264.  Winckler  has
attempted  to  return  to  the  date  657  B.C.  (Altorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  495.  496),  relying  on  the  epoch
assumed  for  the  compilation  of  the  different  Cylinder-inscriptions  of  Assur-bani-pal;  it  does  not
seem  to  me  at  present  that  his  calculations  outweigh  those  of  Gelzer.

^  Herodotus,  I.  sv. :  2,apSeis  ir\V  t^s  aKpoTrSxtos  e'lAov ;  and  Strabo  states  definitely  that  it  was
Lygdamis  who  took  the  city  (I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61).  The  account  given  by  tlie  same  author  of  a  double
destruction  of  Sardes  in  652  and  682  li.c.  is  due  to  an  unfortunate  borrowing  from  the  work  of
Callisthenes  (Strabo,  XIII.  iv.  §  S,  p.  627,  XIV.  i.  §  40,  p.  047;  cf.  MCller-Didot,  Scriptores  rerum
Alexandri  Magni,  p.  18).


DEFEAT  AND   DEATH   OF   GTGES.


429


father  on  the  thvoue,  was  able,  however,  to  save  the  citadel :  he  rallied  around
him  the  remnants  of  his  army  and  once  more  took  the  field.  The  cities  of  Ionia
made  common  cause  with  him  ;  tlieir  hoplites  issued  victorious  from  more  than
one  engagement,  and  their  dogs,  trained  to  harry  fearlessly  the  horses  of  tlie
enemy,  often  took  an  active  part  in  the  battle.^  City  after  city  was  attacked  by
the  barbarians,  and  the  suburbs  plundered.  Ephesus,  on  account  of  the  wealth
it  contained,  formed  their  cliief  attraction,  but  their  forces  dashed  themselves
fruitlessly  against  its  walls ;  they  avenged  themselves  for  their  failure  by
setting  on  fire  the  temple  of  Artemis  which  stood  in  the  outskirts.      This


.  BATTLE   OF   THE   CIMMERIANS   AGAINST   THE    GREEKS    ACOOMPANIED   BY    THEIR   DOGS.^

act  of  sacrilege  profoundly  stirred  the  whole  Hellenic  world,  and  when  the
first  fury  of  pillage  was  exhausted,  the  barbarians  themselves  seemed  to
have  been  struck  with  superstitious  horror  at  their  crime  :  deadly  fevers
contracted  in  the  marshes  near  the  city  thinned  their  ranks,  and  in  the
scourge  which  struck  down  their  forces  they  recognised  the  chastisement  of  the
goddess.^  The  survivors  abandoned  the  siege  and  withdrew  in  disorder  towards
the  mountains  of  the  interior.      On  their  way  they  surprised  Magnesia  on  the

'  On  the  emijloyment  of  dogs  in  warfare  at  this  period  among  both  Hellenic  and  barbaiian
peoples  in  Asia  Minor,  cf.  the  passages  from  ancient  authors  recently  collecled  by  Salomon  Eeinach,
Vn  iioHveati  sarcophage  peiut  de  Clazomcnes,  in  the  Revue  des  Eludes  Grecques,  1895,  vol.  viii.
pp.  175-179,  and  by  A.  !S.  Murray,  Sarcophage  de  Clazovienes  appartenant  an  Musee  Britannique,  in
the  Mgmoires  Piot,  vol.  iv.  pp.  27-52.  Many  of  these  dogs  are  represented  in  the  woodcut  reproduced
in  the  text  on  this  page;  they  are  depicted  harrying  the  horses  of  the  Cimmerians  and  biting  their
haunches.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  sarcophagus  of  ClazomeuEe  reproduced  in  the  Memoires
Piot,  vol.  iv.  pi.  V.

^  The  invasion  of  Ionia  by  the  Cimmerians  is  indicated  in  general  terms  by  Herodotus,  I.  vi. ;
the  details  of  the  attack  on  Ephesus  and  the  destructiou  of  the  temple  of  Artemis  are  preserved  in  a
passage  of  Callimachus  (Ilymns,  iii.  251-25S),  and  in  the  fragments  quoted  by  Hesyohius,  s.v.
AiySafus  and  SkuAwi'  e'pTj^/a.  Cf.,  for  the  details  of  these  events  and  the  different  questions  to  which
they  give  rise,  Gelzer,  Das  Zeitalter  des  Gyges,  in  the  Eheinisches  Museum,  1S75,  vol.  sxx.  p.  258 ;
Schubert,  Geschichte  der  KSnige  eon  Lijdieii,  pp.  40-42 ;  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Moride  Grec  au  temps
des  Mermnades,  pp.  187-189.


430  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

Mseander  and  entirely  destroyed  it,  but  tliis  constituted  their  sole  military
success :    elsewhere,  they   contented   themselves  with   devastating   the   fields
without  venturing  to  attack  the  fortified  towns.'      Scarcely  had  Ardys  freed
himself  from  their  unwelcome  presence,  than,  like  his  father  before  him,  he
tried  to  win  the  support  of  Assyria.      He  sent  an  envoy  to  Nineveh  with  a
letter  couched  in  very  humble  terms  :  "  The  king  whom  the  gods  acknowledge,
art  thou ;  for  as  soon  as  thou  hadst  pronounced  imprecations  against  my  father,
misfortune  overtook  him.     I  am  thy  trembling  servant ;  receive  my  homage
graciously,  and  I  will   bear  thy  yoke ! "     Assur-bani-pal  did  not  harden  his
heart  to  this  suppliant  who  confessed  his  fault  so  piteously,  and  circumstances
shortly  constrained  him  to  give  a  more  efiicacious  proof  of  his  fovour  to  Ardys
than  he  had  done  in  the  case  of  Gyges.^      On  quitting  Lydia,  Tugdami,  with
his  hordes,  had  turned  eastwards,  bent  upon  renewing  in  the  provinces  of  the
Taurus  and  the  Euphrates  the  same  destructive  raids  which  he  had  made
among  the  peoples  of  the  ^Egean  seaboard;  but  in  the  gorges  of  Cilicia  he
came  into  contact  witli  forces  much  superior  to  his  own,  and  fell  fighting  against
them  about  the  year  645  B.C.    His  son  Sanda-khshatru  led  the  survivors  of  this
disaster  back  towards  the  centre  of  the  peninsula,  but  the  conflict  had  been  so
sanguinary  that  the  Cimmerian  power  never  fully  recovered  from  it.     Assur-
bani-pal  celebrated  the  victory  won  by  his   generals  with  a  solemn  thanks-
giving to  Marduk,  accompanied  by  substantial  oflerings  of  gold  and  objects   of
great  valiie.^     The  tranquillity  of  the  north-west  frontier  was  thus  for  a  time
secured,  and  this  success  most  opportunely  afforded  the  king  leisure  to  turn  his
attention  lo  those  of  his  vassals  who,  having  thrown  off  their  allegiance  during
the  war  against  Shamasb-shumukin,  had  not  yet  returned  to  their  obedience.
Among  these  were  the  Arabs  and  the  petty  jsrinces  of  Egypt.     The  contingents
furnished  by  Yauta,  son  of  Hazael,  had  behaved  valiantly  during  the  siege  of
Babylon,   and   when   they   thought  the   end  was  approaching,   their  leaders,
Abiyate  and  Aamu,  had  tried  to  cut  a  way  through  the  Assyrian  lines :  being
repulsed,  they  had  laid  down  their  arms  on  condition  of  their  lives  being  spared.^

'  Strabo,  XI\^.  i.  §  40.  p.  6i7,  and  Hesychius,  s.v.  SxiiBav  epriiA.la;  Calliuus  anJ  ArcLilochus  had
sung  of  the  destructiou  of  Magnesia  (Athen.eos,  xii.  29).

'  Cylinder  A  of  the  Brit.  Mus.,  col.  iii.  II.  oG-42,  in  G.  SaiTH,  Bist.  of  Assurbam'pal.  pp.  G7,  68.
The  name  of  the  Lydian  king  is  mutilated,  but  the  final  .  .  .  sit  permits  of  the  restoration  Ardusu,
which  is  confirmed  by  the  expression  ablu-su,  "bis  son,"  after  the  mutilated  name.

"  Strabo  (I.  ilL  §  21,  p.  Gl)  was  aware,  perhaps  from  Xanthus  of  Lydia,  that  Lygdamis  had
fallen  in  battle  in  Cilicia.  The  hymn  to  Marduk,  published  by  Strong  ( Un  texte  iriAlit  d' Assourbani-
pal,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1S93,  vol.  i.  pp.  3G8,  375,  378;  JIesserscujiidt,  Die  Inschrifl  der  Stele
Nabuna'id's,  pp.  63-67 ;  of.  Winckler,  Allorieiit.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  492,  493),  informs  us  that  the
Cimmerian  chief  fell  upon  the  Assyrians,  and  that  his  sou  Sanda-khshatru  carried  on  hostilities
some  time  longer.  Sanda-khshatru  is  an  Iranian  name  of  the  same  type  as  that  of  the  Median  king
Uva-khshatra  or  Cyaxares.

'  Of.  supra,  p.  422.


SUBMISSION   OF  ARABIA.  431

There  now  remained  the  bulk  of  the  Arab  tribes  to  be  reduced  to  submission,
and  the  recent  experiences  of  Esarhaddon  had  sliown  the  difficulties  attending
this  task.  Assur-bani-pal  entrusted  its  accomplishment  to  his  subjects  in  Edom,
Moab,  Ammon,  the  Hauran,  and  Damascus,  since,  dwelling  on  the  very  borders
of  the  desert,  they  were  familiar  with  the  routes  and  the  methods  of  warfare
best  suited  to  the  country.  They  proved  victorious  all  along  the  line.  Yauta,
betrayed  by  his  own  subjects,  took  refuge  with  the  Nabatfeans ;  but  their  king,
Nadanu,  although  he  did  not  actually  deliver  him  up  to  the  Assyrians,  refused
to  grant  him  an  asylum,  and  the  unhappy  man  was  finally  obliged  to  surrender
to  his  pursuers.  His  cousin  Uate,  son  of  Birdadda,  was  made  chief  in  his  place"
by  the  Assyrians,  and  Yauta  was  sent  to  Nineveh,  where  he  was  exposed  at  one
of  the  city  gates,  chained  in  a  niche  beside  the  watch-dogs.  Amuladdin,  the
leading  prince  of  Kedar,  met  with  no  better  fate  :  he  was  overcome,  in  spite  of
the  assistance  rendered  him  by  Adiya,  the  queen  of  a  neighbouring  tribe,  and  was
also  carried  away  into  captivity.  His  defeat  completed  the  discouragement  of
the  tribes  who  still  remained  unsubdued.  They  implored  mercy,  which  Assur-
bani-pal  granted  to  them,  although  he  deposed  most  of  their  sheikhs,  and
appointed  as  their  ruler  that  Abiyate  who  had  dwelt  at  his  court  since  the
capitulation  of  Babylon.  Abiyate  took  the  oath  of  fidelity,  and  was  sent  back
to  Kedar,  where  he  was  proclaimed  king  of  all  the  Arab  tribes  under  the
suzerainty  of  Assyria.^

Of  all  the  countries  which  had  thrown  off  their  allegiance  during  the  late
troubles,  Egypt  alone  remained  unpunished,  and  it  now  seemed  as  if  its  turn
had  come  to  suffer  chastisement  for  its  rebellion.  It  was,  indeed,  not  to  be
tolerated  that  so  rich  and  so  recently  acquired  a  province  should  slip  from  the
grasp  of  the  very  sovereign  who  had  completed  its  conquest,  without  his  making
an  effort  on  the  first  opportunity  to  reduce  it  once  more  to  submission.  Such
inaction  on  his  part  would  be  a  confession  of  impotence,  of  which  the  other
vassals  of  the  empire  would  quickly  take  advantage:  Tyre,  Judah,  Moab,
the  petty  kings  of  the  Taurus,  and  the  chiefs  of  IMedia,  would  follow  the
example  of  Pharaoh,  and  the  whole  work  of  the  last  three  centuries  would  have
to  be  done  over  again.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Assur-bani-pal  cherished
the  secret  hope  of  recovering  Egypt  in  a  short  campaign,  and  that  he  hoped
to  attach  it  to  the  empire  by  more  permanent  bonds  than  before,  but  as  a

'  The  texts  relating  to  this  part  of  the  wars  against  the  Arabs  have  been  collected  by  G.  Smith,
Hist,  of  Assurbanipal,  pp.  250-205,  283-293,  295,  2'.KJ,  and  In  S.  Alden  Sjhth,  Die  Keitschri/t-
texte  Asurianipals,  vol.  i.  pp.  5S-63;  cf.  Jensen,  Inschr.  AschurbanipaVs,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  214-221.  The  Cylinder  B  of  the  Brit.  Miis.,  col.  vii.  11.  87-92  (cf.  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,
pp.  283,  281),  attributes  to  the  reign  of  Assur-bani-pal  a  whole  series  of  events,  comprising  the  first
submission  of  Yauta  and  the  restitution  of  the  statues  of  Atarsamain,  which  had  taken  place  under
Esarhaddon  (cf.  supra,  pp.  35S-360).  The  Assyrian  annalists  do  not  seem  to  liave  always  clearly
distinguished  between  Yauta,  son  of  Hazael,  and  Uate,  son  of  Birdadda.


432  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS  ZENITH.

preliminary  to  executing  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  close  and  settle  if
possible  the  account  still  open  against  Elam.  Eecent  events  had  left  the  two  rival
powers  in  such  a  position  that  neither  peace  nor  even  a  truce  of  long  duration
could  possibly  exist  between  them.  Elam,  injured,  humiliated,  and  banished  from
the  plains  of  the  Lotter  Euphrates,  over  which  she  had  claimed  at  all  times  an
almost  exclusive  right  of  pillage,  was  yet  not  sufficiently  enfeebled  by  her  disasters
to  be  convinced  of  her  decided  inferiority  to  Assyria.  Only  one  portion  of  her
forces,  and  that  perhaps  the  smallest,  had  taken  the  field  and  sustained  serious
reverses :  she  had  still  at  her  disposal,  besides  the  peoples  of  the  plain  and  the
marshes  who  had  sufi'ered  the  most,  those  almost  inexhaustible  reserves  of  warlike
and  hardy  mountaineers,  whose  tribes  were  ranged  on  the  heights  which  bounded
the  horizon,  occupying  the  elevated  valleys  of  the  Uknu,  the  Ulai,  and  their
nameless  affluents,  on  the  western  or  southern  slopes  or  in  the  enclosed  basins
of  the  Iranian  fable-land.  Here  Elam  had  at  her  command  at  least  as  many
men  as  her  adversaries  could  muster  against  her,  and  though  these  barbarian
contingents  lacked  discipline  and  systematic  training,  their  bravery  compensated
for  the  imperfection  of  their  military  education.  Elam  not  only  refused  to
admit  herself  conquered,  but  she  believed  herself  sure  of  final  victory,  and,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  Assur-baui-pal's  generals  would  ever
have  completely  triumphed  over  her,  if  internal  discords  and  treason  had  not
too  often  paralysed  her  powers.  The  partisans  of  Khumban-igash  were  largely
responsible  for  bringing  about  the  catastrophe  in  which  Tiumman  had  perished,
and  those  who  sided  with  Tammaritu  had  not  feared  to  provoke  a  revolt  at  the
moment  when  Khumban-igash  was  occupied  in  Chaldaea ;  Indabigash  in  his
turn  had  risen  in  rebellion  in  the  rear  of  Tammaritu,  and  his  intervention  had
enabled  the  Assyrians  to  deal  their  final  blow  at  Shamash-shumukin.  The
one  idea  of  the  non-reigning  members  of  the  royal  house  was  to  depose  the
reigning  sovereign,  and  they  considered  all  means  to  this  end  as  justifiable,
whether  assassination,  revolt,  desertion  to  the  enemy,  or  defection  on  the  very
field  of  battle.  As  soon  as  one  of  them  had  dethroned  another,  hatred  of  the
foreigner  again  reigned  supreme  in  his  breast,  and  he  donned  his  armour  with
a  firm  determination  to  bring  the  struggle  to  an  end,  but  the  course  he  had
pursued  towards  his  predecessor  was  now  adopted  by  one  of  his  relatives  towards
himself;  the  enemy  meanwhile  was  still  imder  arms,  and  each  of  these  revo-
lutions brought  him  a  step  nearer  to  the  goal  of  his  endeavours,  the  com-
plete overthrow  of  the  Elamite  kingdom  and  its  annexation  to  the  empire
of  Nineveh.  Even  before  the  struggle  with  Babylon  was  concluded,  Assur-
bani-pal  had  demanded  of  Indabigash  the  release  of  the  Assyrians  whom
Nabo-bel-shumu  had  carried  off  in  his  train,  besides  the  extradition  of  that


TEE  REVOLUTIONS   IN  EL  AM.  433

personage  himself.  Indabigash  had  uo  desire  for  war  at  this  juncture,  but
hesitated  to  surrender  the  Ealda,  who  had  always  served  him  faithfully  :  he
entered  into  negotiations  which  were  interminably  prolonged,  neither  of  the
two  parties  being  anxious  to  bring  them  to  a  close.  After  the  fall  of  Babylon,
Assur-bani-pal,  who  was  tenacious  in  his  hatred,  summoned  the  Elamite
ambassadors,  and  sent  them  back  to  their  master  with  a  message  conceived  in
the  following  menacing  terms :  "  If  thou  dost  not  surrender  those  men,  T
will  go  and  destroy  thy  cities,  and  lead  into  captivity  the  inhabitants  of  Susa,
Madaktu,  and  Khaidalu.  I  will  hurl  thee  from  thy  throne,  and  will  set  up
another  thereon :  as  aforetime  I  destroyed  Tiumman,  so  will  I  destroy  thee."
A  detachment  of  troops  was  sent  to  enforce  the  message  of  defiance,  but  when
the  messengers  had  reached  the  frontier  town  of  Deri,  Indabigash  was  no  longer
there :  his  nobles  had  assassinated  him,  and  had  elected  Khumban-khaldash,
the  son  of  Attametush,  king  in  his  stead.^  The  opportunity  was  a  favourable
one  to  sow  the  seeds  of  division  in  the  Elamite  camp,  before  the  usurper  should
have  time  to  consolidate  his  power :  Assur-bani-pal  therefore  tlirew  himself  into
the  cause  of  Tammaritu,  supporting  him  with  an  army  to  which  many  mal-
contents speedily  rallied.  The  Aramaeans  and  the  cities  of  the  marsh-lands  on
the  littoral,  Kiiilmu,  Billate,  Dummuku,  Sulaa,  Lakhiru,  and  Dibirina,  submitted
without  a  struggle,  and  the  invaders  met  with  no  resistance  till  they  reached
Bit-Imbi.  This  town  had  formerly  been  conquered  by  Sennacherib,  but  it  had
afterwards  returned  to  the  rule  of  its  ancient  masters,  who  had  strongly
fortified  it.  It  now  offered  a  determined  resistance,  but  without  success  :  its
population  was  decimated,  and  the  survivors  mutilated  and  sent  as  captives  into
Assyria — among  them  the  commander  of  the  garrison,  Imbappi,  son-in-law  of
Khumban-khaldash,  together  with  the  harem  of  Tiumman,  with  his  sons  and
daughters,  and  all  the  members  of  his  family  whom  his  successors  had  left  under
guard  in  the  citadel.  The  siege  had  been  pushed  forward  so  rapidly  that  the  kinc
had  not  been  able  to  make  any  attempt  to  relieve  the  defenders :  besides  this,
a  pretender  had  risen  up  against  him,  one  Umbakhabua,  who  had  been  accepted
as  king  by  the  important  district  of  Bubilu.  The  fall  of  Bit-Imbi  filled  the
two  competitors  with  fear :  they  abandoned  their  homes  and  fled,  the  one  to
the  mountains,  the  other  to  the  lowlands  on  the  shores  of  the  Nar-Marratum.
Tammaritu  entered  Susa  in  triumph  and  was  enthroned  afresh  ;  but  the
insolence  and  rapacity  of  his  auxiliaries  was  so  ruthlessly  manifested,  that  at
the  end  of  some  days  he  resolved  to  rid  himself  of  them  by  the  swurd.     A

'  G.  Smith,  History  of  Asstirhanipal,  pp.  177-181.  Tablet  K  13  of  the  British  Museum,  first
utilised  by  G.  Smith  (pp.  197-199),  refers  to  these  events,  and  contains  some  details  of  the  death
of  Indabigash.  Of.  Jensen,  Inschr.  Aschurbanipal's,  in  Scheadek,  Keilinschriflliche  Bibliothek
vol.  ii.  pp.  266-269.

2    F


434  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA   AT  ITS   ZENITH.

traitor  having  revealed  the  design,  Tammaritu  was  seized,  stripped  of  his  royal
apparel,  and  cast  into  prison.  The  generals  of  Assur-bani-pal  had  no  one  whom
they  could  proclaim  king  in  his  stead,  and  furthermore,  the  season  being  well
advanced,  tlie  Elamites,  who  had  recovered  from  their  first  alarm,  were  returning
in  a  body,  and  threatened  to  cut  off  the  Assyrian  retreat :  tliey  therefore  evacuated
Susa,  and  regained  Assyria  with  their  booty.  They  burnt  all  the  towns  along
the  route  whose  walls  were  insufficient  to  protect  them  against  a  sudden
escalade  or  an  attack  of  a  few  hours'  duration,  and  the  country  between  the
capital  and  the  frontier  soon  contained  nothing  but  heaps  of  smoking  ruins
(647  B.c.)^

The  campaign,  which  had  been  so  successful  at  the  outset,  had  not  produced
all  the  results  expected  from  it.  The  Assyrians  had  hoped  henceforth  to  maintain
control  of  Elam  through  Tammaritu,  but  in  a  short  time  they  had  been  obliged
to  throw  aside  the  instrument  with  which  they  counted  on  efi'ecting  the  complete
humiliation  of  the  nation  :  Khumban-khaldash  had  reoccupied  Susa,  following  on
the  heels  of  the  last  Assyrian  detachment,  and  he  reigned  as  king  once  more
without  surrendering  Nabo-bel-shumi,  or  restoring  the  statue  of  Nana,  or
fulfilling  any  of  the  conditions  which  had  been  the  price  of  a  title  to  the
throne.  Assur-bani-pal  was  not  inclined  to  bear  patiently  this  partial  reverse ;
as  soon  as  spring  returned  he  again  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  Chaldsean
and  the  goddess,  under  pain  of  immediate  invasion.  Khumban-khaldash  offered
to  expel  Nabo-bel-shumi  from  Lakbiru  where  he  had  entrenched  himself,  and
to  thrust  him  towards  the  Assyrian  frontier,  where  the  king's  troops  would
be  able  to  capture  him.  His  offer  was  not  accepted,  and  a  second  embassy,
headed  by  Tammaritu,  who  was  once  more  in  favour,  arrived  to  propose
more  trenchant  terms.  The  Elamite  might  have  gone  so  far  as  to  grant
the  extradition  of  Nabo-bel-shumi,  but  if  he  had  yielded  the  point  con-
cerning Nana,  a  rebellion  would  have  broken  out  in  the  streets  of  Susa :
he  preferred  war,  and  prepared  in  desperation  to  carry  it  on  to  the  bitter
end.  The  conflict  was  long  and  sanguinary,  and  the  result  disastrous  for
Elam.  Bit-Imbi  opened  its  gates,  the  district  of  Eashi  surrendered  at  discre-
tion, followed  by  the  city  of  Khamanu  and  its  environs,  and  the  Assyrians
approached  JMadaktu  :  Khumban-khaldash  evacuated  the  place  before  they
reached  it,  and  withdrew  beneath  the  walls  of  Dur-Undasi,  on  the  western  bank
of  the  Ididi.     His  enemies  pursued  him  thither,  but  the  stream  was  swift  and

'  G.  Smith,  History  of  Aieurbanipal,  pp.  205-217 ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  KeiUchr.  Asurbanipah,
Tol.  i.  pp.  be-iS ;  cf.  Jensen,  Insclir.  Aschurbaniixd's,  in  Schbadek,  Etil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  195-199.
The  difficulty  we  experience  in  locating  on  tlio  map  most  of  the  names  of  Elamite  towns  is  the
reason  why  we  cannot  determine  with  any  certainty  the  whole  itinerary  followed  by  the  .Assyrian
army.


SACK  AND   DESTRUCTION  OF  SUSA.


435


swollen  by  rain,  so  that  for  two  days  they  encamped  on  its  bank  without  daring
to  cross,  and  were  perhaps  growing  discouraged,  when  Ishtar  of  Arbela  once
more  came  to  the  rescue.  Appearing  in  a  dream  to  one  of  her  seers,  she  said,
"  I  myself  go  before  Assur-bani-pal,  the  king  whom  my  hands  have  created ; "
the  army,  emboldened  by  this  revelation,  overcame  the  obstacle  by  a  vigorous
effort,  and  dashed  impetuously  over  regions  as  yet  unvisited  by  any  conqueror.
The  Assyrians  burnt  down  fourteen  royal  cities,  numberless  small  towns,  and
destroyed  the  cornfields,  the  vines,  and  the  orchards  ;  Khumban-khaldash,
utterly  exhausted,  fled  to  the  mountains  "like  a  young  dog."  Banunu  and
the  districts  of  Tasarra,  twenty  cities  in  the  country  of  Khumir,  Khaidalu,  and
Bashimu,  succumbed  one

Is''.


after  another,  and  when

the    invaders    at   length

decided  to  retrace  their

steps     to     the     frontier,

Susa,    deserted    by    her

soldiers  and  deprived  of

her    leaders,    lay   before

them  an   easy    prey.     It

was    not   the   first    time

in  the  last  quarter  of  a

century  that  the  Assyrians

had  had  the  city  at  their

mercy.      They  had  made

some  stay  in  it  after  the  battle  of  Tulliz,  and  also  after  the  taking  of  Bit-

Imbi  in  the  preceding  year;   but  on  those  occasions  they  had  visited  it  as

allies,  to  enthrone  a  king  owing  allegiance  to  their  own  sovereign,  and  political

exigencies  had  obliged  them  to  repress  their   pillaging   instincts  and  their

long-standing   hatred.      Now   that   they   had    come    as    enemies,  they  were

restrained  by  no   considerations  of   diplomacy  :    the  city  was  systematically

pillaged,  and  the  booty  found  in  it  was  so  immense  that  the  sack  lasted  an  entire

month.     The  royal  treasury  was  emptied  of  its  gold  and  silver,  its  metals  and

the  valuable  objects  which  had  been  brought  to  it  from  Sumir,  Accad,  and

Karduniash  at  successive  periods  from  the  most  remote  ages  down  to  that  day,

in  the  course  of  the  successful  invasions  conducted  by  the  princes  of  Susa  beyond

the  Tigris ;  among  them,  the  riches  of  the  Babylonian  temples,  which  Shamash-

shumukin  had  lavished  on  Tiumman  to  iiurchase  his   support,  being  easily

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-GuJin,  from  Layard,  The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  30.  Cf.  the  plates
(vol.  i.  pi.  65,  and  vol.  ii.  pi.  50)  of  the  same  work,  and  the  vignette  reproduced  in  Struqgle  of  the
Nations,  p.  3G.


STATUES   OF   THE   GODS   CARRIED    OFF   ISY    ASSYRIAN    SOLDIERY.'


436  THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

distinguishable.     The  furniture  of  the  pahice  was  sent  to  Nineveh  in  a  long
procession ;  it  comprised  beds  and  chairs  of  ivory,  and  chariots  encrusted  with
enamel  and  precious  stones,  the  horses  of  which  were  caparisoned  with  gold.
The  soldiers  made  their  way  into  the  ziggurat,  tore  down  the  plates  of  ruddy
copper,  violated  the  sanctuary,  and  desecrated  the  prophetic  statues  of  the  gods
who  dwelt  within  it,  shrouded  in  the  sacred  gloom,  and  whose  names  were  only
uttered  by  their  devotees  with  trembling  lips.     Shumudu,  Lagamar,  Partikira,
Ammankasibar,  Uduran,  Sapak,  Aipaksina,  Bilala,  Panintimri,  and  Kindakarpu,
were  now  brought  forth  to  the  light,  and  made  ready  to  be  carried  into  exile
together  with  their  belongings  and  their  priests.     Thirty-two  statues  of  the
kings,  both  ancient  and  modern,  in  silver,  gold,  bronze,  and  marble,  escorted
the  gods  on  their  exodus,  among  their  number  being  those  of  Khumbanigash,
son  of  Umbadara,  Shiitruk-nakhunta,  and  Tammaritu  II.,  the  sovereigns  who
had  treated  Assyria  with  the  greatest  indignity.    The  effigy  of  Khalludush  was
subjected  to  humiliating  outrage:  "his  mouth,  witli  its  menacing  smile,  was
mutilated ;  his  lips,  which  breathed  forth  defiance,  were  slit ;  his  hands,  which
had  brandished  the  bow  against  Assiir,  were  cut  off,"  to  avenge,  though  tardily,
the  ill  success  of  Sennacherib.^     The  sacred  groves  shared  the  fate  of  the
temples,  and  all  the  riches  collected  in  them  by  generations  of  victors  were
c.irried  off  in  cartloads.     They  contained,  amongst  other  edifices,  the  tombs  of
the  ancient  heroes  of  Eiam,  who  had  feared  neither  Assur  nor  Ishtar,  and  who
had  often  brought  trouble  on  the  ancestors  of  Assur-bani-pal.     Their  sepulchres
were  violated,  their  coffins  broken  open,  their  bones  collected  and  despatched
to  Nineveh,  to  crumble  finally  into  dust  in  the  land  of  exile  :    their   souls,
chained  to  their  mortal  bodies,  shared  their  captivity,  and  if  they  were  provided
with  the  necessary  sustenauce  and  libations  to  keep  them  from  annihilation,  it
was  not  from  any  motives  of  compassion  or  pity,  but  from  a  refinement  of
vengeance,  in    order   tliat   they  might   the  longer   taste    the   humiliation  of
captivity.     The  image  of  Nana  was  found  among  those  of  the  native  gods  :i
it  was  now  separated  from  them,  and  after  having  been  cleansed  from  pollution
by  the  presciibed  ceremonies,  it  was  conducted  to  Uruk,  which  it  entered  in
triumph  on  the  1st  of  the  mouth  Kislev.    It  was  reinstated  in  the  temple  it  had
inhabited  of  old  :  sixteen  hundred  and  thirty-five  years  had  passed  since  it  had
been  carried  off,  in  the  reign  of  Kutar-nakhunta,  to  dwell  as  a  prisoner  in  Susa.^
Assur-bani-pal   had   no   intention   of  preserving   the   city   of  Susa   from
destruction,  or  of  making  it  the  capital  of  a  province  which  should  comprise

'  See  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  303,  304.

'  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Afsurhanipal,  pp.  218-237,243-251  ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keihchr.  Amrhani-
pah.  vol.  i.  pp.  42-51 :  cf.  Jensen,  Iiischr.  AschuThauipal's,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  198-
211,  and,  for  the  whole  history  of  this  war,  Billerbeck,  Susa,  pp.  112-118.  On  the  value  of  the
chrc  nological  data  respecting  Nana,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  37,  nott-  2.


3
o

Q


;       —    -    ---J        ■       I      ■-*•,■         '».-        i-      ■     .


^1^


438  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH,

the  plain  of  Elam.     Possibly  it  appeared  to  liim  too  difficult  to  defend  as
long  as  the  mountain  tribes  remained  unsubdued,  or  perhaps  the  Elamites
themselves  were  not  so  completely  demoralised  as  he  was  pleased  to  describe
them  in  his  inscriptions,  and  the  attacks  of  their  irregular  troops  would  have
rendered  the  prolonged  sojourn  of  the  Assyrian  garrison  difficult,  if  not  im-
possible.    Whatever  the   reason,  as   soon   as  the  work  of  pillage   was  fully
accomplished,  the  army  continued  its  march  towards  the  frontier,  carrying  with
it  the  customary  spoil  of  the  captured  towns,  and  their  whole  population,  or  all,
at  least,  who  had  not  fled  at  the  approach  of  the  enemy.     The  king  reserved
for  himself  the  archers  and  pikemen,  whom  he  incorporated  into  his  own  body-
"uard,  as  well  as  the  artisans,  smelters,  sculptors,  and   stonemasons,   whose
talents  he  turned  to  account  in  the  construction  and  decoration  of  his  palaces  ;
the  remainder  of  the  inhabitants  he  apportioned,  like  so  many  sheep,  to  the
cities  and  the  temples,  governors  of  provinces,  oflicers  of  state,  military  chiefs,
and  private  soldiers.     Khumbau-khaldash  reoccupied  Susa  after  the  Assyrians
had  quitted  it,  but  the  misery  there  was  so  great  that  he  could  not  endure
it :    he   therefore  transferred  his  court  to  Madaktu,  one  of  the  royal  cities
which  had  suffered  least  from  the  invasion,  and  he  there  tried  to  establish
a  regular  government.     Kival  claimants  to  the  throne  had  sprung  up,  but  he
overcame  them  without  much  difficulty :  one  of  them,  named  Pae,  took  refuge
in  Assyria,  joining  Tammaritu  and  that  little  band  of  dethroned  kings  or
pretenders  to  the  throne  of  Susa,  of  whom  Assur-bani-pal  had  so  adroitly  made
use  to  divide  the  forces  of  his  adversary.     Khumbau-khaldash  might  well
believe  that  the  transportation  of  the  statue  of  Nana  and  the  sack  of  Susa
had  satisfied  the  vengeance  of  the  Assyrians,  at  least  for  a  time,  and  that
they  would  afford  him  a  respite,  however  short ;  but  he  had  reckoned  without
taking  into  consideration  the  hatred  which  had  pursued  Nabo-bel-shumi  during
so  many  years :  an  envoy  followed  him  as  far  as  Madaktu,  and  offered  Khumban-
khaldash  once  more  the  choice  between  the  extradition  of  the  Chaldaean  or
the  immediate  reopening  of  hostilities.     He  seems  to  have  had  a  moment's
hesitation,  but  when  Nabo-bel-shumi  was  informed  of  the  terms  offered  by  the
envoy,  "life  had  no  more  value  in  his  eyes:  he  desired  death."     He  ordered
his  shield-bearer  to  slay  him,  and  when  the  man  refused  to  do  so,  declaring
that  he  could  not  live  without  his  master,  they   stabbed  each  other  simul-
taneously, and   perished,  as  they  had  lived,  together.      Khumbau-khaldash,
delivered  by  this  suicide  from  his  embarrassments,  had  the  corpse  of  the  master
and  the  head  of  the  faithful  shield-bearer  duly  embalmed,  and  sent  them  to
Nineveh.     Assur-bani-pal  mutilated  the  wretched  body  in  order  to  render  the
conditions  of  life  in  the  other  world  harder  for  the  soul :  he  cut  off  its  head,


THE   CAMPAIGN    AGAINST   TEE  ABABS    OF  KEDAE.  439

and  forbade  the  burial  of  the  remains,  or  the  rendering  to  the  dead  of  the  most
simple  offerings.!  About  this  time  the  inhabitants  of  Bit-Imbi,  of  Til-Khumba,
and  a  dozen  other  small  towns,  who  had  fled  for  refuge  to  the  woods  of  Mount
Saladri,  came  forth  from  their  hiding-places  and  cast  themselves  on  the  mercy
of  the  conqueror :  he  deigned  to  receive  them  graciously,  and  enrolled  them  in
his  guard,  together  with  the  prisoners  taken  in  the  last  campaign.  He  was
contented  to  leave  Elam  to  itself  for  the  moment,  as  he  was  disquieted  at  the
turn  affairs  were  taking  in  Arabia.-  Abiyate,  scarcely  seated  on  the  throne,
had  refused  to  pay  tribute,  and  had  persuaded  Uate  and  Nadanu  to  join  him  in
his  contumacy  ;  several  cities  along  the  Phoenician  seaboard,  led  away  by  his
example,  shut  their  gates  and  declared  themselves  independent.  Assur-bani-
pal  had  borne  all  this  patiently,  while  the  mass  of  his  troops  were  engaged
against  Khumban-khaldash  ;  but  after  the  destruction  of  Susa,  he  determined
to  revenge  himself.  His  forces  left  Nineveh  in  the  spring  of  642  B.C.,  crossed
the  Euphrates,  and  the  line  of  wooded  hills  which  bordered  the  course  of  the
river  towards  the  west,  provisioned  themselves  with  water  at  the  halting-place
of  Laribda,  and  plunged  into  the  desert  in  search  of  the  rebels.  The  Assyrians
overran  the  country  of  Mash,  from  the  town  of  larki  to  Azalla,  wliere  "there
dwell  no  beasts  of  the  field,  where  no  bird  of  the  sky  builds  its  nest,"  and  then,
after  filling  their  water-skins  at  the  cisterns  of  Azalla,  they  advanced  boldly  into
the  thirsty  lands  which  extend  towards  Qurazite ;  they  next  crossed  the  territory
of  Kedar,  cutting  down  the  trees,  filling  up  the  wells,  burning  the  tents,  and
reached  Damascus  from  the  north-east  side,  bringing  in  their  train  innumerable
flocks  of  asses,  sheep,  camels,  and  slaves.  The  Bedawin  of  the  north  had
remained  passive,  but  the  Nabatheans,  encouraged  by  the  remoteness  of  their
country  and  the  difficulty  of  access  to  it,  persisted  in  their  rebellion.  The
Assj-rian  generals  did  not  waste  much  time  in  celebrating  their  victory  in  the
Syrian  capital :  on  the  3rd  of  Ab,  forty  days  after  leaving  the  Chaldajan  frontier,
they  started  from  Damascus  towards  the  south,  and  seized  the  stronghold  of
Khalkhuliti,  at  the  foot  of  the  basaltic  plateau  overlooked  by  the  mountains
of  the  Haurun ;  they  then  destroj'ed  all  the  fortresses  of  the  country  one  after
another,  driving  the  inhabitants  to  take  shelter  in  the  rugged  range  of  volcanic
rocks,  where  they  were  blockaded,  and  finally  reduced  by  famine :  Abiyate
capitulated,  Nadanu  ransomed  himself  by  a  promise  of  tribute,  and  the  whole
desert  between  Syria  and  the  Euphrates  fell  once  more  into  the  condition  of
an  Assyrian  province.     Before  returning  to  Nineveh,  Assur-bani-pal's  generals

'  For  the  belief  presupposed  by  this,  cf.  what  ia  stated  concerning  the  kings  of  Susa,  gupra,  p.  436.

-  G.  Smitu,  Eistory  of  Asmrhtudpal,  pp.  237-243 ;  S.  Aldbn  Smitu,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Asur-
Ijanipah,  vol.  i.  pp.  52-57 :  cf.  .Jensen,  ImcUr.  Ascliurbanipal's,  in  Scheader,  EeilinschriftUclie
BibUothek,  vol.  ii.  pp.  210-215.


440  TEE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.

inflicted  chastisement  on  Akko  and  Ushu,  tlie  two  chief  Tyrian  cities  which  had
revolted,  and  tliis  vigorous  action  confirmed  the  fidelity  of  the  Assyrian  vassals
in  Palestine.  Uate's  life  was  spared,  but  his  lip  and  cheek  were  pierced  by  the
hand  of  the  king  himself,  and  he  was  led  by  a  cord  passed  through  the  wounds,  as
if  he  had  been  a  wild  beast  intended  for  domestication ;  a  dog's  collar  was  riveted
round  his  neck,  and  he  was  exposed  in  a  cage  at  one  of  the  gates  of  Nineveh.
Aamu,  the  brother  of  Abiyate,  was  less  fortunate,  for  he  was  flayed  alive  before
the  eyes  of  the  mob.  Assyria  was  glutted  with  the  spoil :  the  king,  as  was
customary,  reserved  for  his  own  service  the  able-bodied  men  for  the  purpose  of
recruiting  his  battalions,  distributing  the  remainder  among  his  officers  and
soldiers.  The  camels  captured  were  so  numerous  that  their  market-value  was
for  a  long  time  much  reduced ;  they  were  offered  in  the  open  market,  like  sheep,
for  a  half-shekel  of  silver  apiece,  and  the  vendor  thought  himself  fortunate  to
find  a  pur(;haser  even  at  this  price.^

The  final  rain  of  Elam  followed  swiftly  on  the  subjugation  of  Arabia.
While  one  division  of  the  army  was  scouring  the  desert,  the  remainder  were
searching  the  upland  valleys  of  the  Ulai  and  the  Uknu,  and  relentlessly
pursuing  Khumban-khaldash.  The  wretched  monarch  was  now  in  command  of
merely  a  few  bands  of  tattered  followers,  and  could  no  longer  take  the  field  ;
the  approach  of  the  enemy  obliged  him  to  flee  from  Madaktu,  and  entrench
himself  on  the  heights.  Famine,  misery,  and  probably  also  the  treachery  of
his  last  adherents,  soon  drove  him  from  his  position,  and,  despairing  of  his  cause,
he  surrendered  himself  to  the  ofiicers  who  were  in  pursuit  of  him.  He  was  the
third  king  of  Elam  whom  fate  had  cast  alive  into  the  hands  of  the  conqueror:
his  arrival  at  Nineveh  afforded  the  haughty  Assur-bani-pal  an  occasion  for
celebrating  one  of  those  triumphal  processions  in  which  his  proud  soul  delighted,
and  of  going  in  solemn  state  to  thank  the  gods  for  the  overthrow  of  his  most
formidable  enemy.  On  the  day  when  he  went  to  prostrate  himself  before
Assur  and  Ishtar,  he  sent  for  Tammaritu,  Pae,  and  Khumban-khaldash,  and
adding  to  them  Uate,  who  was  taken  out  of  his  cage  for  the  occasion,  he  harnessed
all  four  to  his  chariot  of  state,  and  caused  himself  to  be  drawn  through  Nineveh
by  this  team  of  fallen  sovereigns  to  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  L-mashmash.^
And,  indeed,  at  that  moment,  he  might  reasonably  consider  himself  as  having
reached  the  zenith  of  his  power.     Egypt,  it  is  true,  still  remained  unpunished,

•  G.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  263-2S3,  294-296 ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschr.  Asurlani-
paU,  vol.  i.  pp.  64-75 :  cf.  Jensen,  Inschr.  Aschurhauipal's,  in  Schradeb,  Keil.  Bill.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  218-
229.  For  the  general  direction  of  the  marches  executed  by  the  Assyrian  army  across  the  desert,
from  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  to  Damascus  and  the  Hauran,  I  have  followed  the  indications  of
Delattre,  X'^ste  Occid.  dans  les  Inscr.  Assyr.,  pp.  108-120.

-  G.  Smith,  op.  cit.,  pp.  300-306;  S.  Alden  Smith,  op.  oil.,  vol.  i.  pp.  74-77  :  cf.  Jensen,  op.  oil.,  in
ScHRADER,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  ii.  pp.  228-231.


THE  FINAL   CONVULSIONS    OF  ELAM.  441

and  its  renewed  vitality  under  the  influence  of  the  Saite  Pharaohs  allowed  no
hope  of  its  being  speedily  brought  back  into  subjection,  but  its  intrigues  no
longer  exerted  any  influence  over  Syria,  and  Tyre  itself  appeared  to  be  resigned
to  the  loss  of  its  possessions  on  the  mainland.     Lydia  under  the  rule  of  Ardys
continued  to  maintain  intermittent  intercourse  with  its  distant  protector.     The
provinces  of  the  Taurus,  delivered  from  the  terror  inspired  by  the  Cimmerians,
desired  peace  above  all  things,  and  the  Manual  had  remained  quiet  since  the
defeat  of  Akhsheri.     Babylon  was  rapidly  recovering  from  the  ills  she  had
endured.     She  consoled  herself  for  her  actual  servitude  by  her  habitual  simu-
lation of  independence;    she  called  Assur-bani-pal  Kandalanu,  and  this  new
name  allowed  her  to  fancy  she  had  a  separate  king,  distinct  from  the  King  of
Assyria.     Elam  no  longer  existed.     Its  plains  and  marsh  lands  were  doubtless
occupied    by  Assyrian    garrisons,  and   formed   an   ill-defined    annexation   to
Nineveh ;  the  mountain  tribes  retained  their  autonomy,  and  although  still  a
source  of  annoyance  to  their  neighbours  by  their  raids  or  sudden  incursions,  they
no  longer  constituted  a  real  danger  to  the  state  :  if  there  still  remained  some
independent  Elamite  states,  Elam  itself,  tiie  most  ancient,  except  Babylon,  of
all  the  Asiatic  kingdoms,  was  erased  from  the  map  of  the  world.    The  memories
of  her  actual  history  were  soon  effaced,  or  were  relegated  to  the  region  of  legend,
where  the  fabulous  Memnon  sujiplanted  in  the  memory  of  men  those  lines  of
hardy  conquerors  who  had  levied  tribute  from  Syria  in  the  days  when  Nineveh
was  still  an  obscure  provincial  town.     Assyria  alone  remained,  enthroned  on  the
ruins  of  the  past,  and  her  dominion  seemed  established  for  all  time ;  yet,  on
closer  investigation,  indications  were  not  wanting  of  the  cruel  sufferings  that
she  also  had  endured.     Once  again,  as  after  the  wars  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  and
those  of  Assur-nazir-pal  and  Shalmaneser  III.,  her  chiefs  had  overtaxed  her
powers  by  a  long  series  of  unremitting  wars  against  vigorous  foes.     Doubtless
the  countries  comprised  within  her  wide  empire  furnished  her  with  a  more
ample  revenue  and  less  restricted  resources  than  had  been  at  the  command  of
the  little  province  of  ancient  days,  which  had  been  bounded  by  the  Khabur  and
the  Zab,  and  lay  on  the  two  banks  of  the  middle  course  of  the  Tigris ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  the  adversaries  against  whom  she  had  measured  her  forces,  and
whom  she  had  overthrown,  were  more  important  and  of  far  greater  strength
than  her  former  rivals.     She  had  paid  dearly  for  humiliating  Egypt  and  laying
Babylon  in  the  dust.     As  soon  as  Babylon  was  overthrown,  she  had,  without
pausing  to  take  breath,  joined  issue  with  Elam,  and  had  only  succeeded  in
triumphing  over  it  by  drawing  upon  her  resources  to  the  utmost  during  many
years  :  when  the  struggle  was  over,  she  realised  to  what  an  extent  she  had  been
weakened  by   so   lavish   an   outpouring   of  the  blood  of  her  citizens.     The


442


THE  POWER    OF  ASSYRIA    AT  ITS  ZENITH.


Babylonian  and  Elamite  recruits  whom  she  incorporated  into  her  army  after
each  of  her  military  expeditions,  more  or  less  compensated  for  the  void  which
victory  itself  had  caused  in  her  population  and  her  troops  ;  but  the  fidelity  of
these  vanquished  foes  of  yesterday,  still  smarting  from  their  defeat,  could  not
be  relied  on,  and  the  entire  assimilation  of  their  children  to  their  conquerors
was  the  work  of  at  least  one  or  two  generations.  Assyria,  therefore,  was  on  the
eve  of  one  of  those  periods  of  exhaustion  which  had  so  often  enfeebled  her
national  vitality  and  imperilled  her  very  existence.  On  each  previous  occasion
she  had,  it  is  true,  recovered  after  a  more  or  less  protracted  crisis,  and  the
brilliancy  of  her  prospects,  tliough  obscured  for  a  moment,  appeared  to  be
increased  by  their  temporary  eclipse.  There  was,  therefore,  good  reason  to
hope  that  she  would  recover  from  her  latest  phase  of  depression  ;  and  the  only
danger  to  be  apprehended  was  that  some  foreign  power,  profiting  by  her
momentary  weakness,  might  rise  up  and  force  her,  while  still  suifering  from
the  effects  of  her  heroic  labours,  to  take  the  field  once  more.


THE    MEDES    AND    THE    SECOND
CHALD.EAN    EMPIRE.


THE    FALL   OF   SISEVEH    ASD   TUE    RISE    OP   THE    OUALD.EAX    AND    MEDIAN    EMriKES— THE    XXVl"'
EGYPTIAN   DYNASTY  :    CYAXAKES,    ALYATTES,    AND    NEBUCHADREZZAU.

The  legendary  history  of  the  Icings  of  Media  and  the  first  contact  of  the  Medes  with  the
Assyrians :  the  alleged  Iranian  migrations  of  the  Avesta — Media  proper,  its  fauna  and  flora  ;
Phraortes  and  the  beginning  of  the  Median  empire — Persia  proper  and  the  Persians  :  conquest  of
Persia  hy  the  Medes — The  last  monuments  of  Assur-hani-pal :  the  library  of  Kouyxmfih —
Phraortes  defeated  and  slain  by  the  Assyrians.

Cyaxares  and  his  first  attack  on  Nineveh — The  Assyrian  triangle  and  thedefence  of  Nineveh  :
Assiir-bani-2)al  summons  the,  Scythians  to  his  aid — The  Scythian  invasion — Judah  under
Manasseh  and  Amon :  development  in  the  conceptions  of  the  p>rophets — The  Scythians  in  Syria
and  on  the  borders  of  Egypt :  they  are  defeated  and  driven  lack  hy  Cyaxares —  The  last  kings
of  Nineveh  and  Nahopolassar — Taking  and  destruction  of  Nineveh:  divisiun  of  the  Assyrian
empire  between  the  Chaldeeans  and  the  Medes  (608  e.c).

The  XXVI"'  Egyptian  dynasty — Psammetichus  I.  and  the  Ionian  and  Carian  mercenaries  ;
final  retreat  of  the  Ethiopians  and  the  annexation  of  the  Thehan  principality ;  the  end  of  Egypt
as  a  great  power — First  Greek  settlements  in  the  Delia;  flight  of  the  Mashauasha  an  i  the
reorganisation  of  the  army — Besumption  of  important  works  and  the  renaissance  of  art  in  Egi/pt
—  The  occupation  of  Ashdod,  and  the  Syrian  policy  of  Psammetichus  I,


(     444     )

Josiah,  King  of  Jitdah  ;  the  discovert/ and  public  reading  of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant;  the
religious  reform — Necho  II.  invades  Syria :  Josiah  slain  at  Megiddo,  the  battle  of  Oarchemish —
Nebuchadrezzar  II. :  his  policy  with  regard  to  Media — The  conquests  of  Cyaxares  and  the
struggles  of  the  Mermnadce  against  the  Greek  colonies — The  war  between  Alyattes  and  Cyaxares :
the  battle  of  the  Tlalys  and  the  peace  of  585  n.c. — Necho  reorganises  his  army  and  his  fleet :  the
circumnavigation  of  Africa — Jeremiah  and  the  Egyptian  party  in  Jerusalem :  the  revolt  of
Jehoiakim  and  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin.

Psammetichus  I.  and  Zedekiah — Apries  and  the  revolt  of  Tyre  and  of  Judah  :  the  siege  and
destruction  of  Jerusalem — The  last  convulsions  of  Judah  and  the  submission,  of  Tyre ;  the
successes  of  Apries  in  Phoenicia — The  Greeks  in  Libya  and  the  founding  of  Cyrene  ;  the  defeat  of
Irasa  and  the  fall  of  Apries — Amasis  and  the  campaign  of  Nebuchadrezzar  against  Egypt —
Eelations  between  Nebuchadrezzar  and  Astyages — The  fortifications  of  Babylon  awl  the  rebuilding
of  the  Great  Ziggurdt — The  successors  of  Nebuchadrezzar  :  Nabonidus.


SCTTHIANS   LASSOIKG  HOBSES."


CHAPTER    Y.

THE  MEDES  AND  THE  SECOND  CHALD/EAN  EMPIRE.

The  fall  of  Nineveh  and  the  rise  of  the  ChaldEean  and  Median  empires — The  XXVI""  Egyptian
dynasty  :  Cyasares,  Alyattes,  and  Nebnchadrezzar.


THE  East  was  ever  a  land  of  kaleidoscopic  changes  and
startling  dramatic  incidents.  An  Oriental  empire,  even
when  built  up  by  strong  hands  and  watched  over  with  constant
vigilance,  scarcely  ever  falls  to  pieces  in  the  slow  and  gradual
process  of  decay  arising  from  the  ties  that  bind  it  together  be-
coming relaxed  or  its  constituent  elements  growing  antiquated.
It  perishes,  as  a  rule,  in  a  cataclysm  ;  its  ruin  comes  like  a  bolt
from  the  blue,  and  is  consummated  before  the  commencement
of  it  is  realised.  One  day  it  stands  proud  and  stately  in  the
splendour  of  its  glory ;  there  is  no  reiDort  abroad  but  that  which
tells  of  its  riches,  its  industry,  its  valour,  the  good  govern-
ment of.  its  princes  and  the  irresistible  might  of  its  gods,  and
the  world,  filled  with  envy  or  with  fear,  deeming  its  good  fortune  immutable,  never
once  applies  to  it,  even  in  thought,  the  usual  commonplaces  on  the  instability  of
human  things.  Suddenly  an  ill  wind,  blowing  up  from  the  distant  horizon,  bursts
upon  it  in  destructive  squalls,  and  it  is  overthrown  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,
amid  the  glare  of  lightning,  the  resounding  crash  of  thunder,  whirlwinds  of  dust
and  rain  :  when  the  storm  has  passed  away  as  quickly  as  it  came,  its  mutterings
heralding  the  desolation  which  it  bears  to  other  climes,  the  brightening  sky

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  silver  vase  of  Tcliertomlitsk,  now  in  the  museum  of  the
Hermitage.  The  initial  is  also  drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  and  represents  an  Egyptian  torso  in  the
Turin  museum ;  the  cartouche  which  is  seen  upon  the  arm  is  that  of  Psammetichus  I.


446  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

no  longer  reveals  the  old  contours  and  familiar  outlines,  but  the  suu  of  history
rises  on  a  new  empire,  emerging,  as  if  by  the  touch  of  a  magic  wand,  from  the
ruins  which  the  tempest  has  wrought.  There  is  nothing  apparently  lacking
of  all  that,  in  the  eyes  of  the  many,  invested  its  predecessor  with  glory ;  it
seems  in  no  wise  inferior  in  national  vigour,  in  the  number  of  its  soldiers,  in
the  military  renown  of  its  chiefs,  in  the  proud  prosperity  of  its  people,  or  in  the
majesty  of  its  gods  ;  the  present  fabric  is  as  spacious  and  magnificent,  it  would
seem,  as  that  which  has  but  just  vanished  into  the  limbo  of  the  past.  No
kingdom  ever  shone  with  brighter  splendour,  or  gave  a  greater  impression  of
prosperity,  than  the  kingdom  of  Assyria  in  the  days  succeeding  its  triumphs
over  Elam  and  Arabia  :  precisely  at  this  point  the  monuments  and  other  wit-
nesses of  its  activity  fail  us,  just  as  if  one  of  the  acts  of  the  piece  in  which  it  had
played  a  chief  part  having  come  to  an  end,  tlie  droj)-curtain  must  be  lowered,
amid  a  flourish  of  trumpets  and  the  illuminations  of  an  apotheosis,  to  allow  the
actors  a  little  breathing-space.  Half  a  century  rolls  by,  during  which  we  have
a  dim  perception  of  the  subdued  crash  of  falling  empires,  and  of  the  trampling
of  armies  in  fierce  fight ;  then  the  curtain  rises  on  an  utterly  different  drama,
of  which  the  plot  has  been  woven  behind  the  scenes,  and  the  exciting  motif  has
just  come  into  play.  We  no  longer  hear  of  Assyria  audits  kings;  their  palaces
are  in  ruins ;  their  last  faithful  warriors  sleep  in  unhonoured  graves  beneath  the
ashes  of  their  cities,  their  prowess  is  credited  to  the  account  of  half  a  dozen
fabulous  heroes  such  as  Ninus,  Sardanapalus,  and  Semiramis — heroes  whose
names  call  up  in  the  memory  of  succeeding  generations  only  vague  but  terrible
images,  such  as  the  phantasies  of  a  dream,  which,  although  but  dimly  re-
membered in  the  morning,  makes  the  hair  to  stand  on  end  with  terror.  The
nations  which  erewhile  disputed  the  supremacy  with  Assyria  have  either
suffered  a  like  eclipse — such  as  the  Khati,  Urartu,  the  Cossteans,  and  Elam — or
have  fallen  like  Egypt  and  Southern  Syria  into  the  rank  of  second-rate  powers.
It  is  Chaldeea  which  is  now  in  the  van  of  the  nations,  in  company  with  Lydia
and  with  Media,  whose  advent  to  imperial  power  no  one  would  have  ventured
to  predict  forty  or  fifty  years  before.

The  principality  founded  by  Deiokes  about  the  beginning  of  the  seventh
century  B.C.,  seemed  at  first  destined  to  play  but  a  modest  part ;  ^  it  shared  the
fortune  of  the  semi-barbarous  states  with  which  the  Ninevite  conquerors  came
in  contact  on  the  western  boundary  of  the  Iranian  plateau,  and  from  which  the
governors  of  Arrapkha  or  of  Kharkhar  had  extorted  tribute  to  the  utmost  as
often  as  occasion  offered.  According  to  one  tradition,  it  had  only  three  kings  in
an  entire  century  :  Deiokes  up  till  655  B.C.,  Phraortes  from  655  to  633,  and

'  Cf.  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  324-328.


TEE  LEGEND    OF   TEE  MEDIAN  EINGS.  447

after  the  latter  year  Cyaxares,  the  hero  of  his  race.^  Another  tradition  claimed
an  earlier  foundation  for  the  monarchy,  and  doubled  both  the  number  of  the
kings  and  the  age  of  the  kingdom.'-*  This  tradition  ignored  the  monarchs  who
had  rendered  the  second  Assyrian  empire  illustrious,  and  substituted  for  them
a  line  of  inactive  sovereigns,  reputed  to  be  the  descendants  of  Ninus  and
Semiramis.  The  last  of  them,  Sardanajmlus,  had,  according  to  this  account,
lived  a  life  of  self-indulgence  in  his  harem,  surrounded  by  women,  dressing
himself  in  their  garb,  and  adopting  feminine  occupations  and  amusements.
The  satrap  of  Media,  Arbakes,  saw  him  at  his  toilet,  and  his  heart  turned  against
yielding  obedience  to  such  a  painted  doll :  he  rebelled  in  concert  with  Belesys
the  Babylonian.  The  imminence  of  the  danger  thus  occasioned  roused
Sardanapalus  from  his  torpor,  and  revived  in  him  the  warlike  qualities  of  his
ancestors ;  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  overcame  the  rebels,  and
was  about  to  exterminate  them,  when  his  hand  was  stayed  by  the  defection  of
some  Bactrian  auxiliaries.  He  shut  himself  up  in  Nineveh,  and  for  two  whole
years  heroically  repulsed  all  assaults ;  in  the  third  year,  the  Tigris,  swollen  by

'  This  is  the  tradition  gleaned  by  Herodotus  (I.  xcv.-oiii.).  probably  at  Sardes,  from  the  mouths
of  Persians  (I.  scv.)  residing  in  that  city.

'  This  is  the  tradition  derived  from  the  court  of  Artaxerxes  by  Ctesias  of  Cnidus  (Fragm.  25,  in
Mi'LLEK-DiDOT,  Ctesim  Ciiidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  41-53).  Volney  {Recherches  but  VHUtoire  Ancienne,
vol.  1.  p.  144,  et  seq.)  discovered  the  principle  upon  which  the  chronology  of  hia  Median  dynasty  was
based  by  Ctesias.     If  we  place  his  list  side  by  aide  with  that  of  Herodotus —

Herodotus.  Ctesias.

Interregnum x  Arbakes 28

Deiokes 53  Mandaukas 50

Sosarmos 30

Artykas 50

Phraortes 22  Arbianes 22

Artaios 40

Artynes 22

Cyaxares 4ii  Astibaras 40

we  see  that,  while  rejecting  the  names  given  by  Herodotus,  Ctesias  repeats  twice  over  the  number
of  years  assigned  by  the  latter  to  the  reigns  of  his  kings,  at  least  for  the  four  last  generations —

!  Arbianes  ...     22

Artaios      ...  40  I
Artynes     ...     22  >  Cyaxares  ...    40

Astibaras  ...  40  )

At  the  beginning  Herodotus  gives  before  Deiokes  an  interregnum  of  uncertain  duration.  Ctesias
substituted  the  round  number  of  fifty  years  for  the  fifty-three  assigned  to  Deiokes,  and  replaced
the  interregnum  by  a  reign  which  he  estimated  at  the  mean  duration  of  a  human  generation,
thirty  years;  he  then  applied  to  this  new  pair  of  numbers  the  processor  doubling  he  had  employed
for  the  couple  mentioned  above —

Arbakes    ...  28  I

1  Mandaukas   .     .     50  \  Inlerregnuin     .     .    x

Sosarmos  ...  30  )
Artykas    .              .")0

The  number  twenty-eight  has  been  attributed  to  the  reign  of  Arbakes,  instead  of  the  number
thirty,  to  give  an  air  of  truthfulness  to  the  whole  catalogue.  For  the  end  of  the  list  of  Ctesias  and
the  numbers  which  must  be  inserted  in  it,  cf  M.\rquart,  Die  Assijrlalca  dee  Ktesias,  in  the
Philologus,  Supplement,  vol.  v.  pp.  562,  503.


448  TEE   MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

the  rains,  overflowed  its  banks"and  broke  down  the  city  walls  for  a  distance  of
twenty  stadia.  The  king  thereupon  called  to  mind  an  oracle  which  had
promised  him  victoiy  until  the  day  when  the  river  should  betray  him.  Judging
that  the  prediction  was  about  to  be  accomplished,  he  resolved  not  to  yield
himself  alive  to  the  besieger,  and  setting  fire  to  his  palace,  perished  therein,
together  with  his  children  and  his  treasures,  about  788  b.c.^  Arbakes,  thus
rendered  an  independent  sovereign,  handed  down  the  monarchy  to  his  son
Mandaukas,  and  he  in  his  turn  was  followed  successively  by  Sosarmos,  Artykas,
Arbianes,  Artaios,  Artynes,  and  Astibaras.'^  These  names  are  not  the  work  of
pure  invention  ;  they  are  met  with  in  more  than  one  Assyrian  text :  among  the
petty  kings  who  paid  tribute  to  Sargon  are  enumerated  some  which  bear  such
names  as  Mashdaku,*  Ashpanda,*  Arbaku,  and  Khartukka,^  and  many  others,
of  whom  traces  ought  to  be  found  some  day  among  the  archives  of  princely
families  of  later  times.^  There  were  in  these  archives,  at  the  disposal  of  scribes
and  strangers  inclined  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  Asia,  a  supply  of  materials
of  varying  value — authentic  documents  inscribed  on  brick  tablets,  legends  of
fabulous  exploits,  epic  poems  and  records  of  real  victories  and  conquests,  exag-
gerated in  accordance  with  the  vanity  or  the  interest  of  the  composer:  from  these
elements  it  was  easy  to  compile  lists  of  Median  kings  which  liad  no  real  connection
with  each  other  as  far  as  their  names,  order  of  successiou,  or  duration  of  reign
were  concerned.''  The  Assyrian  chronicles  have  handed  down  to  us,  in  place  of
these  dynasties  which  were  alleged  to  have  exercised  authority  over  the  whole
territory,  a  considerable  number  of  noble  houses  scattered  over  the  country,
each  of  them  autonomous,  and  a  rival  of  its  neighbour,  and  only  brought  into
agreement  with  one  another  at  rare  intervals  by  their  common  hatred  of  the
invader.  Some  of  them  were  representatives  of  ancient  races  akin  to  the
Susians,  and  perhaps  to  the  first  inhabitants  of  Chaldgea ;  ^  others  belonged  to
tribes  of  a  fresh  stock,  that  of  the  Aryans,  and  more  particularly  to  the  Iranian

•  For  the  legend  of  Sardanapalus  and  Arbakes,  see  the  narratives  of  Ctesta?,  Fragm.  20-22,  iu
MuLLEK-DiDOT,  Ctesios  Cnidii  Fnigmenta,  pp.  3G-11  ;  cf.  Diodokcs  .Siculcs,  ii.  23-28.

'  Oppert  thought  that  the  names  given  by  Herodotus  represented  "Aryanised  forms  of  Turanian
names,  of  wliich  Ctesias  has  given  the  Persian  translation"  {LePeuple  et  la  langue  des  Medes,  p.  17,
et  seq.).

'  Mashdaku  is  identified  by  Rost  {Uniersuclmngen  zur  Altorient.  Gescli.,  p.  115)  with  the  Man-
daukas or  Maydaukas  of  Ctesias,  which  would  then  be  a  copyist's  error  for  Masdaukas.  Tlie
identitication  with  Vashd[t]aku,  Vashtak,  the  name  of  a  fabulous  king  of  Armenia,  proposed  by
Justi  (Jranuclies  Nameniuch,  p.  359),  is  rejected  by  Kost  (^op.  cit..  p.  Ill,  note  3);  Mashdaku  would
be  the  Iranian  Mazdaka,  preserved  iu  the  Mazakes  of  Arrian  (^Anahauls,  III.  i.  §  2).

*  Ashpanda  is  the  As-pandas  or  Aspadas  which  Ctesias  gives  instead  of  the  Astyages  of  Herodotus
{Fragm.  25,  in  Mijller-Didot,  op.  cit.,  p.  43);  cf.  Justi,  op.  cit.,  p.  45).

'  The  name  of  Artykas  is  also  found  in  the  secondary  form  Kardikeas,  wliich  is  nearer  the
Khartukka  of  the  Assyrian  texts  (Bost,  op.  cit.,  p.  115).

'  These  names  are  taken  from  the  list  discovered  by  G.  Smith  {Assyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  288, 289),
and  interpreted  by  Eoat  {op.  cit.,  pp.  111-115).

'  Rost,  Untersuchungenzur  AltorientalischenGtschichte,'pf.\\0,'m,  115,110.

«  Oa  this  point,  cf.  Struggle,  oj  the  Nations,  jjp.  32-36,  113,  114.


EARLY  RELATIONS  BETWEEN   TEE  MEDES   AND   ASSYRIANS.       449

branch  of  the  Aryan  family.  We  catch  glimpses  of  them  in  the  reign  of
Shalmaneser  III.,  who  calls  them  the  Amadai ;  ^  then,  after  this  first  brush  with
Assyria,  intercourse  and  conflict  between  the  two  nations  became  more  and
more  frequent  every  year,  until  the  "  distant  Medes "  soon  began  to  figure
among  the  regular  adversaries  of  the  Ninevite  armies,  and  even  the  haughtiest
monarchs  refer  with  pride  to  victories  gained  over  them.  Eamman-nirari
waged  ceaseless  war  against  them,^  Tiglath-pileser  III.  twice  drove  them
before  him  from  the  south-west  to  the  north-east  as  far  as  the  foot  of
Demavend,^  while  Sargon,  Sennacherib,  and  Esarhaddon,  during  their  respective
reigns,  kept  anxious  watch  upon  them,  and  endeavoured  to  maintain  some  sort
of  authority  over  the  tribes  which  lay  nearest  to  them.*  Both  in  the  personal
names  and  names  of  objects  which  have  come  down  to  us  in  the  records  of  these
campaigns,  we  detect  Iranian  characteristics,  in  spite  of  the  Semitic  garb  with
which  the  inscriptions  have  invested  them :  among  the  names  of  countries  we
find  Partukka,  Diristanu,  Patusharra,  Nishaia,  Urivzan,  Abiruz,  and  Ariarma,
while  the  men  bear  such  names  as  Ishpabarra,  Eparna,  Shitirparna,  Uarzan,  and
Dayaukku.^  As  we  read  through  the  lists,  faint  resemblances  in  sound  awaken
dormant  classical  memories,  and  the  ear  detects  familiar  echoes  in  the  names
of  those  Persians  whose  destinies  were  for  a  time  linked  with  those  of  Athens
and  Sparta  in  the  days  of  Darius  and  of  Xerxes  -.  it  is  like  the  first  breath  of
Greek  influence,  faint  and  almost  imperceptible  as  yet,  wafted  to  us  across  the
denser  atmosphere  of  the  East.

The  Iranians  had  a  vague  remembrance  of  a  bygone  epoch,  during  which
they  had  wandered,  in  company  with  other  nations  of  the  same  origin  as
themselves,  in  that  cradle  of  the  Aryan  peoples,  Ai-yanem-Vaejo.^  Modern
historians  at  first  placed  their  mythical  birthplace  in  the  wilder  regions  of
Central  Asia,  near  the  Oxus  and  the  Jaxartes,  and  not  far  from  the  so-called
table-land  of  Pamir,  which  they  regarded  as  the  original  point  of  departure  of

'  For  the  identity  of  Amadai  or  the  Madai— or  in  other  %Yords,  the  Medes — cf.  p.  89,  n.  4,  supra.

'  For  Ramman-nirari  IV.  and  hi3_wars  against  the  Medes,  cf.  p.  99,  supra.

^  The  campaigns  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  against  the  Medes  have  been  described  on  pp.  142,  143,
153, 154,  supra.

*  The  little  we  know  of  the  relations  of  the  Medes  with  the  Sargonide  kings  has  already  been
dealt  with  in  the  present  volume,  on  pp.  240-244,  247-259  in  the  case  of  Sargon,  and  on  pp.  276,  277
and  pp.  252-25G  in  tlie  ca^e  of  Sennacherib  and  Esarhaddon  respectively;  it  would  seem  that  at  least
one-half  of  the  plateau  must  at  that  time  have  been  either  directly  or  indirectly  under  the  rule  of
Assyria.

^  The  Iranian  equivalents  of  these  names  have  already  been  given  in  the  present  volume — in  the
case  of  Partukka  on  p.  351!,  note  1,  of  Patusharra  on  p.  355,  note  3,  of  Eparna  and  Shitirparna  on
p.  355,  nole  4.  Urivzan  has  been  connected  witb  the  Avestic  Urvil  (Fk.  Lenokmant,  Lettres
Assyriologiques,  vol.  i.  p.  31),  and  if  so,  would  correspond  to  Urva-Zana  (RosT.  Die  Keihchrifttexle
Tiglat-Pileser's  III.,  vol.  i.  p.  svii.,  and  Untersuchungen  xur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  78,  note  5).
Abiruz  seems  to  me  to  contain  the  element  fcereza,  "high,"  which  is  found  in  the  name  Elburz.
Uarzan  is,  perhaps,  Varzan  or  Varezana,  which  the  Greeks  transliterated  into  Barzanes  (Jcsti,
Iranisches  Namenbuch,  p.  65,  andRosT,  Untersuchuntjen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte,  p.  113,  note  1).

°  J.  Dabmestetek,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  5,  note  4.

•2    G


450  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

the  Indo-European  races.  Tliey  believed  that  a  large  body  of  these  primitive
Aryans  must  have  descended  soutli wards  into  the  basin  of  the  Indus  and  its
affluents,  and  that  other  detachments  had  installed  themselves  in  the  oases  of
Marfiana  and  Khorasmia,  while  the  Iranians  would  have  made  their  way  up
to  the  plateau  which  separates  the  Caspian  Sea  from  the  Persian  Gulf,  where
they  sought  to  win  for  themselves  a  territory  sufficient  for  their  wants.^  The
compilers  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Iranians  claimed  to  be  able  to  trace  each
stage  of  their  peregrinations,  and  to  describe  the  various  accidents  which  befell
them  during  this  heroic  period  of  their  history.  According  to  these  records,  it
was  no  mere  chance  or  love  of  adventure  which  had  led  them  to  wander  for
years  from  clime  to  clime,  but  rather  a  divine  decree.  While  Ahuromazdao,  the
beneficent  deity  whom  they  worshipped,  had  provided  them  with  agreeable
resting-places,  a  perverse  spirit,  named  Angromainyus,  had  on  every  occasion
rendered  their  sojourn  there  impossible,  by  the  plagues  which  he  inflicted  on
them.  Bitter  cold,  for  instance,  had  compelled  them  to  forsake  Aryauem-
Vaejo  and  seek  shelter  in  Sughdha  and  Miiru.^  Locusts  had  driven  them  from
Sughdha  ;  the  incursions  of  the  nomad  tribes,  coupled  with  their  immorality,  had
forced  them  to  retire  from  ^Miiru  to  Bakhdhi,  "  the  country  of  lofty  banners,"  ^  and
subsequently  to  Nisaya,  which  lies  to  the  south-east,  between  Muru  and  Bakhdhi.
From  thence  they  made  their  way  into  the  narrow  valleys  of  the  Haroyu,  and
overran  Vaekereta,  the  laud  of  noxious  shadows.*     From  this  point  forwards,

•  The  theory  that  the  first  chapter  of  the  Vendidad  throws  valuable  light  on  the  early  history  of
the  Aryan  races  and  Iranian  migrations  dates  from  the  beginning  of  this  century.  Heeren  (Jdeen  zur
Alien  GeschiclUe,  vol.  i.  p.  498)  and,  later  on,  Kohde  (Die  Heilige  Sage  des  Zendvolks,  p.  61)  first
advanced  the  view  that  it  describes  the  state  of  Iran  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Zoroaster ;  Rohde
even  went  so  far  as  to  assert  that  the  order  in  which  the  provinces  are  enumerated  corresponds  with
the  successive  stages  of  the  Iranian  conquest.  Lassen,  starting  from  this  hypothesis,  suggested  that
Aryanem-Vaejo,  which  occupies  the  first  place  in  the  list,  was  the  cradle  of  the  race  {Indische
Jlterthumskunde,  1st  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  52t;),  and  soon  afterwards  Hang  proposed  to  regard  the  whole
chapter  as  a  sort  of  diary  composed  during  the  course  of  the  migration  (Das  Erste  Kapitel  des  Yendi-
dads,  in  Bunsen,  ^Egypten's  Slellung  in  der  Weltgeschiehte,  vol.  v.  pt.  2,  pp.  104-127).  Tliese  views  held
the  field  until  they  were  refuted  by  Kiepert  in  the  Monalsherichte  of  the  Berlin  Academy  of  Sciences,
1856,  p.  621,  et  seq.,  and  until  Bre'al  proved  in  his  paper  De  la  G^ographie  de  VAvesta,  published  in  the
Journal  Asialique  for  1862,  and  reproduced  in  3Idaiiges  de  Mythologie  et  de  Linguistique.  p.  187,  et  seq.,
that  "the  geography  of  the  Avesta  is  fabulous  from  beginning  to  end."  This  is  the  view  now
generally  accepted  (J.  Darmf.steter,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-4).

-  Sughdha  is  Sogdiana ;  Muru,  in  ancient  Persian  Margush  (Inscription  of  Behistun,  col.  iii.  1. 11),
is  the  modern  Merv,  the  Margiana  of  classical  geographers.

"  Bakhdhi  is  identical  with  Bactriana,  but,  as  Spiegel  points  out,  this  Avestic  form,  when  compared
with  the  Bakhtrish  of  the  Achjemenian  inscriptions  (Inscription  of  Persepolis  E,  epoch  of  Darius,  1. 16.
and  Inscription  of  Naksh-i-Rustem,  1.  23)  and  the  Greek  Ba/crpa,  is  comparatively  recent,  and  readily
suggests  the  modern  Balkh,  in  which  the  consonants  have  become  weakened.

*  The  Avesta  places  Nisaya  between  Miiru  and  Bakhdlii  (J.  Dakmestetek,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.
p.  9),  to  distinguish  it  from  other  districts  of  the  same  name  to  be  found  in  this  part  of  Asia  :  Eugene
Burnouf  is  probably  correct  in  identifying  it  with  the  Nesa;a  of  Strabo  (XI.  vii.  §  3,  p.  509)  and  of
Ptolemy  (vi.  10,  4),  which  lay  to  the  south  of  Margiana,  at  the  junction  of  the  roads  leading  to
Hyrcania  in  one  direction  and  Bactriana  in  the  other.  Haroyu  or  Haraeva  is  the  Greek  Aria,  the
modern  province  of  Herat.  The  Pehlevi  commentators  identify  Vaekereta  with  Kabulistan,  and  also
volunteer  the  following  interpretation  of  the  title  which  accomi^anies  the  name :  "  The  shadow  of
the  trees  there  is  injurious  to  the  body,  or  as  some  say,  the  shadow  of  the  mountains,"  and  it  produces


TBADITIOXAL  IRANIAN  MIGRATIONS.


451


the  countries  mentioned  by  their  clironiclers  are  divided  into  two  groups,  lying
in  opposite  directions :  Arahvaiti,  Haetumant,  and  Haptahindu  ^  on  the  east ;
and  on  the  west,  Urva,^  Khnenta-Vehrkana,^  Khaga,''  and  Chakhra,'  as  far  as
the  districts  of  Varena  ^  and  the  basin  of  the  Upper  Tigris.'


This  legend  was


THE  LANDS

created  by

/--j=>^__JAHURA-  MAZDA

Scale


composed  long  after  the  event,  in  order  to  explain  in  the  first  place  the  relation-
ship between  the  two  great  families  into  which  the  Oriental  Aryans  were  divided,

fever  there.  Arguing  from  passages  of  similar  construction,  Lassen  was  led  to  recognise  in  the  epithet
duzhako-shayauem  a  place-name, "  inhabitant  of  Duzhako,"  which  he  identified  with  a  ruined  city  in  this
neighbourliood  called  Dushak  ;  Haug  (^Das  erste  Kapitel  ties  Vendidads,  in  Bunsen,  ^Egypten's  Stellung,
Tol.  V.  p.  132)  believed  he  had  found  a  confirmation  of  this  hypothesis  in  the  fact  that  the  Pairika
Khnathaiti  created  there  by  AngrO-mainyus  recalls  in  sound,  at  any  rate,  the  name  of  the  people
Parikani  mentioned  by  classical  writers  (Heiiod.,  III.  xciv.  ;  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  vi.  16)  as  inhabiting
these  regions.

'  Arahvaiti,  the  Harauvatish  of  the  Achfemenian  inscriptions  {Inscription  E  of  Persepolis,  1. 17),  is
the  Greek  Arachosia,  and  Haetumant  the  basin  of  their  Etymander,  the  modern  Helmend;  in  other
words,  the  present  province  of  Seistan.  Hapta-Hindu  is  the  western  part  of  the  Indian  continent,
i.e.  the  Punjaub.

-  The  Pehlevi  commentators  identify  Urva  with  Mesene,  mentioned  by  classical  writers,  at  the
confluence  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  (.1.  Dakmestetek,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  11,  note  24),  or
perhaps  the  plain  around  Ispahan  which  bore  the  name  of  Masan  in  the  Sassanid  period  (J.  Darme-
STETEU,  Tlie  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  2).  Fr.  Lenormant  (Lettres  Assyriol.,  vol.  1.  p.  31)  had  connected  it
with  the  name  Urivzan  (cf.  p.  449,  note  5,  supra),  which  is  applied  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  to  a  dis-
trict of  Media  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  {Tablet  K  3571,  obv..  1. 30,  ed.  RosT,  vol.  i.  pp.  62,  63).

"  The  name  Khneuta  seems  to  have  been  Helleuised  into  that  of  Kharindas,  borne  by  a  river  which
formed  the  frontier  between  Hyrcania  and  Media  (Ammiascs  Marcellincs,  XXIII.  ii.  J  20) ;  according
to  the  Pehlevi  version  it  was  really  a  river  of  Hyrcania,  the  Djordjan(J.  Darmesteter,  The  Zend-Avesta,
vol.  ii.  p.  12,  note  23).  The  epithet  Vehrkana,  which  qualifies  the  name  Khnenta,  has  been  identified
by  Burnouf  (CommentotVe  sur  le  Ya^na,  p.  Ixi.)  with  the  Hyrcania  of  classical  geographers.

*  Eagha  is  identified  with  Azerbaijan  in  the  Pehlevi  version  of  the  Vendidad  (J.  DARiiESTETER,
Tlie  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  13,  note  33),  but  is,  more  probably,  the  Ehagae  of  classical  geographers
(Strabo,  XI.  xiii.  §  6,  p.  524 ;   Arrianus.  Anabasis,  iii.  20),  the  capital  of  Eastern  Media.

'  Chakhra  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  country  of  Karkh,  at  tlie  north-western  extremity  of
Khorassan,  as  suggested  by  Haug  (cf.  J.  Daemi:stetek,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  9,  note  1,  and
The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  13,  note  36).

"  Varena  is  identified  by  the  Pehlevi  commentators  with  Patishkhvargar  (J.  Darmesteter,  The
Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  14,  note  38),  i.e.  probably  the  Patusharra  of  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  (cf.  p.  355,
note  3,  supra).

'  Haug  proposed  to  identify  this  last  station  with  the  regions  situated  on  the  shores  of  the  Caspian,
near  the  south-western  corner  of  that  sea.  But,  as  Garrez  points  out,  the  Pehlevi  commentators  prove
that  it  must  be  the  countries  on  the  Upper  Tigris  {Journal  Asiatique,  1869,  vol.  ii.  p.  186;  cf.
J.  Darmesteter,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  15,  note  44).


452  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

viz.  the  ludian  and  Iranian,  and  in  the  second  to  account  for  the" peopling-
by  the  Iranians  of  a  certain  number  of  provinces  between  the  Indus  and  the
Euphrates.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  more  likely  that  the  Iranians  came
originally  from  Europe,  and  that  they  migrated  from  the  steppes  of  Southern
Eussia  into  the  plains  of  the  Kur  and  the  Araxes  by  way  of  Mount  Caucasus.^
It  is  possible  that  some  of  their  hordes  may  have  endeavoured  to  wedge  them-
selves in  between  the  Halys  and  the  Euphrates  as  far  as  the  centre  of  Asia
Minor.  Their  presence  in  this  quarter  would  explain  why  we  encounter  Iranian
personal  names  in  the  Sargonide  epoch  on  the  two  spurs  of  Mount  Taurus,  such
us  that  of  the  Kushtashpi,  King  of  Kummukh,  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.,
and  of  the  Kundashpi  mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Shalmaneser  III.  in  the  ninth
century  B.c.^  The  main  body,  finding  its  expansion  southwards  checked  by
Urartu,  diverged  in  a  south-easterly  direction,  and  sweeping  before  it  all  the
non-Aryan  or  Turanian  tribes  who  were  too  weak  to  stem  its  progress,  gradually
occupied  the  western  edge  of  the  great  plateau,  where  it  soon  became  mainly
represented  by  the  two  compact  groups,  the  Persians  to  the  south  on  the  farthest
confines  of  Elam,  and  the  Medes  between  the  Greater  Zab,  the  Turnat,  and  the
Caspian.  It  is  probable  that  the  kingdom  founded  by  Deiokes  originally
included  what  was  afterwards  termed  Media  Magna  by  the  Gra3co-Eomuu
geographers.^  This  sovereignty  was  formed  by  the  amalgamation  under  a
single  monarch  of  six  important  tribes — the  Buzte,  Parsetakeni,  Struchatffi,
Arizanti,  Budii,  and  Magi.^  It  extended  north-westwards  as  far  as  the  Kizil-
uzen,  which  formed  the  frontier  between  the  Persians  and  the  Manual  on  this
side.  Northwards,  it  reached  as  far  as  Demavend ;  the  salt  desert  that  rendered
Central  Iran  a  barren  region,  furnished  a  natural  boundary  on  the  east ;  on
both  the  south  and  west,  the  Assyrian  border-lands  of  EUipi,  Kharkhar,  and
Arrapkha  prevented  it  from  extending  to  the  chief  ranges  of  the  Zagros  and
Gordisean  mountains.     The  soil,  though  less  fertile  than  that  of  Chaldaea  or  of

'  Spiegel  has  argued  that  Aryanem-Vaejo  is  probably  Arran,  the  modern  Kazabadagh,  the  moun-
tainous district  between  the  Kur  and  the  Aras  (Eranische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  194,  211,  212),
and  his  opinion, adopted  by Darmesteter(rfce  Zend-Avesta,vol.  i.  p.  3,  TJteZend-Afesla,\ol.  ii.  p.  5,  note  4),
is  now  gaining  acceptance.  The  settlement  of  the  Iranians  in  Eussia,  and  their  entrance  into  Asia
by  -way  of  the  Caucasus,  have  been  admitted  by  Host  (^Uiitersuch.  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,pp.  78-80).  Clas-
sical "Writers  reversed  this  order  of  things,  and  derived  the  Sauromatce  and  other  Scythian  tribes  from
Media  (Diodorcs  Sicclcs,  ii.  43  ;  Plky,  Hist.  Nat.,vi.  19  :  Ammianus  Mabcellinus,  XXXI. ii.  17).

-  Cf.  persons  mentioned  on  pp.  70,  148,  supra.  The  name  Kushtashpi  has  been  compared  witli
that  of  Vistaspa  or  Gushtasp  by  Fr.  Lenormant  (Lettres  Assijriologiques,  vol.  i.  p.  144),  the  name
Kundashpi  with  that  of  Vindaspa  by  Gutschmid  (_Neue  Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  des  Alien  Orients,  pp.
95,  96),  aud,  later  on,  Ball  has  added  to  these  a  long  list  of  names  in  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  inscrip-
tions whicli  he  looks  upon  as  Iranian  {Iranian  Names  amongst  the  Hetia-Hatte,  in  Proc.  of  Bibl.  Arch.
Soc,  18S7-1SS8,  vol.  x.  pp.  424-436).  Kundashpi  recalls  at  first  sight  Gundobunas,  a  name  of  the  Sas-
sanid  epoch,  if  this  latter  form  be  authentic  (Justi,  Iranisches  Namenhuch,  p.  120).  Tiele  adopts  the
identification  of  Kushtashpi  with  Vistaspa  (_Bab.-ass.  Gesch.,  p.  229,  note  1),  and  Justi  has  nothing  to
say  against  it.  nor  against  the  identification  of  Kundashpi  with  Vindaspa  {Iran.  Namenhuch,  p.  378).

^  Cf.  p.  325,  et  seq.,  supra.  *  Hekodotcs,  I.  Ivi.


MEDIA — ITS  FLORA   AND   FAUNA.  453

Egypt,  was  by  no  means  deficient  in  resources.  The  mountains  contained  copper,
iron,  lead,  some  gold  and  silver,^  several  kinds  of  white  or  coloured  marble,^
and  precious  stones,  such  as  topaz,  garnets,  emeralds,  sapphires,  cornelian,  and
lapis-lazuli,  the  latter  being  a  substance  held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  Eastern
jewellers  from  time  immemorial ;  Mount  Eikni  was  specially  celebrated  for  the
fine  specimens  of  this  stone  which  were  obtained  there.^  Its  mountains  were  in
those  days  clothed  with  dense  forests,  in  which  the  pine,  the  oak,  and  the  poplar
grew  side  by  side  with  the  eastern  plane  tree,  the  cedar,  lime,  elm,  ash,  hazel,
and  terebinth.*  The  intermediate  valleys  were  veritable  orchards,  in  which
the  vegetation  of  the  temperate  zones  mingled  with  tropical  growths.  The
ancients  believed  that  the  lemon  tree  came  originally  from  Persia.^  To  this
day  the  peach,  pear,  apple,  quince,  cherry,  apricot,  almond,  filbert,  chestnut,
fig,  pistachio-nut,  and  pomegranate  ^  still  flourish  there  :  the  olive  is  easily
acclimatised,'  and  the  vine  produces  grapes  equally  suitable  for  the  table  or
the  winepress.^  The  plateau  presents  a  poorer  and  less  promising  appearance
— not  that  the  soil  is  less  genial,  but  the  rivers  become  lost  further  inland,
and  the  barrenness  of  the  country  increases  as  they  come  to  an  end  one  after
another.  Where  artificial  irrigation  has  been  introduced,  the  fertility  of  the
country  is  quite  as  great  as  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mountains;'  outside
this  irrigated  region  no  trees  are  to  be  seen,  except  a  few  on  the  banks  of  rivers

'  Rawlinson,  ia  the  Journal  of  the  Geographical  Society,  vol.  x.  p.  55,  has  collected  traditions  in
reference  to  gold  and  silver  mining  among  the  mountains  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Taliht-i-SuIeiman  ;
one  of  these  is  still  called  Zerreh-Sharan,  the  mount  of  the  gold-washers.

'  The  best  known  was  the  so-called  Tauris  marble  quarried  from  the  hills  iu  the  neighbourhood
of  Lake  Urumiyah.

'  The  list  of  precious  stones  which  Pliny  tells  us  (Hist.  Nat.,  xxxvii.  5,  8,  10,  11)  were  found  in
Media,  contains  several  kinds  which  we  are  unable  to  identify,  e.g.  the  Zatlieue,  the  gassinades
and  narcissitis  (of.  Diontsics  Periegetes,  v.  1030,  1031).  Pliny  calls  lapis-lazuli  sapphirus,  and
declares  that  the  bright  specks  of  pyrites  it  contained  rendered  it  unsuitable  for  engraving  (xxxvii.  8).
In  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  Mount  Bikni,  the  modern  Demavend  (cf.  p.  142,  note  2,  supra),  is
described  as  a  mountain  of  Uknu,  or  lapis-lazuli.

*  G.  Rawlinson,  'lite  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  289,  290,  where  references  are
given  to  the  authors  who  mention  the  existence  in  their  time  of  each  of  the  species  enumerated  in  the
text.  A  large  part  of  the  mountains  and  plains  is  now  treeless,  but  it  is  manifest,  both  from  the
evidence  of  the  inscriptions  and  from  the  observations  of  travellers,  that  the  whole  of  Media  was
formerly  well  wooded ;  cf.  Olivier,  Voyage  dans  V Empire  Oi/joman,  vol.  iii.  pp.  119-121,  and  J.  de
Morgan,  Mission  Archgologique  en  Perse,  vol.  ii.  pp.  16,  17,  52,  88-91.

^  The  apple  obtained  from  Media  was  known  as  the  Medicum  vialum,  and  was  credited  with  the
property  of  being  a  powerful  antidote  to  poison  (Virgil,  Georgics,  ii.  126-135):  it  was  supposed  that
it  would  not  grow  anywhere  outside  Media  (Pliny,  Sisf.  Nat.,  xii.  3).

»  G.  Rawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  290.

'  M.  de  Morgan  {Mission  Archeologique  en  Perse,  vol.  iv.  p.  239,  note  1)  denies  tliat  the  olive  can
exist  in  Media,  but  H.  Rawlinson  asserts  that  it  is  found  iu  various  parts  of  the  country  {Journal  of
the  Geographical  Society,  vol.  x.  p.  3).

'  In  some  places,  as,  for  instance,  at  Kirmaushahan  (Olivier,  Voyage  dans  V Empire  Othoman,
vol.  iii.  p.  14),  the  vine-stocks  have  to  be  buried  during  the  winter  to  protect  them  from  the  frost.  As
to  the  making  of  wine,cf.  Olivier,  Voyage  dans  I'Empire  Othoman,  vol.  iii.  pp.  157-159.

"  Irrigation  was  eifected  formerly,  as  now,  by  means  of  subterranean  canals  with  openings  at
intervals,  known  as  handt ;  they  have  been  described  by  Olivier  {op.cii.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  172-174),  and  more
recently,  with  explanatory  drawings  and  sectional  plans,  by  J.  de  Morgan  {op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  300-303).


454


TEE  MEDES   AND    TEE  SECOND    CEALD^AN  EMPIRE.


or  ponds,  but  wlieat,  barley,  rye,  oats,  and  an  abundance  of  excellent  vegetables
grow  readily  in  places  where  water  is  present.  The  fauna  include,  besides  wild
beasts  of  the  more  formidable  kinds,  such  as  lions,  tigers,  leopards,  and  bears,'
many  domestic  animals,  or  animals  capable  of  being  turned  to  domestic  use,
such  as  the  ass,  buffalo,  sheep,  goat,  dog,  and  dromedary,  and  the  camel  with

two  humps,  whose  gait
caused  so  much  merri-
ment among  the  Nine-
vite  idlers  when  they
beheld  it  in  the  trium-
phal processions  of  their
kings ; "  there  were,  more-
over, several  breeds  of
I'vVX^^v/    horses,    amongst    which


:'  --.g-3


S^


XIS^AN   HORSES   HARNESSED  TO   A   ROYAL  CHARIOT.*


the  Nisaean  steed  was
greatly  prized  on  ac-
count of  its  size,  strength,

and  agility.**     In  short.  Media  was  lai'ge  enough  and  rich  enough  to  maintain

a  numerous  population,  and  offered  a  stable  foundation  to  a  monarch  ambitious

of  building  up  a  new  empire.^'

The  first  person  to  conceive  the  idea  of  establishing  one  was,  perhaps,  a

certain  Fravartish,  the  Phraortes  of  the  Greeks,  whom  Herodotus  declares  to

'  G.  Eawlinsou  has  collected  the  evidence  of  modern  writers  in  regard  to  the  actual  existence  of
these  animals  in  Persia  in  his  Fhe  Great  Monarcliies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  294,  295.

'  Cf.  the  two-humped  camels  reproduced  on  p.  C8,  supra,  from  one  of  the  bronze  bas-reliefs  on  the
gates  of  Balawat.

'  Hebodotcs,  VII.  xl.  In  the  time  of  the  Seleucides,  Media  supplied  nearly  the  whole  of  Asia  with
these  animals  (Polybius,  x.  27,  §  2),  and  the  grazing-lands  of  Bagistana,  the  modern  Behistun,  are
said  to  have  supported  160,(100  of  them  (Diodorus  Sicclus,  xvii.  110).  Under  the  Parthian  kings
Media  paid  a  yearly  tribute  of  3000  horses  (Strabo,  XI.  xiii.  §  8,  p.  525),  and  the  ^isajan  breed  was
still  celebrated  at  the  beginning  of  the  Byzantine  era  (Ammianus  Makcellisvs,  xxiii.  C,  §  30).
Horses  are  mentioned  among  the  tribute  paid  by  the  Medic  chiefs  to  tlie  kings  of  Assyria  (^Annals  of
Tiglath-pileser  III.,  11.  30,  40,  170,  1S2,  Rost's  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  0,  7,  10,  11,  30-33  ;  Aunah  of  Sargon,
11  16t>,  167,  Winckler's  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  28,  29).

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  bas-relief  from  Persepolis,  reproduced  from  a  photograpli  of  the
original  now  in  the  Britisli  Museum.

'  The  history  of  the  Medes  remains  shrouded  in  greater  obscurity  than  that  of  any  other  Asiatic
race.  We  possess  no  oiigiual  documents  which  owe  their  existence  to  tliis  nation,  and  the  whole  of
our  information  concerning  its  history  is  borrowed  from  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  inscriptions,
and  from  tlie  various  legends  collected  by  the  Greeks,  especially  by  Herodotus  and  Ctesias,  from
Persian  magnates  in  Asia  Minor  or  at  the  court  of  the  Achsemeuian  kings,  or  from  fragments
of  vanished  works  such  as  the  writings  of  Berosus.  And  yet  modern  arohajnlogists  and  philologists
have,  during  the  last  thirty  years,  allowed  their  critical  faculties,  and  often  their  imagination  as  well,
to  run  riot  when  dealing  with  this  very  period.  After  carefully  examining,  one  after  another,  most
of  the  theories  put  forward,  I  have  adopted  those  hypotheses  which,  while  most  nearly  approximating
to  the  classical  legends,  harmonise  best  with  the  chronological  framework — far  too  imperfect  as  yet —
furnished  by  the  inscriptions  dealing  with  the  closing  years  of  Nineveh ;  I  do  not  consider  them  all
to  be  equally  probable,  but  though  tliey  may  be  mere  stop-gap  solutions,  they  have  at  least  the  merit
of  reproducing  in  many  cases  the  ideas  current  among  those  races  of  antiquity  who  had  been  in  direct
communication  with  the  Medes  and  with  the  last  of  their  sovereigns.


PEBAORTES  AND    THE  RISE   OF   TEE  MEDIC  EMPIRE.


455


liave  been  the  son  and  successor  of  Deiokes.'  He  came  to  the  throne  about
655  B.C.,  at  a  time  when  the  star  of  Assur-bani-pal  was  still  in  the  ascendant,
and  at  first  does  not  seem  to  have  thought  of  trying  to  shake  off  the  incubus
of  Assyrian  rule.  He  began  very  wisely  by  annexing  such  of  the  petty
neighbouring  states  as  had


-V-


THE

PERSIAN  REALM

Scale,


.^TfiePer^tBn Gates        ^-    .      -i.^^


1!  rf.ai}i.t-  Jt)f


hitherto  remained  inde-
pendent, and  then  set  him-
self to  attack  the  one  other
nation  of  Iranian  blood
which,  by  virtue  of  the
number  and  warlike  quali-
ties of  its  clans,  was  in  a
position  to  enter  into  rivalry
witli  his  own  people.^  The
Persians,  originally  concen-
trated in  the  interior,
among  the  steep  valleys
which  divide  the  plateau
on  the  south,  had  probably
taken  advantage  of  the  mis-
fortunes of  Elam  to  extend
their  own  influence  at  its

expense.  Their  kings  were  chosen  from  among  the  descendants  of  a  certain
Akbamanish,  the  Achaemenes  of  the  Greeks,  who  at  the  time  of  the  Iranian
invasion  had  been  chief  of  the  Pasargadae,  one  of  the  Persian  clans.  Achremenes
is  a  mythical  hero  rather  than  a  real  person ;  he  was,  we  are  told,  fed  during
infancy  by  an  eagle — that  mighty  eagle  whose  shadow,  according  to  a  Persian
belief  in  mediaeval  times,  assured  the  sovereignty  to  him  on  whom  it  chanced

'  Herodotus,  I.  cii.  The  ancient  form  of  the  name,  Fravartish  or  Frawarti.  has  been  handed
down  to  us  by  a  passage  in  the  great  inscription  of  Behistun  (col.  ii.  1.  14)  ;  it  means  the  man  who
proclaims  faith  in  Ahura-mazda,  the  believer  (JcsTi.  Iranisches  Namenhuch,  p.  105).  The
existence  of  Phraortes  was  called  in  question  by  the  Bawliusons  (Herodotun,  vol.  i.  pp.  330,  331  ;
Tlie  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  8S3,  note  10),  and  Winckler  has  brought  forward
fresh  arguments  in  support  of  their  view  in  his  UntersucJiungen  zur  Altorientalisclien  Geschichte.
pp.  123, 124  (cf.  AUorientalische  Foradmngen,  vol.  i.  p.  490).  Budinger  had  endeavoured  to  prove,  at
some  length,  that  Phraortes  is  merely  the  Fravartish  of  the  Behistun  inscription,  transported  bodily
into  the  past  {Ausgang  des  Medische7i  Reiches,  pp.  22-24) ;  Winckler,  without  going  so  far  as  this,
admits  that  the  Phraortes  of  the  legends  owes  his  existence  to  the  Oriental  habit  of  givin"  o-rand-
childrcn  the  names  of  their  paternal  grandfathers,  and  believes  that  Phraortes,  father  of  Cyaxares,
grew  out  of  the  fact  that  the  Fravartish  who  flourished  in  the  time  of  Darius  called  himself
the  son  of  Cyaxares.  Floigl  (Kj/rus  uni  Herolot,  pp.  95-113),  and  after  him  linger  (Kyaxares
und  Astijages,  pp.  39-41)  and  Prashek  {Medien  mid  das  Haus  des  Kyaxares.  pp.  51-G3).  admit  that
Phraortes  really  existed,  but  seek  to  identify  him  with  the  Astyages  who,  according  to  the  Baby-
lonian tradition,  married  one  of  his  daughters  to  Nebuchadrezzar  (cf.  p.  484.  supra).

'  Heuodotus,  I.cii.,wherethe  author  follows  the  tradition  of  the  llarpugides,  which  be  had  picked
up  in  Asia  Minor.


456  THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CEALDMAN  EMPIRE.

to  fall.^  Acha^menes  would  seem  to  have  been  followed  by  a  certain  Chaispi
— or  Teispes — a  less  fabulous  personage,  described  in  the  legends  as  his  son.
It  was,  doubtless,  during  his  reign  that  Assur-bani-pal,  in  hot  pursuit  of
Tiumman  and  Khumban-khaldash,  completed  the  downfall  of  Susa ;  Chaispi
claimed  the  eastern  half  of  Elam  as  his  share  of  the  spoil,  and  on  the  streno-tli
of  his  victory  styled  himself  King  of  Anshau — a  title  on  which  his  descendants
still  prided  themselves  a  hundred  years  after  his  death.^  Persia,  as  then  con-
stituted, extended  from  the  mouths  of  the  Oroatis — the  modern  Tab — as  far  as
the  entrance  to  the  Straits  of  Ormuzd.^  The  coast-line,  wliich  has  in  several
places  been  greatly  modified  since  ancient  times  by  the  formation  of  alluvial
deposits,  consists  of  banks  of  clay  and  sand,  which  lie  parallel  with  the  shore,
and  extend  a  considerable  distance  inland ;  in  some  places  the  country  is
marshy,  in  others  parched  and  rocky,  and  almost  everywhere  barren  and
unhealthy.  The  central  region  is  intersected  throughout  its  whole  length  by
several  chains  of  hills,  which  rise  terrace-like,  one  behind  the  other,  from  the  sea
to  the  plateau  ;  some  regions  are  sterile,  more  especially  in  the  north  and  east,
but  for  the  most  part  the  country  is  well  wooded,  and  produces  excellent  crops
of  cereals.  Only  a  few  rivers,  such  as  the  Oroatis,  which  forms  the  boundary
between  Persia  and  Susiana,^  the  Araxes,  and  the  Bagradas  succeed  in  breaking
through  the  barriers  that  beset  their  course,  and  reach  the  Persian  Gulf ;  ^

'  ^LiAN,  Varix  Hist.,  sii.  21 ;  cf.,  for  the  connection  between  this  legend  and  that  of  Humul,  NoL-
CEKE,  Aufsdtze  ZUT  Persischen  Gesch.,  p.  16,  n.  1,  and  Das  Iranische  Nationalepog,  in  Grundriss  der  Iran.
Pliilol.,  vol.  ii.  p.  133 ;  Spiegel  {Eranische  AUerthums,  vol.  ii.  p.  262)  prefers  to  see  in  it  the  Simurgh.
^  Hekodotus,  I.  cxxv.  The  fact  that  Teispes  was  the  immediate  successor  of  Achasmenes,  in-
dicated by  Herodotus  (VII.  xi.),  is  aflirmed  by  Darius  himself  in  the  Behistun  inscription  (col.  i.
11.  n,  6).  Oppert,  in  drawing  up  |the  pedigree  of  these  kings,  assumed  that  Achasmenes  was  a  con-
temporary ofPhraortes,  and  that  the  Iranian  invasion  of  Persia  must  have  taken  place  several  reigns
earlier,  about  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century  B.C.  (Expedition  de  Mg'sopoiamie,  vol.  ii.  p.  201,  et  seq. ;
cf.  Fk.  Lenormakt,  Lettres  Assyriologiques,-vo\.  i.  pp.  08-71),  and  that,  consequently,  there  must  have
been  a  gap  of  greater  or  less  duration  in  the  chronological  series  between  Achfemenes  and  Teispes ;
other  writers,  carrying  this  theory  a  step  further,  have  intercalated  three  kings  into  this  interval
(BOdixgeb,  Neuentdeclcten  Imchriflen  Uber  Cyrus,  pp.  6,  7).  The  Babylonian  monuments  of  Cyrus,
which  credit  this  king  and  his  three  predecessors  with  the  title  "King  of  Anshan  "  {Cylinder,  11.  20,
21,inHAGE!«;  Keihchrifturhunden  zur  Geschiclde  des  Konigs  Cyrus,  pp.  6,  7,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur
Asfyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  20,  21),  have  induced  Eawlinson,  and  a  good  many  other  modern  writers  after
him,  to  regard  Teispes  as  tlie  Persian  king  who  conquered  that  part  of  Elam  known  as  Anshin
(H.  EAWLmsoN,  Sotes  on  a  Newly-discovered  Clay -Cylinder  of  Cyrus  the  Great,  in  the  J.  E.  As.  Sac,
1S80,  vol.  xii.  p.  75,  et  seq. ;  Keipeb,  Die  neuentdeckten  Inschri/ten  Uber  Cyrus,  pp.  18, 19 ;  Eo.  Meter,
GescMchte  des  AUerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  559,  560) ;  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  Floigl  (Kyrus  und  Herodot,  pp.  8-14)
was  the  first  and  only  writer  to  place  this  conquest  in  the  reign  of  Achsemenes,  father  of  Teispes,  but
he  has  since  attributed  it  to  Teispes  himself  {GescMchte  des  Semitisehen  AUerthums,  Tabelle  VI.).
According  to  Billerbeck  {Susa,  p.  127),  the  Anzan  (Anshan)  of  the  early  Acbsemenides  was  merely
a  very  small  part  of  the  ancient  Anzan  (Anshan),  viz.  the  district  on  the  east  and  south-east  of
Kuh-i-Dena,  which  includes  the  modern  towns  of  Yezdeshast,  Abadeh,  Teklid,  and  Kushkiserd.

'  Herodotus  (I.  cxxv.)  imagined  Carmania  and  Persia  Proper  to  be  one  and  the  same  province  ;
from  the  Alexandrine  period  onwards  historians  and  geographers  drew  a  distinction  between  the  two
(Stbabo,  XV.  iii,  §  1,  p.  727 ;  Plikt,  Hist.  Nat.,  vi.  26 ;  Abrian,  vi.  28).

The  form  of  the  name  varies  in  different  writers.  Strabo  calls  it  the  Oroatis  (XV.  iii.  §§  1,  5,
pp.  727,  729),  Nearchus  the  Arosis  (Akrian,  Eistoria  Indica,  xxxix.  8) ;  in  Pliny  it  appears  as
Oi-atis  and  Zarotis  {Hist.  Nat.,  vi.  26, 2S),  and  in  Ammianus  Marcellinus  as  Oroates  (XXIH.  vi.  §  26).

^  The  Araxes  (Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  6,  p.  729)  is  the  modern  Bendamir.     The  Kyros,  which  flowed


SCENE    IN    THE   MOUNTAINS    OP    PERSIA.

Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Coste  and  Flandin,  Voyage  en  Perse,  vol.  i.  pi.  xcvi


458  TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CEALD^AN  EMPIRE.


most  of  the  others  find  no  outlet,  and  their  waters  accumulate  at  the  bottom
of  the  valleys,  ia  lakes  whose  areas  vary  at  the  different  seasons.  The
mountainous  district  is  furrowed  in  all  directions  by  deep  ravines,  with
almost  vertical  sides,  at  the  bottom  of  which  streams  and  torrents  follow  a
headlong  course.  The  landscape  wears  a  certain  air  of  savage  grandeur ;  giant
peaks  rise  in  needle-like  points  perpendicularly  to  the  sky ;  mountain  paths
wind  upward,  cut  into  the  sides  of  the  steep  precipices  ;  the  chasms  are  spanned

by  single-arched  bridges,  so  frail  and
narrow  that  they  seem  likely  to  be
swept  away  in  the  first  gale  that
blows.  No  country  could  present
greater  difSculties  to  the  movements
of  a  regular  army  or  lend  itself  more
readily  to  a  system  of  guerrilla  war-
fare. It  was  unequally  divided  be-
tween some  ten  or  twelve  tribes  :  ^
chief  among  these  were  the  Pasar-
gada%  from  which  the  royal  family
took  its  origin  ;  after  them  came  the
Maraphii  and  Maspii.  The  chiefs  of
these  two  tribes  were  elected  from
among  the  members  of  seven  families,  who,  at  first  taking  equal  rank  with  that  of
tL3  Pasargadse,  had  afterwards  been  reduced  to  subjection  by  the  Acha^menides,
forming  a  privileged  class  at  the  court  of  the  latter,  the  members  of  which  shared
the  royal  prerogatives  and  took  a  part  in  the  work  of  government.^  Of  the  remain-
ing tribes,  the  Panthialaei,  Derusifei,  and  Carmenians  lived  a  sedentary  life,  while
the  Dai,  Mardians,  Dropici,  and  Sagartians  *  were  nomadic  in  their  habits.  Each
one  of  these  tribes  occupied  its  own  allotted  territory,  the  limits  of  which  were  not
always  accurately  defined ;  we  know  that  Sagartia,  Partetakene,  and  Mardia  lay
towards  the  north,  on  the  confines  of  Media  and  the  salt  desert,^  Taokene  extended
along  the  seaboard,  and  Carmania  lay  to  the  east.  The  tribes  had  constructed
large  villages,  such  as  Armuza,  Sisidona,  Apostana,  Gogana,  and  Taoke,  on  the

past  Persepolif,  is  now  the  Pulwar,  an  affluent  of  the  Bendamlr.  The  Bagrudas  of  Ptolemy,  called
the  Hyperis  by  Juba  (Puny,  Hist.  Xal.,  vi.  2G,  §  99),  ia  the  modern  Nabend.

'  Herodotus  only  mentions  ten  Persian  tribes  (I.  cxxv.);  Xeuophou  {Cyrop.fdeui.  I.  ii.)
speaks  of  twelve.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  Naksh-i-Kustera  bas-relief  taken  by  Dieulafoy.

'  As  to  these  seven  royal  families,  of.  Herodotus,  III.  cxsvi.  ;  Josephus,  Ant.  Jud.,  xi.  2.

*  On  all  these  points,  cf.  Elisee  Eeolcs,  Geographie  unii-ersette,  vol.  ix.  pp.  168-171,  177,  180,
185-187.

'  Parffitakene,  which  has  already  been  identified  with  the  Partukkauu  (or  Partakkanu)  of  the
Assyrian  inscriptions  (cf.  p.  356,  supra),  is  placed  by  Ptolemy  in  Persia  (vi.  4) ;  Mardia  corresponds  to
the  mountainous  district  of  Bebahau  and  Kazrun.


HEAD   OF  A   PEKSIAV   ARCHER.'


PERSIANS  PROPER   AND    THE  PERSIANS.


459


sea-coast  (the  last  named  possessing  a  palace  whicli  was  one  of  the  three  chief
residences  of  the  Achscmenian  kings),i  and  Carmana,  Persepolis,  Pasargada?,  and
Gabffi  in  the  interior.'-^     The  Persians  were  a  keen-
witted and  observant  race,  inured  to  all  kinds  of  hard-
ships in  their  occupation  as  mountain  shepherds,  and
they  were  born  warriors.    The  type  preserved  on  the
monuments  differs  but  little  from  that  which  still
exists  at  the  present  day  in  the  more  remote  dis-
tricts.    It  was  marked  by  a  tall  and  slender  iigure,
with  sturdy  shoulders  and  loins,  a  small  head,  with
a  thick  shock  of  hair  and  curling  beard,  a  straight
nose,  a  determined  mouth,  and  an  eye  steady  and
alert.    Yet,  in  spite  of  their  valour,  Phraortes  over-
powered them,  and  was  henceforward  able  to  reckon
the  princes  of  Ansh  an  among  his  vassals;  strength-
ened by  the  addition  of  their  forces  to  his  own,  he
directed  his  efforts  to  the  subjection  of  the  other
races  of  the  plateau.     If  we  may  believe  the  tra-
dition of  the  Hellenic  epoch,  he  reduced  them  to
submission,  and,  intoxicated  by  his  success,  ventured
at  last  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Assyrians,  who
for  centuries  past  had  held  rule  over  Upper  Asia.^
This  was  about  635  B.C.,  or  less  than  ten  years
after  the  downfall  of  Elam,  and  it  does  not  seem

likely  that  the  vital  forces  of  Assyria  can  have  suffered  any  serious  diminution
within  so  short  a  space  of  time.^     Assur-bani-pal,   weary  of  fighting,  even

'  The  position  of  most  of  these  towns  is  still  somewhat  doubtful.  Armuza  is  probably  Ormuz  (or
Hormuz)  on  the  mainland,  the  forerunner  of  the  insular  Hormuz  of  the  Portuguese,  as  the  French
scholar  d'Anville  has  pointed  out  (^Recherches  fj^og.  sur  le  golfe  Perslque,  in  the  Memoires  de  I'Acad.  ties
Jnsc,  vol.  sxx.  p.  HI)  ;  Sisidoua  (Nearohus  in  Arrian,  Hittoria  Indiea,  xxxvii.  8)  has  been  identified
with  the  modem  village  of  Mogu,  near  Kas-Jerd,  Apostaua  (Nearohus,  xxxvii.  5)  with  the  town  of
Shewar,  the  name  seeming  to  be  perpetuated  in  that  of  the  .Jebel  Asban  which  rises  not  far  from  there
(Vincent,  Periplus,  p.  3S1).  Gogana  (Nearchcs,  xxxvii.  7)  is  probably  Bender  Konguu,  and  Taoke,
at  the  mouth  of  the  Granis  (Ne.arohds,  xxxix.  3),  is  either  Khor  GasseirorKohillaat  the  mouth  of  the
Bishawer.  The  palace,  which  was  one  of  the  three  principal  residences  of  the  Achtemenian  kings,  is
probably  mentioned  by  Strabo  (XV.  iii.  §  3,  p.  728,  where  we  must  read  tiV  Tai^K?)^  in  place  of  t>)v
'ClK-nv),  and  possibly  in  Diouysius  Periegetes  (1069,  where  the  Taaxol  of  the  MSS.  is  doubtless  equiva-
lent to  ToiKOl').

^  Carmana  (Ptolemt,  vi.  8)  is  the  modern  Kerman ;  tbe  exact  position  of  Gabse,  which  also
possessed  a  palace  (Ptolemy,  vi.  4 ;  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  3,  p.  728 ;  Dionysios  Periegetes,  1069,  where
we  ought  to  read  TijSai  instead  of  2a/8aO,  is  not  known.  As  to  the  name  and  position  of  Pasargada)
and  Persepolis,  cf.  Spiegel,  Ernniscke  Alterthuingltuude.  vol.  ii.  pp.  617-621;  Noldeke,  AufszUlze
zur  Persischen  Geschichte,  pp.  135-146.  ^  Herouoti's,  I.  cii.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  one  of  the  bas-reliefs  at  Persepolis,  in  Dieulafot,
L'AcTopole  de  Suse,  p.  289.

*  The  date  is  indicated  by  the  figures  given  by  Herodotus  in  regard  to  the  Medic  kings,  based  on  the
calculations  of  himself  or  his  authorities.    Phraortes  died  in  634  B.C.,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-two  years


460  TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CEALDMAN  EMPIRE.

though  he  no  longer  directed  operations  in  person,  had  apparently  deter-
mined to  remain  entirely  on  the  defensive,  and  not  to  take  the  field,  unless
absolutely  compelled  to  do  so  by  rebellion  at  home  or  an  attack  from
outside.  In  view  of  the  growing  need  of  rest  for  the  Assyrian  nation,  he
could  not  have  arrived  at  a  wiser  decision,  provided  always  that  circumstances
allowed  of  its  being  carried  into  effect,  and  that  the  tributary  races  and  frontier
nations  were  willing  to  fall  in  with  his  intentions.  They  did  so  at  first,  for  the
fate  of  Elam  had  filled  even  the  most  unruly  among  them  with  consternation,
and  peace  reigned  supreme  from  the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Mediterranean.  Assur-
bani-pal  took  advantage  of  this  unexpected  lull  to  push  forward  the  construction
of  public  works  in  the  valleys  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates.  The  palace  of
Sennacherib,  though  it  had  been  built  scarcely  fifty  years  before,  was  already
beginning  to  totter  on  its  foundations ;  Assur-bani-pal  entirely  remodelled  and
restored  it — a  proceeding  which  gave  universal  satisfaction.  The  common  people
had,  as  usual,  to  make  the  bricks  with  their  own  hands  and  convey  them  to  the
spot,  but  as  the  chariots  employed  for  this  purpose  formed  part  of  the  booty
recently  brought  back  from  Elam,  the  privilege  of  using  these  trophies  did
something  to  lighten  the  burden  of  the  tasks  imposed  on  them.  Moreover,
they  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  at  work  among  the  squads  of  labourers
several  real  kings,  the  Arabian  chiefs  who  had  been  pursued  and  cajjtured
in  the  heart  of  the  desert  by  Assur-bani-pal's  generals ;  they  plodded  along
under  their  heavy  baskets,  stimulated  by  the  crack  of  the  whip,  amid  insults
and  jeers.^  This  palace  was  one  of  the  largest  and  most  ornate  ever  built  by  the
rulers  of  Assyria.  True,  the  decoration  does  not  reveal  any  novel  process  or
theme;  we  find  therein  merely  the  usual  scenes  of  battle  or  of  the  chase,  but
they  are  designed  and  executed  with  a  skill  to  which  the  sculptor  of  Nineveh
had  never  before  attained.  The  animals,  in  particular,  are  portrayed  with  a
light  and  delicate  touch — the  wild  asses  pursued  by  hounds,  or  checked  while
galloping  at  full  speed  by  a  cast  of  the  lasso ;  the  herds  of  goats  and  gazelles
hurrying  across  the  desert ;  the  wounded  lioness,  which  raises  herself  with  a  last
dying  effort  to  roar  at  the  beaters.'^  We  are  conscious  of  Egyptian  influence
underlying  the  Asiatic  work,  and  the  skilful  arrangement  of  the  scenes  from
the  Elamite  campaigns  also  reminds  us  of  Egypt.  The  picture  of  the  battle
of  Tulliz  recalls,  in  the  variety  of  its  episodes  and  the  arrangement  of  the

(Herodotus,  I.  cii.),  and  as  the  last  year  of  his  reign  coincides  with  the  war  against  Assyria,  tlie  prepa-
rations for  it  cannot  have  been  much  earlier  than  635  or  636  B.C.,  a  year  or  two  before  the  catastrophe.

'  G.  Smith,  Eist.  of  Assurhanipal,  pp.  308-319  ;  S.  Alden  Smith,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Asurhanipals,
vol.  i.  pp.  76  -83 ;  of.  Jensen,  Inechr.  Aiclturbampal's,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  230-237.

'  For  specimens  of  these  bas-reliefs,  dealing  with  battle-scenes,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  A'ations,  p.  G35,
and  pp.  106-412,  415,  lupra  ;  and  for  scenes  of  the  chase,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  559,  Struggle  of
the  Nations,  pp.  622,  624,  and  pp.  401,  461,  supra.  The  banqueting  scene  which  appears  on  p.  413,
supra,  also  comes  from  the  same  place.


THE  LATEST  MONUMENTS    OF  ASSUR-BANI-PAL.


461


perspective,  the  famous  engagement  at  Qodshu,  of  which  Kamses  II.  has  left
such  numerous  presentments  on  the  Theban  pylons.  The  Assyrians,  led  by  the
vicissitudes  of  invasion  to  Luxor  and  the  Eamesseum,  had,  doubtless,  seen  these
masterpieces  of  Egyptian  art  in  a  less  mutilated  state  than  that  in  which  we
now  possess  them,  and  profited  by  the  remembrance  when  called  upon  to  depict
the  private  life  of  their  king  and  the  victories  gained  by  his  armies.  It  was
in  this  magnificent  residence  that  Assur-bani-pal  led  an  existence  of  indolent
splendour,  such  as  the  chroniclers  of  a  later  age  were  wont  to  ascribe  to  all  the
Assyrian  monarchs  from  the  time  of  Semiramis  onwards.^     We  would  gladly


A    UEliD    OP   ■WILD   GOATS — A   BAS-HELIEP  OF    THE   TIME   OP  ASSUK-BANI-PAL.=

believe  that  he  varied  the  monotony  of  his  hunting  expeditions,  his  banquets,
and  entertainments  in  the  gardens  in  company  with  the  women  of  the  harem,
by  pleasures  of  a  more  refined  nature,  and  that  he  took  an  unusual  interest  in
the  history  and  literature  of  the  races  who  had  become  subject  to  his  rule.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  there  have  been  discovered  in  several  of  the  ruined  chambers
of  his  palaces  the  remains  of  a  regular  library,  which  must  originally  have
contained  thousands  of  clay  tablets,  all  methodically  arranged  and  catalogued
for  his  use.^  A  portion  of  them  furnish  us  at  first-hand  with  the  records  of
his  reign,  and  include  letters  exchanged  with  provincial  governors,^  augural

'  Stories  of  the  effeminacy  of  Sardanapalus  had  been  collected  by  Ctesias  of  Cnidus  {Clesix  Cnidii
Fragmenta,  in  Mullek-Didot,  pp.  35-39)  ;  they  soon  grew  under  the  hands  of  historians  in  the  time
of  Alexander,  and  were  passed  on  by  them  to  writers  of  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  epochs.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  sketch  by  Place,  Ninive  el  I'Assyrie,  vol.  iii.  pi.  56.

^  For  a  general  description  of  the  discovery  and  arrangement  of  this  library,  cf.  the  little  book  by
J.  Mesant,  La  Bibliothique  du  Palais  de  Niyiive,  which  gives  all  the  necessary  information.

'  As  to  this  part  of  the  collection,  cf.  the  papers  by  Pixches,  Notes  upon  the  Aesijrian  Report


462  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.

predictions,  consultation  of  oracles,^  observations  made  by  the  royal  astrologers,
standiuf  order?,  accounts  of  income  and  expenditure,  even  the  reports  of  phy-
sicians in  regard  to  the  health  of  members  of  the  royal  family  or  of  the  royal
household  : "  these  documents  reveal  to  us  the  whole  machinery  of  government  in
actual  operation,  and  we  almost  seem  to  witness  the  secret  mechanism  by  which
the  kingdom  was  maintained  in  activity.  Other  tablets  contain  authentic  copies
of  works  which  were  looked  upon  as  classics  in  the  sanctuaries  of  the  Euphrates.
Probably,  when  Babylon  was  sacked,  Sennacherib  had  ordered  the  books  which
lay  piled  up  in  E-Sagilla  and  the  other  buildings  of  the  city  to  be  collected  and
carried  away  to  Nineveh  along  with  the  statues  and  property  of  the  gods.  They
had  been  placed  in  the  treasury,  and  there  they  remained  until  Esarhaddon
re-established  the  kingdom  of  Karduniash,  and  Assur-bani-pal  was  forced  to
deliver  up  the  statue  of  Jfarduk  and  restore  to  the  sanctuaries,  now  rebuilt,  all
the  wealth  of  which  his  grandfather  had  robbed  them  :  but  before  sending  back
the  tablets,  he  ordered  copies  to  be  made  of  them,  and  his  secretaries  set  to  work
to  transcribe  for  his  use  such  of  tliese  works  as  they  considered  worthy  of
reproduction.  The  majority  of  them  were  treatises  compiled  by  the  most
celebrated  adepts  in  the  sciences  for  which  Chald^a  had  been  famous  from  time
immemorial ;  they  included  collections  of  omens,  celestial  and  terrestrial,  in
which  the  mystical  meaning  of  each  phenomenon  and  its  influence  on  the
destinies  of  the  world  was  explained  by  examples  borrowed  from  the  Annals
of  w  orld-renowned  conquerors,  such  as  Naramsin  and  Sargon  of  Agade ;  ^  then
there  were  formulae  for  exorcising  evil  spirits  from  the  bodies  of  the  possessed,
and  against  phantoms,  vampires,  and  gho.sts,  the  recognised  causes  of  all
disease ;  prayers  and  psalms,  which  had  to  be  repeated  before  the  gods  in  order
to  obtain  pardon  for  sin  ;  and  histories  of  divinities  and  kings  from  the  time  of
the  creation  down  to  the  latest  date.'*     Among  these  latter  were  several  versions

Tablet!,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Biblical  Archaeological  Society,  vol.  vi.  pp.  209-243 ;  Assyrian
Meport  Tablets,  in  the  Secords  of  the  Past,  1st  series,  vol.  xi.  pp.  75-78,  and  Specimens  of  Assyrian
Correspondence,  ibid.,  2nd  series,  vol.  iii.  pp.  178-189,  by  S.  Alden  Smith,  Keilschrifttexte  Asur-
banipals,  vol.  ii.,  and  Assyrian  Letters  (reprinted  from  the  Proceedings  of  the  Biblical  Archaeological
Society,  vol.  ix.  pp.  2-10-25B,  18SG-1887,  and  vol.  x.,  1887-1888,  pp.  60-72,  155-177,  305-315),  by
Fr.  Delitzsch,  Beitriige  zur  Erhldrung  der  Bahylonisch-assyrischen  Briefllteratur,  in  the  Beitrage
zur  Assyriulogie,  vol.  i.  pp.  184-248,  613-663,  vol.  ii.  pp.  19-62,  and  by  Christopher  Johnston,  Tlie
Epistolary  Literature  of  the  Assyrians  and  Bahylrmians,  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental
Society,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  125-175,  vol.  xix.  pp.  42-96,  where  a  comiilete  Bibliography  of  the  whole
subject  is  given,  pp.  94-96.

'  Ou  this  subject,  cf.  the  frequently  quoted  work  of  Knudtzon,  Assyrisehe  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,
and  the  article  by  A.  Strong,  On  some  Oracles  to  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-bani-pal,  in  the  Beitriige  zur
Assijriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  627-636.

-  Cf.  the  letter  K  515  in  regard  to  the  recovery  of  Nabu-nadin-shumu  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Beitriige  zur
Erlilarung  der  Babylonitch-assyrischen  Briefliteratur,  in  the  Beitriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  i.  pp.  196-198),
and  the  letter  K  SI  in  regard  to  the  cure  of  Kudurru,  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  298-302.

'  Cf.  Dawn  of  denization,  pp.  599-773.

'  In  regard  to  most  of  these  works,  cf  Damn  of  Civilizalion,  pp.  750-782.


TEE  LIBRARY   OF  ASSUB-BANT-PAL   AT  KOVYUNJIK.


463


of  the  epic  of  Gilgames,  the  story  of  Etana,  of  Adapa,  and  many  others  ;  ^  and  we
may  hope  to  possess  all  that  the  Assyrians  knew  of  the  old  Chaldtean  literature
in  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  as  soon  as  the  excavators  have  unearthed  from  the
mound  at  Kouyunjik  all  the  tablets,  complete  or  fragmentary,  which  still  lie
hidden  there.  Even  from  the  shreds  of  information  which  they  have  already
yielded  to  us,  we  are  able  to  piece  together  so  varied  a  picture  that  we  can


^~X'^r^


'^.j-Cr: ;'  |;/>>=f^


REMAINS    OF    ASSLl.-U.VNi-rAL'a    WALL    AT    NUl'LU.-

readily  imagine  Assur-bani-pal  to  have  been  a  learned  and  studious  monarch,  a
patron  of  literature  and  antiquarian  knowledge.  Very  possibly  he  either  read
himself,  or  had  read  to  him,  many  of  the  authors  whose  works  found  a  place  in
his  library:  the  kings  of  Nineveh,  like  the  Pharaohs,  desired  now  and  then  to  be
amused  by  tales  of  the  marvellous,  and  they  were  doubtless  keenly  alive  to  the
delightful  rhythm  and  beautiful  language  em^iloyed  by  the  poets  of  the  past  in
singing  the  praises  of  their  divine  or  heroic  ancestors.  But  the  mere  fact  that
his  palace  contained  the  most  important  literary  collection  which  the  ancient
East  has  so  far  bequeathed  to  us,  in  no  way  proves  that  Assur-bani-pal
displayed  a  more  pronounced   taste  for  literature  than  his  predecessors;  it

'  The  epic  of  Gilgames  has  been  analysed  fully  iu  the  Dawn  ofCirllizaiion,  pp.  566-572, 574-589 ;
as  to  the  poems  of  Etana  and  Adapa,  of.  pp.  573,  O.jO-661,  698-700,  ibid.

-  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  the  photograph  published  by  Peters,  Nippur,  or  Explorations
and  Adventureg  on  the  Euphrates,  vol.  ii.  p.  164.


464  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CBALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

indicates  merely  the  zeal  and  activity  of  his  librarians,  their  intelligence,  and
their  respect  and  admiration  for  the  great  works  of  the  past.  Once  he  had
issued  his  edict  ordering  new  editions  of  the  old  masters  to  be  prepared,  Assur-
bani-pal  may  have  dismissed  the  matter  from  his  mind,  and  the  work  would  go
on  automatically  without  need  for  any  further  interference  on  his  part.  The
scribes  enriched  his  library  for  him,  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  generals  won
his  battles,  or  the  architects  built  his  monuments :  they  were  nothing  more
than  nameless  agents,  whose  individuality  was  eclipsed  by  that  of  their  master,
their  skill  and  talent  being  all  placed  to  his  credit.  Babylonia  shared  equally
with  Assyria  in  the  benefits  of  his  government.  He  associated  himself  with
his  brother  Shamash-shumukin  in  the  task  of  completing  the  temple  of
E-Sagilla ;  ^  afterwards,  when  sole  monarch,  he  continued  the  work  of  restoration,
not  only  in  Babylon,  but  in  the  lesser  cities  as  well,  especially  those  which  had
suffered  most  during  the  war,  such  as  TJru,  Uruk,  Borsippa,  and  Cutha.^  He
remodelled  tlie  temple  of  Bel  at  Nippur,  the  walls  built  there  by  him  being
even  now  distinguishable  from  the  rest  by  the  size  of  the  bricks  and  the  careful
dressing  of  the  masonry.*  Frohi  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  mountains
of  Armenia,  Assyria  and  Karduniash  were  covered  with  building-yards  just  as
they  had  been  in  the  most  peaceful  days  of  the  monarchy.

It  was  at  this  unique  juncture  of  apparent  grandeur  and  prosperity  that
Phraortes  resolved  to  attack  Assur-bani-pal.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that
his  action  took  place  simultaneously  with  some  movement  on  the  part  of  other
peoples,  or  with  a  serious  insurrection  in  any  of  the  Assyrian  provinces.  For
my  part,  I  prefer  to  set  it  down  to  one  of  those  sudden  impulses,  those  irresis-
tible outbursts  of  self-confidence,  which  from  time  to  time  actuated  the  princes
tributary  to  Nineveh  or  the  kings  on  its  frontier.  The  period  of  inactivity  to
which  some  previous  defeat  inflicted  on  them  or  on  their  predecessors  had  con-
demned them,  allowed  them  to  regain  their  strength,  and  one  or  two  victories
over  less  powerful  neighbours  served  to  obliterate  the  memory  of  former
humiliation  and  disaster ;  they  flew  to  arms  full  of  hope  in  the  result,  and  once
more  drew  down  defeat  upon  their  heads,  being  lucky  indeed  if  their  abortive
rising  led  to  nothing  worse  than  the  slaughter  of  their  armies,  the  execution  of
their  generals,  and  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  their  former  tribute.  This  was
the  fate  that  overtook  Phraortes ;  the  conqueror  of  the  Persians,  when  confronted
by  the  veteran  troops  of  Assyria,  failed  before  their  superior  discipline,  and  was

'  Cf.  pp.  382,  383,  supra.

■  He  refers  to  the  works  at  Borsippa  and  Kuta  towards  the  end  of  the  account  of  his  campaign
against  Shamash-shumukia  (G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurbanipal,i^p.  167,  lOS),  and  to  those  at  Uruk  in
describing  the  war  against  Khumbau-khaldash  (G.  Smith,  History  of  Assurhanipal,  p.  236).

'  A  description  of  the  parts  built  by  Assnr-bani-pal  will  be  found  in  Petebs,  Nippur,  vol.  ii.
pp.  162-16i,  261.


PHRAORTES  IS  DEFEATED    AND    SLAIN  BY    TEE  ASSYRIANS.      465

left  dead  upon  the  field  of  battle  with  the  greater  part  of  his  army.^  So  far  the
affair  presented  no  unusual  features ;  it  was  merely  one  more  commonplace
repetition  of  a  score  of  similar  episodes  which  had  already  taken  place  in
the  same  region,  under  Tiglath-pileser  III.  or  the  early  Sargonides ;  but
Huvakshatara,  the  son  of  Phraortes,  known  to  the  Greeks  as  Cyaxares,^  instead
of  pleading  for  mercy,  continued  to  offer  a  stubborn  resistance.  Cyaxares
belongs  to  history,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  exercised  a  decisive
influence  over  the  destinies  of  the  Oriental  world,  but  precise  details  of  his
exploits  are  wanting,  and  his  personality  is  involved  in  such  obscuring  mists
that  we  can  scarcely  seize  it ;  the  little  we  have  so  far  been  able  to  glean  con-
cerning him  shows  us,  not  so  much  the  man  himself,  as  a  vague  shadow  of  him
seen  dimly  through  the  haze.  His  achievements  prove  him  to  have  been  one
of  those  perfect  rulers  of  men,  such  as  Asia  produces  every  now  and  then,  who
knew  how  to  govern  as  well  as  how  to  win  battles — a  born  general  and  lawgiver,
who  could  carry  his  people  with  him,  and  shone  no  less  in  peace  than  in  war.-^
The  armies  at  the  disposal  of  his  predecessors  had  been  little  more  than
heterogeneous  assemblies  of  feudal  militia ;  each  clan  furnished  its  own  con-
tingent of  cavalry,  archers,  and  pikemen,  but  instead  of  all  these  being  combined
into  a  common  whole,  with  kindred  elements  contributed  by  the  other  tribes,
each  one  acted  separately,  thus  forming  a  number  of  small  independent  armies
within  the  larger  one.  Cyaxares  saw  that  defeat  was  certain  so  long  as  he  had
nothing  but  these  ill-assorted  masses  to  match  against  the  regular  forces  of
Assyria  ;  he  therefore  broke  up  the  tribal  contingents  and  rearranged  the  units
of  which  they  were  composed  according  to  their  natural  affinities,  grouping
horsemen  with  horsemen,  archers  with  archers,  and  pikemen  with  pikemen,
taking  the  Assyrian  cavalry  and   infantry  as  his  models.*     The  foot-soldiers

'  Hekodotcs,  I.  cii.

-  The  original  form  of  the  name  is  furnished  by  passages  in  the  Behistun  inscriptiou  (col.  ii.  U.  15,
81,  and  iv.  19,  22),  where  Chilrantakhma  of  Sagartia  and  Fravartish  of  Media,  two  of  the  claimants
for  the  throne  wiio  rose  against  Darius,  are  represented  as  tracing  their  descent  from  Huvaksliatara
(Cyaxares) ;  cf.  Jcsti,  Eranisches  Namenbuch,  p.  140.

'  G.  Rawlinson  {The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  iH,  415)  takes  a  somewhat
different  view  of  Cyaxares'  character ;  he  admits  that  Cyaxares  knew  how  to  win  victories,  but
refuses  to  credit  him  with  the  capacity  for  organisation  required  in  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of
conquest,  giving  as  his  reason  for  this  view  the  brief  duration  of  the  Medic  empire.  The  test  applied
by  him  does  not  seem  to  me  a  conclusive  one,  for  tlie  existence  of  the  second  Ohaldsean  empire  was
almost  as  short,  and  yet  it  would  be  decidedly  unfair  to  draw  similar  inference.^  touching  the  character
of  Nabopolassar  or  Nebuchadrezzar  from  this  fact.

*  HERODOirs,  I.  ciii.,  where  we  are  told  that  Cyaxares  was  "  the  first  to  divide  the  Asiatics  into
different  regiments,  separating  the  pikemen  from  the  archers  and  horsemen ;  before  his  time,  these
troops  were  all  mixed  up  haphazard  together."  I  have  interpreted  his  evidence  in  the  sense  which
seems  most  in  liarmony  with  what  we  know  of  Assyrian  military  tactics.  It  seems  incredible  that  the
Medic  armies  can  have  fought  pell-mell,  as  Herodotus  declares,  seeing  that  for  two  hundred  years  past
the  Medes  had  been  frequently  engaged  against  such  well-drilled  troops  as  those  of  Assyria ;  if  the
statement  be  authentic,  it  merely  means  that  Cyaxares  converted  all  the  small  feudal  armies  which  liad

2    H


4GG


TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


woie  a  bigh  felt  cap  known  a3  a  tiara  ;  they  had  long  tunics  with  wide  sleeves,
tied  in  at  the  waist  by  a  belt,  and  sometimes  reinforced  by  iron  plates  or  scales,
as  well  as  gaiters,  buskins  of  soft  leather,  and  large  wickerwork  shields  covered
with  ox-hide,  which  they  bore  in  front  of  them  like  a  movable  bulwark ;  their
weapons  consisted  of  a  short  sword,  which  depended  from  the  belt  and  lay  along
the  thigh,  one  or  two  light  javelins,  a  bow  with  a  strongly  pronounced  curve,  and
a  quiver  full  of  arrows  made  from  reeds.^     Their  horsemen,  like  those  of  other

warlike  nations  of  theEast,
used  neither  saddle  nor
stirrups,  and  though  they
could  make  skilful  use
of  lance  and  sword,  their
favourite  weapon  was  the
bow.'-^  Accustomed  from
their  earliest  childhood  to
all  kinds  of  equestrian
exercises,  they  seemed  to
sit  their  horses  as  though
they  actually  formed  part
of  the  animal.^  They  sel-
dom fought  in  line,  but,
from  the  very  beginning
of  an  action,  hung  like  a
dense  cloud  on  the  front  and  flanks  of  the  enemy,  and  riddled  them  with
missiles,  without,  however,  coming  to  close  quarters.  Like  the  Parthians  of
a  later  epoch,  they  waited  until  they  had  bewildered  and  reduced  the  foe
by  their  ceaseless  evolutions  before  giving  the  final  charge  which  was  to  lout
them  completely.  No  greater  danger  could  threaten  the  Assyrians  than  the
establishment  of  a  systematically  organised  military  power  within  the  borders
of  Media.  An  invader  starting  from  Egypt  or  Asia  ilinor,  even  if  he  succeeded
in  overthrowing  the  forces  sent  out  to  meet  him,  had  still  a  long  way  to  go
before  he  could  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  the  empire.     Even  if  Cilicia  and  Syria

hitherto  fought  side  by  side  on  behalf  of  the  king  into  a  single  royal  army  in  which  the  different
kinds  of  troops  were  kept  separate.

'  Herodotus,  VII.  Ixi.,  where  the  historian  describes  the  equipment  of  the  Persians  ia  much  the
same  terms  as  I  have  used  above,  and  then  adds  in  the  following  chapter  that  "  the  Medes  had  the
same  equipment,  for  it  is  the  equipment  of  the  Medes  and  not  that  of  the  Persians."

■  Heeodotus,  VII.  Ixxxvi.,  where  he  says  that  the  Medic  horsemen  were  armed  ia  the  same
manner  as  the  infantry.

'  As  to  the  education  they  received,  cf.  Xenophos,  Cgropxdia,  I.  iv.  §  4.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  Cqste  aud  Flaxdix,  La  Perse  Ancienne,  pi.  oi.  The  first  and
third  figures  are  Medes,  the  second  and  fourth  Persians.


^m^^ii^mm0mmmmamm»s^€imii^^0i


MEDIC   AND  PERSIAN   FOOT-SOLDIERS.'


CYAXASES  MAKES  HIS  FIRST  ATTACK   UPON  NINEVEH.


467


should  be  conquered,  nothing  was  easier  than  to  oppose  a  further  advance  at

the  barrier  of  the  Euphrates ;  and  should  the  Euphrates  be  crossed,  the  Khabur

still  remained,  and  behind  it  the  desert  of  Singar,  which  offered  the  last  obstacle

between  Nineveh  and  the  invaders.     The  distances  were  less  considerable  in

the  case  of  an  army  setting  out  from  Urartu  and  proceeding  along  the  basin

of  the  Tigris  or  its  affluents ;  but  here,  too,  the  difficulties  of  transit  were  so

serious  that  the  invader  ran  a  great  risk  of  gradually  losing  the  best  part  of  his

forces  on  tiie  road.     On  the  north-east  and  east,  however,  the  ancient  heritage

of  Assur  lay  open  to   direct  and  swift  attack.     An  enemy  who  succeeded  in

destroying    or  driving   back

the   garrisons    stationed    as

outposts  on   the  rim  of  the

plateau,   from   Kharkhar   to

Parsua,^   if  he    ventured  to

pursue    his    advantage    and

descended  into  the  plain  of

the  Tigris,  had  no  less  than

three  routes  to  choose  from

—the    Kirind    road   on   the

south,   the    Baneh   road   on

the    north,    and    the   Sulei-

manyeh   road   between  the  two.     The  last  was   the   easiest  of  all,  and    led

almost  straight  to  the  fords  of  Altun-Keupri  and  the  banks  of  the  Lesser  Zab,  on

the  confines  of  Assyria  proper,  close  under  the  walls  of  Arbela,  the  holy  city  of

Ishtar.     He  needed  but  to  win  two  victories,  one  upon  leaving  the  mountains,

the  other  at  the  passage  of  the  Zab,  and  two  or  three  weeks'  steady  marching

would  bring  him  from  Hamadan  right  up  to  the  ramparts  of  Nineveh.^

Cyaxares  won  a  victory  over  Assur-bani-pal's  generals,  and  for  the  first  time
in  over  a  hundred  years  Assyria  proper  suffered  the  ignominy  of  foreign
invasion.*  The  various  works  constructed  by  twenty  generations  of  kings  had
gradually  transformed  the  triangle  enclosed  between  the  Ujjper  Zab,  the  Tigris,
and  the  Jebel-Makhlub  into  a  regular  fortified  camp.  The  southern  point  of
this  triangle  was  defended  by  Calah  from  the  attacks  of  Chaldsea  or  from  foes
coming  down  from  Media  by  Holwaa  and  Suleimanyeh,  while  Nineveh  guarded
it  on  the  north-east,  and  several    lines  of   walled  cities — among   which  Dur-

'  A3  to  these  garrisons,  cf.  pp.  243,  356,  supra.

■  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  cast  of  the  Medic  intaglio  in  the  Cabinet  des  Me'Jailles;  cf.
Lajard,  Le  Calte  de  Mlthra,  jil.  xxv.,  No.  7,  ami  MiiNAUT,  La  Glyptique  Orientate,  vol.  ii.  p.  153.

^  Cf.  tlie  noteworthy  paper  by  BiUerbeck,  ia  Billekbeok  and  Jekemias,  Der  Untergang  Nineveh's
und  die  Weissagungssckrift  des  Nahum,  in  the  Beilrdge  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  131-144.

*  Herodotuk,  I.  ciii.


A    MEDIC   HORSEMAN.^


468


THE  MEDES   JND    TEE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


Sharrukin  and  Imgur-Bel
can  still  be  identified —
protected  it  on  the  north
and  east,  extending  from
the  Tigris  as  far  as  the
(ihazir  and  Zab.*  It  was
necessary  for  an  enemy  to
break  through  this  com-
plex defensive  zone,  and
(;ven  after  this  had  been
successfully  accomplished
and  the  walls  of  the  capital
had  been  reached,  the
siffht  which  would  meet
the  eye  was  well  calculated
to  dismay  even  the  most
resolute  invader.  Viewed
as  a  whole,  Nineveh  ap-
peared as  an  irregular  quadrilateral  figure,  no  two  sides  of  which  were  parallel,
lying  on  the  left  bank  of


the  Tigris.  The  river  came
right  up  to  the  walls  on  the
west,  and  the  two  mounds
of  Kouyunjik  and  Nebi-
Yunus,  on  which  stood  the
palaces  of  the  Sargonides,
were  so  skilfully  fortified
that  a  single  wall  connect-
ino-  the  two  sufficed  to
ward  off"  all  danger  of
attack  on  this  side.  The
south  wall,  which  was  the
shortest  of  the  four,  being
only  about  870  yards  in
length,  was  rendered  inac-
cessible by  a  muddy
stream,  while  the  north
wall,  some  2150  yards  long,  was  protected  by  a  wide  moat  which  could  be


'  BiLLEKBECK  and  Jeremias,  Der  Untergang  Nineveh's  und  die  Weissagungsschrift  des  Nahum  von
Elkosch,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assi/riologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  127-131.


THE  ASSYRIAN    TRIANGLE  AND    THE  DEFENCE   OF  NINEVEH.      469

filled  from  the  waters  of  the  Kliuzur.  The  eastern  front  had  for  a  long
time  depended  for  its  safety  on  a  single  wall  reinforced  by  a  moat,  but
Sennacherib,  deeming  it  insutiiciently  protected  against  a  sudden  attack,  had
piled  up  obstacles^  in  front  of  it,  so  that  it  now  presented  a  truly  formi-
dable appearance.  It  was  skirted  throughout  its  whole  lengtli  by  a  main
rampart,  5400  yards  long,  which  described  a  gentle  curve  from  north  to  south,
and  rose  to  a  height  of  about  50  feet,^  being  protected  by  two  small  forts
placed  closed  to  the  main  gates.  The  fosse  did  not  run  along  the  foot  of  the
wall,  but  at  a  distance  of  about  fifty  yards  in  front  of  it,  and  was  at  least  some


PART  OF    TUE   FOSSE    AT   NINEVEH.''


20  feet  deep  and  over  150  feet  in  width.  It  was  divided  into  two  unequal
segments  by  the  Khuzur :  three  large  sluice-gates  built  on  a  level  with  the
wall  and  the  two  escarpments  allowed  the  river  to  be  dammed  back,  so  that  its
waters  could  be  diverted  into  the  fosse  and  thus  keep  it  full  in  case  of  siege.
In  front  of  each  segment  was  a  kind  of  demi-lune,  and — as  though  this  was  not
precaution  enough — two  walls,  each  over  4300  yards  long,  were  built  in  front  of
the  demi-lunes,  the  ditch  which  separated  them  being  connected  at  one  end
with  the  Khuzur,  and  allowed  to  empty  itself  into  a  stream  on  the  south.*    The

'  As  to  the  fortificationa  undertaten  by  Sennacherib,  of.  Meissn'ER  and  Rosx,  Die  Bauinschriften
Sanherib's,  pp.  68-72,  etc. ;  also  cf.  p.  310,  supra.

-  This  was  still  the  approximate  height  of  the  ruins,  when  Jones  drew  up  a  plan  of  them  about
the  middle  of  the  present  century  {Toimgraphy  of  Nineveh,  ia  the  J.  R.  As.  Soc,  1855,  vol.  xv.  p.  322,
where  the  height  is  estimated  at  forty-six  English  feet).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  in  Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  5tl3.

*  The  remains  of  tbe  fortifications  at  Nineveh  have  been  surveyed  by  Jones  (Topography  of
Nineveh,  in  the  J.  R.  As.  Sue,  IS.'io,  vol.  xv.  pp.  297-335),  whose  data  furnished  material  for  G.
Kawlinson  (The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  252-261),  and,  with  some  modifications,  for
Billerbeck  and  Jeremias  as  well  {Der  Untergang  Nineveh's,  in  the  Beiiriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.
pp.  118-127).


470  THE  MEBES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.

number  of  inhabitants  sheltered  behind  these  defences  was  perhaps  300,000
souls  ;^  each  separate  quarter  of  the  city  was  enclosed  by  ramparts,  thus
forming,  as  it  were,  a  small  independent  town,  which  had  to  be  besieged  and
captured  after  a  passage  had  been  cut  through  the  outer  lines  of  defence.
Cyaxares  might  well  have  lost  heart  in  the  face  of  so  many  difficulties,  but  his
cupidity,  inflamed  by  reports  of  the  almost  fabulous  wealth  of  the  city,  impelled
him  to  attack  it  with  extraordinary  determination  :  the  spoils  of  Susa,  Babylon,
and  Thebes,  in  fact,  of  the  whole  of  Western  Asia  and  Ethiopia,  were,  he  felt,
almost  within  his  reach,  and  would  inevitably  fall  into  his  hands  provided  his
courage  and  perseverance  did  not  fail  him.  After  shutting  up  the  remnant  of
the  Assyrian  army  inside  Nineveh  he  laid  patient  siege  to  the  city,  and  the
fame  of  his  victories  being  noised  abroad  on  all  sides,  it  awoke  among  the  subject
races  that  longing  for  revenge  which  at  one  time  appeared  to  have  been  sent  to
sleep  for  ever.  It  almost  seemed  as  tliough  the  moment  was  approaching  when
the  city  of  blood  should  bleed  in  its  turn,  when  its  kings  should  at  length
undergo  the  fate  which  they  had  so  long  imposed  on  other  monarchs.  Nahum
the  Elkoshite,^  a  Hebrew  born  in  the  Assyrian  province  of  Samaria,  but  at  that
time  an  exile  in  Judah,  lifted  up  bis  voice,  and  the  echo  of  his  words  still
resounds  in  our  ears,  telling  us  of  the  joy  and  hope  felt  by  Judah,  and  with
Judah,  by  the  whole  of  Asia,  at  the  prospect.  Speaking  as  the  prophet  of
Jahveh,  it  was  to  Jahveh  that  he  attributed  the  impending  downfall  of  the
oppressor  :  "  Jahveh  is  a  jealous  God  and  avengeth ;  Jahveh  avengeth  and  is
full  of  wrath ;  Jahveh  taketh  vengeance  on  His  adversaries,  and  He  reserveth
wrath  for  His  enemies.  Jahveh  is  slow  to  anger  and  great  in  power,  and  will
by  no  means  clear  the  guilty ;  Jahveh  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in
the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  His  feet.  He  rebuketh  the  sea  and
maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers :  Bashan  languisheth,  and  Carmel,
and  the  flower  of  Lebanon  languisheth."  *  And,  "  Behold  upon  the  mountains
the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings."*     Then  he  goes  on  to  unfold

'  This  is  the  estimate  given  by  Billerbeck  and  Jeremias,  Unlergang  Nineveh's,  in  the  Beilrage
zur  Assi/riologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  119,  120  ;  Jones  {Topography  of  Nineveh,  in  the  /.  B.  As.  Soc.,  1855,  vol.
XV.  p.  324)  and  G.  Eawlinson  credit  Nineveh  with  a  population  of  not  more  than  175,000  (The  Five
Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  256).

'  Elkosh  is  identified  by  Eusebius  (Onnmaslicon,  Parthet's,  edit.,  pp.  182,  183)  with  Elkese,
which  St.  Jerome  (Proleg.  Comni.  Nahunt)  declares  to  have  been  in  Galilee,  the  modern  el-Kauzeh,
Iwo  and  a  half  hours'  walk  south  of.Tibnin.  The  prophecy  of  Nahum  has  been  taken  by  some  as
referring  to  the  campaign  of  Phraortes  against  Assyria  (Ewald,  Prophelen  desAlten  Bundes,  2nd  edit.,
vol.  ii.  p.  3,  et  acq.),  but  more  frequently  to  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  by  the  Medes  and  Chaldoeans
(Ed.  Meter,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  574,  575  ;  Tiele,  Bahylonisch-assyrische  Geschichte,
p.  412 ;  Wellhausen,  Shizzen  und  Vorarbeiten,  vol.  v.  pp.  155, 156).  It  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  siege
interrupted  by  the  Scythian  invasion,  as  is  admitted  by  Kuenen  (K.  H.  Onderzoeh,  vol.  ii.  §  75,  et  seq.),
Comill  {Einleitung  in  das  AUe  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  188),  Kittel  (Geschichte  der  Hebraer,  vol.  ii.  p.  322),
and  many  others.

'  Nahum  i.  2-1.  «  Nahum  i.  15.


ASSUR-BANI-PAL    CALLS  IN   THE  AID    OF   TEE  SCYTHIANS.       471

before  the  eyes  of  his  bearers  a  picture  of  Nineveh,  humiliated  and  in  the  last
extremity.  There  she  lies,  behind  her  bastions  of  brick,  anxiously  listening  for
the  approach  of  the  victorious  Medes.  "  The  noise  of  the  whip,  and  the  noise  of
the  rattling  of  wheels  ;  and  prancing  horses  and  jumping  chariots ;  the  horse-
men mounting,  and  the  flashing  sword,  and  the  glittering  spear ;  and  a  miiltitude
of  slain  and  a  great  heap  of  carcases  :  and  there  is  no  end  of  tlie  corpses  ;  they
stumble  upon  their  corpses  :  because  of  the  multitude  of  the  whoredoms  of  the
well-favoured  harlot,  the  mistress  of  witchcrafts,  that  selleth  nations  through
her  whoredoms,  and  families  through  her  witchcrafts.  Behold,  I  am  against
thee,  saith  Jahveh  of  hosts,  and  I  will  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face ;  and  I
will  show  the  nations  thy  nakedness,  and  the  kingdoms  thy  shame.  And  I  will
cast  abominable  filth  upon  thee,  and  make  thee  vile,  and  will  set  thee  as  a
gazing-stock.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  all  they  that  look  upon  thee
shall  flee  from  thee,  and  say,  Nineveh  is  laid  waste :  who  will  bemoan  her  ?
Whence  shall  I  seek  comforters  for  thee  ?  "  ^  Thebes,  the  city  of  Amon,  did
not  escape  captivity  ;  why  then  should  Nineveh  prove  more  fortunate  ?  "  All
thy  fortresses  shall  be  like  fig  trees  with  the  firstripe  figs :  if  they  be  shaken
they  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater.  Behold,  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee
are  women ;  the  gates  of  thy  land  are  set  wide  open  unto  thine  enemies :  the
fire  hath  devoured  thy  bars.  Draw  thee  water  for  the  siege,  strengthen  thy
fortresses :  go  into  the  clay  and  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  brick-kiln.
There  shall  the  fire  devour  thee ;  the  sword  shall  cut  thee  off,  .  .  .  make
thyself  many  as  the  caukerworm,  make  thyself  many  as  the  locusts.  Thou
hast  multiplied  thy  merchants  as  the  stars  of  heaven  :  the  cankerworm
spoileth  and  flieth  away.  Thy  crowned  are  as  the  locusts  and  thy  marshals
as  the  swarms  of  grasshoppers,  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day,
but  when  the  sun  ariseth  they  flee  away,  and  their  place  is  not  known  where
they  are.  Thy  shepherds  slumber,  0  King  of  Assyria :  thy  worthies  are  at
rest :  thy  people  are  scattered  upon  the  mountains,  and  there  is  none  to  gather
them.  There  is  no  assuaging  of  thy  hurt ;  thy  wound  is  grievous :  all  that
hear  the  bruit  of  thee  clap  the  hands  over  thee  ;  for  upon  whom  hath  not  thy
wickedness  passed  continually  ?  "  -

On  this  occasion  Nineveh  escaped  the  fate  with  which  the  prophet  had
threatened  it,  but  its  safety  was  dearly  bought.  According  to  the  tradition
accepted  in  Asia  Minor  two  hundred  years  later,  a  horde  of  Scythians  under
King  Madyes,  son  of  Protothyes,  setting  out  from  the  Eussian  steppes  in
pursuit  of  the  Cimmerians,  made  their  appearance  on  the  scene  iu  the  nick
of  time.     We  are  told  that  they  flung  themselves  through  the  Caspian  Gates

'  Nahum  iii.  2-7.  '  Nahum  in.  12-19.


472  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

into  the  basin  of  the  Kur,  and  came  into  contact  with  the  Medes  at  the  foot
of  Mount  Caucasus.  The  defeat  of  the  Medes  here  would  necessarily
compel  them  to  raise  the  siege  of  Nineveh.^  This  crisis  in  the  history  of
Asia  was  certainly  not  determined  by  chance.  For  eighty  years  Assyria
had  been  in  contact  with  the  Seythiaus,  and  the  Assyrian  kings  had
never  ceased  to  keep  an  eye  upon  their  movements,  or  lose  sight  of  the
advantage  to  which  tlieir  bellicose  temper  might  be  turned  in  circumstances
like  the  present.  They  had  pitted  them  against  the  Cimmerians,  then
against  the  Medes,  and  probably  against  the  kings  of  Urartu  as  well,  and
the  intimacy  between  the  two  peoples  came  to  be  so  close  that  the  Scythian
king  Bartatua  did  not  hesitate  to  demand  one  of  the  daughters  of  Esarhaddon
in  marriage.'^  From  the  very  beginning  of  his  reign  ^  Assur-bani-pal  had
shown  them  the  utmost  consideration,  and  when  King  Madyes,  son  of  his  ally
Bartatua,  intervened  thus  opportunely  in  the  struggle,  he  did  so,  not  by  mere
chance,  as  tradition  would  have  us  believe,  but  at  the  urgent  request  of
Assyria.*  He  attacked  Media  in  the  rear,  and  Cyaxares,  compelled  to  raise  the
siege  of  Nineveh,  hastened  to  join  battle  with  him.  The  engagement  probably
took  place  on  the  banks  of  the  Lower  Araxes  or  to  the  north  of  Lake  Urumiah,
in  the  region  formerly  inhabited  by  the  Manual ;  but  after  defeating  his  foe
and  dictating  to  him  the  terms  of  submission,  Madyes,  carried  away  by  the  lust
of  conquest,  did  not  hesitate  to  turn  his  arms  against  his  ally.  Exhausted  by
her  recent  struggle,  Assyria  lay  at  his  mercy,  her  fortresses  alone  being  able  to
offer  any  serious  resistance  :  he  overran  the  country  from  end  to  end,  and
tliough  the  walled  cities  withstood  the  fury  of  his  attack,  the  rural  districts
were  plundered  right  and  left,  and  laid  desolate  for  many  a  year  to  come.
The  Scythians  of  this  epoch  probably  resembled  those  whom  we  find  repre-
sented on  the  monuments  of  Greek  art  two  centuries  later.  Tall,  fierce-looking
men,  with  unkempt  beards,  their  long  and  straggling  locks  surmounted  by
the  hyi-basis,^  or  pointed  national  cap  of  felt ;  they  wore  breeches  and  a  blouse
of  embroidered  leather,  and  were  armed  with  lances,  bows,  and  battle-axes.
They  rode  bareback  on  untrained  horses,  herds  of  which  followed  their  tribes

'  Hebodotos,  I.  ciii.,  civ.;  cf.  tlic  details  borrowed  by  Justin  (ii.  3)  and  Jordanes  {De  Origine
Getarum,  6)  from  Trogus  I'ompeius,  who  was  probably  indebted  for  his  facts  to  Diuou.

"  As  to  the  Scythians  in  the  time  of  Esarhaddon,  cf.  pp.  352-355,  supra.

'  Cf.  pp.  354,  355,  supra.

*  This  is  the  view  taken  by  Floigl,  Cyrus  und  Herodot,  pp.  157, 158  (where  the  author  pushes  his
ingenious  hypothesis  too  far  when  he  tries  to  make  out  that  every  one  of  the  Scythian  expeditions
was  undertaken  by  the  order  or  at  the  request  of  Assur-bani-pal),  by  Pkashek,  Medien  und  das  Haus
des  Kyaxares,  p.  69,  and  above  all  by  Winckler,  Altorientalische  Forschuncjen,  vol.  i.  pp.  489,  490,  wlio
rightly  looks  upon  the  Scytliian  invasion  as  a  natural  outcome  of  the  policy  previously  followed  by
the  Assyrian  kings  ill  dealing  with  the  northern  barbarians,  iladyes  is  tlie  form  given  by  Herodotus
(I.  ciii.);  Strabo  gives  the  name  as  Jladys  (I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  01).

''  Herodotus,  VII.  Isiv.,  where  he  relors  to  the  Sakiu  or  Sacse  of  the  laxartes.  For  an  explanation
of  this  passage,  cf.  Kondakoff  and  Reikach,  Les  AntiquH€s  dii  Bofphore  Cimmgrien,  pp.  13ti,  137.


THE   SCYTHIAN  INVASION.


473


about  on  their  wanderings;  each  man  caught  the  animal  he  required  with
the  help  of  a  lasso,  put  bit  and  bridle  on  him,  and  vaulting  on  to  his  back  at  a
single  bound,  reduced  him  to  a  state  of  semi-obedience.  No  troops  could  stand
their  ground  before  the  frantic  charge  of  these  wild  horsemen  ;  like  the  Huns
of  Roman  times,  the  Scythians  made  a  clean  sweep  of  everything  they  found
in  their  path.  They  ruined  the  crops,  carried  off  or  slaughtered  the  herds,
and  set  fire  to  the  villages  from  sheer  love  of  destruction,  or  in  order  to  inspire
terror;  every  one  who  failed  to  fly  to  the  mountains  or  take  refuge  in  some
fortress,  was  either  massacred  on  the  spot  or  led  away  into  slavery.  Too
ignorant  of  the  arts  of  war  to  undertake  a  siege  in  the  regular  way,  they
usually  contented  themselves  with  levying  ransoms  on  fortified  towns  ;  occa-
sionally, however,  when  the  wealth  accumulated  behind  the  walls  held  out  a
prospect  of  ample  booty,  they  blockaded  the  place  until  famine  compelled
it  to  surrender.  More  than
one  ancient  city  which,
thanks  to  the  good  govern-
ment of  its  rulers  and  the
industry  of  its  citizens,  had
amassed  treasure  of  inesti-
mable value,  was  put  to  fire
and  sword,  and  more  than  one  fertile  and  populous  region  left  untilled
and  deserted.^  Most  of  the  states  which  for  the  last  three  centuries  had
fought  so  stubbornly  against  the  Assyrians  for  independence,  went  down
before  the  storm,  including  the  kingdoms  of  Urartu,  of  the  Mushku,
and  of  the  Tabal,^  their  miserable  end  furnishing  the  Hebrew  prophets
full  fifty  years  later  with  a  theme  of  sombre  rejoicing.  "  Tiiere  is  jMeshech,
Tubal,  and  all  her  multitude ;  her  graves  are  round  about  her :  all  of  them
uncircumcised,  slain  by  the  sword ;  for  they  caused  their  terror  in  the  land
of  the  living.  And  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  mighty  that  are  fallen  of
the  uncircumcised,  which  are  gone  down  to  hell  with  their  weapons  of  war,  and
have  laid  their  swords  under  their  heads,*  and  their  iniquities  are  upon  their

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  the  reliel's  ou  a  silver  vase  from  Kul-Oba.  As  to  the  capture
of  horses  by  means  of  the  la.sso,  ef.  the  illustration  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  chapter,  p.  445,
supra.

■  This  may  be  deduced  from  the  passage  in  Herodotus  (I.  cvi.),  where  he  says  that  "  the  Scythians
were  masters  of  Asia  for  twenty-eight  years,  and  overturned  everything  by  their  brutality  and  stupidity  :
for,  in  addition  to  tribute,  they  exacted  from  every  one  whatever  they  chose,  and,  moreover,  they
prowled  here  and  there,  plundering  as  they  thought  good."

"  I^TRABO,  XI.  viii.  §  4,  p.  511,  refers  in  general  terms  to  the  presence  of  Scythians  (or,  as  he  calls
them,  Sacce)  in  Armenia,  Cappadocia,  and  on  the  shores  of  the  Bhick  Sea.

*  This,  doubtless,  means  tliat  the  JIushku  and  Tabal  had  been  so  utterly  defeated  that  they
could  not  procure  honourable  burial  for  their  dead,  i.e.  with  their  swords  beneath  their  heads  and
their  weapons  on  their  bodies.


St'YTHUNS   TENDING   THEIR    WOUNDED.'


474  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CHALDJSAN  EMPIRE.

bones  ;  for  they  were  the  terror  of  the  mighty  in  the  hind  of  the  living."  '  The
Cimmerians,  who,  since  their  reverses  in  Lydia  and  on  IMount  Taurus,^  had
concentrated  practically  the  whole  of  their  tribes  in  Cappadocia  and  in  the
regions  watered  by  the  Halys  and  Thermodon,  shared  the  good  fortune  of  their
former  adversaries.  At  that  time  they  lived  under  the  rule  of  a  certain  Kobos,
who  seems  to  have  left  a  terrible  reputation  behind  him  ;  tradition  gives  him  a
place  beside  Sesostris  among  the  conquerors  of  the  heroic  age,  and  no  doubt,
like  his  predecessor  Dugdamis,  he  owed  this  distinction  to  some  expedition  or
other  against  the  peoples  who  dwelt  on  the  shores  of  the  iEgean  Sea,  but  our
knowledge  of  his  career  is  confined  to  the  final  catastrophe  which  overtook
him.  After  some  partial  successes,  such  as  that  near  Zela,  for  instance,^  he
was  defeated  and  made  prisoner  by  Madyes.*  His  subjects,  as  vassals  of  the
Scythians,  joined  them  in  their  acts  of  brigandage,''  and  together  they  marched
from  province  to  province,  plundering  as  they  went ;  they  overran  the  western
regions  of  the  Assyrian  kingdom  from  ]\Ielitene  and  ^Mesopotamia  to  Northern
Syria,  from  Northern  Syria  to  Phoenicia,  Damascus,  and  Palestine,"  and  at
length  made  their  appearance  on  the  JudiEan  frontier.  Since  the  day  when
Sennacherib  had  been  compelled  to  return  to  Assyria  without  having  succeeded
in  destroying  Jerusalem,''  or  even  carrying  it  by  storm,  Judah  had  taken  little
or  no  part  in  external  politics.  Divided  at  first  by  a  conflict  between  the
party  of  prudence,  who  advised  submission  to  Nineveh,  and  the  more  warlike
spirits  who  advocated  an  alliance  with  Egypt,  it  had  ended  by  accepting  its
secondary  position,  and  had  on  the  whole  remained  fairly  loyal  to  the  dynasty
of  Sargon.  On  the  death  of  Hezekiah,  his  successor,  ]\Ianasseh,  had,  as  we
know,^  been  tempted  to  intervene  in  the  revolutions  of  the  hour,  but  the
prompt  punishment  which  followed  his  first  attempt  put  an  end  for  ever  to
his  desire  for  independence.  His  successor,  Amon,  during  his  brief  reign  of
two  years,^  had  no  time  to  desert  the  ways  of  his  father,  and  Josiah,^"
who  came  to  the  throne  in  638  B.C.,  at  the  age  of  eight,  had  so  far  manifested
no  hostility  towards  Assyria.     Thus,  for  more  than  fifty  years,  Judah  enjoyed

'  Ezek.  xxxii.  26,  27.  =  Cf.  p.  430,  supra.

^  Strabo,  XI.  viii.  §  4,  p.  511,  where  the  defeat  of  the  Scythians  is  wrongly  attributed  to  Persia.

*  Steabo,  I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61.

'  It  seems  probable  tliat  this  was  so.  when  we  consider  the  confusion  between  the  Scythians  or  Sakse,
and  the  Cimmerians  in  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  inscriptions  of  the  Achoemeuian  epoch  (Schbader,
Keilinschri/ten  und  Geschichtsforsclning,  p.  150;  Fr.  Len-ormant,  Les  Origiiies  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.
pp.  347-350).

°  Their  migration  from  Media  into  Syria  and  Palestine  is  expressly  mentioned  by  Herodotcs,  I.  cv.

'  Cf.  pp.  288-295,  mpra.

'  As  to  llanasseh's  rebellion,  cf.  pp.  368,  369,  aipra.

°  2  Kinqs  xxi.  18-26;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  20-25.  The  reign  of  iifty-five  years  attributed  to
Jlanasseh  by  the  Jewish  annalists  cannot  be  fitted  into  the  chronology  of  the  period  ;  we  must  either
take  off  teu  years,  thus  reducing  the  duration  of  the  reign  to  forty-five  years,  or  else  we  must  assume
the  first  ten  of  Jlanasseh  to  be  synchronous  with  the  last  ten  of  Hezekiah.

"■  2  Kings  xxii.  1 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  1.


JUDAH   UNDER    THE   RULE    OF  MANASSEH  AND   AMON.


475


IRANIAN  SOLDIERS  FIGHTING  AGAINST  THE   SCYTHIANS.'


almost  unbroken  peace,  and  led  as  happy  and  prosperous  an  existence  as  the
barrenness  of  its  soil  aud  the  unruly  spirit  of  its  inhabitants  would  permit.

But  though  its  political  activity  had  been  almost  nothing  during  this
interval,  its  spiritual  life  had  seldom  been  developed  with  a  greater  intensity.
The  reverse  sustained  by  Sennacherib  had  undoubtedly  been  a  triumph  for
Isiiiah,  and  for  the  religious  party  of  which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard
him  as  the  sole  representative.  It  had  served  to  demonstrate  the  power
of  Jahveh,  and  His  aversion  for  all  idolatrous  worship  and  for  all  foreign
alliances.  In  vain  did  the  partisans  of  Egypt  talk  loudly  of  Pharaoh  and  of  all
those  principalities  of  this
world  which  were  drawn
round  in  Pharaoh's  orbit ;
Egypt  had  shown  herself  in-
capable of  safeguarding  her
friends,  and  things  had  gone
steadily  from  bad  to  worse  so
long  as  these  latter  held  the
reins  of  government ;  their
removal  from  ofQce  had
been,  as  it  were,  the  signal
for  a  welcome  change  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Jews.  Jahveh  had  delivered  His  city
the  moment  when,  ceasing  to  rely  upon  itself,  it  had  surrendered  its  guidance
into  His  hands,  and  the  means  of  avoiding  disaster  in  the  future  was  clearly
pointed  out  to  it.  Judah  must  be  content  to  follow  the  counsels  which  Isaiah
had  urged  upon  it  in  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  aud  submissively  obey  the
voice  of  its  prophets.  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers :  and  thine  ears  shall
hear  a  word  behind  thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn
to  the  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left.  And  ye  shall  defile  the  over-
laying of  thy  graven  images  of  silver,  and  the  plating  of  thy  molten  images  of
gold :  thou  shalt  cast  them  away  as  an  unclean  thing ;  thou  shalt  say  unto
it.  Get  thee  hence."  ^  Isaiah  seems  to  disappear  after  his  triumph,  and
none  of  his  later  prophecies  have  come  down  to  us:  yet  the  influence  of  his
teachin"-  lasted  throughout  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  and  the  court,  supported  by
the  more  religious  section  of  the  people,  not  only  abjured  the  worship  of  false
gods,  but  forsook  the  high  places  and  discontinued  the  practices  which  he  had
so  strenuously  denounced.  The  great  bulk  of  the  nation,  however,  soon
returned  to  their  idolatrous  practices,  if,  indeed,  they  had  ever  given  them  up,

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  tbe  cast  of  a  cylinder  given  by  Cunningham,  Relics  from  Ancient
Persia,  in  the  Journal  of  the  R.  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  vol.  i.  Tbe  cylinder  is  usually  described  as
Persian,  but  the  dress  is  tbat  of  tbe  Modes  as  well  as  of  the  Persians  (of.  what  has  been  said  on  this
subject  on  p.  460,  note  1,  supra.  '  Isa.  xxx.  20-22.


476  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

and  many  of  the  royal  advisers  grew  weary  of  the  rigid  observances  which  it
was  sought  to  impose  upon  them ;  rites  abhorrent  to  Jahveh  found  favour
even  among  members  of  the  king's  own  family,  and  on  Hezekiah's  death,
about  ii&&  B.C.,  a  reaction  promptly  set  in  against  both  his  religious  views  and
the  material  reforms  he  had  introduced.^  iManasseh  was  only  thirteen  yeans
old  when  he  came  to  the  throne,  and  his  youth  naturally  inclined  him  towards
the  less  austere  forms  of  divine  worship :  from  the  very  first  he  tolerated  much
that  his  father  had  forbidden,  and  the  spirit  of  eclecticism  which  prevailed
among  his  associates  rendered  him,  later  on,  an  object  of  special  detestation  to
the  orthodox  historians  of  Jerusalem.  Worshippers  again  began  openly  to
frequent  the  high  places ;  they  set  up  again  the  prostrate  idols,  replanted  the
sacred  groves,  and  even  "  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two
courts  of  the  house  of  Jahveh."  The  chariots  and  horses  of  the  sun  reappeared
within  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  together  with  the  sacred  courtesans.  Baal
and  the  Phcenieian  Astarte  were  worshipped  on  Mount  Sion.  The  valley  of
Hinnom,  where  Ahaz  had  already  burnt  one  of  his  children  during  a  desperate
crisis  in  the  Syrian  wars,^  was  again  lighted  up  by  the  flames  of  the  sacred
pyre.  We  are  told  that  Manasseh  himself  set  the  example  by  passing  his  son
through  the  ilames;  he  also  had  recourse  to  astrologers,  soothsayers,  fortune-
tellers, and  sorcerers  of  the  lowest  type.  The  example  of  Assyria  in  matters
of  this  kind  exercised  a  preponderant  influence  on  Jewish  customs,  and  certainly
it  would  have  been  a  miracle  if  Jerusalem  had  succeeded  in  escaping  it;  did
not  Nineveh  owe  the  lofty  place  it  occupied  to  these  occult  sciences  and  to  the
mysterious  powers  of  its  gods  ?  In  thus  imitating  its  conqueror,  Judah  was
merely  borrowing  the  weapons  which  bad  helped  him  to  subdue  the  world.  The
partisans  of  the  ancient  religions  who  were  responsible  for  these  innovations  must
have  regarded  them  as  perfectly  legitimate  reforms,  and  their  action  was  received
with  favour  in  the  provinces:  before  long  the  latter  contained  as  many  sanctuaries
as  there  were  towns,^  and  by  thus  multiplying  the  centres  of  worship,  they  hoped
that,  in  accordance  with  ancient  belief,  the  ties  which  existed  between  Jahveh
and  His  chosen  people  would  also  be  increased.  The  fact  that  the  provinces  had
been  ravaged  from  end  to  end  in  the  days  of  Sennacherib,  while  Jerusalem  had
been  spared,  was  attributed  to  the  circumstance  that  Hezekiah  had  destroyed
the  provincial  sanctuaries,  leaving  the  temple  on  Mount  Sion  alone  standing.
Wherever  Jahveh  possessed  altars,  He  kept  guard  over  His  people,  but  His  pro-
tection was  not  extended  to  those  places  where  sacrifices  were  no  longer  offered

'  2  Kings  xxi.  2-7  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  2-7),  where,  in  spite  of  manifest  recensions  of  the  text,
the  facts  themselves  seem  to  have  been  correctly  set  forth.

'  Cf.  pp.  185,  186,  284,  supra.

'  Jer.  ii.  2G-30.  For  the  quotation  see  also  Jer.  xi.  13:  "  For  according  to  the  number  of  thy
cities  are  thy  gods,  0  Judah  ;  and  according  to  the  number  of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  have  ye  set
up  altars  to  the  shameful  thing,  even  altars  to  burn  incense  unto  Baal."


DEVELOPMENT  IN   THE    CONCEPTIONS    OF   TEE  PROPHETS.        477

to  Him.  The  reaction  was  not  allowed  to  take  place  without  opposition  on  the
part  of  the  prophets  and  their  followers.  We  are  told  that  Manasseh  "  slied  inno-
cent blood  very  much  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end  to  another ; "
there  is  even  a  Rabbinic  tradition  to  the  effect  that,  weary  of  the  admonitions
of  the  aged  Isaiah,  he  put  him  to  death  by  shutting  him  up  in  the  hollow  trunk
of  a  tree,  and  causing  him  to  be  sawn  in  two.^  For  a  long  time  after  this  no
instance  can  be  found  of  a  prophet  administering  public  affairs  or  directing
the  actions  of  tlie  king  himself;  the  priests  and  reformers,  finding  no  outlet
for  their  energy  in  this  direction,  fell  back  on  private  preaching  and  literarv
propaganda.  And,  above  all,  they  applied  themselves  to  the  task  of  rewriting
the  history  of  Israel,  which,  as  told  by  the  chroniclers  of  the  previous  century,
presented  the  national  Deity  in  too  material  a  light,  and  one  which  failed  to
harmonise  with  the  ideals  then  obtaining.  So  long  as  there  were  two  separate
Hebrew  kingdoms,  the  existence  of  the  two  parallel  versions  of  the  Elohist  and
.Jahvist  gave  rise  to  but  little  difficulty :  each  version  had  its  own  supporters
and  readers,  whose  consciences  were  readily  satisfied  by  the  interpolation  of  a
few  new  facts  into  the  text  as  occasion  arose.  But  now  that  Samaria  had
fallen,  and  the  whole  political  and  religious  life  of  the  Hebrew  race  was
centred  in  Judah  alone,  the  necessity  for  a  double  and  often  contradictory
narrative  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  the  idea  occurred  of  combining  the  two  in
a  single  work.  This  task,  which  was  begun  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  and
continued  under  Manasseh,  resulted  in  the  production  of  a  literature  of  which
fragments  have  been  incorporated  into  the  historical  books  of  our  Bible.^

The  reign  of  Amon  witnessed  no  alteration  in  the  policy  initiated  by  his
predecessor  Manasseh;  but  when,  after  less  than  two  years'  rule,  he  was  suddenly
struck  down  by  the  knife  of  an  assassin,  the  party  of  reform  carried  the  day,
and  the  views  of  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  regained  their  ascendency.  Josiah  had
been  king,  in  name  at  any  rate,  for  twelve  years,^  and  was  learning  to  act  on  his
own  responsibility,  when  the  Scythian  danger  appeared  on  the  horizon.     This

1  2  Kinrjs  xxi.  16.  The  tradition  in  regard  to  the  fate  of  Isaiah  took  its  foundation  in  this
text,  and  it  is  perhaps  indirectly  referred  to  in  Heb.  xi.  37.

'  The  scheme  of  tlie  present  work  prevents  me  from  doing  more  than  allude  in  passing  to  these
preliminary  stages  in  the  composition  of  the  Priestly  Code.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  return  briefly  to
the  subject  at  the  close  of  the  present  volume.

'  The  date  is  supplied  by  the  opening  passage  of  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  "  to  whom  the  word
of  Jahveh  came  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  the  son  of  Amon,  King  of  Judah,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his
reign"  (i.  2).  Volney  recognised  that  chaps,  i.,  iv.,  v.,  and  vi.  of  Jeremiah  refer  to  the  Scythian
invasion,  and  since  his  time  it  has  been  admitted  that,  with  the  exception  of  certain  interpolations  in
chaps,  i.  and  iii.,  the  whole  of  the  first  six  chapters  date  from  this  period  (Stade,  Geschichte  des
Volkes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  646,  et  seq. ;  AVildeboeu,  Die  Litcratur  des  Allen  Testaments,  p.  205),  but  that
they  underwent  slight  modifications  in  the  recension  which  was  made  in  the  fourth  year  of
Jehoiachin  in  order  to  make  them  applicable  to  tlie  threatened  Chaldiean  invasion.  The  date  is
important,  since  by  using  it  as  a  basis  we  can  approximately  restore  the  chronology  of  the  whole
period.  If  we  assume  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  to  have  been  627-G26  B.C.,  we  arc  compelled  to
place  all  the  early  Medic  wars  in  the  reign  of  Assur-bani-pal,  as  I  have  done.


478  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

barbarian  invasion,  wliich  burst  upon  the  peace  of  Assyria  like  a  thunderbolt
from  a  cloudless  sky,  restored  to  the  faithful  that  confidence  in  the  omnipotence
of  tlieir  God  wliich  had  seemed  about  to  fail  them  ;  when  they  beheld  the  down-
fall of  states,  the  sack  of  provinces  innumerable,  whole  provinces  in  flames  and
whole  peoples  irresistibly  swept  away  to  death  or  slavery,  they  began  to  ask
themselves  whether  these  were  not  signs  of  the  divine  wrath,  indicating  that
the  day  of  Jahveh  was  at  hand.  Prophets  arose  to  announce  the  approaching
judgment,  among  the  rest  a  certain  Zephaniah,  a  great-grandson  of  Hezekiah  :  *
"  I  will  utterly  consume  all  things  from  off  the  face  of  the  ground,  saith  Jahveh.
I  will  consume  man  and  beast ;  I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the
fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  stumbling-blocks  with  the  wicked ;  and  I  will  cut  off
man  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  saith  Jahveh.  And  I  will  stretch  out  My  hand
upon  Judah,  and  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem ;  and  I  will  cut  off  the
remnant  of  Baal  from  this  place,  and  the  name  of  the  Chemarim  with  the
priests ;  and  them  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the  housetops ;  and
them  that  worship,  which  swear  to  Jahveh  and  swear  by  Malcham ;  and  them
that  are  turned  back  from  following  Jahveh ;  and  those  that  have  not  sought
Jahveh  nor  inquired  after  Him.  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord
Jaliveh ;  for  the  day  of  Jahveh  is  ^t  hand ;  for  Jahveh  hath  prepared  a
sacrifice.  He  hath  sanctified  His  guests."  '^  "  That  day  is  a  day  of  wrath,  a
day  of  trouble  and  distress,  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  a  day  of  dark-
ness and  gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkne.ss,  a  day  of  the  trumpet
and  alarm,  against  the  fenced  cities,  and  against  the  high  battlements.  And
I  will  bring  distress  upon  men,  that  they  shall  walk  like  blind  men,  because
they  have  sinned  against  Jahveh  :  and  their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust,
and  their  flesh  as  dung.  Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to
deliver  them  in  the  day  of  Jahveh's  wrath ;  but  the  whole  land  shall  be
devoured  by  the  fire  of  His  jealousy  ;  for  He  shall  make  an  end,  yea,  a  terrible
end,  of  all  them  that  dwell  in  the  land."  ^  During  this  same  period  of  stress
and  terror,  there  came  forward  another  prophet,  one  of  the  greatest  among  the
prophets  of  Israel — Jeremiah,  son  of  Hilkiah.  He  was  born  in  the  village  of
Anathoth,  near  Jerusalem,  being  descended  from  one  of  those  priestly  families
in  which  the  faith  had  been  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation  in  all
its  original  purity.*     When  Jahveh  called  him,  he  cried  out  in  amazement,

'  Zepbaniah  gives  his  own  genealogy  at  the  beginning  of  bis  prophecy  (i.  1),  though,  it  is  true,
he  does  not  add  the  title  "  King  of  Judah  "  after  the  name  of  his  ancestor  Hezekiah.

'  ZepJi.  i.  2-7.  =  ZepU.  i.  15-18.

'  The  descent  and  birthplace  of  Jeremiah  are  given  at  the  beginning  of  his  prophecies  (i.  1).  He
must  have  been  quite  young  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah,  as  is  evident  from  the  statement  in  i.  6.
We  are  told  in  chap,  xxxvi.  that  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  he  dictated  a  summary  of  all  the
prophecies  delivered  by  him  from  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  up  to  the  date  indicated  to  his  servant
Baruch,  and  that  later  on  he  added  a  number  of  others  of  the  same  kind.  As  to  the  contents  of  this
first  collection  and  the  form  in  which  it  now  appears,  cf.  Cobxill,  Einleituiig  in  da/  Alte  Testament,


THE   CIMMERIANS  IN  SYRIA   AND    ON   THE   EGYPTIAN  FRONTIER.     479

"Ah,  Lord  God!  behold,  I  cannot  speak:  for  I  am  a  child."  But  Jahveh
reassured  him,  and  touching  his  lips,  said  unto  him,  "  Behold,  I  have  put  My
words  in  thy  mouth :  see,  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  nations  and  over
the  kingdoms,  to  pluck  up  and  to  break  down,  and  to  destroy  and  to  over-
throw, to  build  and  to  plant."  Then  the  prophet  perceived  a  seething  cauldron,
the  face  of  which  appeared  from  the  north,  for  the  Eternal  declared  to  him  that
"  Out  of  the  north  evil  shall  break  out  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  ^
Already  the  enemy  is  hastening :  "  Behold,  he  shall  come  up  as  clouds,  and  his
chariots  shall  be  as  the  whirlwind :  his  horses  are  swifter  than  eagles.  Woe
unto  us !  for  we  are  spoiled.  0  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness,
that  thou  mayest  be  saved.  How  long  shall  thine  evil  thoughts  lodge  within
thee  ?  For  a  voice  declareth  from  Dan,  and  publisheth  evil  from  the  hills  of
Ephraim:  make  ye  mention  to  the  nations;  behold,  publish  against  Jerusalem ! "
The  Scythians  had  hardly  been  mentioned  before  they  were  already  beneath
the  walls,  and  the  prophet  almost  swoons  with  horror  at  the  sound  of  their
approach.  "  ily  bowels,  my  bowels !  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart :  my
heart  is  disquieted  in  me;  I  cannot  hold  my  peace;  because  thou  hast  heard,
0  my  soul,  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm  of  war.  Destruction  upon
destruction  is  cried  ;  for  the  whole  land  is  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment.
How  long  shall  I  see  the  standard  and  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  ?  "  ^  It
would  seem  that  the  torrent  of  invasion  turned  aside  from  the  mountains  of
Judah ;  it  flowed  over  Galilee,  Samaria,  and  the  Philistine  Shephelah,  its  last
eddies  dying  away  on  the  frontiers  of  Egypt.  Psammetichus  is  said  to  have
bribed  the  barbarians  to  retire.  As  they  fell  back  they  plundered  the  temple
of  Derketo,  near  Ashkelon :  we  are  told  that  in  order  to  punish  them  for  this  act
of  sacrilege,  the  goddess  visited  them  with  a  disease  which  caused  serious  ravages
amongst  them,  and  which  the  survivors  carried  back  with  them  to  their  own
country. ''  There  was,  however,  no  need  to  introduce  a  supernatural  agency  in
order  to  account  for  their  rapid  disappearance.  The  main  body  of  invaders  had
never  quitted  Media  or  the  northern  jjart  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  and  only  the
southern  regions  of  Syria  were  in  all  probability  exposed  to  the  attacks  of
isolated  bands.  These  stragglers,  who  year  after  year  embarked  in  one  desperate
adventure  after  another,  must  have  found  great  diflSculty  in  filling  up  the  gaps

2nd  edit.,  pp.  157,  158;  Driver,  An  Introduclion  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  5th  edit.,  pp.
254,  255;  Wildeboeb,  Die  Literatur  des  Alien  Testaments,  pp.  204-206.

'  Jer.  i.  4-14.  "  Jer.  iv.  13-16,  19-21.

'  Hekodotcs,  I.  cv.,  where  the  author  calU  the  goddess  Aphrodite  Urania,  by  which  we  must
understand  Derketo  or  Atargatis  (cf.  Slrvgijle  of  the  Nations,  vol.  ii.  p.  69SJ,  who  is  mentioned  by
several  other  classical  authors,  e.g.  Xanthus  of  Lydia  (Fragm.  11,  in  MOller-Didot's  Fragm.  Hist,
Graic,  vol.  i.  p.  38),  Diodorus  Siculus  (ii.  4),  Strabo  (XVI.  iv.  §  17,  p.  785),  Pliny  {Hist.  Nat.,  v.  23).
According  to  Justin  (ii.  3),  the  Scythians  were  stopped  only  by  the  marshes  of  the  Delta.  The  disease
liy  which  the  Scythians  were  attacked  is  described  by  Hippocrates  (_De  aere,  aqua  et  loois,  vi.  §  108);
but  in  spite  of  what  he  tells  us  about  it,  its  precise  nature  has  not  yet  been  determined.


480  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDJSAN  EMPIRE.

which  even  victories  made  in  their  ranks ;  enervated  by  the  relaxing  nature  of
the  climate,  thev  conld  offer  little  resistance  to  disease,  and  excess  completed
what  the  climate  had  betjun,  the  result  bring  that  most  of  them  died  on  the
way,  and  only  a  few  survived  to  rejoin  the  main  body  with  their  booty.  For
several  months  the  tide  of  invasion  continued  to  rise,  then  it  ebbed  as  quickly
as  it  had  risen,  till  soon  nothing  was  left  to  mark  where  it  had  passed  save  a
pathway  of  ruins,  not  easily  made  good,  and  a  feeling  of  terror  which  it  took
many  a  year  to  efface.  It  was  long  before  -Tudah  forgot  the  "  mighty  nation,  the
ancient  nation,  the  nation  whose  language  thou  knowest  not,  neither  under-
standest  thou  what  they  say."  ^  Men  could  still  picture  in  imagination  their
squadrons  marauding  over  the  plains,  robbing  the  fellah  of  his  crops,  his  bread,
his  daughters,  his  sheep  and  oxen,  his  vines  and  fig  trees,  for  "  they  lay  hold
on  bow  and  spear ;  they  are  cruel  and  have  no  mercy  ;  their  voice  roareth  like  the
sea,  and  they  ride  upon  horses ;  every  one  set  in  array  as  a  man  to  the  battle,^
against  thee,  0  daughter  of  Sion.  We  have  heard  the  fame  thereof;  our  hands
wax  feeble ;  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  and  pangs  as  of  a  woman  in  travail."  ^
The  supremacy  of  the  Scythians  was  of  short  duration.  It  was  said  in
after-times  that  they  had  kept  the  whole  of  Asia  in  a  state  of  terror  for  twenty-
eight  years,  dating  Irom  their  defeat  of  Cyaxares ;  but  the  length  of  this
period  is  exaggerated.*  The  Medes  soon  recovered  from  their  disaster,  but
before  engaging  their  foes  in  open  conflict,  they  desired  to  rid  themselves  of
the  prince  who  had  conquered  them,  and  on  whom  the  fortunes  of  the  whole
Scythian  nation  depended.  Cyaxares,  therefore,  invited  Madyes  and  his
officers  to  a  banqiiet,  and  after  plying  them  to  excess  with  meat  and  drink,  he
caused  them  all  to  be  slain.^     The  barbarians  made  a  brave  resistance,  in  spite

'  Jer.  V.  15 ;  it  seems  curious  that  the  Hebrew  prophet  should  use  the  epithet  "  ancient,"  wlien
we  remember  that  the  Scythians  claimed  to  be  the  oldest  nation  in  the  world,  older  than  even  the
Egyptians  themselves  (Justin,  ii.  1 ;  cf.  Stiuggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  56).

'  An  obvious  allusion  to  the  regular  formation  adopted  by  the  Scythian  squadrons.

'  Jer.  V.  17 ;  vi.  23,  21.

*  HEKODOTrs,  I.  cvi.  The  authenticity  of  the  number  of  years  given  in  Herodotus  has  been
energetically  defended  by  some  modem  historians  (cf.  Floigl,  Cyrus  und  Herodot,  pp.  l'>tj,  157),  and
not  less  forcibly  denied  by  others,  who  reduce  it,  for  example,  in  accordance  with  a  doubtful  passage
of  Justin  (ii.  5,  1).  to  eight  years  (F.  be  Saclcy,  Chronologie  des  Empires  de  Ninice,  de  Babylone
et  d'Elcuiane,  p.  69;  cf  G.  Eawlinsox,  The  Fii-e  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226,  227,
391-393 ;  Fr.  Lexormaxt,  Lettres  astyriologiques,  vol.  i.  pp.  71-S3,  and  Les  Origines  de  VBistoire,
vol.  ii.  p.  Hi).  By  assigning  all  the  events  relating  to  the  Scythian  invaders  to  the  mean  period  of
twenty  years,  we  should  obtain  the  length  of  time  which  best  corresponds  to  what  is  actually  knowu
of  the  general  history  of  this  epoch.

'  Hekodotcs,  I.  cv.  This  episode  is  regarded  as  legendary  by  many  modern  historians  (Ed.  Meter,
Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  55S  ;  Prashee,  Medien  und  das  Haus  des  Kyaxares,  p.  75  ;  Winckleb,
Untersuch.  :ur  AUorient.  Gesch.,  p.  125 ;  Einige  Bemerliungen  zur  Nabmiid-Stele,  in  3Iesseesch31Idt,
Die  Insch.  der  Stele  Nahuna'id's,  pp.  71,  72,  and  AUorient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  p.  i91).  Winckler  even  goes
so  far  as  to  deny  the  defeat  of  the  Scythians :  according  to  his  view,  they  held  possession  of  Media
till  their  chief,  Astyages,  was  overthrown  by  Cyrus.  This  tlieory  was  accepted  first  by  Tiele  (Zeitschri/t
far  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  425,  426),  then  by  Lehmann  {Zii  Nabonid's  Bericht  iiher  die  Besiegung  des
Astyages  durch  Eyros,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  vol.  v.  p.  84),  by  Billerbeck  and  Jeremias  (^Der  Untergang
Nineveh's,  in  the  Beitriige  :ur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  p.  90,  note  1)  ;  Eost  has  gone  even  further  {Untersuch.


THE  SCYTHIANS  VANQDISHED  AND  DRIVEN  BACK  BY  CYAXAEES.      481

of  the  treason  wliicli  had  deprived  them  of  their  leaders :  they  yielded  only
after  a  long  and  bloody  campaign,  the  details  of  which  are  unknown  to  us.
Iranian  legends  wove  into  the  theme  of  their  expulsion  all  kinds  of  fantastic
or  romantic  incidents.  They  related,  for  instance,  how,  in  combination  with
the  Parthians,  the  Scythians,  under  the  leadership  of  their  queen  Zarinsea,
several  times  defeated  the  Medes :  she  consented  at  last  to  conclude  a  treaty
on  equal  terms,  and  peace  having  been  signed,  she  retired  to  her  capital  of
Eoxanake,  there  to  end  her  days.^  One  body  of  the  survivors  re-entered
Europe  through  the  Caspian  Gates,^  another  wandered  for  some  time  between
the  Araxes  and  the  Halys,  seeking  a  country  adapted  to  their  native  instincts
and  customs.*  Cyaxares,  relieved  from  the  pressure  put  upon  him  by  the
Scythians,  immediately  resumed  his  efforts  against  Assyria,  and  was  henceforward
able  to  carry  his  plans  to  completion  without  encountering  any  serious  obstacle.
It  would  be  incorrect  to  say  that  the  Scythian  invasion  had  overthrown  the
empire  of  the  Sargonids :  it  had  swept  over  it  like  a  whirlwind,  but  had  not
torn  from  it  one  province,  nor,  indeed,  even  a  single  city.  The  nations,  already
exhausted  by  their  struggles  for  independence,  were  incapable  of  displaying
any  energy  when  the  barbarians  had  withdrawn,  and  continued  to  bow  beneath
the  Ninevite  yoke  as  much  from  familiarity  with  habitual  servitude  as  from
inability  to  shake  themselves  free.  Assur-bani-pal  had  died  about  the  year
G25  B.C.,  after  a  reign  of  forty-two  years,  and  his  son  Assur-etililani  had
assumed  the  double  crown  of  Assyria  and  Babylon  without  opposition.*
Nineveh  had  been  saved  from  pillage  by  the  strength  of  her  ramparts,  but

zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  p.  93,  et  seq.),  deeming  even  Cyaxares  himself  to  have  been  a  Scythian.  For  my
part,  I  see  no  reason  to  reject  the  tradition  of  tlie  fatal  banquet.  Without  referring  to  more  ancient
illustrations,  Noldeke  recalls  the  fact  that  in  a  period  of  only  ten  years,  from  1030  to  1040  a.d.,  the
princes  reigning  over  the  Iranian  lands  rid  themselves  by  similar  methods  of  the  Turcoman  bands
which  harassed  them  (^Aufsdtze  zur  Persischen  Geschichte,  p.  S,  note  2).  Such  a  proceeding  has  never
been  repugnant  to  Oriental  morality,  and  it  is  of  a  kind  to  fis  itself  in  the  popular  mind  :  far  from
wishing  to  suppress  it,  I  should  be  inclined  to  see  in  it  the  nucleus  of  the  whole  tradition.

'  The  legend  is  recounted  in  a  slightly  different  manner  by  tlie  authors  who  have  drawn  upon
Ctesias  of  Cnidus  (Fragm.  20,  27,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Ctesias  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  4-45),  sucli  as
Diodorus  Siculus  (ii.  34),  Nicolas  of  Damascus  (Fragm.  12,  in  MClleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,
vol.  iii.  pp.  364,  365),  and  the  anonymous  author  of  tlie  treatise  De  Claris  mulieribus,  §  2.

■  Herodotds,  IV.  i.-iv.

'  Hekodotus,  I.  Isxiii.,  Ixxiv.,  speaks  of  these  Scythians  as  having  lived  at  first  on  good  terms
with  Cyaxares  (of.  infra,  p.  525).

'  The  date  of  Assur-bani-pal's  death  is  not  furnished  by  any  Assyrian  monument,  but  is  inferred
from  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy,  where  Saosduchin  or  Shamash-shumukln  and  Chinaladan  or  Assur-bani-pal
eacli  reigns  forty-two  years,  from  668  or  667  to  626  or  625  B.C.  The  order  of  succession  of  the  last
Assyrian  kings  was  for  a  long  time  doubtful,  and  Sin-shar-ishkuu  was  placed  before  Assur-etililani
(TiEhE,  Bab.-ass .  GescA.,  pp.  405, 406;  Hommel,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  742,  743);  the  inverse  order
(Delitzsch  and  MiJKDTER,  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  233 ;  Wincklek,  Untersuch.  zur  Alt.  Gesch.,
pp.  60-63,  and  Gesch.  Bab.  und  Ass.,  pp.  290,  291 ;  Hommel,  Gesch.  des  Alien  Morgenlandes,  pp.  150, 151  ;
Messehsohmidt,  Die  Inschrifl  der  Stele  Nabuna'id's,  p.  12,  note  1)  seems  to  be  now  conclusively  proved .
The  documents  which  seemed  at  one  time  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  last  king  of  Assyria  named  Esar-
haddon,  identical  with  the  Saracos  of  classical  writers,  really  belong  to  Esarhaddon,  the  father  of
Assur-bani-pal  (cf.  supra,  p.  354,  note  1).  [Another  king,  Siu-sum-lisir,  is  mentioned  in  a  contract
dated  at  Nippur  in  his  accession  year.   He  may  have  been  the  immediate  predecessor  of  Sarakos. — Ed.]

2  I


482  TEE  MEDES  AXD    THE   SECOND    CHALD^AK  EMPIRE.

the  other  fortresses,  Assur,   Calah,  and  Dur-Sharrukin,  had  been   destroyed

during  the  late  troubles;  the  enemy,  whether  Medes  or  Scythians,  had  taken

them  by  storm  or  reduced  them  by  famine,  and  they  were  now  mere  heaps  of

ruin,  deserted  save  for  a  few  wretched  remnants  of  their  population.^     Aasur-

etililaui  made  some  feeble  attempts  to  restore  to  them  a  semblance  of  their

ancient  splendour.     He  erected  at  Calah,  on  the  site  of  the  palaces  which  had

been  destroyed  by  fire,  a  kind  of  castle  rudely  built,  and  still  more  rudely

decorated,  the  rooms  of  which  were  small  and  low,  and  the  walls  of  sun-dried

brick  were  panelled  only  to  the  height  of  about  a  yard  with  slabs  of  limestone

roughly  squared,  and  without  sculpture  or  inscription  :  the  upper  part  of  the

walls  was  covered  with  a  coating  of  uneven  plaster.^     We  do  not  know  how

long    the    inglorious    reign    of    Assur-etililani   lasted,    nor   whether   he   was

assassinated   or  died   a   natural   death.      His   brother,  Sin-shar-ishkun,^  who

succeeded  him  about  620  b.c.,^  at  first  exercised  authority,  as  he  had  done,

over    Babylon    as   well   as    Nineveh,"   and    laboured,    like    his   predecessor,

'  Layard  has  ascertained  that  the  palace  of  EsarhadJon  at  Calah  was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  that
of  Asaur-etililani  built  on  a  higher  level  (Nineceh  and  Bahijlon,  p.  558).  Both  Kawlinsons  (Tfte  Five
Great  MonarcMes,  2nJ  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  228)  attribute  its  destruction  to  the  Scythians,  and  this  hypo-
thesis has  been  pretty  commonly  accepted  since  their  time ;  nothing,  however,  proves  that  the  de-
struction may  not  be  referred  to  the  first  invasion  of  Cyaxares,  a  theory  of  which  G.  Eawlinson
himself  admits  the  possibility  in  his  JTerodo/iw,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  398.

-  This  palace  is  at  present  only  known  to  us  from  the  researches  and  descriptions  of  L.ward,
Nineveh  and  its  Bemaine,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  39 ;  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  558.

'  The  name  of  this  king  was  discovered  by  G.  Smith  on  the  fragments  of  a  cylinder  brought  from
Kouyunjik  (Asfyrian  Discoveries,  pp.  103,  382-384),  where  he  read  it  as  Bel-zakir-iskun.  As  the  first
characters  were  doubtful,  so  that  Sohrader  thought  it  prudent  to  transcribe  the  name  as  X-shum-
ishkun  (_Zur  Eritik  der  Chrono!ogischen  Angahen  des  Alexander  Pohjhistor  und  des  Abydemis,  pp.
28-30,  33-41 ;  Die  Keilins.  und  das  Alte  Testament,  2nd  edit.,  p.  360),  which  was  reduced  to  X-?-iskun
by  Winckler  {Einige  neuer  Inschriften/ragmenie  des  letzteii  Assyrischen  Eiinigs,  in  the  Eevue  d'Assyri-
ologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  tJG,  07),  while  Tiele  (Bab.-assyr.  Gesch.,  pp.  405,  400,  412-488)  kept  the  form  Bel-
zakir-ishkun,  and  Hommel  (fiesch.  Bab.  und  Assyr.,  p.  742)  proposed  Belshumishkun  in  default  of
anything  better.  The  real  reading  is  Sin-shar-ishkun,  and  the  similarity  of  this  name  with  that  of
Saracos,  the  last  king  of  Assyria  according  to  Greek  tradition,  strikes  one  immediately.  The
relationship  of  this  king  to  Assur-etililani  was  pointed  out  by  Father  Scheil  (Sin-shar-ishlntn,  fits
dAshshurbanipal,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fUr  Assyriologie,  vol.  xi.  pp.  47-49)  from  the  fragment  of  a  tablet
on  which  Sin-shar-ishkun  is  declared  to  be  the  son  of  Assur-bani-pal,  king  of  Assyria.

*  A  contract  discovered  at  Nipur  by  HUpreclit  {Keilinschriftliche  Fund  in  Niffer,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,
vol.  iv.  pp.  166-169)  is  dated  in  the  fourth  year  of  Assur-etililani.  On  the  other  hand,  a  contract
from  Uruk  published  by  King  (Sinsharishhiiu  und  his  Bute  in  Babylonia,  in  the  Zeitschri/tfilr  Assyri-
ologie, vol.  ix.  pp.  39G-400)  is  dated  in  the  seventh  year  of  Sin-shar-ishkun.  We  have,  therefore,
eleven  years  attributed  with  certainty,  out  of  the  seventeen  or  eighteen  which  separate  the  death  of
Assur-banipal  in  626  or  625  e.g.  from  the  fall  of  Nineveh  in  608.  Since,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  un-
likely that  a  contract  of  Urnk  should  have  been  dated  in  the  reign  of  a  king  of  Assyria  after  the
revolt  of  Nabopolassar,  which  occurred  in  611  or  610  at  the  latest,  we  cannot  push  the  accession  of
Sin-shar-ishkun  further  back  than  620  or  619  B.C.

'  This  may  be  deduced  from  a  passage  of  Abydeuus  {Fragm.  7,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragni.  Hist.
Grsec.,  vol.  iv.  p.  282),  where  Saracos  or  Sin-shar-ishkun  sends  Bussalossoros  (that  is,  Nabopolassar)
to  defend  Chaldsea  against  tlie  invasion  of  the  peoples  of  the  sea  ;  so  according  to  Abydeuus,  or  rather
Berosus,  from  whom  Abydenus  indirectly  obtained  his  information,  Saracos  was  King  of  Babylon  as
well  as  of  Nineveh  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign.  The  contract  dated  in  the  year  VII.,  quoted  in  the
preceding  note,  brings  material  proof  of  this  fact,  since  it  comes  from  Uruk,  and  its  testimony  is  con-
firmed by  that  of  two  other  tablets,  dated  in  the  king's  second  year,  which  come  from  Sippara,  one  of
which  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  (Evetts,  Inscriptions  of  the  Beigns  of  Evil-Merodaclt,
Nerigliisar,  and  Laborosoarchod.  pp.  90,  91),  and  the  other  in  the  museum  at  Berlin.


LAST  KINGS  OF  NINEVEH  AND   TEE   REVOLT  OF  NABOPOLASSAB.     483

to  repair  the  edifices  which  had  suffered  by  the  invasion,  making  war  on
his  neighbours,  perhaps  even  on  the  Medes,  without  incurring  serious
losses.^  The  Chaldaeans,  however,  merely  yielded  him  obedience  from  force
of  habit,  and  the  moment  was  not  far  distant  when  they  would  endeavour
to  throw  off  his  yoke.  Babylon  was  at  that  time  under  the  rule  of  a  certain
Nabu-bal-uzur,  known  to  us  as  Nabopolassar,  a  Kaldu  of  ancient  lineage,  raised
possibly  by  Assur-bani-pal  to  the  dignity  of  governor,  but  who,  in  any  case,
had  assumed  the  title  of  king  on  the  accession  of  Assur-etililani.'-  His  was
but  a  local  sovereignty,  restricted  probably  to  the  city  and  its  environs ;  and
for  twelve  or  thirteen  years  he  had  rested  content  with  this  secondary  position,
when  an  unforeseen  incident  presented  him  with  the  opportunity  of  rising  to
the  first  rank.^  Tradition  asserted  that  an  immense  army  suddenly  landed
at  the  mouths  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris;  probably  under  this  story  is
concealed  the  memory  of  one  of  those  revolts  of  the  Bit-Yakin  and  the  tribes
dwelling  on  the  shores  of  the  Nar-Marratum,  such  as  had  often  produced
consternation  in  the  minds  of  the  Sargonid  kings.*  Sin-shar-ishkun,  distracted
doubtless  by  other  anxieties,  acted  as  his  ancestors  had  done  in  similar
circumstances,  and  enjoined  on  his  vassal  to  march  against  the  aggressors  and
drive  them  into  the  sea ;  but  Nabopolassar,  instead  of  obeying  his  suzerain,
joined  forces  with  the  rebels,  and  declared  his  independence.  Assur-etililani
and  his  younger  brother  had  possibly  neglected  to  take  the  hands  of  Bel,  and
were  therefore  looked  upon  as  illegitimate  sovereigns.  The  annalists  of  later
times  erased  their  names  from  the  Royal  Canon,  and  placed  Nabopolassar
immediately  after  Assur-bani-pal,  whom  they  called  Kandalanu.  But  however
feeble  Assyria  had  become,  tlie  cities  on  tiie  Lower  Euphrates  feared  her  still,

'  This  seems  to  follow  from  the  fragments  published  by  Winckler  (Einige  neuer  Inschriflenfrag-
meiite  des  letzen  Asmjrischen  Konigs,  in  the  Revue  d'Assyriologi'e,  vol.  ii.  p.  67).

-  The  Canon  of  Ptolemy  makes  Nabopolassar  the  direct  successor  of  Chiualadan,  and  his  testimony
is  justified  by  the  series  of  Babylonian  contracts  which  exist  in  fairly  regular  succession  from  the
second  to  the  twenty-first  years  of  Nabopolassar.  The  account  given  by  Berosus  makes  him  a
general  of  Saracos,  but  the  contradiction  which  this  ofters  to  the  testimony  of  the  Canon  can  be  ex-
plained if  he  is  considered  as  a  vassal-king ;  the  kings  of  Egypt  and  of  Media  were  likewise  only
satraps,  according  to  Babylonian  tradition  (BEROsrs,  Fragm.  12, 14,  in  MtLLEK-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.
Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  505,  506).

^  Fixing  the  date  of  the  fall  of  Nineveh  in  60S  or  607,  and  keeping  in  view  the  fact,  that  the
contract  dated  in  the  j'ear  VII.,  mentioned  supra,  p.  4S2,  notes  4,  5,  comes  from  Uruk,  it  appears
difficult  to  place  the  invasion  of  the  barbarians  more  than  three  or  four  years  before  the  final  cata-
strophe, viz.  in  012  or  611  B.C.

*  See  the  account  of  the  revolts  and  wars  occasioned  by  these  invasions,  supra,  pp.  222-225
231,  232,  254-257,  274-276,205,  291),  299-304,  349,  350,  35S,  394,  398,  404,  412,  416,  434,  438,  439.'
Formerly  tliese  barbarians  were  identified  with  the  remains  of  the  Scythian  hordes  (Brandis,  Rerum
Assyriacarwu  Tempora  Emenilaia,  p.  31),  and  this  hypothesis  has  been  recently  revived  by  Prashek
{Medien  und  das  Haus  des  Eyaxares,  p.  645).  C4.  Eawlinson  long  ago  recognised  that  the  reference
must  be  to  the  Chaldfeans,  wbo  were  perliaps  joined  by  the  Susians  (^Herodotus,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.
pp.  399-415,  and  the  Four  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  p.  44),  and  this  opinion  has  been
rightly  accepted  by  Unger  (Kijaxares  und  Astyages,  p.  39,  note  2),  by  Tiele  {Bah.-assijr.  Gesch.,  p.  421),
and  by  Kost  {Unlersunh.  zur  Allorient.  Gesch.,  p.  94),  while  Hommel  {Gesch.  Bab.  und  Assi/r.,  p.  743)
tliiuks  an  invasion  of  Elamites  alone  is  meant.


484  THE  MEDES   AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

and  refused  to  ally  themselves  with  the  pretender.  Nabopolassar  might
perhaps  have  succumbed,  as  so  many  before  him  had  done,  had  he  been  forced
to  rely  entirely  on  his  own  resources,  and  he  might  have  shared  the  sad  fate  of
Merodach-baludan  or  of  Shamash-shumukin ;  but  Marduk,  wlio  never  failed  to
show  favour  to  his  faithful  devotees,  "  raised  up  help  for  him  and  secured  hiui
an  ally."  ^  The  eyes  of  all  who  were  oppressed  by  tlie  cruel  yoke  of  Nineveh
were  now  turned  on  Cyaxares,  and  from  the  time  that  he  had  dispersed  the
Scythian  hordes  it  was  to  him  that  they  looked  for  salvation.  Nabopolassar
besought  his  assistance,  which  the  Median  king  graciously  promised  ;'•*  it  is
even  affirmed  that  a  marriage  concluded  between  one  of  his  daughters,  Amytis,
and  Nebuchadrezzar,  the  heir  to  the  throne  of  Babylon,  cemented  the
alliance.'    The  western  provinces  of  the  empire  did  not  permit  themselves  to

'  Cylinder  of  Nahonidos,  col.  ii.  11.  1-12.  This  cylinder,  the  only  original  document  in  which
allusion  is  made  to  the  destruction  of  Xineveh,  was  discovered,  published,  and  translated  into  French
by  Father  Scbeil,  Inter,  de  Nabonide,iathe  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  15-29,  and  pis.  i.-iii. ;  it
was  at  once  republished  and  retranslated  into  German  by  L.  Messerschmidt,  Die  Inschrifl  der  Stele
Nabujta'id's,  Konigs  von  Balnjlon,  in  the  MiUeilungen  der  Vorderaeiatischen  Gcselhchaft,  1896,  No.  1.
Father  Scheil  first  read  as  Iriba-tukte  the  characters  at  the  end  of  Hue  13,  col.  ii.,  and  saw  in  them
the  name  of  the  king  of  the  Manda  who  conducted  tlie  war  (op.  oil.,  pp.  16,  24),  while  Oppert
thought  that  the  passage  relating  tn  Nineveh  referred,  not  to  the  final  destruction  of  that  city,  but
to  the  abortive  attempt  of  Phraortes  (Sur  Vinicr.  de  Nahunide,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  deg
Imariptions,  1896,  vol.  xsiv.  pp.  129,  130);  he  thought  also  that  the  words  Iriba-tukte  represented
the  name  of  the  Median  king  who  attacked  Nineveh,  but  explained  it  as  Arbatyktes  or  Phraortes.
Winckler  first  showed  that  these  words  did  not  represent  a  proper  name  (Berlin  Phil.  Wochenschri/t,
1895,  No.  1435),  and  his  opinion  is  now  generally  adopted ;  cf.,  however,  with  slight  divergences,
Lehmann,  IribatuHe,  in  the  Zeitsckrift  fiir  Aasyriologie,  vol.  xi.  pp.  339-344.

-  The  text  of  Nabonidos  speaks  here  of  the  Umman-Manda  and  their  king,  whom  it  does  not
name  (col.  ii.  II.  3,  4,  14),  and  it  has  been  agreed  to  recognise  Cyaxares  in  this  sovereign  (Messer-
schmidt, op.  cit.,  pp.  2-14 ;  RosT,  Untersuch.  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  96,  97).  On  the  other  hand,  the
name  of  UmmSn-Manda  certainly  designates  in  the  Assyrian  texts  the  wandering  Iranian  tribes  to
whom  the  Greeks  gave  the  name  of  Sakje  or  Scythians  (Delattre,  Le  Peuple  et  I'Empire  dee  Medes,
p.  190;  Winckler,  XJntereuch.  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  112,  124,  125);  the  result,  in  the  opinions  of
several  Assyriologists  of  the  present  day,  is  that  neither  Astyages  nor  Cyaxares  were  Medes  in  the
sense  in  which  we  have  liitherto  accepted  them  as  such  on  the  evidence  of  Herodotus,  but  that  they
were  Scythians,  the  Scythians  of  the  great  invasion.  This  conclusion  does  not  seem  to  me  at  present
justified.  The  Babylonians,  who  up  till  then  had  not  had  any  direct  intercourse  either  with  the
Madai  or  the  Umman-Manda,  did  as  the  Egyptians  had  done  whether  in  Saite  or  Ptolemaic  times,
continuing  to  designate  as  Khari,  Kafiti,  Lotanu,  and  Khati  the  nations  subject  to  the  Persians
or  Macedonians ;  they  applied  a  traditional  name  of  olden  days  to  present  circumstances,  and  I  see,
at  present,  no  decisive  reason  to  change,  on  the  mere  authority  of  this  one  word,  all  that  the  classical
writers  have  handed  down  concerning  the  history  of  the  epoch  according  to  the  tradition  cui'rent  in
their  days.

'  The  name  of  the  princess  is  written  Amuhia  (Ecsebics,  Armenian  Translation,  ed.  Mai,  p.  19),
Amyitis  (Stxcellcs,  p.  396,  note  1,  probably  from  an  extract  from  Berosus;  cf.  Mullek-Dldot,
Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  505).  The  classical  sourcei,  the  ouly  ones  which  mention  her,  make
her  the  daughter  of  Astyages,  and  this  has  given  rise  to  various  hypotheses.  According  to  some,
the  notice  of  this  princess  has  no  historical  value  (Winckler,  op.  cit,,  pp.  62,  63,  and  Altor.  Forsch.,
vol.  i.  pp.  178, 179;  Billereeck  and  Jeremias,  Der  Untergang  Nineveh's,  in  tbe  Beitriige  zur  Assyrio-
logie,  vol.  iii.  p.  113,  note  2 ;  Messerschmidt,  op.  cit.,  p.  11 ;  Kosx,  XJntereuch.  zur  Alt.  Gesch.,  p.  100).
According  to  others,  the  Astyages  mentioned  as  her  father  is  not  Cyaxares  the  Mede,  but  a  Scythian
prince  who  came  to  the  succour  of  Nabopolassar  (Eost,  op.  dt.^  pp.  99,  100),  perhaps  a  predecessor  of
Cyaxares  on  the  Median  throne,  and  in  this  case  Phraortes  himself  under  another  uame  (Ungek,
Kyaxares  U7id  Astyages,  pp.  39-41 ;  Prashek,  Medien  und  das  Haus  des  Eyaxares,  pp.  53-58).  The
most  prndent  course  is  still  to  admit,  as  Noldeke  has  done  (Aufsiitze  zur  Persischen  Geschichte,  p.  9)>
that  Abydeuus,  or  one  of  the  compilers  of  extracts  to  whom  we  owe  the  information,  has  substituted


THE  FALL   AND   DESTHUCTION   OF  NINEVEH.  485

be  drawn  into  the  movement,  and  Judah,  for  example,  remained  faithful  to  its
suzerain  till  the  last  moment,^  but  Sin-shar-ishkun  received  no  help  from  them,
and  was  obliged  to  fight  his  last  battles  single-handed.  He  shut  himself  up
in  Nineveh,  and  held  out  as  long  as  he  could ;  but  when  all  his  resources  were
exhausted — ammunitions  of  war,  men  and  food  supplies — he  met  his  fate  as  a
king,  and  burnt  himself  alive  in  his  palace  with  his  children  and  his  wives,
rather  than  fall  alive  into  the  hands  of  his  conquerors  (608  B.c.).^  The
Babylonians  would  take  no  part  in  pillaging  the  temples,  out  of  respect  for
the  gods,  who  were  practically  identical  with  their  own,  but  the  Medes  felt
no  such  scruples.  "Their  king,  the  intrepid  one,  entirely  destroyed  the
sanctuaries  of  the  gods  of  Assur,  and  the  cities  of  Accad  which  had  shown
themselves  hostile  to  the  lord  of  Accad,  and  had  not  rendered  him  assistance.
He  destroyed  their  holy  places,  and  left  not  one  remaining;  he  devastated  their
cities,  and  laid  them  waste  as  it  were  with  a  hurricane."  ^  Nineveh  laid  low,
Assyria  no  longer  existed.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  she  was  named  only
among  the  legends  of  mythical  days :  two  centuries  later,  her  very  site  was
forgotten,  and  a  Greek  army  passed  almost  under  the  shadow  of  her  dismantled
towers,  without  a  suspicion  that  there  lay  before  it  all  that  remained  of  the
city  where  Semiramis  had  reigned  in  her  glory."*  It  is  true  that  Egypt,
Chaldsea,  and  the  other  military  nations  of  the  East,  had  never,  in  their  hours
of  prosperity,  shown  the  slightest  consideration  for  their  vanquished  foes ;  the

the  name  of  the  last  king  of  Jledia  for  that  of  his  predecessor,  either  by  mistake,  or  by  reason  of
some  chronological  combinations.  Amyitis,  transported  into  the  harem  of  tlie  Chaldaean  monarch,
served,  like  all  princesses  married  out  of  their  own  countries,  as  a  pledge  for  the  faithful  observance
by  her  relatives  of  the  treaty  which  had  been  concluded.

'  It  was  to  oppose  the  march  of  Necho  against  the  King  of  Assyria  that  Josiah  fought  the  battle
of  Megiddo  (2  Kings  sxiii.  29,  30 ;  cf  2  Chron.  xxsv.  20-24,  where  the  mention  of  the  King  of
Assyria  is  suppressed).

^  Cf  what  is  said  about  the  death  of  Shamash-ahumukin,  supra,  pp.  422,  423 ;  we  shall  see  later
on  that  Croesus  ended  his  reign  in  like  fashion.  I  have  followed  the  account  of  Abydenus  {Fragm.  7,
in  MuLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grriec,  vol.  iv.  pp.  282,  283)  ;  for  the  criticisms  passed  upon  it  I  con-
fine myself  to  referring  to  the  works  of  Winckler  and  Kost  cited  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  notes,
the  principal  ideas  of  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  point  out  in  subsequent  pages.

^  Cylinder  of  Nabonidos,  col.  ii.  11.  2-41 ;  cf.  Scheil,  Inscr.  de  Nahoiiide,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  xviii.  p.  24,  and  Messersohmidt,  Die  huchrift  der  Stele  Nabuna'id's,  pp.  25,  26.  Winckler  had
reopened  the  old  controversy  as  to  the  part  which  must  be  assigned  to  each  of  the  allied  powers  in  the
ruin  of  Nineveli,  and  concluded,  from  an  analysis  of  the  texts  known  before  Father  Scheil's  discovery,
that  the  Medes  alone  took  Nineveh  without  the  help  of  the  Babylouiaus  (Untersuch.  zur  Altorient.
Gcsch.,  pp.  ti3-68,  and  Altor.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  170-182) ;  since  then  his  view  has  been  confirmed
(Altur.Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  490,  491),  and  is  shared  by  Lehmann  (Schamaschschumukin,  vol.  ii.  p.  185),
by  Billerbeck  and  Jeremias  (Der  Untergang  Nineveh's,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.
112,  113),  by  Kost  (JJntersuch.  zur  Alt.  Gesch.,  pp.  92-100).  Messersohmidt  h.is  given,  I  believe,  the
true  solution  of  the  problem  when  he  says  that  the  Babylonians  and  Medes  together  destroyed  the
empire,  but  the  Medes  alone  destroyed  the  city  of  Nineveh  (Die  Inschrift  der  Stele  Nabuna'id's,  p.  14).

■*  This  is  what  the  Ten  Tlwusand  did  when  they  passed  before  Larissa  and  Mespila  (Xenophon,
Anabasis,  III.  iv.  §  1).  The  name  remained  famous,  and  later  on  the  town  which  bore  it  attained  a
relative  importance,  as  is  shown  by  the  texts  brought  together  by  Lincke,  in  his  two  memoirs,  Con-
tinuance of  the  Names  of  Assyria  and  Nineveh  after  607-606  B.C.  (Memoirs  of  the  IX.  Oriental  Congress
at  London  in  1891),  and  Assyria  und  Nineveh  in  Geschichte  und  Sage  der  MittehneervSllcer  (nach  607-
606),  1894.


486  TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CE ALB  MAN  EMPIRE.

Theban  Pharaohs  had  mercilessly  crushed  Africa  and  Asia  beneath  their  feet,
and  had  led  into  slavery  the  entire  population  of  the  countries  they  had
subdued.     But  tlie  Egyptians  and  Chakheans  had,  at  least,  accomplished  a
work  of  civilisation  whose  splendour  redeemed  the  brutalities  of  their  acts  of
reprisal.     It  was  from  Egypt  and  Chaldrea  that  the  knowledge  and  the  arts
of  antiquity — astronomy,  medicine,  geometry,  physical  and  natural  sciences —
spread  to  the  ancestors  of  the  classic  races;  and  though  Chaldsea  yields  up
to  us   unwillingly,  with   niggard  hand,  the  monuments  of  her  most  ancient
kings,   the  temples  and  tombs  of  Esxypt   still    exist   to  prove   what  signal
advances  the  earliest  civilised  races  made  in  the  arts  of  the  sculptor  and
the  architect.      But  on  turning  to  Assyria,  if,  after  patiently  studying  the
successive  centuries  during  which  she  held  supreme  sway  over  the  Eastern
world,   we   look   for   other  results  besides  her  conquests,  we  shall  find  she
possessed   nothing   that   was   not   borrowed   from    extraneous    sources.      She
received  all  her  inspirations  from  Chaldaea — her  civilisation,  her  manners,  the
implements   of  her  industries  and  of  agriculture,  besides  her  scientific  and
religious  literature  :  one  thing  alone  is  of  native  growth,  the  military  tactics  of
her  generals  and  the  excellence  of  her  soldiery.     From  the  day  when  Assyria
first  realised  her  own  strength,  she  lived  only  lor  war  and  rapine ;  and  as  soon
as  the  exhaustion  of  her  population  rendered  success  on  the  field  of  battle  an
impossibility,  the  reason  for  her  very  existence  vanished,  and  she  passed  away.
Two  great  kingdoms  rose  simultaneously  from  her  ruins.    Cyaxares  claimed
Assyria  proper  and  its  dependencies  on  the  Upper  Tigris,  but  he  specially
reserved  for  himself  the  yet  unconquered  lands  on  the  northern  and  eastern
frontiers,  whose  inhabitants  had  only  recently  taken  part  in  the  political  life
of  the  times.     Nabopolassar  retained  the  suzerainty  over  the  lowlands  of  Elam,
the  districts  of  Mesopotamia  lying  along  the  Euphrates,  Syria,  Palestine,  and
most  of  the  countries  which  had  hitherto  played  a  part  in  history ;  ^  he  claimed
to  exert  his  supremacy  beyond  the  Isthmus,  and  the  Chaldaean  government
looked  upon  the  Egyptian  kings  as  its  feudatories  because  for  some  few  years
they  had  owned  the  suzerainty  of  Nineveh.^     The  Pharaoh,  however,  did  not
long  tolerate  this  pretension,  and  far  from  looking  forward  to  bend  the  knee

'  There  was  no  actual  dit ision  of  the  empire,  as  has  been  often  asserted,  but  each  of  the  allies
kept  the  portion  which  fell  into  his  power  at  the  moment  of  their  joint  effort.  The  two  new  states
gradually  increased  in  power  by  successive  conquests,  each  annexing  by  degrees  tlie  ancient
provinces  of  Assyria  nearest  to  its  own  frontier.

-  This  seems  to  be  implied  by  the  terms  in  which  Berosus  speaks  of  Necho :  he  considers  him  as
a  rebel  satrap  over  the  proviuces  of  Egypt,  Coele-Syria,  and  Phosaicia,  and  enumerates  Egypt  in  con-
junction with  Syria,  Phcenicia,  and  Arabia  among  the  dependencies  of  Nabopolassar  and  Nebuchad-
rezzar {Fragiii.  14,  ill  MtLLER-DlDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grasc,  vol.  ii.  p.  506;.  Just  as  the  Egyptian
state  documents  never  mentioned  the  Lotanu  or  the  Kliaru  without  eutitliug  them  Children  of
Rebellion,  so  the  Chaldsean  government,  the  heir  of  Assyria,  could  only  look  upon  the  kings  of  Syria,
-\rabia,  and  Egypt  as  rebelUous  vassals.


488  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.

before  a  Chaldteau  monarcli,  he  believed  himself  strong  enough  to  reassert
his  ancestral  claims  to  the  possession  of  Asia.  Egypt  had  experienced  many
changes  since  the  day  when  Tanuatamanu,  returning  to  Ethiopia,  had
abandoned  her  to  the  ambition  of  the  petty  dynasties  of  the  Delta.^  One  of
the  romances  current  among  the  people  of  Sais  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  related
that  at  that  time  the  whole  land  was  divided  between  twelve  princes.  They
lived  peaceably  side  by  side  in  friendly  relations  with  each  other,  until  an
oracle  predicted  that  the  whole  valley  would  finally  belong  to  that  prince
among  them  who  should  j^our  a  libation  to  Phtah  into  a  brazen  cup,  and
thenceforward  they  jealously  watched  each  other  each  time  they  assembled  to
officiate  in  the  temple  at  Memphis.  One  day,  when  they  had  met  together  in
state,  and  the  high  priest  presented  to  them  the  golden  cups  they  were  wont
to  use,  he  found  he  had  mistaken  their  number,  and  had  only  prepared  eleven.
Psammetichus  was  therefore  left  without  one,  and  in  order  not  to  disarrange
the  ceremonial  he  took  off  his  brazen  helmet  and  used  it  to  make  his  libation ;
when  the  rest  perceived  this,  the  words  of  the  oracle  came  to  their  remem-
brance, and  they  exiled  the  imprudent  prince  to  the  marshes  along  the  sea-
coast,  and  forbade  him  ever  to  quit  them.  He  secretly  consulted  the  oracle  of
Isis  of  Buto  to  know  what  he  might  expect  from  the  gods,  and  she  replied
that  the  means  of  revenge  would  reach  him  from  the  sea,  on  the  day  when
brazen  soldiers  should  issue  from  its  waters.  He  thought  at  first  that  the
priests  were  mocking  him,  but  shortly  afterwards  Ionian  and  Carian  pirates,
clad  in  their  coats  of  mail,  landed  not  far  from  his  abode.  The  messenger  who
brought  tidings  of  their  advent  had  never  before  seen  a  soldier  fully  armed,
and  rejiorted  that  brazen  men  had  issued  from  the  waves  and  were  pillaging
the  country.  Psammetichus,  realising  at  once  that  the  prediction  was  being
fulfilled,  ran  to  meet  the  strangers,  enrolled  them  in  his  service,  and  with  their
aid  overthi-ew  successively  his  eleven  rivals.^  A  brazen  helmet  and  an  oracle
had  dethroned  him ;  another  oracle  and  brazen  men  had  replaced  him  on  his

'  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  399,  400.

^  Herodotus,  II.  exlvii.-clii.  The  account  given  by  Diodorus  of  these  events  (i.  66)  is  in  general
derived  from  that  of  Herodotus,  with  additional  details  borrowed  directly  or  indirectly  from  some
historian  of  the  same  epoch,  perhaps  Hellanicus  of  Mityleue  :  the  reason  of  the  persecution  endured
by  Psammetichus  is,  accordiug  to  him,  not  the  fear  of  seeing  tlie  prediction  fulfilled,  but  jealousy  of
the  wealth  the  Saite  prince  had  acquircil  by  his  commerce  with  the  Greeks.  I  have  separated  the
narrative  of  Herodotus  from  his  account  of  the  Labyrinth  wliieh  did  not  originally  belong  to  it,  but
was  connected  with  a  dift'erent  cycle  of  legends.  The  original  romance  was  part  of  the  cycle  which
grew  up  around  the  oracle  of  Buto,  so  celebrated  in  Egypt  at  the  Persian  epoch,  several  other  frag-
ments of  which  are  preserved  in  Herodotus  (II.  cxi..  Story  of  Pheron ;  II.  cxxxiii.,  Story  of  Mycerinus ;
III.  Ixiv.,  Story  of  Camhynes) ;  it  had  been  mixed  up  with  one  of  the  versions  of  the  stories  relating  to
the  Labyrinth,  probably  by  some  dragoman  of  the  Fayyum.  The  number  twelve  does  not  correspond
with  the  information  furnished  by  the  Assyrian  texts,  which  enumerate  more  than  twenty  Egyptian
princes  (cf.  stipra,  pp.  378,  379);  it  is  perhaps  of  Greek  origio,  like  the  twelve  great  gods  which  the
informants  of  Herodotus  tried  to  make  out  in  Egypt  (II.  xliii.),and  was  introduced  into  the  Egyptian
version  by  a  Greek  interpreter  (Mali.et,  Les  Premiers  ^tablissemenis  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  p.  37,  note  2).


PSAMMETICHUS  I.  AND  THE  IONIAN  AND  CABIAN  MERCENARIES.      489


throne.     A  shorter  version  of  these  events  made  no  mention  of  the  twelve
kings,  but  related  instead  that  a  certain  Pharaoh  named  Tementhes  had  been
warned  by  the  oracle  of  Amon  to  beware  of  cocks.     Now  Psammetichus  had  as
a  companion  in  exile  a  Carian  named  Pigres,  and  in  conversing  with  him  one
day,  he  learned  by  chance  that  the  Cariaus  had  been  the  first  people  to  wear
crested  helmets ;  he  recalled  at  once  the  words  of  the  oracle,  and  hired  from
Asia  a  number  of  these  "  cocks,"  with  whose  assistance  he  revolted  and  over-
threw his  suzerain  in  battle  under  the  walls  of  Memphis,  close  to  the  temple
of  Isis.^     Such  is  the  legendary  account  of  the  Saite   renaissance;    its  true
history  is  not  yet  clearly  and  precisely  known.     Egypt  was  in  a  state  of  com-
plete disintegration  when
Psammetichus  at  length
revived     the    ambitious
projects   of    his   family,
but    the    dissolution    of
the    various    component
parts  had  not  everywhere
taken  place  in  the  same
manner.      In  the  north,
the  Delta  and  the  Nile
valley,  as  far  as  Siut,  were  in  the  power  of  a  military  aristocracy,  supported
by   irregular   native   troops   and    bands    of  mercenaries,   for   the    most   part
of  Libyan  extraction,  who  were  always  designated  by  the  generic  name  of
Mashauasha.     Most  of  these  nobles  were  in  possession  of  not  more  than  two  or
three  cities  apiece  :  they  had  barely  a  sufficient  number  of  supporters  to  main-
tain their  precarious  existence  iu  their  restricted  domains,  and  would  soon
have  succumbed  to  the  attacks  of  their  stronger  neighbours,  had  they  not  found
a  powerful  protector  to  assist  them.     They  had  ilnally  separated  themselves
into  two  groups,  divided  roughly  by  the  central  arm  of  the  Nile.     One  group
comprised  the  districts  that  might  be  designated  as  the  Asiatic  zone  of  the
country — Heliopolis,  Bubastis,  Mendes,  Tanis,  Busiris,  and  Sebennytos — and  it
recognised  as  chief  the  lord  of  one  or  other  of  those  wealthy  cities,  now  the
ruler  of  Bubastis,  now  of  Tanis,  and  lastly  Pakruru  of  Pisaptit.     The  second


*   ^"^X


i.


THREE    HOPLITES    IN    ACTION.'


•  PoLTaiNTjs,  Stratacfemata,  vii.  3 ;  very  probably  from  the  lost  work  of  Aristagoras  of  Miletus.
Gutschmid,  who  pointed  out  the  origin  of  tlie  story  {Kleiiie  Schrifteii,  vol.  i.  pp.  135-138,  177),
maintainerl  that  the  narrative  given  by  Aristagoras  represented  a  Thebau  version  of  the  romance  of
the  "  twelve  kings,"  relying  on  the  name  of  Amon  attributed  to  the  god  who  delivered  the  oracle.
Considering  the  period  we  have  reached,  I  should  prefer  to  see  in  it  a  variant  in  which  the  oracle
of  the  Libyan  Amon — Amou  of  the  Oasis — received  all  the  honour  of  the  prediction  whicli  others
claimed  for  the  rival  oracle  of  Buto.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  an  archaic  vase-painting  iu  the  collection  of  Salzmans,  La
N^cropole  de  Camiros,  pi.  53,  No.  1.


41)0  THE  MEDES  ASD    TEE   SECOND    CHALBJEAN  EMPIRE.

grouj)  centred  in  the  lords  of  Sais,  to  wliom  the  possession  of  Memphis  had
secured  a  preponderating  voice  in  the  counsels  of  the  state  for  more  than  a
century.'  The  fiefs  and  Icingdoms  of  Middle  Egypt  wavered  between  the  two
groups,  playing,  however,  a  merely  passive  part  in  affairs  :  abandoning  themselves
to  the  stream  of  events  rather  than  attempting  to  direct  it,  they  owed  allegiance
to  Sais  and  Tanis  alternately  as  each  prevailed  over  its  rival.  Ou  passing
thence  into  the  Thebaid  a  different  world  appeared  to  be  entered.  There  Amon
reigned,  ever  increasingly  supreme,  and  the  steady  advance  of  his  influence
had  transformed  his  whole  domain  into  a  regular  theocracy,  where  the
women  occupied  the  highest  position  and  could  alone  transmit  authority.  At
first,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  passed  on  to  their  husbands  and  their  children,'-
but  latterly  the  rapidity  with  which  the  valley  had  changed  masters  had
modified  this  law  of  succession  in  a  remarkable  way.  Each  time  the  jirinci-
pality  shifted  its  allegiance  from  one  king  to  another,  the  new  sovereign
naturally  hastened  to  install  beside  the  divine  female  worshii^per  a  man  devoted
to  his  interests,  who  should  administer  the  lief  to  the  best  advantage  of  the
suzerain.  It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  he  actually  imposed  this  minister  on
her  as  a  husband,  or  whether  the  time  came  when  she  was  obliged  to  submit  to
as  many  espousals  as  there  occurred  revolutions  in  the  destinies  of  Egypt.^
However  this  may  be,  we  know  that  from  the  first  half  of  the  seventh
century  B.C.  the  custom  arose  of  placing  beside  "  the  divine  worship^^er "  a
princess  of  the  dominant  family,  whom  she  adopted,  and  who  thus  became
her  heiress-designate.  Taharqa  had  in  this  way  associated  one  of  his  sisters,
Shapenuapit  II.,  with  the  queen  Amenertas  when  the  latter  had  lost  her  husband,
Pionkhi ;  and  Shapenuapit,  succeeding  her  adopted  mother,  had  reigned  over
Thebes  in  the  Ethiopian  interest  during  many  years.^  There  is  nothing  to
show  that  she  was  married,  and  perhaps  she  was  compensated  for  her  official
celibacy  by  being  authorised  to  live  the  free  life  of  an  ordinary  Pallacide  ;  ^  her

'  This  grouping,  whicli  might  already  have  been  suspected  from  the  manner  in  which  the'
Assyrian  and  Egyptian  monuments  of  the  period  show  us  the  feudal  princes  rallying  round  Necho  I.
and  Pakruru  (cf.  the  passages  relating  to  tliese  personages,  supra,  pp.  37S,  379).  is  indicated  by  the
details  iu  the  demotic  romance  published  by  Krall  (Eiii  neucr  Historischer  Roman  in  Demotischer
Schri/t,  1897),  where  the  foundation  of  the  story  is  the  state  of  Egypt  in  the  time  of  the  "twelve
kings"  (Maspeko,  Un  Xouvean  Conte  ^gt/ptien,  in  the  Journal  des  Sarants,  1897,  pp.  t)52-65i).

-  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  164,  et  seq.

'  They  would  have  been,  in  fact,  in  the  same  condition  as  the  Hova  queens  of  our  century,  who
married  the  ministers  who  reigned  in  their  names.

*  Cf.  Erman  (Z«  den  Lejjrain'sciien  Inschriften,  in  the  Zeiischri/t,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  28,  29),  after  an
inscription  given  in  Legrain  {Deux  Steles  irouv&s  a  Karnalc,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  sxxv.  pp.  16-19).
Cf.,  for  Shapenuapit  I.  and  Amenertas,  supra,  pp.  246,  247.

'  It  is  perhaps  these  last  female  descendants  of  the  high  priests  that  are  intended  iu  a  passage
where  Strabo  (XVII.  i.  §  46,  p.  817)  speaks  of  the  Pallacides  who  were  chosen  from  among  the  most
noble  families  of  the  city.  Diodorus  mentions  their  tombs,  quoting  from  Heoataeus  of  Abdera  (i.  47),
but  he  does  nut  appear  to  know  the  nature  of  their  life ;  but  the  name  of  Pallacides  which  he  applies
to  them  proves  that  their  manner  of  life  was  really  that  which  Strabo  describes.


THE  FINAL    WITHDRAWAL    OF    THE  ETHIOPIANS.


491


minister  Montumihait  directed  her  affairs  for  her  so  completely  that  the
Assyrian  conquerors  looked  upon  him  as  petty  king  of  Thebes.'  Tanuatamanu
conhrmed  liim  in  his  office  when  the  Assyrians  evacuated  the  Said,  and  the
few  )'ears  \vhich  had  elapsed  since  that  event  had  in  no  way  modified  the  regime
established  immediately  on  their  departure.

It  is  uncertain  how  long  Assur-bani-pal  in  the  north,  and  Tanuatamanu  in
the  south,  respectively  maintained  a  precarious  sove-
reignty over  the  portions  of  Egypt  nearest  to  their  own
capitals.  The  opening  of  the  reign  of  Psammetichus
seems  to  have  been  fraught  with  difficulties,  and  the
tradition  which  represents  him  as  proscribed  by  his
peers,  and  confined  to  the  marshes  of  the  sea-coast,  has
probably  a  certain  basis  of  truth.  Pakruru,  who  had
brought  all  the  western  part  of  the  Delta  under  his
own  influence,  and  who,  incessantly  oscillating  between
Assyria  and  Ethiopia,  had  yet  been  able  to  preserve  his
power  and  his  life,  had  certainly  not  of  his  own  free
will  renounced  the  hope  of  some  day  wearing  the
double  crown.  It  was  against  him  or  his  successor  that
Psammetichus  must  have  undertaken  his  first  wars,
and  it  was  perhaps  with  the  help  of  Assyrian  gover-
nors that  the  federal  coalition  drove  him  back  to  the
coast.  He  extricated  himself  from  this  untoward  situ-
ation by  the  help  of  Greek  and  Asiatic  mercenaries,
his  lonians  and  Carians.  Some  historians  stated  that
the  decisive  battle  was  fought  near  Memphis,  in  sight
of  the  temple  of  Isis ; '  others  affirmed  that  it  took
place  at  Momemphis,  that  several  of  the  princes
perished  in  the  conflict,  and  that  the  rest  escaped  into  Libya,  whence
they   never  returned ;  *    others,   again,   spoke   of  an  encounter   on  the  Nile,

'  Cf.  what  is  stated  concerning  this  personage,  supra,  pp.  378,  385,  386,  396.

'  Poltj:svs,  Strut.,  \ii.  3:  probably  after  Aristagoras  of  Miletus, 'as  w-is  stated  supra,  p.  489,
note  2.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  de  Biasing.  The  statue,  whose  feet  are  missing,
represents  either  Ameuertas  I.  or  Mutertas ;  it  was  never  completely  finished,  and  several  of  the  parts
have  never  received  their  final  polish.

•  Dioi)ORi:s  SiccLUS,  I.  60.  It  is  possible  that  tliis  version  is  only  a  transposition  of  the  events,
which  happened  a  century  later,  on  the  fall  of  Apiies,  which  were  narrated  by  Herodotus  (II.  clxiii.),
but  it  is  useless  to  suppose  with  Wiedemann  {Geschichle  JEgyptens  von  Psammetich  I.  his  auf  Alexander,
p.  121)  that  Momemphis  should  be  corrected  to  Memphis.  Diodorus,  or  rather  the  historian  whom
he  followed  in  tliis  matter,  having  located  the  site  of  tlie  battle  between  Apries  and  Amasis  (i.  (iS  ,  at
Marea,  was  free  to  place  at  Monumphis  the  battle  between  Psammetichus  and  the  eleven  kings,  the
locality  of  which  was  not  known  to  Herodotus.


STATUE  OP    A    THEE.\N'    QUEEN.^


492  TEE  MEDE8   AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

when  the  fleet  of  the  Saite  king  dispersed  that  of  his  rivals.'  It  is,  iu
fact,  probable  that  a  single  campaign  sufifieed  for  Psammetichus,  as  formerly
for  the  Ethiopian  pretenders,  to  get  the  upper  hand,  and  that  the  Egyptian
feudal  lords  submitted  after  one  or  two  defeats  at  most,^  hoping  that,  as  in
days  gone  by,  when  the  first  dasli  made  by  the  new  Pharaoh  was  over,
his  authority  would  decline,  and  their  own  would  regain  the  ascendency.
Events  showed  that  they  were  deceived.  Psammetichus,  better  served  by  his
Hellenes  than  Tafnakhti  or  Bocchoris  had  been  by  their  Libyans,  or  Pioakhi
and  Tanuatamauu  by  tlieir  Ethiopians,  soon  consolidated  his  rule  over  the
country  he  had  conquered.  From  660  or  659  B.C.  he  so  effectively  governed
Egypt  that  foreigners,  and  even  the  Assyrians  themselves,  commonly  accorded
him  the  title  of  king.  The  fall  of  the  Ninevite  rule  had  been  involved  in  that
of  the  feudal  lords,  but  it  was  generally  believed  that  Assur-bani-pal  would  leave
no  means  untried  to  recall  the  countries  of  the  Nile  to  their  obedience :  Psam-
metichus knew  this,  and  knew  also  that,  as  soon  as  they  were  no  longer  detained
by  wars  or  rebellions  elsewhere,  the  Assyrian  armies  would  reappear  in  Egypt.
He  therefore  entered  into  an  alliance  with  Gyges,^  and  subsequently,  perhaps,
with  Shamash-shumukin  also ;  then,  while  his  former  suzerain  was  waging  war
in  Elam  and  Chaldsea,  he  turned  southwards,  in  658  B.C.,  and  took  possession  of
the  Thebaid  without  encountering  any  opposition  from  the  Ethiopians,  as  his
ancestor  Tafnakhti  had  from  Pionkhi-Miamun.  Montumihait  negotiated  this
capitulation  of  Thebes,  as  he  had  already  negotiated  so  many  others ;  in  recom-
pense for  this  service,  he  was  confirmed  iu  his  office,  and  his  queen  retained
her  high  rank.*  A  century  or  two  earlier  Psammetichus  would  have  married
one  of  the  princesses  of  sacerdotal  lineage,  and  this  union  would  have  sufficed
to  legalise  his  position ;  °  perhaps  he  actually  associated  Shapenuapit  with
himself  by  a  show  of  marriage,  but  in  any  case  he  provided  her  with  an  adopted

'  Strabo,  XVII.  i.  §  18,  p.  SOI,  where  tliis  event  is  connected  with  the  founding  of  Naucratis ;  the
name  of  Inaros,  which  is  mixed  up  with  this  legend,  is  evidently  a  reminiscence  of  the  Egyptian  wars
of  Artaxerxes  I.  (Mallet,  Les  Premiers  PJtahlissements  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  pp.  40,  47).

'  This  is  wliat  happened  in  the  times  of  Pionkhi  Mariamonu,  Sabaco,  and  Tauuatamanu ;  cf
supra,  pp.  16G-181,  244-247,  390-400).

'  For  the  relations  between  Gyges  and  Psammetichus,  cf.  what  was  stated  supra,  pp.  424,  425,
428.  Legrain's  inscription  (J)eux  Steles  trouvges  a  Karnak  en /Gorier  1S97,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  xxxv.
pp.  10-19)  proves  that  the  annexation  of  the  Thebaid  and  the  consequent  pacification  of  Egypt  was
an  accomplished  fact  in  the  year  IX.  of  Psammetichus  I.  The  analogy  of  similar  documents,  e.g.  the
stele  of  the  high  priest  Menkhopirri  (cf  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  762),  shows  that  the  ceremony  of
adoption  which  consecrated  the  reunion  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  cannot  have  beeu  separated  by
a  long  interval  from  the  completion  of  the  reunion  itself:  in  placing  this  at  tlie  end  of  the  year  VIII.,
we  should  have  for  the  two  events  the  respective  dates  of  65S-057  and  057-050  e.o.

*  The  part  played  by  Montumihait  iu  this  afi'air  is  easily  deduced  :  (1)  from  our  knowledge  of
his  conduct  some  years  previously  under  Taharqa  and  Tauuatamanu  (cf.  supra,  pp.  378,  385,  390)  ;
(2)  from  the  jjosition  he  occupied  at  Thebes,  in  the  year  IX.,  with  regard  to  Shapenuapit,  according
to  the  stele  of  Legrain.

'  Cf.  what  is  stated  ou  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  164,  166.


THE  REUNION  OF  TEE  PRINCIPALITY  OF  THEBES   WITH  EGYPT.     493

daughter  according  to  the  custom  instituted  by  the  Ethiopian  Pharaohs.  She
already  had  one  daughter  by  adoption,  whom  she  had  received  at  the  hands  of
Taharqa,  and  who,  in  changing  lier  family,  had  assumed  the  name  of  Amenertas
in  honour  of  the  queen  who  had  preceded  Shapenuapit :  Psammetichus  forced
her  to  replace  the  Ethiopian  princess  by  one  of  his  own  daughters,  who  was
henceforth  called  Shapenuapit,  after  her  new  mother.  A  deputation  of  the
nobles  and  priests  of  Thebes  came  to  escort  the  princess  from  Memphis,  in
the  month  of  Tybi,  in  the  ninth  year  of  the  reign :  Psammetichus  formally
presented  her  to  them,  and  the  ambassadors,  having  listened  to  his  address,
expatiated  in  the  customary  eulogies  on  his  splendour  and  generosity.  "  They
shall  endure  as  long  as  the  world  lasteth ;  all  that  thou  ordainest  shall  endure.
How  beautiful  is  tliat  which  God  hath  done  for  thee,  how  glorious  that  which
thy  divine  father  hath  done  for  thee !  He  is  pleased  that  thy  double  should
be  commemorated,  he  rejoices  in  the  pronouncing  of  thy  name,  for  our  lord
Psammetichus  has  made  a  gift  to  his  father  Amon,  he  has  given  him  his  eldest
daughter,  Jiis  beloved  Nitauqrit  Shapenuapit,  to  be  his  divine  spouse,  that  she
may  shake  the  sistrum  before  him ! "  On  the  ■2Sth  of  Tybi  the  princess
left  the  harem,  clothed  in  fine  linen  and  adorned  with  ornaments  of  malachite,
and  descended  to  the  quay,  accompanied  by  an  immense  throng,  to  set  out  for
her  new  home.  Relays  stationed  along  the  river  at  intervals  made  the  voyage
so  expeditious  that  at  the  end  of  sixteen  days  the  princess  came  in  sight  of
Thebes.  She  disembarked  on  the  14th  of  Khoiak,  amid  the  acclamations  of  the
people:  "She  comes,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  South,  Nitauqrit,  to  the
dwelling  of  Amon,  that  he  may  possess  her  and  unite  her  to  himself;  she
comes,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  North,  Shapenuapit,  to  the  temple  of
Karnak,  that  the  gods  may  there  chant  her  praises."  As  soon  as  the  aged
Shapenuapit  had  seen  her  coadjutor,  "she  loved  her  more  than  all  things,"  and
assigned  her  a  dowry,  the  same  as  that  which  she  had  received  from  her  own
parents,  and  which  she  had  granted  to  her  first  adopted  daughter  Amenertas.  The
magnates  of  Thebes — the  aged  Montumihait,  his  son  Nsiphtah,  and  the  prophets
of  Amon — vied  with  each  other  in  their  gifts  of  welcome :  Psammetichus,  on
his  side,  had  acted  most  generously,  and  the  temples  of  Egypt  assigned  to  the
princess  an  annual  income  out  of  their  revenues,  or  bestowed  upon  her  grants
of  houses  and  lands,  in  all  constituting  a  considerable  inheritance,  which  some-
what consoled  the  Thebans  for  their  subjection  to  a  dynasty  emanating  from
the  cities  of  the  north. ^     The  rest  of  the  principality  imitated  the  example  of

'  AH  the  facts  relating  to  the  enthronement  of  the  princess  are  made  known  to  us  by  the  stele
diecovered  and'  published  by  Legrain,  which  was  first  closely  examined  by  Erman  (Legraix,  Deux
Steles  irouv^es  it  Karnak  en  fierier  1807,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  vol.  xxsv.  pp.  16-1'J,  and  Erman',  Zu  den
Legrain'schen  Iiischrijten,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  24-29).


494  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

Thebes,  and  the  whole  of  Egypt,  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  to  the
rocks  of  the  first  cataract,  once  more  found  itself  reunited  under  the  sceptre  of
an  Egyptian  king.  A  small  part  of  Nubia,  the  portion  nearest  to  Elephantine,
followed  this  movement,  but  the  greater  part  refused  to  cut  itself  off  from  the
Ethiopians.  These  latter  were  hencefortli  confined  to  the  regions  along  the
middle  course  of  the  Nile,  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  world  by  the  deserts,
the  Red  Sea,  and  Egypt.  It  is  probable  that  they  did  not  give  up  without
a  struggle  the  hope  of  regaining  the  ground  they  had  lost,  and  that  their
armies  made  more  than  one  expedition  in  a  northerly  direction.  The  inhabitants
of  the  Thebaid  could  hardly  fail  to  remain  faithful  to  them  at  heart,  and  to
recognise  in  tliem  the  legitimate  representatives  of  the  posterity  of  Anion ;  it
is  possible  that  now  and  again  they  succeeded  in  penetrating  as  far  as  the
ancient  capital,  but  if  so,  their  success  was  always  ephemeral,  and  their  sojourn
left  no  permanent  traces.  The  same  causes,  however,  which  had  broken  uji  the
constituent  elements,  and  destroyed  the  unity  of  Greater  Egypt  at  the  end  of
the  Theban  period,  were  still  at  work  in  Saite  times  to  prevent  the  building
up  again  of  the  empire.  The  preservation  of  the  balance  of  power  in  this  long
and  narrow  strip  of  country  depended  on  the  centre  of  attraction  and  on
the  seat  of  government  being  nearly  equidistant  from  the  two  extremities.
This  condition  had  been  fulfilled  as  long  as  the  court  resided  at  Thebes ;
but  as  the  removal  of  the  seat  of  government  to  the  Delta  caused  the
loss  and  separation  of  the  southern  provinces,  so  its  sudden  return  to  the
extreme  south,  with  a  temporary  sojourn  at  Napata,  necessarily  produced  a
similar  eifect,  and  led  to  the  speedy  secession  of  the  northern  provinces.
In  eitlier  ease,  the  dynasty  placed  at  one  extremity  of  the  empire  was  unable  to
sustain  for  any  length  of  time  the  weight  depending  on  it  at  the  other ;  when
once  the  balance  became  even  slightly  disturbed,  it  could  not  regain  its
equilibrium,  and  there  was  consequently  a  sudden  dislocation  of  the  machinery
of  government.

The  triumph  of  the  Saite  dynasty  accomplished  the  final  ruin  of  the  work
begun  under  the  Papis,  and  brought  to  completion  by  the  Amenemhaits  and
the  Usirtasens.  Greater  Egypt  ceased  to  exist,  after  more  than  twenty  centuries
of  glorious  life,  and  was  replaced  by  the  Little  Egypt  of  the  firstages  of  history.
The  defeat  of  the  military  chiefs  of  the  north,  the  annexation  of  the  prin-
cipality of  Amou,  and  the  final  expulsion  of  the  Ethiopians  and  the  Asiatics
had  occupied  scarcely  nine  years,  but  these  feats  constituted  only  the  smaller
part  of  the  work  Psammetichus  had  to  accomplish  :  his  subsequent  task  lay  in
restoring  prosperity  to  his  kingdom,  or,  at  all  events,  in  raising  it  from  the
state  of  misery  into  which  two  centuries  of  civil  wars  and  invasions  had
plunged  it.  The  important  cities  had  suffered  grievously :  Memphis  had
been  besieged  and  taken  by  assault  by  both  Pionkhi  and  Esarhaddon,  Thebes


TEE  END    OF   GREATER   EGYPT.  495

had  been  twice  sacked  by  the  veterans  of  Assur-bani-pal,  and  from  Syene  to
Pelusium  there  was  not  a  township  but  bad  suffered  at  the  hands  of  foreigners
or  of  the  Egyptians  themselves.  The  country  had  enjoyed  a  moment's  breath-
ing-space under  Sabaco,  but  the  little  good  which  this  prince  had  been  able
to  accomplish  was  eifaced  immediately  after  his  death  :  the  canals  and  dykes
had  been  neglected,  the  supervision  of  the  police  relaxed,  and  the  population,
periodically  decimated  or  driven  to  take  refuge  in  the  strongholds,  had  often
allowed  the  lands  to  lie  waste,  so  that  famine  had  been  superadded  to  the  other
evils  under  which  the  land  already  groaned.  Psammetichus,  having  forced  the
feudal  lords  to  submit  to  his  supremacy,  deprived  them  of  the  royal  titles  they
had  unduly  assumed ;  he  no  longer  tolerated  their  habits  of  private  warfare,
but  restricted  them  to  the  functions  of  hereditary  governors,  which  their
ancestors  had  exercised  under  the  conquering  dynasties  of  former  times,^  and  this
enforced  peace  soon  allowed  the  rui-al  population  to  devote  themselves  joyfully
to  their  regular  occupations.  With  so  fertile  a  soil,  two  or  three  years  of
security,  during  which  the  fellahin  were  able  to  sow  and  reap  their  crops  free
from  the  fear  of  marauding  bands,  sufficed  to  restore  abundance,^if  not  wealth,  to
the  country,  and  Psammetichus  succeeded  in  securing  both  these  and  other
benefits  to  Egypt,  thanks  to  tiie  vigilant  severity  of  his  administration.  He
would  have  been  unable  to  accomplish  these  reforms  had  he  relied  only  on  the
forces  which  had  been  at  tlie  disposal  of  his  ancestors — the  native  troops
demoralised  by  poverty,  and  the  undisciplined  bands  of  Libyan  mercenaries,
which  constituted  the  sole  normal  force  of  the  Tanite  and  Bubastite  Pharaohs
and  the  barons  of  the  Delta  and  Middle  Egypt.  His  experience  of  these  two
classes  of  soldiery  had  decided  him  to  look  elsewhere  for  a  less  precarious  sup-
port, and  ever  since  chance  had  brought  him  in  contact  with  the  lonians  and
Carians,  he  had  surrounded  himself  with  a  regular  army  of  Hellenic  and  Asiatic
mercenaries.  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  terror  that  the  apparition  of
these  men  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  African  peoples,  or  the  revolution  they
effected,  alike  in  peace  or  war,  in  Oriental  states :  ^  the  charge  of  the  Spanish
soldiery  among  the  lightly  clad  foot-soldiers  of  Mexico  and  Peru  could  not
have  caused  more  dismay  than  did  that  of  the  hoplites  from  beyond  the  sea
among  the  half-naked  archers  and  pikemen  of  Egypt  and  Libya.      With  their

'  During  tlie  last  few  years  records  of  a  certain  number  of  persona  have  been  diacoverecl  whose
names  and  condition  prove  that  they  were  tlic  descendants  of  semi-independent  princes  of  the
Ethiopian  and  Buoastito  periods :  e.g.  a  certain  Akaneshu,  who  was  prince  of  Sebennytos  under
Psammetichus  I.  (Naville,  The  Mound  of  the  Jews  and  the  Citij  of  Onias,  pp.  2-i,  25,  pi.  v.),  and  who
very  probably  was  the  grandson  of  Akaneshu,  prince  of  the  same  town  under  Pidukhi  (cf.  supra,
p.  178,  note  2) ;  and  a  Sheshonq  of  Busiris,  who  was  perhaps  a  descendant  of  Sheshouq,  prince  of
Buslria  uuder  Pionkhi  (Naville,  op.  cit.,  p.  28,  pL  vii.  o).

'  For  tlie  impression  caused  by  the  hoplites,  cf.  BIallet,  Les  Premiers  Etablissements  des  Grecs
en  i'gypde,  pp.  38-45.


496


THE  21EDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


bulgiug  corselets,  the  two  plates  of  which  protected  back  and  chest,  their  greaves
made  of  a  sini^le  piece  of  bronze  reaching  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee,  their
square  or  oval  Inicklers  covered  with  metal,  their  heavy  rounded  helmets  fitting
closely  to  the  head  and  neck,  and  surmounted  by  crests  of  waving  plumes,  they
were,  in  truth,  men  of  brass,  invulnerable  to  any  Oriental  weapon.  Drawn  up
inclose  array  beneath  their  "  tortoise,"  they  received  almost  unhurt  the  hail  of
arrows  and  stones  hurled  against  them  by  the  lightly  armed  infantry,  and  then,
when  their  own  trumpet  sounded  the  signal  for  attack,  and  they  let  themselves
fall  with  their  whole  weight  upon  the  masses?  of  the  enemy,  brandishing  their

spears  above  the  upper  edge
of  their  bucklers,  there  was
no  force  of  native  troops
or  company  of  Mashauasha
that  did  not  waver  beneath
the  shock,  and  finally  give
way  before  their  attack.
The  Egyptians  felt  them-
selves incapable  of  over-
coming   tliem    except     by


THE  SAITE  FOUTUESS   OF   DAPHNE.'


superior  numbers  or  by
stratagem,  and  it  was  the  knowledge  of  their  own  hopeless  inferiority  which
prevented  the  feudal  lords  from  attempting  to  revenge  themselves  on  Psam-
metichus.  To  make  themselves  his  equals,  they  would  have  been  obliged
either  to  take  a  sufficient  number  of  similar  warriors  into  their  own  pay — and
this  they  were  not  able  to  afford — or  they  must  have  won  over  those  already  in
the  employ  of  their  suzerain ;  but  the  liberality  with  which  Psammetichus
treated  his  mercenaries  gave  them  good  cause  to  be  faithful,  even  if  military
honour  had  not  sufficed  to  keep  them  loyal  to  their  employer.  Psammetichus
granted  to  them  and  their  compatriots,  who  were  attracted  by  the  fame  of
Egypt,  a  concession  of  the  fertile  lands  of  the  Delta  stretching  along  the
Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile,  and  he  was  careful  to  separate  the  lonians  from
the  Carians  by  the  whole  breadth  of  the  river :  this  was  a  wise  precaution,
for  their  union  beneath  a  common  flag  had  not  extinguished  their  inherited
hatred  of  one  another,  and  the  authority  of  the  general  did  not  always  suffice
to  prevent  fatal  quarrels  breaking  out  between  contingents  of  different  nation-
alities.^ They  occupied,  moreover,  regularly  entrenched  camjjs,  enclosed  within
massive  walls,  containing  a  collection  of  mud  huts  or  houses  of  brick,  the  whole
enclosure  commanded  by  a  fortress  which  formed  the  headquarters  of  the  general

1  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  restoration  by  Fl.  Petrie,  Ten  Years'  Digging  in  Egypt,  p.  52.
-  Herodotcs,  II.  cliv.   This  observation  was  made  by  Kenkick,  Ancient  Egypt  under  the  Pharaohs,
vol.  ii.  p.  223.


FIBST   GEEEE  SETTLEMENTS  IS  EGYPT.


497


EGYPTIAN  GREEK.*


and  staff  of  officers.!  Some  merchants  from  Miletus,  emboldened  by  the  presence

of  their  fellow-countrymen,  sailed  with    thirty

vessels  into  the  mouth  of  the  Bolbitine  branch

of  the  Nile,  and  there  founded  a  settlement  which

they  named  the   Fort  of  the   Milesians,'-   and,

following   in   their   wake,    successive   relays   of

emigrants  arrived  to  reinforce  the  infant  colony.

The  king  entrusted  a  certain  number  of  Egyptian

children  to  the  care  of  these  Greek  settlers,  to

be  instructed  in  their  language,^  and  the  inter-
preters thus  educated  in  their  schools  increased

in  proportion  as  the  bonds  of  commercial  and

friendly  intercourse  between  Greece  and  Egypt

became  strengthened,  so  that  ere  long,  in  the

towns  of  the  Delta,  they  constituted  a  regular

class,  whose  function  was  to  act  as  intermediaries  between  the  two  races.  By
tlius  bringing  his  subjects  in  contact  with  an  active,  industrious,
and  enterprising  nation,  full  of  youthful  vigour,  Psammetichus  no
doubt  hoped  to  inspire  them  with  some  of  the  qualities  which
he  discerned  in  the  colonists,  but  Egypt  during  the  last  two
centuries  had  suffered  too  much  at  the  hands  of  foreigners  of  all
kinds  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  these  new-comers.  It  would
have  been  different  had  they  presented  themselves  in  humble
guise  like  the  Asiatics  and  Africans  to  whom  Egypt  had  opened
her  doors  so  freely  after  the  XVIII"*  dynasty,  and  if  they  had
adopted  the  obsequious  manners  of  the  Phcenician  and  Hebrew
merchants;  but  they  landed  from  their  ships  fully  equipped  for
war,  and,  proud  of  their  own  courage  and  ability,  they  vied  with  the
natives  of  the  ancient  race,  whetlier  of  plebeian  or  noble  birth,  for
the  favour  of   the  sovereign.     Their  language,  their  rude  military  customs,

'  Such  as  that  at  Daphnco,  whose  ruius  at  Tel-Defenneh  have  been  excavated  and  described  by
W.  Flindebs  Petrie,  Nehesheh  (^m)  and  Defenneh  (Tahpanhes),  pp.  47-67.

-  Strabo,  XVII.  i.  §  18,  p.  801,  where  the  account  of  the  founding  of  the  Fort  of  the  Milesiam^
MtX-qa-laiv  reixus,  is  mixed  up  with  that  of  the  foundation  of  Xaueratis.  Mallet  is  inclined  to  believe
this  event  prior  to  the  Saite  epoch  {Les  Premiers  £lahl.  des  Grecs  en  Pgijpte,  pp.  28-34,  37, 38,  etc. J.

'  Herodotus,  II.  cliv.  Diodorus,  or  rather  the  historian  whom  he  follows,  assures  us  that
Psammetichus  went  still  further,  and  gave  his  own  children  a  Greek  education  (i.  66) ;  what  is  possible
and  even  probable,  is,  that  he  had  them  taught  Greek.  A  bronze  Apis  in  the  Gizeh  Museum  was
dedicated  by  an  interpreter  who  inscribed  on  it  a  bilingual  inscription  in  hieroglyphics  and  Carian
(Mahiette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  106  a,  and  p.  30 ;  cf.  JIaspeeo,  Guide  da  Visiteur,  p.  180,  No.  1576,  and
Sayce,  The  Karian  Language  and  Liecriptiom,  iu  Trans,  of  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  pp.  126, 146).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Fl.  Petbie,  Naukratis,  vol.  i.  pi.  i.  2,  and  p.  36.  The  original
statuette  in  alabaster  is  now  in  the  Gizeh  Museum ;  the  Cyprian  style  of  the  figure  is  easily  recognised.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Fl.  Petbie,  Xaukratis,  vol.  i.  pi.  ii.  1.  The  original  limestone
statuette  is  iu  the  Gizeh  Museum.

•:>  K


498  TEE  MEDES   AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.

their  cunniDg  devices  in  trade,  even  the  astonishment  they  manifested  at  the
civilisation  of  the  country,  rendered  them  objects  of  disdain,  as  well  as  of  jealous
hatred  to  the  Egyptian.  The  food  of  which  they  partook  made  them  unclean
in  native  estimation,  and  the  horrified  fellah  shunned  contact  with  them  from
fear  of  defiling  himself,  refusing  to  eat  with  them,  or  to  use  the  same  knife
or  cooking-vessel :  ^  the  scribes  and  members  of  the  higher  classes,  astonished
at  their  ignorance,  treated  them  like  children  with  no  past  history,  whose
ancestors  a  few  generations  back  had  been  mere  savages.

Although  unexpressed  at  first,  tliis  hostility  towards  the  Hellenes  was  not
long  in  manifesting  itself  openly.  The  Saite  tradition  attributed  it  to  a  move-
ment of  wounded  vanity.  Psammetichus,  to  recompense  the  prowess  of  his
Ionian  and  Carian  soldiers,  had  attached  them  to  his  own  person,  and  assigned
to  them  the  post  of  honour  on  the  right  wing  when  the  army  was  drawn  up  for
review  or  in  battle  array.^  They  reaped  thus  the  double  advantage  of  the
glory,  which  they  greatly  prized,  and  of  the  higher  pay  attached  to  the  title  of
body-guard,^  but  the  troops  who  had  hitherto  enjoyed  these  advantages  were
naturally  indignant  at  losing  them,  and  began  to  murmur.  One  particularly
galling  circumstance  at  last  caused  their  discontent  to  break  out.  The  eastern
and  southern  frontiers  of  Egypt  were  conterminous  with  those  of  two  conquer-
ing empires,  Assyria  and  Ethiopia,  and  on  the  west  the  Libyan  tribes  along  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean  were  powerful  enough  to  demand  constant  vigilance
on  the  part  of  the  border  garrisons.  Psammetichus,  among  other  reforms,  had
reorganised  the  ancient  system  of  defence.  While  placing  outposts  at  the
entrance  to  the  passes  leading  from  the  desert  into  the  Nile  valley,*  he  had  con-
centrated considerable  masses  of  troops  at  the  three  most  vulnerable  points — the
outlets  of  the  road  to  Syria,  the  country  surrounding  Lake  Mareotis,  and  the
first  cataract;  he  had  fortified  Daphna^,  near  the  old  town  of  Zalu,  as  a  defence
against  the  Assyrians,  Marea  against  the  Libyan  Bedawin,  and  Elephantine
against  the  Ethiopians.  These  advanced  posts  had  been  garrisoned  with  native
troops  who  were  quartered  there  for  a  year  at  a  time.  To  be  condemned  to
such  an  exile  for  so  long  a  period  raised  in  them  a  sense  of  profound  indigna-
tion, but  when  the  king  apparently  forgot  them  and  left  them  there  three  years
without  sending  other  troops  to  relieve  them,  their  anger  knew  no  bounds.
They  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  such  treatment,  and  as  the  hope  of  a  successful

'  Herodotus,  II.  xli. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Eerodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  187-193.

-  DiODORCS  SiouLrs,  i.  67,  where  it  is  stated  that  it  was  during  the  Syrian  war  that  the  king
thus  honoured  his  mercenary  troops.  AViedeniann  thinks  this  is  an  erroneous  inference  drawn  from
the  passage  of  Herodotus  (II.  xxx.),  in  which  he  explains  the  meaning  of  the  word  Aamakh.  (Herodofs
Zweites  Buck,  pp.  12S,  129).

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxviii.,  where  the  details  of  this  high  pay  are  given  at  length ;  cf.  infra,  p.  500.

■"  For  these  posts  established  at  the  entrances  to  the  valley,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  293,  294.


FLIGHT  OF  TEE  UASEAUA8EA   AND  MILITABT  BEORGANISATION.      499

rebellion  seemed  but  small,  they  decided  to  leave  the  country.  Two  hundred
and  forty  thousand  of  them  assembled  on  a  given  day  with  their  arms  and
baggage,  and  marched  in  good  order  towards  Ethiopia.  Psammetichus,  warned
of  their  intentions  when  it  was  too  late,  hastened  after  them  with  a  handful  of
followers,  and  coming  up  with  them,  besought  them  not  to  desert  their  national
gods,  their  wives,  and  their  children.  He  had  nearly  prevailed  on  them  to
return,  when  one  soldier,  with  a  significant  gesture,  intimated  that  while  man-
hood lasted  they  had  power  to  create  new  families  wherever  they  might  chance
to  dwell.^  The  details  of  this  story  betray  the  popular  legend,  but  nevertheless
have  a  basis  of  truth.  The  inscriptions  from  the  time  of  Psammetichus
onwards  never  mention  the  Mashauasha,  while  their  name  and  their  exploits
constantly  recur  in  the  history  of  the  preceding  dynasties  :  lienceforth  they  and
their  chiefs  vanish  from  sight,  and  discord  and  brigandage  simultaneously  cease
in  the  Egyptian  nomes.  It  was  very  probably  the  most  turbulent  among
these  auxiliaries  who  left  the  country  in  the  circumstances  above  narrated :
since  they  could  not  contest  the  superiority  of  their  Greek  rivals,  they  con-
cluded that  their  own  part  was  played  out,  and  rather  than  be  relegated  to  the
second  rauk,  they  preferred  to  quit  the  land  in  a  body."  Psammetichus,  thus
deprived  of  their  support  at  the  moment  when  Egypt  had  more  than  ever  need
of  all  her  forces  to  regain  lier  rightful  position  in  the  world,  reorganised  the
military  system  as  best  he  could.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  relied  much  upon
the  contingents  from  Upper  Egypt,  to  whom  was  doubtless  entrusted  the
defence  of  the  Nubian  frontier,  and  who  could  not  be  withdrawn  from  their  posts
without  danger  of  invasion  or  revolt.  But  the  source  of  imminent  peril  did  not
lie  in  this  direction,  where  Ethiopia,  exhausted  by  the  wars  of  Taharqa  and
Tanuatamanu,  perhaps  needed  repose  even  more  than  Egypt  itself,  but  rather
on  the  Asiatic  side,  where  Assur-bani-pal,  in  spite  of  the  complications  con-
stantly arising  in  Karduniash  and  Elam,  had  by  no  means  renounced  his  claims
to  the  suzerainty  of  Egypt.  The  Pliaraoh  divided  the  feudatory  militia  of  the
Delta  into  two  classes,  which  resided  apart  in  different  sets  of  nomes.  The
first  group,  who  were  popularly  called  Hermotybies,  were  stationed  at  Busiris,
Sais,  and  Khemmis,  in  the  island  of  Prosopitis,  and  in  one  half  of  Natho — in
fact,  in  the  district  which  for  tlie  last  century  had  formed  the  centre  of  the
principality  of  the  Saite  dynasty  :  perhaps  they  were  mostly  of  Libyan  origin,

'  Herodotcs,  II.  XXX.

-  The  classical  refereuces  to  this  emigration  were  collected  a  century  ago  by  Heeken,  Commenlalio
lie  Militum  .Eijiipliorum  in  J^lhiopiam  Migratioue,  ia  the  Mii'motres  de  V Acad€inie  de  Gottingen,  Phil.
Hist.  Classe,  vol.  xii.  p.  48.  Their  authenticity  has  been  controverted  several  times  by  Wiedemann
(Vie  Grlechische  Inschrift  voti  Abusiiiihel,  iu  the  Rheinisches  Museum,  1S80,  pp.  305,366;  Geschichtu
Jigyptens,  pp.  131-138,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  128-133 ;  ^gypt.  Gesch.,  pp.  617, 018);  I  have  else-
where given  my  reasons  for  the  conclusions  I  have  adopted  in  the  text  (Eludes  de  Myth,  et  d'Arch.  Egyp-
tiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  398-402 ;  cf.  Mallet,  Zes  Premiers  Etablissements  des  Greet  en  £gypte,  pp.  77-82).


500  THE  MEDES  AXD    THE  SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

and  represented  the  bands  of  Mashauasha  who,  from  father  to  son,  had  served
under  Tafnakhti  and  his  descendants.  Popuhir  report  numbered  them  at
160,000  men,  all  told,  and  the  total  number  of  the  other  class,  known  as  the
Calasiries,  at  250,000;  these  latter  belonged,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  pure  Egyp-
tian race,  and  were  met  with  at  Thebes,  while  the  troops  of  the  north,  who  were
more  generally  called  out,  were  scattered  over  the  territory  which  formerly
supported  the  Tanite  and  Bubastite  kings,  and  latterly  Pakruru,  and  which
comprised  the  towns  of  Bubastis,  Aphthis,  Tanis,  Mendes,  Sebennytos,  Athribis,
Pharbaethos,  Thmuis,  Onuphis,  Anysis,  and  Myecphoris.  Each  year  one
thousand  Hermotybies  and  one  thousand  Calasiries  were  chosen  to  form  the
royal  body-guard,  and  these  received  daily  five  minae  of  bread  apiece,  two
minae  of  beef,  and  four  bowls  of  wine ;  the  jealousy  which  had  been  excited  by
the  Greek  troops  was  thus  lessened,  as  well  as  the  discontent  provoked  by  the
emigration.*  The  King  of  Napata  gladly  welcomed  the  timely  reinforcements
which  arrived  to  fill  up  the  vacancies  in  his  army  and  among  his  people,
weakened  by  a  century  of  rapid  changes,  and  generously  gave  them  permission
to  conquer  for  themselves  some  territory  in  the  possession  of  his  enemies !
Having  driven  out  the  barbarians,  they  established  themselves  in  the  peninsula
formed  by  the  White  and  Blue  Niles,  and  their  numbers  increased  so  greatly
that  in  course  of  time  they  became  a  considerable  nation.  They  called  them-
selves Asmakh,  the  men  who  stand  on  the  king's  left  hand,  in  memory  of  the
afi'ront  put  upon  them,  and  which  they  had  avenged  by  their  self-exile :  Greek
travellers  and  geographers  called  them  sometimes  Automoli,  sometimes  Sem-
brites,  names  which  clung  to  them  till  almost  the  beginning  of  our  present  era.^
This  departure  of  the  Mashauasha  was  as  the  last  blast  of  wind  after  a
storm  :    the   swell   subsided  by  degrees,  and  peace  reigned   in  the  interior.

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxiv.-clxviii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buck,  pp.  57ii-580.  Calasiris
is,  as  Birch  saw  fifty  years  ago  (Leitre  a  M.  Letronne  sur  Je  mot  Calasiris,  in  the  Bevue  Arclteologique,
1847,  vol.  iv.  p.  195,  et  seq.),  the  exact  transcription  of  Khala-shiri,  Khala-shere,  signifying  younrj  man.
The  meaning  and  original  of  the  word  transcribed  Hermotybies  by  Herodotus,  and  Hermotymbies
according  to  a  variant  given  by  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  is  as  yet  uukuown,  but  it  seems  to  me  to
conceal  a  title  analogous  to  that  of  Hir-mazaiu,  and  to  designate  what  remained  of  Libyan  soldiers
in  Egypt.  This  organisation  of  the  army  is  described  by  Herodotus  as  existing  in  his  own  days,  and
there  were  Calasiries  and  Hermotybies  in  the  Egyptian  contingent  which  accompanied  the  army  of
Mardonius  to  Greece  (Herodotus,  II.  xxxii.);  it  is  nowhere  stated  that  it  was  the  work  of  Psamme-
tichus,  but  everything  points  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  so,  at  all  events  in  the  form  iu  which  it
was  known  to  tlie  Greeks.

^  Herodotus,  II.  xxx. ;  cf.  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etahlissem,ents  des  Grecs  en  Egijpte,  pp.  95,  96.
The  name  Asmakh  is  sometimes  given  as  Askham  in  the  manuscripts,  which  has  led  Wiedemann  (op.
cit.,  pp.  128,  129)  to  reject  the  etymology  proposed  by  M.  de  Horrack  {Leitre  h  propos  d'un  mot
^gyptien  significant  la  gauche,  r^cemment  signals  par  M.  F.  Chahas,  in  the  Revue  Arche'ologique,  1862,
vol.  ii.  pp.  368,  369),  according  to  which  Asmakh  would  be  the  exact  tr.anscription  of  Smalii,  the  left.
It  is  certain  that  the  Egyptians,  whatever  may  have  been  the  real  signification  of  the  name,  had  in
their  minds  the  word  indicated  by  31.  de  Horrack,  and  the  very  expression  used  by  Herodotus,  oi  e'f
dpiffTepfjs  xe'p<is,  proves  it :  it  was  doubtless  this  popular  etymology  which  suggested  to  the  romance-
writers  the  original  cause  they  assigned  to  the  quarrel.


RESUMPTION   OF    WORKS    ON  A    GRAND    SCALE   IN  EGYPT.        501

Thebes  accommodated  itself  as  best  it  could  to  the  new  order  of  things  under
the  nominal  administration  of  the  Divine  Spouses,  the  two  Shapenuapits.
Building  works  were  recommenced  at  all  points  where  it  appeared  necessary,
and  the  need  of  restoration  was  indeed  pressing  after  the  disorders  occasioned
by  the  Assyrian  invasion  and  the  Ethiopian  suzerainty.  At  Karnak,  and  in
the  great  temples  on  both  banks  of  the  Nile,  Psammetichus,  respecting  the
fiction  which  assigned  the  chief  authority  to  the  Pallacides,  effaced  himself
in  favour  of  them,  allowing  them  to  claim  all  the  merit  of  the  work  ;  in  the
cities  they  erected  small  chapels,  in  which  they  are  portrayed  as  queens  fulfilling
their  sacerdotal  functions,  humbly  escorted  by  the  viceroy  who  in  other  respects
exercised  the  real  power.^  The  king's  zeal  for  restoration  is  manifest  all  along
the  Nile,  at  Coptos,^  Abydos,^  and  in  the  plains  of  the  Delta,  which  are  crowded
with  memorials  of  him.  His  two  favourite  capitals  were  Memphis  and  Sais,  on
both  of  which  he  impartially  lavished  his  favours.  At  Memphis  he  built  the
propylons  on  the  south  side  of  the  temple  of  Phtah,  and  the  court  in  which  the
living  Apis  took  his  exercise  and  was  fed  :  this  court  was  surrounded  by  a
colonnade,  against  the  pillars  of  which  were  erected  statues  twelve  cubits
high,  probably  representing  Osiris  as  in  the  Ramesseum  and  at  Medinet-Habu.*
Apis  even  when  dead  also  received  his  share  of  attention.  Since  the  days  when
Ramses  II.  had  excavated  the  subterranean  Serapeum  as  a  burial-place  of
the  sacred  bulls,  no  subsequent  Pharaoh  who  had  reigned  at  Memphis  had
failed  to  embellish  their  common  tomb,  and  to  celebrate  with  magnificence
their  rites  of  sepulture.  The  body  of  the  Apis,  carefully  embalmed,  was  sealed
up  in  a  coffin  or  sarcophagus  of  hard  stone,  the  mouth  of  the  vault  was  then
walled  up,  and  against  the  fresh  masonry,  at  the  foot  of  the  neighbouring
rocks,  on  the  very  floor  of  the  passage,  or  wherever  there  was  a  clear  space
available,  the  high  dignitaries,  the  workmen  or  the  priests  who  had  taken  any
part  in  the  ceremonial,  set  up  a  votive  stele  calling  down  upon  themselves  and
their  families  divine  benedictions.  The  gallery  was  transformed  by  degrees
into  a  kind  of  record-ofiicQ,  where  each  dynasty  in  turn  recorded  its  name,
whenever  a  fresh  apotheosis  aiforded  them  the  opportunity  :  these  records  were
discovered  in  our  own  time  by  Marietta,  almost  perfect  in  spite  of  the  destroy-
ing hand  of  men,  and  comprised  inscriptions  by  the  Bubastites,  by  Bocchoris,
and  even  by  the  Ethiopians.  Taharqa,  when  menaced  by  the  Assyrians,  had
stayed  at  Memphis,  only  a  year  before  his  death,  in  the  interval  between  two

'  Petrie,  Koptos,  pi.  xxxvi.  1,  and  p.  17 ;  tlie  fragment  seems  to  me  to  belong  to  Psammetichus  I.

'  Mariette,  Ahydos,  vol.  i.  pi.  ii.  b,  where  Psammetichus  is  accompanied  by  Nitauqrit.

'  The  first  Egyptologists  attributed  the  prenominal  cartouche  of  Psammetichus  I.  to  Psamme-
tichus II.,  and  vice  versa  :  this  error  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  in  referring  to  their  woiks.

*  Herodotus,  II.  cliii.;  cf.  DioBOKUs,  i.  67,  where  the  propylons  atlributed  to  Psammetichus  I.  are
those  on  the  east.     Strabo  (XVII.  i.  §  'Si,  p.  807)  also  describes  the  court.


502


TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CUALDJEAN  EMPIRE.


campaigns,  in  order  to  bury  an  Apis,  and  Psammeticbus  likewise  took  care  not
to  neglect  this  part  of  his  regal  duties.  He  at  first  was  content  to  imitate  his
predecessors,  but  a  subsidence  having  occurred  in  that  part  of  the  Serapeum
where  the  Apis  who  had  died  in  tlie  twentieth  year  of  his  reign  reposed,  he
ordered  his  engineers  to  bore  another  gallery  in  a  harder  vein  of  limestone,

iiud  he  performed  the
opening  ceremony  in  his
fifty-second  year.  It  was
the  commencement  of  a
thoiough  restoration.  The
vaults  in  whicli  the  sacred
bulls  were  entombed  were
severally  inspected,  the
wrappings  were  repaired
together  with  tlie  mummy
cases,  the  masonry  of
the  cliapel  was  strength-
ened, and  the  building
endowed  with  woods,
stuffs,  perfumes,  and  the
necessary  oils.^  No  less
activity  apparently  was
displayed  at  Sais,  the
native  home  and  favourite
residence  of  the  Pharaoh  ;
but  all  the  monuments
which  adorned  the  place,
including  the  temple  of  Nit,  and  the  royal  palace,  have  been  entirely  destroyed  ;
the  enclosing  wall  of  unbaked  bricks  alone  remains,  and  here  and  there,  amid
the  debris  of  the  houses,  may  be  seen  some  heajjs  of  shattered  stone  where  the
public  buildings  once  stood.  On  several  blocks  the  name  and  titles  of  Psam-
metichus  may  yet  be  deciphered,  and  there  are  few  cities  in  the  Delta  which
cannot  make  a  similar  sbow.^  From  one  end  of  the  Nile  valley  to  the  other  the
quarries  were  reopened,  and  the  arts,  stimulated  by  the  orders  which  flowed  in,

'  Mariette,  Benseigiiements  sur  les  soixante-quatre  Apis  trouv^s  daiis  les  souterrains  du  S^rapium,
in  the  Bulletin  Arch^ologique  de  V Alhinsrum  Franrais,  1S55,  pp.  47,  48,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  78;  cf.  Le  S^ra-
p^am  de  Memphis,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  118-121.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  an  engraving  published  in  Makiette,  Choix  de  Monuments  du
Si'rapium,  pi.  vi.

^  For  the  ruins  of  Sais,  see  the  descriptions  of  Champolltox,  Lettres  icrites  d'Egypte,  3rd  edit.,
pp.  50-53,  and  pis.  i.,  ii.,  and  of  Wilkinson,  Topograph!/  v/  Ththes  and  General  Views  of  Hgy jit,  p.  29G,
as  well  as  the  plan  of  G.  Foucart,  A'oies  prises  dans  le  Delta,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xx.  p.  1G9.


CHAMBEH    AXD    SAIICOPHAGl'S   OF    AN    Al'lS."


THE  RENAISSANCE   OF  ART  IN  EGYPT.


503


soon  flourished  anew.  The  engraving  of  liieroglyphics  and  the  art  of  painting
both  attained  a  remarkable  degree  of  elegance ;  fine  statues  and  bas-reliefs  were
executed  in  large  numbers,  and  a  widely  spread  school  of  art  was  developed.
The  local  artists  had  scrupulously  observed  and  handed  down  the  traditions
which  obtained  in  the  time  of  the  Pyramids,  and  more  especially  those  of  the


THE   GKEAT   GALLEKT   OF   THE    SERAPEUM.'


first  Theban  period ;  even  the  few  fragments  that  have  come  down  to  us  of  the
works  of  these  artists  in  the  age  of  the  Kamessides  recall  rather  the  style  of  the
VI"'  and  Xir"  dynasties  than  that  of  their  Theban  contemporaries.  Their
style,  brought  to  perfection  by  evident  imitation  of  the  old  Memphite  masters,
pleases  us  by  its  somewhat  severe  elegance,  the  taste  shown  in  the  choice  of
detail,  and  the  extraordinary  skill  displayed  in  the  working  of  the  stone.  The
Memphites  had  by  preference  used  limestone  for  their  sculpture,  the  Thebans
red  and  grey  granite  or  sandstone ;  but  the  artists  of  tlie  age  of  Psammeti-
chus  unhesitatingly  attacked  basalt,  breccia,  or  serpentine,  and  obtained
marvellous  effects  from  these  finely  grained  materials  of  regular  and  even
texture.  The  artistic  renaissance  which  they  brought  to  its  height  had  been
already  inaugurated  under  the  Ethiopians,  and  many  of  the  statues  we  possess
of  the  reign  of  Taharqa  are  examples  of  excellent  workmanship.  That  of
Amenertas  was  over-praised  at  the  time  of  its  discovery ;  the  face,  half  buried

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudiu,  from  au  engiaviDg  of  Deveria,  published  in  Mariette,  CLoix  de
Monuments  du  Sirapeum,  pi.  v.


504


THE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CHALDMAN  EMPIRE.


by  the  wig  which  we  usually  associate  with  the  statues  of  the  goddesses,  has  a
dull  and  vacant  expression  in  spite  of  its  set  smile,  and  the  modelling  of  the
figure  is  rather  weak,  but  nevertheless  there  is  something  easy  and  refined  in
the  gracefulness  of  the  statue  as  a  whole.  A  statuette  of  another  "Divine
Spouse,"  though  mutilated  and  unfinished,  is  pleasing  from  its  greater  breadth  of
style,^  although  such  breadth  is  rarely  found  in  the  works  of  this  school,  which
toned  down,  elongated,  and  attenuated  the  figure  till  it  often  lost  in  vigour  what
it  gained  in  distinction.  The  one  jjoint  in  which  the  Saite  artists  made  a  real
advance,  was  in  the  treatment  of  the  heads  of  their  models.  The  expression  is
often  refined  and  idealised  as  in  the  case  of  older  works,  but  occasionally  the
portraiture  is  exact  even  to  coarseness.     It  was  not  the  idealised  likeness  of


MEIIPHITK   BAS-ltELIEF    OF   THE    SAITE    EPOCU."


Montumihait  which  the  artist  wished  to  portray,  but  Montumihait  himself,
with  his  low  forehead,  his  small  close-set  eyes,  his  thin  cheeks,  and  the  deep
lines  about  his  nose  and  mouth.^  And  besides  this,  the  wrinkles,  the  crows'
feet,  tlie  cranial  projections,  the  shape  of  ear  and  neck,  are  brought  out  with
minute  fidelity.  A  statue  was  no  longer,  as  in  earlier  days,  merely  a  piece  of
sacred  stone,  the  support  of  the  divine  or  human  double,  in  which  artistic
value  was  an  accessory  of  no  importance  and  was  esteemed  only  as  a  guarantee
of  resemblance :  without  losing  aught  of  its  religious  significance,  a  statue
henceforward  became  a  work  of  art,  admired  and  prized  for  the  manner  in  which
the  sculptor  faithfully  represented  his  model,  as  well  as  for  its  mystic  utility.

The  reign  of  Psammetichus  lasted  till  nearly  the  end  of  the  century,  and  was
marked  by  peace  both  at  home  and  abroad.  No  doubt  skirmishes  of  some  kind
took  place  in  Lydia  and  Nubia,  but  we  know  nothing  of  them,  nor  have  we  any
account  of  engagements  with  the  Asiatics  which  from  time  to  time  must  liave
taken  place  during  this  reign.     Psammetichus  followed  with  a  vigilant  eye  the

'  See  this  statue  reproduced,  supra,  p.  491.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  heliogravure  iu  Maeiette,  Monuments  Divers,  pi.  35  b.  The  bas-
relief  was  worked  into  the  masonry  of  a  house  in  Memphis  iu  the  Byzantine  period,  and  it  was  in
order  to  fit  it  to  the  course  below  that  the  masons  bevelled  the  lower  part  of  it.

'  See  the  portrait  in  question,  supra,  p.  386.


:yw'  /'         /  ,,,,  ,/c'//'/.j


I


'4b^'


THE   SYRIAN  POLICY   OF  PSAMMETICHUS  I


505


revolutionary  cliauges  beyond  the  isthmus,  actuated  at  first  by  the  fear  of  an
offensive  movement  on  the  part  of  Syria,  and  when  that  ceased  to  be  a  danger,
by  the  hope  of  one  day  recovering,  in  Southern  Syria,  at  all  events,  that
leading  position  which  his  predecessors  had  held  so  long.     Tradition  asserts


XHli    KUINS   OP   SAIS.'


that  be  wisely  confined  his  ambition  to  the  conquest  of  the  Philistine
Pentapolis;  it  is  even  reported  that  he  besieged  Ashdod  for  twenty-nine
years  before  gaining  possession  of  it.  If  (ve  disregard  the  cipher,  which
is  evidently  borrowed  from  some  popular  romance,  the  fact  in  itself  is  in
no  way  improbable.  Ashdod  was  a  particularly  active  community,  and  had
played  a  far  more  important  part  in  earlier  campaigns  than  any  other
member  of  the  Pentapolis.  It  possessed  outside  the  town  proper,  which
was  situated  some  little  distance  from  the  coast,  a  seaport  similar  to  that
of  Gaza,  and  of  sufficient  size  to  shelter  a  whole  fleet.  Whoever  held
this  harbour  could  exercise  effective  control  over  the  main  routes  leading
from  Syria  into  Egypt.  Psammetichus  probably  undertook  this  expedition
towards  the  end  of  his  life,  when  the  victories  gained  by  the  Medes  had
demonstrated  the  incapacity  of  Assyria  to  maintain  the  defence  of  her  distant

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Golcnischeff,  taken  in  18S8.


506  TEE  MEDES   AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

provinces.^  The  attack  of  the  Scythians,  which  might  have  proved  dangerous  to
Egypt,  had  it  been  pushed  far  enough,  had  left  her  unharmed,  and  was  in  the  end
even  advantageous  to  her.^  It  was  subsequent  to  the  retreat  of  the  barbarians,
no  doubt,  that  Psammetiehus  sent  his  troops  into  Philistia  and  succeeded
in  annexing  the  whole  or  part  of  it.  After  this  success  he  was  content  to  wait
and  watch  the  course  of  events.  The  surprising  revival  of  Egypt  must  have
had  the  effect  of  infusing  fresh  life  into  the  Egyptian  factions  existing  in  all
the  autonomous  states,  and  in  the  prefectures  of  Syria.  The  appearance  of  the
Pharaoh's  troops,  and  the  toleration  of  their  presence  within  the  territory  of
the  Assyrian  empire,  aroused  on  all  sides  the  hope  of  deliverance,  and  incited
the  malcontents  to  take  some  immediate  action.

We  do  not  know  what  may  have  happened  at  Tyre  and  Sidon,  or  among
the  peoples  of  Edom  and  Arabia,  but  Judah,  at  any  rate,  under  the  rule  of
Josiah,  carefully  abstained  from  any  action  inconsistent  with  the  pledge  of  fidelity
which  it  had  given  to  Assyria.  Indeed,  the  wiiole  kingdom  was  completely
absorbed  in  questions  of  a  theological  nature,  and  the  agitations  which  affected
the  religious  life  of  the  nation  reacted  on  its  political  life  as  well.  Josiah,  as  he
grew  older,  began  to  identify  himself  more  and  more  with  the  doctrines  taught
by  the  prophets,  and,  thanks  to  his  support,  the  party  which  sought  to  complete
the  reforms  outlined  by  Hezekiah  gained  fresh  recruits  every  day.  The  oppo-
sition which  they  had  formerly  aroused  among  the  priests  of  the  temple  had
gradually  died  out,  partly  as  the  result  of  genuine  conviction,  and  partly
because  the  priests  had  come  to  realise  that  the  establishment  of  a  single  exclu-
sive sanctuary  would  work  for  their  own  interest  and  advantage.  The  high  priest
Hilkiah  took  up  the  line  followed  by  Jeremiah,  and  was  supported  by  a  number
of  influential  personages  such  as  Shaphan  the  scribe,  son  of  Azaliah,  Ahikam,
Achbor  son  of  Micaiah,  and  a  prophetess  named  Huldah,  who  had  married  the
keeper  of  the  royal  wardrobe.  The  terrors  of  the  Scythian  invasion  had  oppressed
the  hearts  and  quickened  the  zeal  of  the  orthodox.  Judah,  they  declared,  had  no
refuge  save  Jahveh  alone ;  all  hope  was  lost  if  it  persisted  in  the  doctrines  which
had  aroused  against  the  faithless  the  implacable  wrath  of  Jahveh ;  it  must
renounce  at  once  those  idols  and  superstitious  rites  with  which  His  worship  had
been  disfigured,  and  overthrow  the  altars  which  were  to  be  found  in  every  part  of

'  Herodotcs,  II.  clvii. ;  Diodorus  Sioulus,  i.  67.  At  one  time  I  was  inclined  to  explain  this  period  of
twenty-nine  years  by  assuming  that  the  fall  of  Ashdod  took  place  in  the  twenty-ninth  year  of  the  king's
reign,  and  that  Herodotus  had  mistaken  the  date  of  its  surrender  for  the  duration  of  the  siege :  such
an  hypothesis  is,  however,  unnecessary,  since  it  is  very  probable  that  we  have  here  one  of  those  exag-
gerated estimates  of  time  so  dear  to  the  hearts  of  popular  historians.  If  we  are  to  believe  the  account
given  by  Diodorus,  it  was  in  Syria  that  Psammetiehus  granted  the  honour  of  a  place  in  the  right  wing
of  his  army  to  the  Greek  mercenaries :  the  capture  of  Ashdod  must,  in  this  case,  have  occurred  before
the  emigration  of  the  native  troops.  In  .Ter.  xxv.  20,  reference  is  made  to  ''  the  remnant  of  Ashdod,"
in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  i.e.  about  603  B.C.,  and  the  decadence  of  the  city  is  generally  attri-
buted to  tlie  war  with  Egypt;  it  might  with  equal  probability  be  ascribed  to  the  Scythian  invasion.

-  Cf.  what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  the  Scythian  invasion  on  p.  479,  supra.


BISCOVEIIY    OF   THE  BOOK    OF   TEE  LAW  IN  JUDAH.  507

the  country  in  order  to  concentrate  all  its  devotion  on  the  temple  of  Solomon.
In  a  word,  Judah  must  return  to  an  observance  of  the  strict  letter  of  the  law,
as  it  had  been  followed  by  their  forefathers.  But  as  tills  venerable  code  was
not  to  be  found  either  in  the  "  Book  of  the  Covenant "  or  in  any  of  the  other
writings  held  sacred  by  Israel,  the  question  naturally  arose  as  to  where  it  was
now  hidden.  In  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign,  Josiah  sent  Shaphan  the
scribe  to  the  temple  in  order  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  sums  collected  at
the  gates  for  the  maintenance  of  the  building.  After  the  accounts  had  been
checked,  Hilkiah  suddenly  declared  that  he  had  "  found  the  Book  of  the  Law  "
in  the  temple,  and  thereupon  handed  the  document  to  Shaphan,  who  perused
it  forthwith.  On  his  return  to  the  palace,  the  scribe  made  his  report :  "  Thy
servants  have  emptied  out  the  money  that  was  found  in  the  house,  and  have
delivered  it  into  the  hand  of  the  workmen ;  "  then  he  added,  "  Hilkiah  the  priest
hath  delivered  me  a  book,"  and  proceeded  to  read  it  to  the  king.  When  the
latter  had  heard  the  words  contained  in  this  Book  of  the  Law,  he  was  seized
with  anguish,  and  rent  his  garments ;  then,  unable  to  arrive  at  any  decision  by
himself,  he  sent  Hilkiah,  Shaphan,  Ahikam,  Achbor,  and  Asaiah  to  inquire  of
Jahveh  for  him  and  for  his  people,  "  for  great  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is
kindled  against  us,  because  our  fathers  have  not  hearkened  unto  the  words  of
this  book,  to  do  according  unto  all  that  which  is  written  concerning  us."  The
envoys  betook  themselves  not  to  the  official  oracle  or  the  recognised  prophets,
but  to  a  woman,  the  prophetess  Huldah,  who  was  attached  to  the  court  in  virtue
of  her  husband's  office ;  and  she  bade  them,  in  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  to
summon  a  meeting  of  the  faithful,  and,  after  reading  the  new  code  to  them,
to  call  upon  all  present  to  promise  that  they  would  henceforth  observe  its
ordinances :  thus  Jahveh  would  be  appeased,  and  since  the  king  had  "  rent  his
garments  and  wept  before  Me,  I  also  have  heard  thee,  saith  Jahveh.  There-
fore, behold,  I  will  gather  thee  to  thy  fathers,  and  thou  shalt  be  gathered  to
thy  grave  in  peace."  Josiah  thereupon  having  summoned  the  elders  of  Judah
and  Jerusalem,  went  up  into  the  temple,  and  there,  standing  on  the  platform,
he  read  the  Book  of  the  Law  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  people.^

It  dealt  with  questions  which  had  been  frequent  subjects  of  debate  in
prophetic  circles  since  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  and  the  anonymous  writer  who
had  compiled  it  was  so  strongly  imbued  with  the  ideas  of  Jeremiah,  and  had
so  closely  followed  his  style,  that  some  have  been  inclined  to  ascribe  the  work
to  Jeremiah  himself.'^     It  has  always  been  a  custom  among  Orientals  to  affirm

'  2  Kings  xxii.  3-20;  xxiii.  1,  2.  The  narrative  lias  undergone  slight  interpolation  in  places,  e.ij.
verses  ib,  5u,  ej,  auj  7,  where  the  compiler  has  made  it  harmonise  with  events  previously  recorded
in  connection  with  the  reign  of  Joash  (2  Kings  xii.  G-16;  of.  p.  101,  supra).  The  beginning  of
Huldah's  prophecy  was  supprcsstd,  when  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  proved  tliat  the  reform  of  divine
worship  had  not  succeeded  in  aveitiug  the  wrath  of  Jahveh.  It  jjrobably  contained  directions  to
read  the  Buvh  of  the  Cooenant  to  tlie  peoijle,  and  to  persuade  them  to  adopt  its  precepts,  followed  by
a  promise  tu  save  Judah  provided  it  remained  faithful  to  its  engagements.

^  Kenan,  Hietoire  du  reuplc  tl'Israel,  vol.  iii.  pp.  233-23G.


508  THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

that  any  work  for  ivhich  they  profess  particular  esteem  was  discovered  in
the  temple  of  a  god ;  the  Egyptian  priests,  for  instance,  invented  an  origin
of  this  nature  for  the  more  important  chapters  of  their  Book  of  the  Dead,
and  for  the  leading  treatises  in  the  scientific  literature  of  Egypt.^  The
author  of  the  Book  of  the  Law  had  ransacked  the  distant  past  for  the  name  of
the  leader  who  had  delivered  Israel  from  captivity  in  Egypt.  He  told  how
Moses,  when  he  began  to  feel  the  hand  of  death  upon  him,  determined  to
declare  in  Gilead  the  decrees  which  Jahveh  had  delivered  to  him  for  the
guidance  of  His  people.^  In  these  ordinances  the  indivisible  nature  of  God,
and  His  jealousy  of  any  participation  of  other  deities  in  the  worship  of  His
people,  are  strongly  emphasised.  "  Ye  shall  surely  destroy  all  the  places
wherein  the  nations  which  ye  shall  possess  served  their  gods,  upon  the  high
mountains  and  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree :  and  ye  shall  break
down  their  altars,  and  dash  in  pieces  their  pillars,  and  burn  their  Aslierim  with
fire ;  and  ye  shall  hew  down  the  graven  images  of  their  gods ;  and  ye  shall
destroy  their  name  out  of  that  place."  ^  Even  were  a  prophet  or  dreamer  of
dreams  to  arise  in  the  midst  of  the  faithful  and  direct  them  by  a  sign  or  a
miracle  to  turn  aside  after  those  accursed  gods,  they  must  not  follow  the  teaching
of  these  false  guides,  not  even  if  the  sign  or  miracle  actually  came  to  pass,  but
must  seize  and  slay  them.  Even  "  if  thy  brother,  the  son  of  thy  mother,  or
thy  son,  or  thy  daughter,  or  the  wife  of  thy  bosom,  or  thy  friend  which  is  as
thine  own  soul,  entice  thee  secretly,  saying.  Let  us  go  and  serve  other  gods,
.  .  .  thou  shalt  not  consent  unto  him  nor  hearken  unto  him :  neither  shall
thine  eye  pity  him,  neither  shalt  thou  spare,  neither  shalt  thou  conceal  him  :
but  thou  shalt  surely  kill  him;  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put
him  to  death,  and  afterwards  the  hand  of  all  the  people.  And  thou  shalt  stone
him  with  stones  that  he  die ;  because  he  hath  sought  to  draw  thee  away  from
Jahveh !  "  *  And  this  Jahveh  was  not  the  Jahveh  of  any  special  place.  He
was  not  the  Jahveh  of  Bethel,  or  of  Dan,  or  of  Mizpah,  or  of  Geba,  or  of

'  Cf.  the  instances  which  I  have  mentioned  on  pp.  224,  225,  supra.

-  Even  St.  Jerome  (^Contra  Jovinianum,  i.  5)  and  St.  John  Chrysostom  {Homilia  de  Matth.,  9,  p.  1356)
admitted  that  Deuteronomy  was  the  book  discovered  by  Hilkiah  in  the  temple  during  the  reign  of
Josiah,  and  this  view  is  accepted  at  present,  though  it  is  applied,  not  to  tlie  book  of  Deuteronomy
as  it  appears  in  the  Pentateuch,  but  rather  to  the  nucleus  of  this  book,  and  especially  chaps,  xii.-
xxvi.  For  an  accurate  statement  of  the  whole  question,  and  an  indication  of  the  issues  raised  by  it
which  are  still  undecided,  I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  the  reader  to  one  of  the  numerous  test-books
ou  the  subject,  such  as  Coruill's  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  2ud  edit.,  pp.  29-45,  or  Driver's
Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  5th  edit.,  pp.  65-96.  The  numerous  editions  of
these  works  present  an  almost  annual  record  of  the  existing  state  of  critical  knowledge.  I  may  here
repeat  that  I  am  not  writing  llie  individual  history  of  the  Hebrews,  but  a  general  history  of  the
nations  of  the  East.  I  confine  myself  to  using  sucli  results  of  modern  criticism  as  seem  to  me
calculated  to  explain  the  march  of  political  events,  without  laying  stress  on  questions  which
belong  more  exclusively  to  the  history  of  religious  ideas.

=  Deut.  xii.  2,  3.  •  Deut.  xiii.  1-10.


THE  BOOK   OF   TEE  LAW  READ   IN  PUBLIC.  509

Beersbeba ;  He  is  simply  Jahveh.*  Yet  the  seat  of  His  worship  was  not  a
matter  of  indifference  to  Him.  "  Unto  the  place  which  Jahveh  shall  choose
out  of  all  your  tribes  to  put  His  name  there,  even  unto  His  habitation  shall  ye
seek,  and  thither  shalt  thou  come :  and  thither  shall  ye  bring  your  .  .  .
sacrifices  and  your  tithes."  ^  Jerusalem  is  not  mentioned  by  name,  but  the
reference  to  it  was  clear,  since  every  one  knew  that  the  suppression  of  the
provincial  sanctuaries  must  necessarily  benefit  it.  One  part  of  the  new  code
dealt  with  the  relations  between  different  members  of  the  community.  The
king  was  to  approximate  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  ideal  priest ;  he  was  not  to
lift  up  his  heart  above  his  brethren,  nor  set  his  mind  on  the  possession  of  many
chariots,  horses,  or  wives,  but  must  continually  read  the  law  of  God  aud  ponder
over  His  ordinances,  and  observe  them  word  for  word  all  the  days  of  his  life.^
Even  in  time  of  war  he  was  not  to  put  his  trust  in  his  soldiers  or  in  his  own
personal  valour ;  here  again  lie  must  allow  himself  to  be  guided  by  Jahveh,  and
must  undertake  nothing  without  first  consulting  Him  through  the  medium  of
His  priests.  The  poor,*  the  widow,  and  the  orphan,^  the  bondservant,^  and
even  the  stranger  within  the  gates — in  remembrance  of  the  bondage  in  Egypt '
— were  all  specially  placed  under  the  divine  protection ;  every  Jew  who  had
become  enslaved  to  a  fellow-countryman  was  to  be  set  at  liberty  at  the  end  of
six  years,  and  was  to  receive  a  small  allowance  from  his  master  which  would
ensure  him  for  a  time  against  starvation.^  The  regulations  in  regard  to  divine
worship  had  not  as  yet  been  drawn  up  in  that  spirit  of  hair-splitting  minute-
ness which,  later  on,  became  a  characteristic  of  Hebrew  legislation.  Only
three  great  festivals  are  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  the  Law.  The  Passover  was
celebrated  in  the  month  of  Abib,  when  the  grain  is  in  the  ear,  and  had  already
come  to  be  regarded  as  commemorative  of  the  Exodus ;  but  the  other  two,  the
Feast  of  Weeks  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  were  merely  associated  with  the
agricultural  seasons,  and  took  place,  the  former  seven  weeks  after  the  beginning
of  the  liarvest,  the  latter  after  the  last  of  the  crops  had  been  housed.^     The

'  Ueut,  vi.  i.  The  expression  found  in  Zech.  xiv.  9  was  borrowed  from  the  second  of  the
introductions  added  to  Deuteronomy  at  a  later  date  ;  the  phrase  harmonises  so  closely  with  the
main  purpose  of  the  bouk  itself,  that  there  can  be  no  objection  to  employing  it  here.

'  Deut.  xii.  5,  6.

'  Deut.  xvii.  li-20  ;  cf.  xx.  1-9  for  the  regulations  in  regard  to  the  levying  of  troops.

•  As  to  the  poor,  and  the  charitable  obligations  towards  them  imposed  by  their  common  religion,
cf.  Deut.  XV.  7-11 ;  as  to  the  rights  of  the  hired  servant,  cf.  xxiv.  14,  15.

'  Deut.  xxiv.  17-22  forbids  the  taking  of  a  widow's  clothing  in  pledge,  and  lays  down  regulations
in  regard  to  gleaning  permitted  to  widows  and  orphans  (cf.  Lev.  xix.  9, 10);  relerence  is  also  made  to
their  share  in  triennial  tithe  {Deut.  xiv.  28,  29;  xxvi.  12,  13)  and  in  the  solemn  festivals
{Deut.  xvi.  11-14).

'  Slaves  were  allowed  to  share  in  the  rejoicings  during  the  great  festivals  {Deut.  xvi.  11,  14),
and  certain  rights  were  accorded  to  women  taken  prisoners  in  war  who  had  become  their  captors'
concubines  {Deut.  xxi.  10-14).

'  Participation  of  the  stranger  in  the  triennial  tithe  {Deut.  xiv.  28,  29  ;  xxvi.  12,  13).

"  Deut.  XV.  12-18.  »  Deut.  xvi.  1-17.


510  THE  MEDES   AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIBE.

claim  of  the  priest  to  a  share  iu  the  victim  and  in  tlie  offerings  made  on
Tarious  occasions  is  maintained,  and  the  lawgiver  allows  him  to  draw  a  similar
benefit  from  the  annual  and  triennial  tithes  which  he  imposes  on  corn  and
wine  and  on  the  firstborn  of  cattle,  the  produce  of  this  tithe  being  devoted  to
a  sort  of  family  festival  celebrated  in  the  Holy  Place.^  The  priest  was  thus
placed  on  the  same  footing  as  the  poor,  the  widow,  the  orphan,  and  the  stranger,
and  his  influence  was  but  little  greater  than  it  had  been  in  the  early  days  of
the  monarchy.  It  was  to  the  prophet  and  not  to  the  priest  that  the  duty  be-
longed of  directing  the  public  conscience  in  all  those  cases  for  which  the  law
had  made  no  provision.  "  I  will  put  My  words  into  his  mouth  (said  Jahveh),
and  he  shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall  command  him.  And  it  shall
come  to  pass  that  whosoever  will  not  hearken  unto  My  words  which  he  shall
speak  in  My  name,  I  will  require  it  of  him.  But  the  prophet  which  shall
speak  a  word  presumptuously  in  My  name,  which  I  have  not  commanded  him
to  speak,  or  that  shall  speak  in  the  name  of  other  gods,  that  same  prophet
shall  die.  And  if  thou  say  in  thine  heart.  How  shall  we  know  the  word  wliich
the  Lord  hath  not  spoken  ? — when  a  prophet  speaketh  in  the  name  of  Jahveh,
if  the  thing  follow  not,  nor  come  to  pass,  that  is  the  thing  which  Jahveh  hath
not  spoken :  the  prophet  hath  spoken  it  presumptuously ;  thou  shalt  not  be
afraid  of  him."  ^

When  the  reading  of  the  law  had  ended,  Josiali  implored  the  people  to
make  a  covenant  with  Jahveh ;  that  is  to  say,  "  to  walk  after  Jahveh,  and  to
keep  His  commandments,  and  His  testimonies,  and  His  statutes,  with  all  their
hearts  and  all  their  souls,  to  confirm  the  words  of  this  covenant  that  were
written  in  this  book."  The  final  words,  which  lingered  in  every  ear,  contained
imprecations  of  even  more  terrible  and  gloomy  import  than  those  with  which
the  prophets  had  been  wont  to  threaten  Judah.  "  If  thou  wilt  not  hearken  unto
the  voice  of  Jahveh  thy  God,  to  observe  to  do  all  His  commandments  and  His
statutes  which  I  command  thee  this  day ;  then  all  these  curses  shall  come
upon  thee,  and  overtake  thee.  Cursed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city,  and  cursed
shalt  thou  be  in  the  field.  Cursed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  tliy  kneading-
trough.  Cursed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  body,  and  the  fruit  of  thy  ground,
the  increase  of  thy  kine,  and  tlie  young  of  thy  flock.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt
betroth  a  wife,  and  another  man  shall  lie  with  her  :  thou  shalt  build  an  house,
and  shalt  not  dwell  therein :  thou  shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  and  shalt  not  use  the
fruit  thereof.  Thine  ox  shall  be  slain  before  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shalt  not
eat  thereof.  .  .  .  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  given  unto  another
people ;  and  thine  eyes  shall  look,  and  fail  with  longing  for  them  all  the  day  :

'  Deut.  xviii.  1-8 :  as  to  the  share  in  the  triennial  tithe,  cf.  Deut.  xiv.  28,  29 ;  xxvi.  12,  13.
=  Deut.  xviii.  9-22.


w  JOSIAH'S  RELIGIOUS  BEFOBMS.  511

and    there  shall  be  naught    in    the  power  of  thine  hand.  .  .  .  Jahveh  shall

bring  a  nation  against  thee  from  far,  from  the  end  of  the  earth,  as  the  eagle

flieth  ;  a  nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  understand  ;  a  nation  of  fierce

countenance,  which  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the  old,  nor  show  favour  to

the  young."     This  enemy  was  to  burn  and  destroy  everything  :  "  and  he  shall

besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates,  throughout  all  thy  land,  which  Jahveh  thy  God

hath  given  thee.      And  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thine  own  body,  the  flesh  of

thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters  ...  in  the  straitness  wherewith  thine  enemies

shall  straiten  thee."     Those  who  escajDC  must  depart  into  captivity,  and  there

endure  for  many  a  long  year  the  tortures  of  direst  slavery ;  "  thy  life  shall  hang

in  doubt  before  thee;  and  thou  shalt  fear  night  and  day, and  shalt  have  none

assurance  of  thy  life  :  in  the  morning    thou  shalt    say,  Would   God  it  were

even !  and  at  even  thou  shalt  say.  Would  God  it  were  morning !   for  the  fear

of  thine  heart  which  thou  shalt  fear,  and  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou

shalt  see."  ^     The  assembly  took  the  oath  required  of  them,  and  the  king  at

once  displayed  the  utmost  zeal  in  exacting  literal  performance  of  the  ordinances

contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Law.     His  first  step  was  to  purify  the  temple  :

Hilldah  and  his   priests   overthrew  all  the  idols  contained  in  it,  and  all  the

objects   that  had  been  fashioned  in  honour  of  strange  gods — the  Baals,   the

Asherim,  and  all  the  Host  of  Heaven — and,  carrying  them  out  of  Jerusalem  into

the  valley  of  the  Kidron,  cast  them  into  the  flames,  and  scattered  the  ashes

upon  the  place  where  all  the  filth  of  the  city  was  cast  out.     The  altars  and  the

houses  of  the  Sodomites  which  defiled  the  temple  courts  were  demolished,  the

chariots  of  the  sun  broken  in  pieces,  and  the  horses  of  the  god  sent  to  the

stables  of  the  king's  chamberlain  ;  *   the  sanctuaries  and  high  places  which

had  been  set  up  at  the  gates  of  the  city,  in  the  public  places,  and  along  the

walls  were  razed  to  the  ground,  and  the  Tophet,  where  the  people  made  their

children  pass  through  the  fire,  was  transformed  into  a  common  sewer.     The  jn-o-

vincial  sanctuaries  shared  the  fate  of  those  of  the  capital ;  in  a  short  time,  from

Geba  to  Beersheba,  there  remained  not  one  of  those  "  high  places,"  at  which  the

ancestors  of  the  nation  and  their  rulers  had  offered  prayers  for  generations

past.      The  wave  of  reform  passed  even  across  the  frontier  and  was  borne  into

the  Assyrian  province  of  Samaria  ;  the  temple  and  image  which  Jeroboam  had

set  up  at  Bethel  were  reduced  to  ashes,  and  human  bones  were  burnt  upon  the

altar  to  desecrate  it  beyond  possibility  of  purification.-     The  governor  ofiiered

'  Deut.  xxviii.  The  two  sets  of  imprecations  (xxvii.,  xxviii.)  which  terminate  the  actual  work
are  both  of  later  redaction,  but  the  original  MS.  undoubtedly  ended  with  some  analogous  formula.
I  have  quoted  above  the  most  characteristic  parts  of  the  twenty-eighth  chapter.

*  [The  Hebrew  text  admits  of  this  meaning,  which  is,  however,  not  clear  in  the  English  A.V. — Tr.]

^  2  Kings  xxiii.  3-20,  21-27,  where  several  glosses  and  interpolations  are  easily  recognisable,

such  as  the  episode  at  Bethel  (v.  15-20),  the  authenticity  of  which  is  otherwise  iucontestable  (Stade,

in  the  Zeiiichrift  fiir  AltlestameiUliche  Wiseenscha/t,  1885,  p.  292,  et  seii.).     The  account  in  2  Chron.


512  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CEALDMAN  EMPIBE.

no  objection  to  these  acts ;  lie  regarded  them,  in  the  first  place,  as  the  private
affairs  of  the  subjects  of  the  empire,  with  which  he  had  no  need  to  interfere,  so
long  as  the  outburst  of  religious  feeling  did  not  tend  towards  a  revolt :  we
know,  moreover,  that  Josiah,  guided  on  this  point  by  the  prophets,  would  have
believed  that  he  was  opposing  the  divine  will  had  he  sought  to  free  himself  from
the  Assyrian  yoke  by  ordinary  political  methods;  besides  this,  in  621,  under
Assur-etililani,  five  years  after  the  Scythian  invasion,  the  prefect  of  Samaria
had  possibly  not  sufficient  troops  at  his  disposal  to  oppose  the  encroachments
of  the  vassal  princes.  It  was  an  affair  of  merely  a  few  months.  In  the  follow-
ing year,  when  the  work  of  destruction  was  over,  Josiah  commanded  that  the
Passover  should  be  kept  in  tlie  manner  prescribed  in  the  new  book ;  crowds
flocked  into  Jerusalem,  from  Israel  as  well  as  from  Judah,  and  the  festival
made  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  people.  Centuries  afterwards  the
Passover  of  King  Josiah  was  still  remembered  :  "  There  was  not  kept  such  a
Passover  from  the  days  of  the  Judges  .  .  .  nor  in  all  the  days  of  the  Kings
of  Israel,  nor  of  the  Kings  of  Judah."  ^  The  first  outburst  of  zeal  having
spent  itself,  a  reaction  was  ere  long  bound  to  set  in  both  among  the  ruling
classes  and  among  the  people,  and  the  spectacle  that  Asia  at  that  time  presented
to  their  view  was  truly  of  a  nature  to  incite  doubts  in  the  minds  of  the  faithful.
Assyria — that  Assyria  of  which  the  prophets  had  spoken  as  the  irresistible
emissary  of  the  Most  High — had  not  only  failed  to  recover  from  the  injuries  she
had  received  at  the  hands,  first  of  the  Medes,  and  then  of  the  Scythians,  but
had  with  each  advancing  year  seen  more  severe  wounds  inflicted  upon  her,
and  hastening  her  irretrievably  to  her  ruin.  And  besides  this,  Egypt  and
Chaldsea,  the  ancient  kingdoms  which  had  for  a  short  time  bent  beneath  her
yoke,  had  now  once  more  arisen,  and  were  astonishing  the  world  by  their
renewed  vigour.  Psammetichus,  it  is  true,  after  having  stretched  his  arm
across  the  desert  and  laid  hands  upon  the  citadel  which  secured  to  him  an  out-
let into  Syria  for  his  armies,  had  proceeded  no  further,  and  thus  showed  that  he
was  not  inclined  to  reassert  the  ancient  rights  of  Egypt  over  the  countries  of  the
Jordan  and  the  Orontes ;  but  he  had  died  in  611,  and  his  son,  Necho  II.,  who

xsxiv.  is  a  defaced  reproduction  of  that  of  2  Kings,  and  it  places  the  reform,  in  part   at  least,
before  the  discovery  of  the  new  law.

'  2  Kings  xsiii.  21-23;  of.  2  Chron.  xxxv.  1-19.  The  text  of  the  LXX.  appears  to  imply  that
it  -was  the  first  Passover  celebrated  in  Jerusalem.  It  also  gives  in  chap.  xxii.  3,  after  the
mention  of  the  eighteenth  year,  a  date  of  the  seventh  or  eighth  month,  which  is  not  usually  accepted,
as  it  is  in  contradiction  with  what  is  affirmed  in  chap,  xxiii.  21-23,  viz.  that  the  Passover
celebrated  at  Jerusalem  was  in  the  same  year  as  the  reform,  iu  the  eighteenth  year.  It  is  to  do  away
with  the  contradiction  between  these  two  passages  that  the  Hebrew  text  has  suppressed  the  mention  of
the  month.  I  think,  however,  it  ought  to  be  considered  authentic  and  be  retained,  if  we  are  allowed
to  place  the  celebration  of  the  Passover  in  what  would  be  one  year  after.  To  do  this  it  would  not  be
needful  to  correct  the  regnal  date  in  the  text:  admitting  that  the  reform  took  place  in  621,  the
Passover  of  620  would  still  quite  well  liave  taken  place  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah,  that  being
dependent  on  the  time  of  year  at  which  the  king  had  ascended  the  throne.


,  NECEO   II.    INVADES   SYRIA.  513

P

succeeded  him,  did  not  manifest  the  same  peaceful  intentions.^  If  he  decided
to  try  his  fortune  in  Syria,  supported  by  his  Greek  and  Egyptian  battalions,
what  would  be  the  attitude  that  Judah  would  assume  between  moribund  Assyria
and  the  kingdom  of  the  Phai-aohs  in  its  renewed  vigour  ?

It  was  in  the  spring  of  608  that  the  crisis  occurred.  Nineveh,  besieged  by
the  Medes,  was  on  the  point  of  capitulating,  and  it  was  easy  to  foresee  that  the
question  as  to  who  should  rule  there  would  shortly  be  an  open  one  :  ^  should
Egypt  hesitate  longer  in  seizing  what  she  believed  to  be  her  rightful  heritage,
she  would  run  the  risk  of  finding  the  question  settled  and  another  in  posses-
sion. Necho  quitted  Memphis  and  made  his  way  towards  the  Asiatic  frontier
with  the  army  which  his  father  had  left  to  him.^  It  was  no  longer  composed
of  the  ill-organised  bands  of  the  Ethiopian  kings  or  the  princes  of  the  Delta,
temporarily  united  under  the  rule  of  a  single  leader,  but  all  the  while  divided
by  reciprocal  hatreds  and  suspicions  which  doomed  it  to  failure.  All  the  troops
which  constituted  it — Egyptians,  Libyans,  and  Greeks  alike — were  thoroughly
under  the  control  of  their  chief,  and  advanced  in  a  compact  and  irresistible
mass  "like  the  Nile  :  like  a  river  its  volume  rolls  onward.  It  said  :  I  arise,  I
inundate  the  earth,  I  will  drown  cities  and  people  !  Charge,  horses  !  Chariots,
fly  forward  at  a  gallop  !  Let  the  warriors  march,  the  Ethiopian  and  the  Libyan
under  the  shelter  of  his  buckler,  the  fellah  bending  the  bow  ! "  *  As  soon  as
Josiah  heard  the  news,  lie  called  together  his  troops  and  prepared  to  resist  the
attack.  Necho  affected  not  to  take  his  d^onstrations  seriously,  and  sent  a
disdainful  message  recommending  him  to  remain  neutral :  "  What  have  I  to  do
with  thee,  thou  King  of  Judah  ?  I  come  not  against  thee  this  day,  but  against
the  house  wherewith  I  have  war  ;  and  God  hath  commanded  me  to  make
haste :  forbear  thee  from  meddling  with  God  who  is  with  me,  that  He  destroy
thee  not ! "  ^  Having  despatched  the  message,  probably  at  the  moment  of
entering  the  Shephelali,  he  continued  in  a  northerly  direction,  nothing  doubting
that  his  warning  had  met  a  friendly  reception  ;  but  however  low  Nineveh
had  fallen,  Josiah  could  not  feel  that  he  was  loosed  from  the  oaths  which
bound   him  to  her,  and,  trusting   in  the  help  of  Jahveh,   he   threw  himself

'  The  last  dated  stele  of  Psammetichus  I.  is  the  official  epitaph  of  the  Apis  which  died  in  his
fifty-second  year  (Mariette,  Henseignements  siir  les  soixaide-quatre  Apis,  iu  the  Bulletin  Ardigologique
de  V Ath^iimimi  Frangais,  1856,  pp.  78-80).  On  the  other  hand,  an  Apis,  born  in  the  fifty-third  year  of
Psammetichus,  died  in  tlie  sixteenth  year  of  Necho,  after  liaviiig  lived  16  years,  7  months,  17  days.
A  very  simple  calculation  shows  that  Psammetichus  I.  reigned  fifty-four  years,  as  stated  by  Herodotus
(II.  clvii.)  and  Manetho,  according  to  Julius  Africauus  (Mijller-Didot,  Fragrii.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp .
593-595).  Cf.  on  this  subject  Lepsius,  Einige  von  Jlerrn  Mariette  hrieflich  ubersendete  Apis-Daten,  in
Transactions  of  Acad,  of  Sciences  at  Berlin,  185'1,  where  the  calculation  was  made  for  the  first  time.

=  Cf.  supra,  pp.  184,  485.

3  Herodotus.  II.  clix.,  where  it  is  distinctly  said  that  Neclio  took  the  land  route.

'  Jer.  xlvi.  7-9,  where  the  prophet  describes,  not  the  army  which  marclied  against  Josiah,  but  tliat
which  was  beaten  at  Carohemish.  With  a  difference  of  date  of  only  three  or  four  years,  the  constituent
elements  of  the  army  were  certainly  the  same,  so  tliat  the  description  of  one  would  apply  to  the  other.

'  The  message  of  Necho  to  Josiah  is  known  to  us  from  2  Citron,  xxxv.  20-22.

2   L


514  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

resolutely  into  the  struggle.  The  Egyptian  generals  were  well  acquainted  with
the  route  as  far  as  the  further  borders  of  Philistia,  having  passed  along  it  a  few
years  previously,  at  the  time  of  the  campaign  of  Psammetichus ;  but  they  had
no  experience  of  the  country  beyond  Ashdod,  and  were  solely  dependent  for
guidance  on  the  information  of  merchants  or  the  triumphant  records  of  the
old  Theban  Pharaohs.  These  monuments  followed  the  traditional  road  which
had  led  their  ancestors  from  Gaza  to  Megiddo,  from  Megiddo  to  Qodshu,  from
Qodshu  to  Carchemish,  and  they  were  reckoning  on  passing  through  the  valley
of  the  Jordan,  and  then  that  of  the  Orontes,  without  encountering  any  resistance,
when,  at  the  entrance  to  the  gorges  of  Carmel,  they  were  met  by  the  advance
guard  of  the  Judtean  army.  Josiah,  not  having  been  warned  in  time  to  meet
them  as  they  left  the  desert,  !iad  followed  a  road  parallel  to  their  line  of  march,
and  had  taken  up  his  position  in  advance  of  them  on  the  plain  of  Megiddo,  on
the  very  spot  where  Thutmosis  III.  had  vanquished  the  Syrian  confederates
nearly  ten  centuries  before.  The  King  of  Judah  was  defeated  and  killed  in
the  confusion  of  the  battle,  and  the  conqueror  pushed  on  northwards  without,
at  that  moment,  giving  the  fate  of  the  scattered  Jews  a  further  thought.^  He
rapidly  crossed  the  plain  of  the  Orontes  by  the  ancient  caravan  track,  and
having  reached  the  Euphrates,  he  halted  under  the  walls  of  Carchemish.
Perhaps  he  may  have  heard  there  of  the  fall  of  Nineveh,  and  the  fear  of
drawing  down  upon  himself  the  Medes  or  the  Babylonians  prevented  him
from  crossing  the  river  and  raiding  the  country  of  the  Balikb,  whicli,  from  the
force  of  custom,  the  royal  scribes  still  persisted  in  designating  by  the  disused
name  of  Mitanni.'^  He  returned  southwards,  after  having  collected  the  usual
tributes  and  posted  a  few  garrisons  at  strategic  points ;  at  Eiblah  he  held  a
kind  of  Durhar  to  receive  the  homage  of  the  independent  Phoenicians  ^  and
of  the  old  vassals  of  Assyria,  who,  owing  to  the  rapidity  of  his  movements,
had  not  been  able  to  tender  their  offerings  on  his  outward  march.  The  Jews
had  rescued  the  body  of  their  king  and  had  brought  it  back  in  his  cliariot  to

'  2  Kings  xxiii.  29 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  sxxv.  22,  23.  It  is  probably  to  this  battle  that  Herodotus  alludes
(II.  clix.)  when  he  says  that  Necho  overcame  the  Syrians  at  Magdolos.  The  identity  of  Magdolosand
Megiddo,  accepted  by  almost  all  historians,  was  disputed  by  Gutschmid  {Kleiiie  Schriften.  vol.  iv.  pp.
496,  497),  who  sees  in  the  Magdolos  of  Herodotus  the  Migdol  of  the  Syro-Egyptiaa  frontier,  and  in
the  engagement  itself,  an  engagement  of  Necho  with  the  Assyrians  and  their  Philistine  allies;  also
by  Th.  Eeinach  {La  Bataille  de  Mageddo  et  la  chute  de  Ninive,  pp.  4,  5),  who  prefers  to  identify
Magdolos  with  one  of  the  Migdols  near  Ascalou,  and  considera  this  combat  as  fought  against  the
Assyrian  army  of  occupation.  If  the  information  in  Herodotus  were  indeed  borrowed  from  Hecatseus
of  Miletus  (Wiedemann',  Uerodot's  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  567,  568),  and  by  the  latter  from  the  inscription
placed  by  Necho  in  the  temple  of  Branchidse  (Th.  Reixach,  La  Bataille  de  Mageddo,  p.  4),  it  appears
to  me  impossible  to  admit  that  Magdolos  does  not  here  represent  Megiddo.

'  The  text  of  2  Kings  xxiii.  29  says  positively  that  Necho  was  marching  towards  the  Euphrates.
The  name  Mitanni  is  Ibund  even  in  Ptolemaic  times.

^  The  submission  of  the  Phoenicians  to  Necho  is  gathered  from  a  passage  in  Berosus  (Fragm.  14,  in
Mt'LLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  506),  where  he  says  that  the  Egyptian  army  beaten  at
Carchemish  comprised  Phanicians,  besides  Syrians  and  Arabs.  For  the  similar  gathering  held  by
Tiglath-pileser  HI.  at  Damascus,  cf.  pp.  189,  190  of  the  present  volume.


THE  DEATH   OF  JaSIAH  AT  MEGIDDO.  515

Jerusalem ;  they  proclaimed  iu  his  stead,  not  his  eldest  son  Eliakim,  but  the
youngest,  Shallum,  who  adopted  the  name  of  Jehoahaz  on  ascending  the  throne.
He  was  a  young  man,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  light  and  presumptuous  of
disposition,  opposed  to  the  reform  movement,  and  had  doubtless  been  unwise
enough  to  display  his  hostile  feelings  towards  the  conqueror.  Necho  sum-
moned him  to  Riblah,  deposed  him  after  a  reign  of  three  months,  condemned
him  to  prison,  and  replaced  him  by  Eliakim,  who  changed  his  name  to  that  of
Jehoiakim — "  he  whom  Jahveh  exalts  ;  "  and  after  laying  Judah  under  a  tribute
of  one  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  one  of  gold,  the  Egyptian  monarch  returned
to  his  own  country.^  Certain  indications  lead  us  to  believe  that  he  was  obliged
to  undertake  other  punitive  expeditions.  The  Philistines,  pro-
bably deceived  by  false  rumours  of  his  defeat,  revolted  against  him
about  the  time  that  he  was  engaged  iu  hostilities  in  Northern
Syria,  and  on  receiving  news  not  only  of  his  safety,  but  of  the
victory  he  had  gained,  their  alarm  was  at  once  aroused.  Juduh
forgot  her  own  sorrows  on  seeing  the  peril  in  which  they  stood,
and  Jeremiah  pronounced  against  them  a  prophecy  full  of  menace.

VICTORIOUS  NECHO.-

"Behold,"  he  cried,  "waters  rise  up  out  of  the  north,  and  shall
become  an  overflowing  stream,  and  shall  overflow  the  land  and  all  that  is  therein,
the  city  and  them  that  dwell  therein :  and  the  men  shall  cry,  and  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  land  shall  howl  .  .  .  for  the  Lord  will  spoil  the  Philistines,  the  remnant
of  the  Isle  of  Caphtor.  Baldness  is  come  upon  Gaza  ;  Ascalon  is  dumb  with  terror,
and  you,  all  that  are  left  of  the  giants,  how  long  will  ye  tear  your  faces  in  your
mourning  ?  "  *  Ascalon  was  sacked  and  then  Gaza,^  and  Necho  at  length  was  able
to  re-enter  his  domains,  doubtless  by  the  bridge  of  Zalu,  following  in  this  his
models,  his  heroic  ancestors  of  the  great  Theban  dynasties.  He  wi.shed  thereupon
to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  Greeks  who  had  served  him  so  bravely,  and  as
soon  as  the  division  of  the  spoil  had  been  made,  he  sent  as  an  offering  to  the  temjjle
of  Apollo  at  Miletus,  the  cuirass  which  he  had  worn  throughout  the  campaign.^

'  2  Kings  sxiii.  30-55;  cf.  2  Chron.  .xxxvi.  1-4,  and  for  the  name  of  Shallum,  Jer.  xxii.  II.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gutlin,  fro"m  a  photograplx  published  in  MAraETTE,  Album  photograpkique  du
Muf^e  de  Buidaq,  pi.  36.  This  scarab,  now  in  the  Gizeh  ^Museum  (Mariette,  Notice  des  prin.  Mon.,  1876,
p.  207,  and  Mon.  Divers,  pi.  48  c),  is  the  only  Egyptian  monument  which  alludes  to  the  victories  of  Necho.
Above,  the  king  stands  between  Nit  and  Isis ;   below,  the  vanquished  are  stretched  on  the  ground.

*  [R.V.,  "Ashkelon  is  brought  to  nought,  the  remnant  of  their  valley:  how  long  wilt  thou  cut
thyself?"— Tr.]

'  Jer.  xlvii.,  which  is  u.sually  attributed  to  a  period  subsequent  to  the  defeat  at  Carchemish  or  even
later ;  the  title,  which  alone  mentions  the  Egyptians,  is  wanting  iu  the  LXX.  If  we  admit  that  the
enemy  coming  from  the  north  is  the  Egyptian  and  not  the  Chaldasan,  as  do  most  writers,  the  only
time  that  danger  could  have  tlireatened  Philistia  from  tlie  Egyptians  coining  fjom  the  north,  was  when
Necho,  victorious,  was  returning  from  his  first  campaign.  In  this  case,  tlie  Kadytis  of  Herodotus
(II.  clix.),  which  has  caused  so  much  trouble  to  commentators,  would  certainly  be  Gaza,  and  there
would  be  no  dilliculty  in  explaining  how  tlie  tradition  preserved  by  the  Greek  historian  placed  the
taking  of  tliis  town  after  the  battle  of  Megiddo.

*  Hekodoti'.s,  II.  clix.,  probably  following  Iltcatajus  of  Jliletus;  cf.  Wiedema.vm,  Jhrodal'ii
Zweites  Buck,  pp.  567,  568.


516  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

We  can  picture  the  reception  which  bis  subjects  gave  him,  and  how  the
deputations  of  priests  and  nobles  in  white  robes  flocked  out  to  meet  him  with
garlands  of  flowers  in  their  hands,  and  with  acclamations  similar  to  those  which
of  old  had  heralded  the  return  of  Seti  I.  or  Ramses  11.^  National  pride,  no
doubt,  was  flattered  by  tliis  revival  of  military  glory,  but  other  motives  than
those  of  vanity  lay  at  the  root  of  tiie  delight  exhibited  by  the  whole  country  at
the  news  of  the  success  of  the  expedition.  The  history  of  the  century  which
was  drawing  to  its  close,  had  demonstrated  more  than  once  how  disadvantageous
it  was  to  Egypt  to  be  separated  from  a  great  power  merely  by  the  breadth  of
the  isthmus.  If  Taharqa,  instead  of  awaiting  the  attack  on  the  banks  of
the  Nile,  had  met  the  Assyrians  at  the  foot  of  Carmel,  or  even  before  Gaza,
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  Esarhaddon  to  turn  the  glorious  king-
dom of  the  Pharaohs  into  an  Assyrian  province  after  merely  a  few  weeks  of
fighting.  The  dictates  of  prudence,  more  tlian  those  of  ambition,  rendered,
therefore,  tlie  conquest  of  Syria  a  necessity,  and  Necho  showed  his  wisdom  in
undertaking  it  at  the  moment  when  the  downfall  of  Nineveh  reduced  all  risk
of  opposition  to  a  minimum ;  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  the  conquerors
of  Sin-shar-ishkun  would  tolerate  for  long  the  interference  of  a  third  robber,
and  would  consent  to  share  the  spoil  with  these  Africans,  who,  having  had
none  of  the  trouble,  had  hastened  to  secure  the  profit.  All  the  Mediterranean
dependencies  of  Assyria,  such  as  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  and  Judoea,  fell  natur-
ally within  the  sphere  of  Babylon  rather  than  that  of  Media,  and,  indeed,
Cyaxares  never  troubled  himself  about  them  ;  and  Nabopolassar,  who  con-
sidered them  his  own  by  right,  had  for  the  moment  too  much  in  hand  to
permit  of  his  reclaiming  them.  The  Aramaeans  of  the  Khabur  and  the  Balikh,
the  nomads  of  the  Mesopotamian  plain,  had  not  done  homage  to  him,  and  the
country  districts  were  infested  with  numerous  bands  of  Ciuimeriaus  and
Scythians,  who  had  quite  recently  pillaged  the  sacred  city  of  Harran  and
violated  the  temple  of  the  god  Sin.^  Nabopolassar,  who  was  too  old  to
command  his  troops  in  person,  probably  entrusted  the  conduct  of  them  to
Nebuchadrezzar,  who  was  the  son  he  had  appointed  to  succeed  him,  and
who  had  also  married  the  Median  princess.  Three  years  suftieed  this  prince  to
carry  the  frontier  of  the  new  Chaldsean  empire  as  far  as  the  Syrian  fords  of
the  Euphrates,  within  sight  of  Thapsacus  and  Carchemish.     Harran  remained

'  Cf.  the  picture  given  of  the  reception  of  Seti  I.  at  Zalu  on  his  return  from  his  tirst  Syrian
campaign  {Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  123,  371,  372).

'  Inscrip.  of  the  Cylinder  of  Nabonidus,  col.  x.  II.  12-21,  where  the  pillage  of  Harran  is  mentioned
as  having  taken  place  tifty-four  years  before  the  dato  of  its  restoration  by  Nabonidus.  This  was  begun ,
as  we  know,  in  the  third  year  of  that  king  (Cylinder  of  Nabonidus,  col.  i.  11.  8-38;  cf.  Peiser,  In-
schriften  Nabonid's,  iu  Schbadee,  Keilinschrift.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  06-99),  possibly  in  534-3.
The  date  of  tlie  destruction  is,  therefore,  G08-7,  that  is  to  say,  a  few  months  before  the  destruction
of  Nineveh.


TEE  BATTLE   OF  CAECEEMISH.  517

in  the  hands  of  the  barbarians,^  probably  on  condition  of  their  paying  a
tribute,  but  the  district  of  the  Subaru  was  laid  waste,  its  cities  reduced  to
ashes,^  and  the  Babylonian  suzerainty  established  on  the  southern  slopes  of  the
Masios.  Having  brought  these  prelirainary  operations  to  a  sirccessful  issue,
Nabopolassar,  considering  himself  protected  on  the  north  and  north-east  by  his
friendship  with  Cyaxares,  no  longer  hesitated  to  make  an  effort  to  recover  the
regions  dominated  by  Egyptian  influence,  and,  if  the  occasion  presented  itself,
to  reduce  to  submission  the  Pharaoh  who  was  in  his  eyes  merely  a  rebellious
satrap.^  Nebuchadrezzar  again  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops  ;
Necho,  warned  of  his  projects,  hastened  to  meet  him  with  all  the  forces  at  his
disposal,  and,  owing  probably  to  the  resistance  offered  by  the  garrisons  which
he  possessed  in  the  Hittite  fortresses,  he  bad  time  to  continue  his  march  as  far
as  the  Euphrates.  The  two  armies  encountered  each  other  at  Carchemish ;  the
Egyptians  were  completely  defeated  in  spite  of  their  bravery  and  the  skilful
tactics  of  their  Greek  auxiliaries,  and  the  Asiatic  nations,  who  had  once  more
begun  to  rely  on  Egypt,  were  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  they  were  as
unequal  to  the  task  of  overcoming  Chaldaea  as  they  had  been  of  sustaining  a
struggle  with  Assyria.*  The  religious  party  in  Judah,  whose  hopes  had  been
disappointed  by  the  victory  of  Pharaoh  at  Megiddo,  now  rejoiced  at  his  defeat,
and  when  the  remains  of  his  legions  made  their  way  back  across  the  Philistine
plain,  closely  pressed  by  the  enemy,  Jeremiah  hailed  them  as  they  passed  with
cutting  irony.  Two  or  three  brief,  vivid  sentences  depicting  the  spirit  that  had
fired  them  a  few  months  before,  and  then  the  picture  of  their  disorderly  flight:
"  Order  ye  the  buckler  and  shield,  and  draw  near  to  battle.  Harness  the  horses ;
and  get  up,  ye  horsemen,  and  stand  forth  with  your  helmets ;  furbish  the  spears,
put  on  the  coats  of  mail.  Wherefore  have  I  seen  it  ?  They  are  dismayed  and
turn  backward  ;  and  their  mighty  ones  are  beaten  down,  and  are  fled  apace,  and
look  not  back ;  terror  is  on  every  side,  saith  the  Lord.     Let  not  the  swift  flee

'  The  p;i36age  in  the  Cylinder  of  Nahunhlus,  cited  on  note  2  of  p.  510,  shows  that  the  barbarians
remained  in  possession  of  the  town.'

'  Cylinder  of  Nabopolassar,  col.  ii.  11.  1-4,  where  the  te.xt,  incomplete  when  published  by  Wiucklei-
(Einige  neuveroffentiichte  Texte  Hammurahis,  Nahopolassars  und  Nehukadnezars,  in  the  Zeitschri/t  fUr
Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  145,  140  ;  cf.  Strassmatek,  Inschriften  Nahopolassars  und  Smerdis,  in  the  Zeit-
scliriftfiir  .48«.,  vol.  iv.  lOS),  has  been  corrected  from  the  copy  discovered  hy  KiXyTaoht  {The  Bahylonian
Expedition  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  i.  p.  33,  col.  i.  II.  27-29).  Messerschinidt  has  pointed
out  its  value,  but  he  would  see  in  it  a  preliminary  attack  of  the  Chaldeans  against  Nineveli  prior  to
its  fall  (Die  Imchrift  der  Stele  Nabunaid's,  pp.  7,  8) :  it  appears  to  me  more  reasonable,  until  further
light  shall  be  cast  on  the  question,  to  recognise  in  this  war,  as  a  natural  result  of  the  f^iU  of  Niueveh,
the  submission  of  the  peoples  of  the  Masios,  shortly  before  the  campaign  against  Neclio.  For  the
Subaru,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  597,  note  1,  005,  007.

"  Cf.  supra,  p.  480,  note  2.

'  Jer.  xlvi.  2 ;  cf.  2  Kings  xxiv.  7,  where  the  editor,  without  mentioning  the  battle  of  Carchemish,
recalls  in  passing  that  "  the  King  of  Babylon  had  taken,  from  the  brook  of  Egypt  unto  the  river
Euphrates,  all  that  pertained  to  the  King  of  Egypt."


518  THE   MEDES   ASl>    TEE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

away,  nor  the  miglity  man  escape ;  in  the  north  by  the  river  Euphrates  have
they  stumbled  and  fallen.  ...  Go  up  into  Gilead,  and  take  balm,  0  virgin
daughter  of  Egypt ;  in  vain  dost  thou  use  many  medicines  ;  there  is  no  healing
for  thee.  The  nations  have  heard  of  thy  shame,  and  the  earth  is  full  of  thy
cry :  for  the  mighty  man  hath  stumbled  against  the  mighty,  they  are  falleu
both  of  them  together."  *  Nebuchadrezzar  received  by  the  way  the  submission
of  Jehoiakim  and  of  the  princes  of  Ammon,  Moab,  and  the  Philistines ;  '^  he  was
uearing  Pelusium  on  his  way  into  Egypt,  when  a  messenger  brought  him  the
news  of  his  father's  death.  He  feared  lest  a  competitor  should  dispute  his
throne — perhaps  his  younger  brother,  that  Nabu-shum-lishir  who  had  figured  at
his  side  at  the  dedication  of  a  temple  to  Marduk.*  He  therefore  concluded
an  armistice  with  Necho,  by  the  terms  of  wliich  he  remained  master  of  the
whole  of  Syria  between  tlie  Euphrates  and  theWady  el-Arish,  and  then  hastily
turned  homewards.  But  his  impatience  could  not  brook  the  delay  occasioned
by  the  slow  march  of  a  large  force,  nor  the  ordinary  circuitous  route  by
Carchemish  and  through  Mesopotamia.  He  hurried  across  the  Arabian  desert,
accompanied  by  a  small  escort  of  light  troops,  and  presented  himself  unex-
pectedly at  the  gates  of  Babylon.  He  found  all  iu  order.  His  Chaldsean
ministers  had  assumed  the  direction  of  affairs,  and  had  reserved  the  throne
for  the  rightful  lieir;  he  had  only  to  appear  to  be  acclaimed  and  obeyed
(B.C.  605).^

His  reign  was  long,  prosperous,  and  on  the  whole  peaceful.  The  recent
changes  in  Asiatic  politics  had  shut  out  the  Chaldseans  from  the  majority  of
the  battle-fields  on  which  the  Assyrians  had  been  wont  to  wage  warfare  with
the  tribes  on  their  eastern  and  northern  frontiers.  We  no  longer  see  stirring
on  the  border-land  those  confused  masses  of  tribes  and  communities  of  whose
tumultuous  life  the  Ninevite  annals  make  such  frequent  record :  Elam  as  an
independent  state  no  longer  existed,  neither  did  EUipi  and  Namri,  nor  the
Cossseans,  nor  Parsua,  nor  the  Medes  with  their  perpetual  divisions,  nor  the
Urartians  and  the  Mannai  iu  a  constant  state  of  ferment  within  their  moun-
tain territory ;  all  that  remained  of  that  turbulent  world  now  constituted  a
single  empire,  united  under  the  hegemony  of  the  Medes,  and  the  rule  of  a

'  /cr.  xlv.  3-6,  11,  12.

'  The  submission  of  all  these  peoples  is  implied  by  the  passage  already  cited  in  2  Kings
xxiv.  7;  Berosus  speaks  of  the  Phoenician,  Jewish,  and  Syrian  prisoners  whom  Nebuchadrezzar
left  to  his  generals,  when  he  resolved  to  return  to  Babylon  by  the  shortest  route  {Fragment  H,
in  MuLLEK-DiDOT,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grsecorum,  vol.  ii.  p.  506;  cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  Jud.,
bk.  s.

^  Cylinder  of  Nahopolassar,  col.  iii.  11.  6-25  :  ef.  Winxkler,  Inschrift.  Nabopolassar's,  in  Sohradee,
Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  iii,,  2nd  part,  pp.  6,  7.

'  Berosus,  Fragm.  14,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragin.  Eist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  506,  507 ;  ef.  for  the  details,
JosEPHfs,  Ant.  Jud.,  bk.  x.


NEBVCEADEEZZAR  AND  EIS  POLICY  WITH  BEGARD  TO  MEDIA.      519

successful  conqueror.  The  greater  part  of  Elam  was  already  subject  to  those
Achsemenides  who  called  themselves  sovereigns  of  Anshan  as  well  as  of  Persia,
and  whose  fief  was  dependent  on  the  kingdom  of  Ecbatana :  ^  it  is  probable
that  Chaldaja  received  as  her  share  of  the  ancient  Susian  territory  the  low
countries  of  the  Uknu  aud  the  Ulai,  occupied  by  the  xVramfean  tribes  of  the
Puqudu,  the  Kutu,  and  the  Gambulu  ;  ^  but  Susp,  fell  outside  her  portion,  and
was  soon  transformed  into  a  flourishing  Iranian  town.  The  plains  bordering
the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris,  from  the  Uknu  to  the  Turnat  or  the  Kadanu,
which  had  belonged  to  Babylon  from  the  very  earliest  times,  were  no  doubt
still  retained  by  lier;^  but  the  mountain  district  which  commanded  them
certainly  remained  in  the  hands  of  Cyaxares,  as  well  as  the  greater  part  of
Assyria  proper,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  from  the  Radanu
northwards  the  Tigris  formed  the  boundary  between  tlie  two  allies,  as  far  as  the
confluence  of  the  Zab.  The  entire  basin  of  the  Upper  Tigris  and  its  Assyrian
colonies,  Amidi  aud  Tushkan,  were  now  comprised  in  the  sphere  of  Medic
influence,  and  the  settlement  of  the  Scythians  at  Harrau,  around  one  of  the
most  venerated  of  the  Semitic  sanctuaries,  shows  to  what  restrictions  the  new
authority  of  Chaldaea  was  subjected,  even  in  the  districts  of  Mesopotamia,  which
were  formerly  among  the  most  faithful  possessions  of  Nineveh.  If  these  barbarians
had  been  isolated,  they  would  not  long  have  defied  the  King  of  Babylon,  but
being  akin  to  the  peoples  who  were  subject  to  Cyaxares,  they  probably  claimed
his  protection,  and  regarded  themselves  as  his  liege  men ;  it  was  necessary  to
treat  them  with  consideration,  and  tolerate  the  arrogance  of  their  presence
upon  the  only  convenient  road  which  connected  the  eastern  with  the  western
provinces  of  the  kingdom.^     It  is  therefore  evident  that  there  was  no  opening

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  456,  ioO.  "The  king  and  the  princes  of  Elam  "  mentioned  in  Jer.  xxv.  25,  xlix.
35-39,  and  in  Ezel:.  sxxii.  2-t,  25,  in  tlie  time  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  are  probably  tlie  Persian  kings  of
Anshan  and  their  Elamite  vassals— not  only,  as  is  usually  believed,  the  kiugs  and  native  princes
conquered  by  Assur-bani-pal ;  the  same  probably  holds  good  of  the  Elam  which  an  anonymous  prophet
associates  with  the  Medes  under  Nabonidns,  in  the  destruction  of  Babylon  {ha.  xxi.  2).  The  princes
of  Malamir,  whom  BiUerbeck  places  about  this  time  {Susii,  pp.  122-125),  appear  to  me  to  belong  to  an
anterior  ejKJoh,  as  I  have  said  above  (cf.  supra,  pp.  228,  230).

=  The  enumeration  given  in  Ezelc.  xxiii.  23,  "the  Babylonians  and  all  the  Chaldicans,  Peliud,
and  Shoa,  and  Koa,"  shows  us  probably  that  the  Aramseans  of  the  Lower  Tigris  represented  by  Pekod,
as  those  of  the  Lower  Euphrates  are  by  the  Cliald;oans,  belonged  to  the  Babylonian  empire  in  tbe  time
of  the  prophet.  They  are  also  considered  as  belonging  to  Babylon  in  the  passage  of  an  anonymous
prophet  (Jer.  1.  21),  who  wrote  in  tlie  last  days  of  the  Chaldaian  empire :  "  Go  up  against  the  laud  of
Merathaim,  even  against  it  and  the  inhabitants  of  Pekod."  Translators  and  commentators  have  until
quite  recently  mistaken  the  import  of  the  name  Pekod.

'  This  is  what  appears  to  me  to  follow  from  the  account  of  the  conquest  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus,  as
related  by  Herodotus  (I.  clxxvii.,  clxxxviii.,  clxxxix.).

»  This  is  the  opinion  of  G.  Eawliuson  {The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  440),  adopted
by  most  modem  historians  (Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Allerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  577, 578  ;  Tiele,  Bahylonisch-
asm/rische  Gesch.,  p.  422  ;  Homsiel,  Geschichte  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  pp.  745,  74(j ;  Winckler,
Geschichle  Babyloniens  und  Assyriens,  jip.  2U1,  292).  For  the  presence  of  the  Scythians  at  Harran,
ef.  swpnt,  p.  516.


520  TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CEALD^AN  EMPIRE.

on  this  side  for  those  ever-recurring  struggles  in  which  Assyria  had  exhausted
her  best  powers ;  one  war  was  alone  ])ossible,  that  with  Media,  but  it  was
fraught  with  such  danger  that  the  dictates  of  prudence  demanded  that  it
should  be  avoided  at  all  costs,  even  should  the  alliance  between  the  two  courts
cease  to  be  cemented  by  a  royal  marriage.  However  great  the  confidence  which
he  justly  placed  in  the  valour  of  his  Chaldaeans,  Nebuchadrezzar  could  not
hide  from  himself  the  fact  that  for  two  centuries  they  had  always  been  beaten
by  the  Assyrians,  and  that  therefore  he  would  run  too  great  a  risk  in  pro-
voking hostilities  with  an  army  which  had  got  the  better  of  the  conquerors  of
his  people.  Besides  this,  Cyaxares  was  fully  engaged  in  subjecting  the  region
which  he  had  allotted  to  himself,  and  had  no  special  desire  to  break  with  his
ally.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  history  during  the  years  which  followed  the
downfall  of  Nineveh,  but  it  is  not  difBcult  to  guess  what  were  the  obstacles  he
had  to  surmount,  and  the  result  of  the  efforts  which  he  made  to  overcome  them.
The  country  which  extends  between  the  Caspian  and  the  Black  Sea — the
mountain  block  of  Armenia,  the  basins  of  the  Arases  and  tlie  Kur,  the  valleys
of  the  Halys,  the  Iris,  and  the  Thermodon,  and  the  forests  of  the  Anti-Taurus
and  the  Taurus  itself — had  been  thrown  into  utter  confusion  by  the  Cimmerians
and  the  Scythians.  Nothing  remained  of  the  previous  order  of  things  which
had  so  long  prevailed  there,  and  the  barbarians  who  for  a  century  and  a  half
had  destroyed  everything  in  the  country  seemed  incapable  of  organising
anything  in  its  place.  Urartu  had  shrunk  within  its  ancient  limits  around
Ararat,  and  it  is  not  known  who  ruled  her ;  the  civilisation  of  Argistis  and
Meuuas  had  almost  disappeared  with  the  dynasty  which  had  opposed  the
power  of  Assyria,  and  the  people,  who  had  never  been  much  impregnated  by  it,
soon  fell  back  into  their  native  rude  habits  of  life.  Confused  masses  of
European  barbarians  were  stirring  in  Etiaus  and  the  regions  of  the  Araxes,
seeking  a  country  in  which  to  settle  themselves,  and  did  not  succeed  in
establishing  themselves  lirmly  till  a  much  later  period  in  the  district  of  Saka-
sene,  to  which  was  attached  the  name  of  one  of  their  tribes.^  Sucli  of  the
Mushku  and  the  Tabal  as  had  not  perished  had  taken  refuge  in  the  north,
among  the  mountains  bordering  the  Black  Sea,  where  they  were  ere  long
known  to  the  Greeks  as  the  Moschi  and  the  Tibarenians.^  The  remains  of  the
Cimmerian  hordes  had  taken  their  place  in  Cappadocia,  and  the  Phrygian
population  which  had  followed  in  their  wake  had  spread  themselves  over  the
basin  of  the  Upper  Halys  and  over  the  ancient  Milidu,  which  before  long  took

'  Strabo  (XI.  viii.  §  4,  p.  511)  states  that  Armenia  and  the  maritime  regions  of  Cappadocia  suftered
greatly  from  the  invasion  of  the  Sej'thians.  For  the  identity  of  the  diminished  Urartu  with  the  country
of  the  Alarodians  of  Herodotus  (III.  xoiv.,  VII.  Ixsix.),  cf.  H.  Eawlinsok,  On.  the  Alarodians  of  Hero-
dolus,  in  G.  Eawlinson,  Herodotus,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203-206.

-  Fr.  Lenoejiast,  Les  Origines  de  I'Histoire,  vol.  iii.  pp.  243-216.


THE  CONQUESTS  OF  CTAXABES  IN  UBABTU  AND  ASIA  MINOB.      521

from  them  the  name  of  Armenia.^  All  these  elements  constituted  a  seething,
struggling,  restless  mass  of  people,  actuated  by  no  plan  or  method,  and  subject
merely  to  the  caprice  of  its  chiefs ;  it  was,  indeed,  the  "  seething  cauldron  "  of
which  the  Hebrew  prophets  had  had  a  vision,  which  at  times  overflowed  over
the  neighbouring  nations,  and  at  others  was  consumed  within  and  wasted  itself
in  fruitless  ebullition.^

It  took  Cyaxares  years  to  achieve  his  conquests ;  he  finally  succeeded,  how-
ever, in  reducing  the  various  elements  to  subjection — Urartians,  Scythians,
Cimmerians,  Chaldeei,  and  the  industrious  tribes  of  the  Chalybes  and  the  White
Syrians — and,  always  victorious,  appeared  at  last  on  the  right  bank  of  tlie
Halys;^  but  having  reached  it,  he  found  himself  face  to  face  with  foes  of
quite  a  different  calibre  from  those  with  whom  he  had  hitherto  to  deal.  Lydia
had  increased  both  in  wealth  and  in  vigour  since  the  days  when  her  king  Ardys
informed  his  ally  Assur-bani-pal  that  he  had  avenged  the  death  of  his  father
and  driven  the  Cimmerians  from  the  valley  of  the  JIaeander.*  He  had  by  so
doing  averted  all  immediate  danger;  but  as  long  as  the  principal  horde
remained  unexterminated,  another  invasion  was  always  to  be  feared ;  besides
which,  the  barbarian  inroad,  although  of  short  duration,  had  wrought  such
havoc  in  the  country  that  no  native  power  in  Asia  Minor  appeared,  nor  in
reality  was,  able  to  make  the  effort  needful  to  destroy  them.  Their  king
Dugdamis,  it  will  be  remembered,  met  his  death  in  Cilicia  at  the  hands  of  the
Assyrians  about  the  year  GiO,  and  Kobos,  his  successor,  was  defeated  and  killed
by  the  Scythians  under  Madyes  about  633.^  The  repeated  repulses  they  had
suffered  had  the  effect  of  quickly  relieving  Lydia,  Phrygia,  and  the  remaining
states  of  the  ^gean  and  the  Black  Sea  from  their  inroads  ;  the  Milesians  wrested
Sinope  from  them  about  630,^  and  the  few  bands  left  behind  when  the  main
body  set  out  for  the  countries  of  the  Euphrates  were  so  harried  and  deci-
mated by  the  people  over  whom  they  had  terrorised  for  nearly  a  century,  that
they  had  soon  no  refuge  except  round  the  fortress  of  Antandros,  in  the  mountains
of  the  Troad.''      Most  of  the_  kingdoms  whose  downfall  they  had  caused  never

'  The  Phrygian  origiu  of  the  Armenians  is  pointed  out  by  Herodotug  (Til.  lxxiii.)andby  Eudoxius
(EcsTATHirs,  Ad  Dionysium  Periegetcyt,  v.  694,  in  MLxler-Didot,  Geographi  Gneci  Minores,  vol.  ii.
p.  341)  ;  cf.,  lastly,  Kretscumer,  Einleitung  in  die  Geschichte  der  Griechischen  Spraehe,  pp.  208-210.

-  Jer.  i.  13 ;  for  the  Cimmerians,  of.  supra,  pp.  478-480.

'  Hekodotcs,  I.  ciii.,  knows  none  of  the  details  of  the  conquests  of  Cyaxares :  he  merely  describes
this  prince  as  ttji'  "AKvos  noraiiov  &iia  'Affiriv  Trii.aa.v  tTv!Tri\(Tas  eavr^,  and  he  seems  to  understand  by
the  expression  aya>  '\a'n\v  Tranav  all  the  countries  included  in  the  XIII"',  XVIII"',  and  XIX'"
satrapies  of  Darius,  and  in  the  eastern  half  of  the  III'^''  satrapy.

«  For  this,  cf.  supra,  pp.  429,  430.

^  For  these  eyeuts,  of.  supra,  pp.  430,  474.

'  EuSEBirs,  Chronicou,  ed.  Schcexe,  vol.  ii.  p.  89,  after  St.  Jerome:  cf.  Gelzer,  Das  Zeilalter  des
Gyges,  in  the  Hlieinisches  Museum,  vol.  xxx.,  1875,  p.  257.

'  For  this  settlement  at  Antandros,  cf.  supra,  p.  392.  According  to  Aristotle,  the  Cimmerians  must
have  held  the  town  for  a  hundred  years  (Stephen  of  Byzanticm,  s.v.  'AvravSpos),  which  would  be
until  about  580.


522


TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SEOOXD    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.


recovered  from  their  reverses;  but  Lydia,  which  had  not  laid  down  its  arms
since  the  death  of  Gyges,  became  possessed  by  degrees  of  the  whole  of  their
territory  ;  Phrygia  proper  came  back  to  her  in  the  general  redistribution,  and
with  it  most  of  the  countries  which  had  been  under  the  rule  of  the  dynasty  of
Midas,  from  the  mountains  of  Lycia  to  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.  The
transfer  was  effected,  apparently,  with  very  slight  opposition  and  with  little  loss


A    VIEW    IN    THE    MOUNTAINS    OF    THE    MESSOGIS.'

of  time,  since  in  the  four  or  five  years  which  followed  the  death  of  Kobos,
Ardys  had  risen  in  the  estimation  of  the  Greeks  to  the  position  enjoyed  by
Gyges  ;  and  when,  in  628,  Aristomenes,  the  hero  of  the  Messenian  wars,  arrived
at  Rhodes,  it  is  said  that  he  contemplated  proceeding  from  thence,  first  to
Sardes  and  then  to  Ecbatana,  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  the  adherence  of  Lydia
and  Media  to  his  cause.  Death  put  an  end  to  his  projects,  but  he  would  not  for
a  moment  have  entertained  them  had  not  Ardys  been  at  that  time  at  the  head
of  a  renowned  and  flourishing  kingdom.^  The  renewal  of  international
commerce  followed  closely  on  the  re-establishment  of  peace,  and  even  if  the
long  period  of  Scythian  invasion,  followed  by  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,
rendered  the  overland  route  less  available  for  regular  traffic  than  before,  at  all
events  relations  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  Euphrates  valley  and  those  of

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  heliogravure  of  Eatet  and  Thomas,  Milet  et  le  golfe  Latmiqtie,  pi.  3.
^  Pausanias,  iv.  2-1,  §§  2, 3 ;  cf.  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  192.


THE  WARS  OF  THE  MERMXADES  WITH  THE  GREEK  COLONISTS.       o23

the  ^gean  littoral  were  resumed  to  such  good  purpose  that  before  long  several
fresh  marts  were  opened  in  Lydia.  Kyme  and  Ephesiis  put  the  region  of  the
Messogis  and  the  Tmolus  into  communication  with  the  sea,  but  the  lower
valleys  of  theHermos  and  the  Majander  were  closed  by  the  existence  of  Greek
colonies  at  Smyrna,  Clazomense,  Colophon,  Priene,  and  3Iiletus — all  hostile  to


■^


'm^^^'^^s^


,'i^'


-«!!>;;^.'-*^.^.


'':-Ks^


■>^i— fi---'


>=^*-t,'r!i '""'';'-


THE    SITE    OF    tlUliNE.'


the  Mermnadfe— which  it  would  be  necessary  to  overcome  if  these  countries
were  to  enjoy  the  prosperity  shared  by  other  parts  of  the  kingdom ;  hence
the  principal  efibrt  made  by  the  Lydians  was  either  directly  to  annex  these
towns,  or  to  impose  such  treaties  on  them  as  would  make  them  their  depen-
dencies.2  Ardys  seized  Priene  towards  620,  and  after  having  thus  established
himself  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  Latmic  Gulf,^  he  proceeded  to  besiege
Miletus  in  616,  at  the  very  close  of  his  career.  Hostilities  were  wearily
prolonged  all  through  the  "reign  of  Sadyattes  (615-610),  and  down  to  the
sixth  year  of  Alyattes.^     The  position  of  Miletus  was  too  strong  to  permit

•  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  heliogravure  of  Eatet  and  Thomas,  Miht  et  le  gol/e  Laimique,  pi.  5.

=  For  the  policy  of  the  Lydian  kings  towards  the  Greek  colonies,  cf.  the  remarks  of  Kadet,  La
Lydie  et  le  Monde  Crrec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  192,  et  seq.

'  Heeodotcs,  I.  XV.  The  well-known  story  that  Priene  was  saved  under  Alyattes  by  a  stratagem
of  the  philosopher  Bias  (Diogenes  Laertes,  i.  S3)  is  merely  a  fable,  of  which  several  other  examples
are  found  (Herodotus,  I.  xsi.,  xxii. ;  PoLyiEyus,  Stratagemata,  vii.  36).  It  would  not  be  possible  to
conclude  from  it,  as  Grote  did  {Hittorij  of  Greece,  vol.  iii.  p.  301),  that  Ardys'  rule  over  the  town  was
but  ephemeral.

'  The  periods  of  duration  assigned  here  to  the  reigns  of  these  princes  are  those  of  Eusebius— that  is
to  say,  15  years  for  Croesus,  37  for  Alyaltes,  5  for  Sadyattes,  37  for  Ardys  (Chronicle,  ed.  Schcene,  vol.
i.  p.  69);  Julius  Africanus  gives  15  for  Sadyattes  and  38  for  Ardys  (Soh(e>je,  vol.  i.,  App.  VI.,  p.  220),


524  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

of  its  being  carried  by  a  coxq)  de  main ;  besides  which,  the  Lydians  were
unwilliug  to  destroy  at  one  blow  a  town  whose  colonies,  skilfully  planted
at  the  seaports  from  the  coasts  of  the  Black  Sea  to  those  of  Egypt,  would
one  day  furnish  them  with  so  many  outlets  for  their  industrial  products.
Their  method  of  attacking  it  resolved  itself  into  a  series  of  exhausting
raids.  "  Every  year,  as  soon  as  the  fruit  crops  and  the  harvests  began  to
ripen,  Alyattes  set  out  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  whom  he  caused  to  march  and
encamp  to  the  sound  of  instruments.  Having  arrived  in  the  Milesian  territory,
he  completely  destroyed  the  crops  and  the  orchards,  and  then  again  withdrew."  '
In  these  expeditions  he  was  careful  to  avoid  any  excesses  which  would  have
made  the  injury  inflicted  appear  irretrievable ;  his  troops  were  forbidden  to
destroy  dwelling-houses  or  buildings  dedicated  to  the  gods;  indeed,  on  one
occasion,  when  the  conflagration  which  consumed  the  lands  accidentally  spread
to  the  temple  of  Athena  near  Assesos,  he  rebuilt  two  temples  for  the  goddess
at  his  own  expense.^  The  Milesians  sustained  the  struggle  courageously,  until
two  reverses  at  Limeneion  and  in  the  plain  of  the  Mseander  at  length  induced
them  to  make  terms.  Their  tyrant,  Thrasybulus,  acting  on  the  advice  of  the
Delphic  Apollo  and  by  the  mediation  of  Periander  of  Corinth,  concluded  a
treaty  with  Alyattes  in  which  the  two  princes,  declaring  themselves  the  guest
and  the  ally  one  of  the  other,  very  probably  conceded  extensive  commercial
privileges  to  one  another  both  by  land  and  sea  (604).^  Alyattes  rewarded
the  oracle  by  the  gift  of  a  magnificent  bowl,  the  work  of  Glaucus  of  Chios,
which  continued  to  be  shown  to  travellers  of  the  Komau  period  as  one  of  the
most  remarkable  curiosities  of  Delphi.^  Alyattes  continued  his  expeditions
against  the  other  Greek  colonies,  but  directed  them  prudently  and  leisurely,  so
as  not  to  alarm  his  European  friends,  and  provoke  the  formation  against
himself  of  a  coalition  of  the  Hellenic  communities  scattered  over  the  isles
or  along  the  littoral  of  the  ^gean.  We  know  that  towards  the  end  of
his  reign  he  recovered  Colophon,  which  had  been  previously  acquired  by
Gyges,  but  had  regained  its  independence  during  the  Cimmerian  crisis ;  '"  he

while  Herodotus  suggests  14  for  Croesus  (I.  Ixxxvi.),  57  for  Alyattes  (I.  xxv.),  12  for  Sadyattes  (I.
xvi.),  and  59  for  Ardys  (I.  xvi.).

'  Herodotus,  I.  xvii.  '  Heeodotus,  I.  xix.,  xxii.

^  Herodotus,  I.  xv.-xxv.  ;  Thrasybulus'  stratagem  is  said  to  have  taken  place  at  Prieue  by  Diogenes
Laertes  (i.  83)  and  by  Polysenus  (vii.  36).  For  the  Milesian  wars  I  have  followed  the  arrangement
adopted  by  Eadet  (ia  Lijdie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  193-196).  The  war  begins
under  Ardys  (Herodotus,  I.  xv.),  lasts  for  five  years  under  Sadyattes,  instead  of  the  six  years  which
Herodotus  attributes  to  it  (I.  xviii.),  and  five  years  under  Alyattes  (Herodotus,  I.  xviii.).

'  Herodotus,  I.  xxv.;  Pausasias,  X.  xvi.  §  1.

^  PoLYiENUs,  Stratagem.,  vii.  2,  2,  tells  the  story  of  the  trick  by  which  Alyattes,  after  he  had
treated  with  the  people  of  Colophon,  destroyed  their  cavalry  and  seized  on  their  town.  The  fact  that
a  treaty  was  made  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  a  fragment  of  Phylarchus  (Fragm.  (52,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT,
Fragm.  Eist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  p.  353),  and  the  surrender  of  the  town  to  the  Lydians  by  a  fragment  of


TEE    WAR   BETWEEN  ALYaTTES  AND    CYAXAEES.  525

razed  Smyrna  to  the  ground,  and  forced  its  inhabitants  to  occupy  unfortified
towns,  where  his  suzerainty  could  not  be  disputed ; '  he  half  devastated
Clazomence,  whose  citizens  saved  it  by  a  despairing  effort,^  and  he  renewed
the  ancient  alliances  with  Ephesus,  Kyme,  and  the  cities  of  the  region  of  the
Caicus  and  the  Hellespont,^  though  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  an  accurate  date
to  each  of  these  particular  events.  Most  of  them  had  already  taken  place  or  were
still  proceeding  when  the  irruption  of  the  Medes  across  the  Halys  obliged
him  to  concentrate  all  his  energies  on  the  eastern  portion  of  his  kingdom.

The  current  tradition  in  Lydia  of  a  century  later  attributed  the  conflict  of
the  two  peoples  to  a  romantic  cause.  It  related  that  Cyaxares  had  bestowed
liis  favour  on  the  bands  of  Scythians  wlio  had  become  his  mercenaries  on  the
death  of  Madyes,  and  that  he  had  entrusted  to  them  the  children  of  some  of
the  noblest  Medic  families,  that  they  might  train  them  to  hunt  and  also  teach
them  the  use  of  the  bow.  One  day,  on  their  returning  from  the  chase  without
any  game,  Cyaxares  reproached  them  for  their  want  of  skill  in  such  angry  and
insulting  terms,  that  they  resolved  on  immediate  revenge.  They  cut  one  of
the  children  in  pieces,  which  they  dressed  after  the  same  manner  as  that  iu  which
they  were  accustomed  to  prepare  the  game  they  had  killed,  and  served  up  the
dish  to  the  king  ;  then,  while  he  was  feasting  upon  it  with  his  courtiers,  they
fled  in  haste  and  took  refuge  with  Alyattes.  The  latter  welcomed  them,
and  refused  to  send  them  back  to  Cyaxares ;  hence  the  outbreak  of  hostilities.''
It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  emigration  of  a  nomad  horde  may  have  been
the  cause  of  the  war,^  but  graver  reasons  than  this  had  set  the  two  nations  at
variance.     The  hardworking   inhabitants   of  the  valleys  of  the  Iris  and  the

Xenophanes,  quoted  in  Athenaeus  (xii.  31)).  Schubert  {Geschichte  der  KSnige  von  Lydien,  pp.  49,  50)
does  not  seem  to  believe  that  the  town  was  taken  by  Alyattes;  1  have  adopted  the  opinion  of  Kadet
on  this  point  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  ojt  temps  des  Mermnadea,  pp.  l'J~.  19S).

'  Hebodotcs,  I.  xvi.,  and  Nicolas  or  Damascus,  Frogm.  04  (in  Mcllek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.
Grxc.  vol.  iii.  p.  397),  confine  themselves  to  relating  the  capture  of  the  city  ;  Strabo,  XIV.  i.  §  37,
p.  646,  adds  that  the  Lydians  compelled  the  inhabitants  to  dwell  in  unfortified  towns.  Schubert
(Geschichte  der  KSnige  run  Lydien,  pp.  48,  49)  thinks  that  the  passage  in  Strabo  refers,  not  to  the  time
of  Alyattes,  but  to  a  subsequent  event  in  the  fifth  century;  he  relies  for  this  opinion  on  a  fragment  of
Pindar  (Fragment  204,  in  Bergk,  vgl.  i.,  4th  edit.,  p.  449),  which  represents  Smyrna  as  still  flourishing
in  his  time.  But,  as  Busolt  has  pointed  out,  the  intention  of  the  text  of  Pindar  is  to  represent  the  state
of  the  city  at  about  the  time  of  Homer's  birth,  and  not  in  the  tifth  century  (Griechieche  Geschichte,
vol.  i.  p.  5S2,  note  3).

^  Hekodotcs,  I.  xvi.

'  The  peace  between  Ephesus  and  Lydia  must  have  been  troubled  for  a  little  while  iu  the  reign
of  Sadyattes  (Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  Oo,  in  Mii.ler-Didot,  Fragm.  Hi»t.  Griec,  vol.  iii.  p.  396),
but  it  was  coutirmed  under  Alyattes  by  the  marriage  of  Mehu  II.  with  one  of  the  king's  daughters
(JSlian,  Ilid.  Vur.,  iii.  26).

*  Herodotus,  I.  Ixxiii.,  Ixxiy.

'  Grote  (History  of  Greece,  vol.  iii.  p.  310,  note  1)  has  colleuted  a  certain  number  of  examples  in
later  times  to  show  that  the  journeying  of  a  nomad  horde  from  one  state  to  another  may  provoke  wars,
and  he  concludes  therefrom  that  at  least  the  basis  of  Herodotus'  account  may  be  considered  as  true ;
his  opinion,  which  is  questioned  by  G.  Rawlinson  (Uerodotitu,  vol.  i.  pp.  302,  303),  is,  on  the  other
band,  admitted  by  Schubert  (GescJiichte  der  Eiinige  voii  Lydien,  p.  51).


526


TEE  MEDES   AND    THE  SECOND    CffALDACAN  EMPIRE.


Halys  were  still  |iossessecl  of  considerable  riches,  in  spite  of  the  losses  they  had
suffered  from  the  avaricious  Cimmerians,  and  their  chief  towns,  Comana,  Pteria
and  Teiria,  continued  to  enjoy  prosperity  under  the  rule  of  their  priest-kings.
Pteria  particularly  had  developed  in  the  course  of  the  century,  thanks  to  her
favourable  situation,  which  had  enabled  her  to  offer  a  secure  refutre  to  the
neighbouring  population  during  the  late  disasters.  The  town  itself  was
crowded  into  a  confined  plain,  on  the  left  bank  of  a  torrent  which  flowed  into
the  Halys,  and  the  city  walls  may  still  be  clearly  traced  upon  the  soil ;  the
outline  of  the  houses,  the  silos,  cisterns,  and  rock-cut  staircases  are  still  visible


m


W"^


■  "^,ik^^;^>


iHlJ     la  J^^    Ut     I'TEiaA.'


in  places,  besides  the  remains  of  a  palace  built  of  enormous  blocks  of  almost
rough-hewn  limestone.  The  town  was  defended  by  wide  ramparts,  and  also  by
two  fortresses  perched  upon  enormous  masses  of  rock,  while  a  few  thousand
yards  to  the  east  of  the  city,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  torrent,  three  converging
ravines  concealed  the  sanctuary  of  one  of  those  mysterious  oracles  whose  fame
attracted  worshippers  from  far  and  wide  during  the  annual  fairs.  The  bas-reliefs
which  decorate  them  belong  to  that  semi-barbarous  art  which  we  have  already  met
with  in  the  monuments  attributed  to  the  Khati,  near  the  Orontes  and  Euplirates,
on  both  slopes  of  the  Amanus,  in  Cilicia,  and  in  the  ravines  of  the  Taurus.  Long
processions  of  priests  and  votaries  defile  before  figures  of  the  gods  and  goddesses
standing  erect  upon  their  sacred  animals ;  in  one  scene,  a  tall  goddess,  a  Cybele
or  an  Anaitis,  leans  affectionately  upon  her  chosen  lover,-  and  seems  to  draw


'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  CHAnLES  Texieh.  Description  de  la  Chersonese  d'Asia,  pi.  vi.
'  See  the  reproduction  of  this  sceue  in  the  illustration  on  p.  334  of  the  present  volume.


THE  BATTLE    OF   THE   HALTS.


527


him  with  her  towards  an  image  with  a  lion's  body  and  the  head  of  a  youth.^
Pteria  and  its  surroundinc;  hills  formed  a  kind  of  natural  fortress  which  over-


•lUK   ENTliANCE    TO    i  UE    SANCTUAUY    ul     PTERIA."


looked  the  whole  bend  of  the  Halys  ;  it  constituted,  in  the  hands  of  the  Lydians,

'  Oa  these  ruins  and  the  monuments  wliich  they  contain,  cf.  Pbrbot  and  Chipiez.  Bistoire  de
I'Art  dam  V Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  G03-G.')i;.  Without  entering  into  an  examination  of  the  contradictory
bypotheses  of  dififerent  authors  suggested  by  the  study  of  these  bas-reliefs,  I  will  confine  myself  to
saying  that  Ihey  seem  to  me  to  have  been  executed  at  about  the  time  with  which  we  are  dealiug,
or  perhaps  a  few  years  later — in  any  case,  before  the  Persian  conquest.

'  Drawn  by  Boudicr,  from  a  photograph  by  Chantre.


528


TBE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


an  outpost  wliich  effectually  protected  their  possessions  in  Phrygia  and
Paphlagonia  against  an  attack  from  the  East ;  in  the  hands  of  the  Medes
it  would  be  a  dominant  position  which  would  counteract  the  defensive
features  of  the  Halys,  and  from  it  they  might  penetrate  into  the  heart  of
Asia  Minor  without  encountering  any  serious  obstacles.  The  struggle  be-
tween the  two  sovereigns  was  not  so  unequal  as  might  at  first  appear.  No
doubt  the  army  of  Alyattes  was  inferior  in  numbers,  but  the  bravery  of  its


ONE  OF  THE   PROCESSIONS   IN   THE   liAVINE   OF  MEKIA.'


component  forces  and  the  ability  of  its  leaders  compensated  for  its  numerical
inferiority,  and  Cyaxares  had  no  troop  to  be  compared  with  the  Carian  lancers,
with  the  hoplites  of  Ionia,  or  with  the  heavy  Maeonian  cavalry.  During  six  years
the  two  armies  met  again  and  again — fate  sometimes  favouring  one  and  some-
times the  other — and  were  about  to  try  their  fortune  once  more,  after  several  in-
decisive engagements,  when  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  suspended  operations  (585).  The
Iranian  peoples  would  fight  only  in  full  daylight,  and  their  adversaries,  although
warned,  so  it  is  said,  by  the  Milesian  philosopher  Thales  of  the  phenomenon
about  to  take  place  in  the  heavens,  were  perhaps  not  completely  reassured  as  to
its  significance,  and  the  two  hosts  accordingly  separated  without  coming  to  blows.'-^

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Chautre.

'  This  eclipse  was  identiiied  at  one  time  with  that  of  Sept.  30.  (JlO  (Grote,  History  of  Greece,
vol.  iii.  p.  312,  note ;  Max  Dvnoker,  Geschichte  des  AHerthums,  vol.  ii.  pp.  476,  5S9),  at  another  with
that  of  May  2S,  oS5  (Airy,  On  the  Eclipses  of  Agathocles,  Thales,  and  Xerxes,  in  the  T.-ansactions  of  the
It.  Soc.  of  Astronomers,  1S53,  p.  193).  The  latter  of  these  two  dates  appears  to  me  to  be  the  correct
one.  and  this  opinion  is  shared  by  Gelzer  (Das  Zeitalter  des  Gtjges,  in  the  Eheinisches  Museum,  1S75,
vol.  x.'cx.  pp.  26-1-208),  by  Unger  (Kyaxares  und  Astyaijes,  pp.  33-37),  by  Eadet  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde


THE   PEACE   OF  585    AND    TEE  DEATH    OF   CYAXABES.  529

Nebuchadrezzar  had  followed,  not  without  some  misgivings,  the  vicissitudes  of
the  campaign,  and  his  anxiety  was  shared  by  the  independent  princes  of  Asia
Minor,  who  were  allies  of  the  Lydians  ;  he  and  they  alike  awaited  with  dread  a
decisive  action,  which,  by  crushing  one  of  the  belligerents  beyond  hope  of  re-
covery, would  leave  the  onlookers  at  the  mercy  of  the  victor  in  the  full  flush  of  his
success.  Tradition  relates  that  Syennesis  of  Cilicia  and  the  Babylonian  Nabonidus
had  taken  advantage  of  the  alarm  produced  by  the  eclipse  to  negotiate  an  armis-
tice, and  that  they  were  soon  successful  in  bringing  the  rival  powers  to  an  agree-
ment.^  The  Halys  remained  the  recognised  frontier  of  the  two  kingdoms,  but  the
Lydians  probably  obtained  advantages  for  their  commerce,  which  they  regarded
as  compensatory  for  the  abandonment  of  their  claim  to  the  district  of  Pteria.
To  strengthen  the  alliance,  it  was  agreed  that  Alyattes  should  give  his  daughter
Aryenis  in  marriage  to  Ishtuvigu,  or,  as  the  Greeks  called  him,  Astyages,  the
son  of  Cyaxares.^     According  to  the  custom  of  the  times,  the  two  contracting
parties,  after  taking   the   vow   of  fidelity,  sealed   the   compact  by   pricking
each  other's  arms  and  sucking  the  few  drops  of  blood  which  oozed  from  the
puncture.^     Cyaxares  died  in  the  following  year  (584),  full  of  days  and  renown,
and  was  at  once  succeeded  by  Astyages.    Few  princes  could  boast  of  having  had
such  a  successful  career  as  his,  even  in  that  century  of  unprecedented  fortunes
and  boundless  ambitions.     Inheriting  a  disorganised  army,  proclaimed  king  in
the  midst  of  mourning,  on  the  morrow  of  a  defeat  in  which  the  fate  of  his
kingdom  had  hung  in  the  balance,  he  succeeded  within  a  quarter  of  a  century
in  overthrowing  his  enemies  and  substituting  his  supremacy  for  theirs  through-
out the  whole  of  Western  Asia.     At  his  accession  Media  had  occupied  only

Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  203.  note  2),  and  by  Schubert  {Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Liidieu,pp.  o2-
55),  and  is  the  only  one  wbieh  agrees  with  what  we  know  of  the  general  history  of  the  sixtb  century.

'  The  name  Labynetos  given  by  Herodotus  (I.  Isxiv.)  is  a  trauscript  of  Nabonidus,  but  cannot
here  designate  the  Babyloniau  king  of  that  name,  for  the  latter  reigned  more  thau  thirty  years
after  the  peace  was  concluded  between  the  Lydians  and  the  Medes.  If  Herodotus  has  not  made  the
mistake  of  putting  Labynetos  for  Nebuchadrezzar,  we  may  admit,  with  G.  Rawlinson  (^Herodotus,
vol.  i.  p.  icy,  note  4),  tliat  this  Labynetos  was  a  prince  of  the  royal  family,  or  simply  a  general  wlio
was  commanding  the  Chaldsean  auxiliaries  of  Cyaxares.

-  The  form  Ishtuvigu  is  given  us  by  the  Clialdajan  documents  {Chronicle  of  Nabonidus,  obv. ,
col.  ii.  1.  2;  Cylinder  of  Abu- HahbaJi,  col.  i.  1.  32).  Its  exact  transcript  was  Astuigas,  Astyigas,
according  to  Ctesias  (Fragment  29,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Ctesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  45) ;  in  fact,  this
coincides  so  remarkably  with  the  Babylonian  mode  of  spelling,  that  we  may  believe  that  it  faithfully
reproduces  the  original  pronunciation.

^  HERODOTrs,  I.  Ixxiii.,  Ixxiv.  Many  ancient  authors  have  spoken  of  this  war,  or  at  least  of  the
eclipse  which  brought  it  to  an  end.  Several  of  them  place  the  eonclusiou  of  peace  not  in  the  reign
of  Cyaxares,  but  in  that  of  Astyages — Cicero  (Z)e  Divinatione,  i.  49,  112),  Solinus  (ed.  Mommsen,  p.  95),
and  tlie  Armenian  Eusebius — and  their  view  has  been  adopted  by  some  modern  historians  (Gelzeii,
Las  Ztitalltr  des  Gyges,  in  the  Rheinieches  Museum,  IS75,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  2(56,  267;  Curtics,  Histori/
of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  pp.  IStj,  137).  The  two  versions  of  the  account  can  be  reconciled  by  saying,  as  Radet
does  (La  Lydie  el  le  Monde  Grec,  etc.,  p.  204,  note  3),  that  Astyages  was  commanding  the  Median  army
instead  of  his  father,  who  was  too  old  to  do  so,  but  such  au  explanation  is  unnecessary,  and  Cyaxares,
though  over  seventy,  might  still  have  had  sufficient  vigour  to  wage  war.  The  substitution  of  Astyages
for  Cyaxares  by  the  authors  of  IJoman  times  was  probably  effected  with  the  object  of  making  the  date
of  the  eclipse  agree  with  a  different  system  of  chronology  from  that  followed  by  Herodotus.

2    M


530  THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

a  small  portion  of  the  Irauian  table-land ;  at  his  death,  the  Median  empire
extended  to  the  banks  of  the  Halys.  It  is  now  not  difSeult  to  understand  why
Nebuchadrezzar  abstained  from  all  expeditions  in  the  regions  of  the  Taurus,  as
well  as  in  those  of  the  Upper  Tigris.  He  would  inevitably  have  come  into  contact
with  the  allies  of  the  Lydians,  perchance  with  the  Lydians  themselves,  or  with
the  Medes,  as  the  case  might  be ;  and  he  would  have  been  drawn  on  to  take  an
active  part  in  their  dangerous  quarrels,  from  which,  after  all,  he  could  not  hope
to  reap  any  personal  advantage.  In  reality,  there  was  one  field  of  action  only
open  to  him,  and  that  was  Southern  Syria,  with  Egypt  in  her  rear.  He  found
himself,  at  this  extreme  limit  of  his  dominions,  in  a  political  situation  almost
identical  with  that  of  his  Assyrian  predecessors,  and  consequently  more  or  less

under  the  obligation  of  repeating  their
policy.  The  Saites,  like  the  Ethiopians
before  them,  could  enjoy  no  assured  sense  of
security  in  the  Delta,  when  they  knew  that
they  had  a  great  military  state  as  their
nearest  neighbour  on  tlie  other  side  of  the
isthmus :    they  felt    with    reason   that   the

AN    EGYrilAN  VESSEL  OF  THE  SAITE  PEiaOD.'

thirty  leagues  of  desert  which  separated
Pelusium  from  Gaza  was  an  insufScient  protection  from  invasion,  and  they
desired  to  have  between  themselves  and  their  adversary  a  tract  of  country
sufficiently  extensive  to  ward  off  the  first  blows  in  the  case  of  hostilities.
If  such  a  buffer  territory  could  be  composed  of  feudal  provinces  or  tributary
states,  Egyptian  pride  would  be  flattered,  while  at  the  same  time  the  security
of  the  kingdom  would  be  increased,  and  indeed  the  victorious  progress  of  Necho
had  for  the  moment  changed  their  most  ambitious  dreams  into  realities.  Driven
back  into  the  Nile  valley  after  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  their  pretensions  had
immediately  shrunk  within  more  modest  limits ;  their  aspirations  were  now
confined  to  gaining  the  confidence  of  the  few  surviving  states  which  had  pre-
served some  sort  of  independence  in  spite  of  the  Assyrian  conquest,  to  detach-
ing them  from  Chaldean  interests  and  making  them  into  a  protecting  zone
against  the  ambition  of  a  new  Esarhaddon.  To  this  work  Necho  applied  him-
self as  soon  as  Nebuchadrezzar  had  left  him  in  order  to  hasten  back  to  Babylon.
The  Egyptian  monarch  belonged  to  a  persevering  race,  who  were  never  cast
down  by  reverses,  and  had  not  once  allowed  themselves  to  be  discouraged  during
the  whole  of  the  century  in  which  they  had  laboured  to  secure  the  crown  for
themselves ;  his  defeat  had  not  lessened  his  tenacity,  nor,  it  would  seem,  his
certainty  of  final  success.     Besides  organising  his  Egyptian  and  Libyan  troops,

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-GudiD,  from  a  photograph  kindly  sent  to  me  by  G.  Beue'Jite  ;  the  original  ia
in  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  the  Louvre.


NECEO   MEOEOANISES    THE  EGYPTIAN  FLEET  AND   ARMY.        531


he  enrolled  a  still  larger  number  of  Hellenic  mercenaries,  correctly  anticipating
that  the  restless  spirits  of  the  Phtenicians  and  Jews  would  soon  furnish  him
with  an  opportunity  of  distinguishing  himself  upon  the  scene  of  action.

It  was  perhaps  at  this  juncture  that  he  decided  to  strengthen  his  position
by  the  co-operation  of  a  fleet.  The  superiority  of  the  Chaldiean  battalions  had
been  so  clearly  manifested,  that  he  could  scarcely  hope  for  a  decisive  victory  if
he  persisted  in  seeking  it  on  land ;  but  if  he  could  succeed  in  securing  the
command  of  the  sea,  his  galleys,  by  continually  cruising  along  the  Syrian  coast,
and  conveying  troops,  provisions,  arms,  and  money  to  the  Phcenieian  towns,
would    so    successfully    foster    and    maintain    a  spirit    of   rebellion,    that    the


THE  ANCIENT  HEAD  OF  THE  1;ED  SEA,  SOW  THE  NOKTUEKX  EXTKEMITT  OF  THE  BITIEK  LAKES.'

Chaldaeans  would  not  dare  to  venture  into  Egypt  until  they  had  dealt  with  this
source  of  danger  in  their  rear.  He  therefore  set  to  work  to  increase  the  number
of  his  war-vessels  on  the  Red  Sea,  but  more  especially  on  the  Mediterranean,
and  as  he  had  drawn  upon'Greece  for  his  troops,  he  now  applied  to  her  for  ship-
builders.^ The  trireme,  which  had  been  invented  by  either  the  Samian  or
Corinthian  naval  constructors,  had  as  yet  been  little  used,  and  possibly
Herodotus  is  attributing  an  event  of  his  own  time  to  this  earlier  period  when
he  affirms  that  Xecho  filled  a  dockyard  with  a  whole  fleet  of  these  vessels;  he
possessed,  at  any  rate,  a  considerable  number  of  them,  and  along  with  them

'  Drawn  by  Boutlier,  from  a  photograph  taken  from  the  railway  between  Isma'ilia  and  Suez,  on
the  eastern  shore  of  the  lake.

-  Herodotus,  II.  clis. ;  of.  Wiedemann,  Berodote  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  5C1,  565.  Herodotus  tells  us
that  in  his  time  the  ruins  of  the  docks  which  Necho  had  made  for  the  building  of  his  triremes  could
still  be  seen  on  the  shore  of  the  Eed  Sea  as  well  as  on  that  of  the  Mediterranean.  He  seems  also  lo
say  that  the  building  of  the  fleet  was  anterior  to  the  first  Syrian  expedition.


532  THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CIJALDJSAN  EMPIRE.

other  vessels  of  various  build,  in  which  the  blunt  stem  and  curved  poop  of  the
Greeks  were  combined  with  tlie  square-cabined  barque  of  the  Egyptians.^  At
the  same  time,  in  order  to  transport  the  squadron  from  oue  sea  to  another  when
occasion  demanded,  he  endeavoured  to  reopen  the  ancient  canal  of  Seti  I.,  which
had  been  silted  up  ever  since  the  last  years  of  the  XX"'  dynasty.  He
improved  its  course  and  widened  it  so  as  to  permit  of  two  triremes  sailing
abreast  or  easily  clearing  each  other  iu  passing.  The  canal  started  from  the
Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile,  not  far  from  Patumos,  and  skirted  the  foot  of  the
Arabian  hills  from  west  to  east ;  it  then  plunged  into  the  Wady  Tumilat,  and
finally  entered  the  head  of  the  bay  which  now  forms  the  Lake  of  Ismailia.  The
narrow  channel  by  whjch  this  sheet  of  water  was  anciently  connected  with  the
Gulf  of  Suez  was  probably  obstructed  in  places,  and  required  clearing  out  at
several  points,  if  not  along  its  entire  extent.  A  later  tradition  states  that  after
having  lost  100,000  men  in  attempting  this  task,  the  king  abandoned  the  project
on  the  advice  of  an  oracle,  a  god  haviug  been  supposed  to  have  predicted  to  him
that  he  was  working  for  the  barbarians.-  Another  of  Necho's  enterprises  excited
the  admiration  of  his  contemporaries,  and  remained  for  ever  in  the  memory  of
the  people.  The  Carthaginians  had  discovered  on  the  ocean  coast  of  Libya,  a
country  ricii  in  gold,  ivory,  precious  woods,  pepper,  and  spices,  but  their  political
jealousy  prevented  other  nations  from  following  in  their  wake  in  the  interests
of  trade.  The  Egyptians  possibly  may  have  undertaken  to  dispute  their
monopoly,  or  the  Phoenicians  may  have  desired  to  reach  their  colony  by  a  less
frequented  highway  than  the  Mediterranean.  The  merchants  of  the  Said  and
the  Delta  had  never  entirely  lost  touch  with  the  people  dwelling  on  the  shores
of  the  Ked  Sea,  and  though  the  royal  fleets  no  longer  pursued  their  course  down
it  on  their  way  to  Punt  as  in  the  days  of  Hatshopsitu  and  Ramses  III.,  private
individuals  ventured  from  time  to  time  to  open  trade  communications  with  the
ancient  "  Ladders  of  Incense."  Necho  despatched  the  Phcenician  captains  of
his  fleet  in  search  of  new  lands,  and  they  started  from  the  neighbourhood
of  Suez,  probably  accompanied  by  native  pilots  accustomed  to  navigate  in  those
waters.  The  undertaking,  fraught  with  difficulty  even  iu  the  last  century,  was,
indeed,  a  formidable  one  for  the  small  vessels  of  the  Saite  period.  They  sailed
south  for  mouths  with  the  east  to  the  left  of  them,  and  on  their  right  the
continent   which    seemed    to    extend    indefinitely   before    them.     Towards  the

'  Cf.  tlie  illustration  on  p.  530.  This  is  one  of  tlae  two  Egyptian  ornaments  acquired  by  the  Louvre
some  years  ago ;  for  further  information  on  Necho's  triremes,  cf.  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etabliesements
dee  Grccs  en  Egypte,  pp.  99-105.

'  Herodotu.s,  II.  clviii.  ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buck,  pp.  560-564.  The  figurts,
100,000  men,  are  evidently  exaggerated,  for  in  a  similar  undertaking,  the  digging  of  the  Mahmudiyeli
canal,  Mehemet-Ali  lo^t  only  10,000  men,  though  the  work  was  greater.  For  tlie  canal  itself,  see  Ebers,
Durch  Gosen  zuin  jbVnui,  p.  471,  et  seq.,  and  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etablissemenig  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,
pp.  105-108.


THE    VOYAGE   OF   THE  EGYPTIAN  FLEET  AROUND   AFRICA.      533

autumn  they  disembarked  oa  some  convenient  shore,  sowed  the  wheat  with
which  they  were  provided, and  waited  till  the  crop  was  ripe;  having  reaped  the
harvest,  they  again  took  to  the  sea.  Any  accurate  remembrance  of  what  tliey
saw  was  soon  effaced  ;  they  could  merely  recollect  that,  having  reached  a  certain
poiut,  they  observed  with  astonishment  that  the  sun  appeared  to  have  reversed
its  course,  and  now  rose  on  their  right  hand.  This  meant  that  they  had  turned
the  southern  extremity  of  Africa  and  were  unconsciously  sailing  northwards.  In
the  third  year  they  passed  through  the  pillars  of  Hercules  and  reached  Egypt
in  safety.  The  very  limited  knowledge  of  navigation  possessed  by  the  mariners
of  that  day  rendered  this  voyage  fruitless ;  the  dangerous  route  thus  opened  up
to  commerce  remained  unused,  and  its  discovery  was  remembered  only  as  a
curious  feat  devoid  of  any  practical  use.^  In  order  to  obtain  any  practical  results
from  the  arduous  voyage,  it  would  have  been  necessary  for  Egypt  to  devote
a  considerable  part  of  its  resources  to  the  making  of  such  expeditions,  whereas
the  country  preferred  to  concentrate  all  its  energies  on  its  Tyrian  policy.  Necho
certainly  possessed  the  sympathies  of  the  Tyrians,  who  bad  transferred  their
traditional  hatred  of  the  Assyrians  to  the  Chaldseans.  He  could  also  count  w  ith
equal  certainty  on  the  support  of  a  considerable  party  in  Moab,  Ammon,  and
Edom,  as  well  as  among  the  Nabatfeans  and  the  Arabs  of  Kedar;  but  the  key
of  the  whole  position  lay  with  Judah — that  ally  without  whom  none  of  Xecho's
other  partisans  would  venture  to  declare  openly  against  their  master.  The  death
of  Josiah  had  dealt  a  fatal  blow  to  the  hopes  of  the  prophets,  and  even  long  alter
the  event  they  could  not  recall  it  without  lamenting  the  fate  of  this  king  after
their  own  heart.  "And  like  unto  him,"  exclaims  their  chronicler,  "  was  there
no  king  before  him,  that  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart  and  with  all  his
soul  and  with  all  his  might,  according  to  all  the  law  of  Moses ;  neither  after
him  arose  there  any  like  him."  ^  The  events  which  followed  his  violent  death —
the  deposition  of  Jehoahaz,  the  establishment  and  fall  of  the  Egyptian  supremacy,
the  proclamation  of  the  Chaldsean  suzerainty,  the  degradation  of  the  king
and  the  misery  of  the  people  brought  about  by  the  tribute  exacted  from  them
by  their  foreign  masters, — all  these  revolutions  which  had  succeeded  each  other

'  Hekodotus,  IV.  xlii.;  the  Greek  writers  after  Herodotus  denied  the  possibility  of  such  a  voyage
(Ephorcs,  Fragment  96  a,  in  Mlller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnee  ,  vol.  i.  p.  261),  aud  they  thouglit  that
it  could  not  be  decided  whether  Africa  was  entirely  surrounded  by  water  (Polybics,  iii.  38),  and
that  certainly  no  traveller  had  ever  journeyed  above  5000  stadia  beyond  the  entrance  to  the  Red  Sea
(Steabo,  XVI.  iii.  §  10).  Modern  writers  are  divided  ou  the  point,  some  denying  and  others  main-
taining the  authenticity  of  the  account;  the  latest  geographer  and  historian,  H.  Bergek,  Geichichte
der  Wisnenschafilichen  Erdhunde  der  Griechen,  vol.  i.  pp.  37— tO,  has  pronounced  ugaiust  it.  The
observation  made  by  the  navigators  of  the  apparent  change  in  the  course  of  the  sun,  which  Herodotus
has  recorded,  and  which  neither  he  nor  his  authorities  understood,  seems  to  me  to  be  so  weighty  an
aro-ument  for  its  authenticity,  that  it  is  impossible  to  reject  the  tradition  until  we  have  more  decided
grounds  for  so  doing.

'  2  Kinqs  xxiii.  25.


534  THE  MEDES  AXP    THE   SECOXD    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

without  break  or  respite  had  all  but  rained  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  the
reform  due  to  Hilkiah's  discovery,  aud  preached  by  Jeremiah  and  his  followers.
The  people  saw  in  these  calamities  the  vengeance  of  Jahveh  against  the  pre-
sumptuous faction  which  had  overthrown  His  various  sanctuaries  and  had
attempted  to  confine  His  worship  to  a  single  temple  ;  they  therefore  restored
the  banished  attractions,  and  set  themselves  to  sacrifice  to  strange  gods  with
greater  zest  than  ever.

A  like  crisis  occurred  and  like  party  divisions  had  broken  out  around
Jehoiakim  similar  to  those  at  the  court  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah  a  century
earlier.  The  populace,  the  soldiery,  and  most  of  the  court  officials,  in  short,  all
who  adhered  to  the  old  popular  form  of  religion  or  were  attracted  to  strange
devotions,  hoped  to  rid  themselves  of  the  Chaldoeans  by  earthly  means,  and
since  Necho  declared  himself  an  implacable  enemy  of  their  foe,  their  principal
aim  was  to  come  to  terms  with  Egypt.  Jeremiah,  on  the  contrary,  and  those
who  remained  faithful  to  the  teaching  of  the  prophets,  saw  in  all  that  was
passing  around  them  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  worldly  wisdom  and  advice,
and  for  yielding  themselves  unreservedly  to  the  Divine  will  in  bowing  before
the  Chaldasan  of  whom  Jahveh  made  use,  as  of  the  Assyrian  of  old,  to  chastise
the  sins  of  Judah.  The  struggle  between  the  two  factions  constantly  disturbed
the  public  peace,  and  it  needed  little  to  cause  the  preaching  of  the  prophets
to  degenerate  into  an  incitement  to  revolt.  On  a  feast-day  which  occurred  in
the  early  months  of  Jehoiakim's  reign,  Jeremiah  took  up  his  station  on  the
pavement  of  the  temple  and  loudly  apostrophised  the  crowd  of  worshippers.
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord :  If  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  Me,  to  walk  in  My  law,
which  I  have  set  before  you,  to  hearken  to  the  words  of  My  servants  the
prophets,  whom  I  send  unto  you,  even  rising  up  early  and  sending  them,  but
ye  have  not  hearkened  ;  then  will  1  make  this  house  like  Sliiloh,  and  will  make
this  city  a  curse  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth."  Such  a  speech,  boldly  addressed
to  an  audience  the  majority  of  whom  were  already  moved  by  hostile  feelings,
brought  their  animosity  to  a  climax ;  the  officiating  priests,  the  prophets,  and
the  pilgrims  gathered  round  Jeremiah,  crying,  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die."  The
people  thronged  into  the  temple,  the  princes  of  Judah  went  up  to  the  king's
house  and  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  sat  in  council  in  the  entry  of  the  new
gate.  They  decreed  that  Jeremiah,  having  spoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
did  not  merit  death,-  and  some  of  their  number,  recalling  the  precedent  of
Micaiah  the  Morasthite,  who  in  his  time  had  predicted  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem,
added,  "Did  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  and  all  Judah  put  him  at  all  to  death?"
Ahikam,  the  son  of  Shaphan,  one  of  those  who  had  helped  in  restoring  the  law,
took  the  prophet  under  his  protection  and  prevented  the  crowd  from  injuring
him,  but  some  others  were  not  able  to  escape  the  popular  fury.     The  prophet


JEREMIAH  AND    THE  EGYPTIAN  F ACTIOS  AT  JEBV SALEM.      535

Uriah  of  Kirjath-jearim,  who  unweariedly  prophesied  against  the  city  and
country  after  the  manner  of  Jeremiah,  fled  to  Egypt,  but  in  vain ;  Jehoiakim
despatched  Elnathan,  the  son  of  Achbor,  "  and  certain  men  witli  him,"  who
brought  him  back  to  Judah,  "  slew  him  with  the  sword,  and  cast  his  dead  body
into  tire  graves  of  the  common  people."  ^  If  popular  feeling  had  reached  such
a  pitch  before  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  to  what  height  must  it  have  risen
when  the  news  of  Nebuchadrezzar's  victory  had  given  the  death-blow  to  the
hopes  of  the  Egyptian  faction  !  Jeremiah  believed  the  moment  ripe  for
forcibly  arresting  the  popular  imagination  while  it  was  swayed  by  the  panic  of
anticipated  invasion.  He  dictated  to  his  disciple  Baruch  the  prophecies  he  had
pronounced  since  the  appearance  of  the  Scythians  under  Josiah,  and  on  the  day
of  the  solemn  fast  proclaimed  throughout  Judah  during  the  winter  of  the  fifth
year  of  the  reign,  a  few  months  after  the  defeat  of  the  Egyptians,  he  caused
the  writing  to  be  read  to  the  assembled  people  at  the  entry  of  the  new  gate.^
Micaiah,  the  son  of  Cxeinariah,  was  among  those  who  listened,  and  noting  that
the  audience  were  moved  by  the  denunciations  which  revived  the  memory  of
their  recent  misfortunes,  he  hastened  to  inform  the  ministers  sitting  in  council
within  the  palace  of  what  was  passing.  They  at  once  sent  for  Baruch,  and
begged  him  to  repeat  to  them  what  he  had  read.  They  were  so  much  alarmed
at  its  recital,  that  they  advised  him  to  hide  himself  in  company  with  Jeremiah,
while  they  informed  the  king  of  the  matter.  Jehoiakim  was  sitting  in  a
chamber  with  a  brazier  burning  before  him  on  account  of  the  severe  cold  :
scarcely  had  they  read  three  or  four  pages  before  him  when  his  anger  broke
forth ;  he  seized  the  roll,  slashed  it  with  the  scribe's  penknife,  and  threw  the
fragments  into  the  fire.  Jeremiah  recomposed  the  text  from  memory,  and
inserted  in  it  a  malediction  against  the  king.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning
Jehoiakim,  King  of  Judah :  He  shall  have  none  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David ;
and  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day  to  the  heat,  and  in  the  night  to
the  frost.  And  I  will  punish  him  and  his  seed  and  his  servants  for  their
iniquity  :  and  I  will  bring  upon  them,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,
and  upon  the  men  of  Judah,  all  the  evil  that  I  have  pronounced  against  them  ;
but  they  hearkened  not."  ^     The  Egyptian  tendencies  evinced  at  court,  at

'  Jer.  xxvi.,  where  the  scene  takes  place  at  the  beginniug  of  Jehoiakim's  reigu,  i.e.  under  the
Egyptian  domination.

'  The  date  given  in  Jer.  xxxvi.  9  makes  the  year  begin  in  spring,  since  the  ninth  month  occurs
in  winter;  this  date  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  later  recensions  of  the  text  (Stade,  Geschichte  cles
Volhes  Israel,  vol.  i.  p.  677,  note  1).  It  is  nevertheless  probably  authentic,  representing  the  exact
equivalent  of  the  original  date  according  to  the  old  calendar.

'  Jer.  xxxvi.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  reconstruct  the  contents  of  Jeremiah's  roll,  and  most
of  the  authors  who  have  dealt  with  this  subject  think  that  the  roll  contained  the  greater  part  of  the
fragments  which,  in  the  book  of  the  prophet,  occupy  chaps,  i.  4-19,  ii.,  iii.  1-5,  19-25,  iv.-vi.,  vii.,
viii.,  ix.  1-21,  X.  17-25,  xi.,  xii.  1-6,  xvii.  19-27,  xviii.,  xix.  1-13,  which  it  mu.st  be  admitted
have  not  in  every  case  been  preserved  in  their  original  form,  but  have  been  abridged  or  rearranged


536  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

first  discreetly  veiled,  were  now  accentuated  to  such  a  degree  that  Nebu-
chadrezzar became  alarmed,  and  came  in  person  to  Jerusalem  iu  the  year  601.
His  presence  frustrated  the  intrigues  of  Pharaoh.  Jehoiakim  was  reduced
to  order  for  a  time,  but  three  years  later  he  revolted  afresh  at  the  instigation
of  Necho,  and  this  time  the  Chaldtean  satraps  opened  hostilities  in  earnest.
They  assembled  their  troops,  which  were  reinforced  by  Syrian,  Moabite,  and
Ammonite  contingents,  and  laid  siege  to  Jerusalem.^  Jehoiakim,  left  to  himself,
resisted  with  such  determination  that  Nebuchadrezzar  was  obliged  to  bring  up
his  Chaldivan  forces  to  assist  in  the  attack.  Judaii  trembled  with  fear  at  the
mere  description  which  her  prophet  Habakkuk  gave  of  this  fierce  and  sturdy
people,  "  which  march  tiirough  the  breadth  of  the  earth  to  possess  dwelling-
places  which  are  not  theirs.  They  are  terrible  and  dreadful:  their  judgment
and  their  dignity  proceed  from  themselves.  Their  horses  also  are  swifter  than
leopards,  and  are  more  fierce  than  the  evening  wolves ;  and  their  horsemen
spread  themselves ;  yea,  their  horsemen  come  from  far ;  they  fly  as  an  eagle
that  hasteneth  to  devour.  Tliey  come  all  of  tliem  for  violence ;  their  faces
are  set  eagerly  as  the  east  wind,  and  they  gather  captives  as  the  sand.  Yea,
he  scoffeth  at  kings,  and  princes  are  a  derision  unto  him :  he  derideth  every
stronghold  :  for  he  heapetli  up  dust  and  taketh  it.  Then  shall  he  sweep  by  as
a  wind,  and  shall  pass  over  the  guilty,  even  he  whose  might  is  his  god."^
Nebuchadrezzar's  army  must  have  presented  a  spectacle  as  strange  as  did  that  of
Necho.  It  contained,  besides  its  nucleus  of  Chaldaean  and  Babylonian  infantry,
squadrons  of  Scythian  and  Median  cavalry,  whose  cruelty  it  was,  no  doubt,
that  had  alarmed  the  prophet,  and  certainly  bands  of  Greek  hoplites,  for
the  poet  Alcteus  had  had  a  brother,  Antimenidas  by  name,  in  the  Chaldaean
monarch's  service.^  Jehoiakim  died  before  the  enemy  appeared  beneath  the
walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  was  at  once  succeeded  by  his  son  Jeconiah,*  a  youth  of
eighteen  years,  who  assumed  the  name  of  Jehoiachin.^    The  new  king  continued

after  tlie  exile.  Other  chapters  evidently  belong  to  the  years  previous  to  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiakim,
as  well  as  part  of  the  prophecies  against  the  barbarians,  but  they  could  not  have  been  included  in  the
original  roll,  as  the  latter  would  then  have  been  too  long  to  have  been  read  three  times  in  one  day.

'  2  Kings  sxiv.  1-4.  The  passage  is  not  easy  to  be  understood  as  it  stands,  and  it  has  been
differently  interpreted  by  historians.  Some  have  supposed  that  it  refers  to  events  immediately
following  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  and  that  Jehoiakim  defended  Jerusalem  against  Nebuchadrezzar
in  605  (WiscKLEB,  AHtestamentliche  Uiiterauchungen,  pp.  81-87).  Others  thiijk  that,  after  the  battle
of  Carchemish,  Jehoiakim  took  advantage  of  Nebuchadrezzar's  being  obliged  to  return  at  once  to
Babylon,  and  would  not  recognise  the  authority  of  the  Chaldaeans ;  that  Nebuchadrezzar  returned
later,  towards  601,  and  took  Jerusalem,  and  that  it  is  to  this  second  war  that  allusion  is  made  in  the
Booh  of  Kings  (Tiele,  Bahylonisch-assyrische  Gtschicldc,  pp.  425-427 ;  Stade,  Gesch.  des  Volhes  Israel,
vol.  i.  p.  678;  Kittel,  Gesch.  der  Sebrseer,  vol.  ii.  p.  318).  It  is  more  simple  to  consider  that  which
occurred  about  600  as  a  first  attempt  at  rebellion  which  was  punished  lightly  by  the  Clialdsans.

=  Bab.  i.  6-U.  •  Steabo,  XIII.  ii.  §  3.  p.  017.

*  [Jehoiachiu  is  called  Coniah  in  Jer.  xxli.  24  and  xxiv.  1,  and  Jeconiah  in  1  Chroii.  iii.  16.— Tr.]

*  2  Kings  xxiv.  5-10 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6-9,  where  the  writer  says  that  Nebuchadrezzar  bound
Jehoiakim  "in  fetters,  to  carry  him  to  Babylon."


THE  REVOLT  OF  JEEOIAKIM  AND  THE  CAPTIVITT  OF  JEHOIACEIN.    537

the  struggle  at  first  courageously,  but  the  advent  of  Nebuchadrezzar  so  clearly
convinced  him  of  the  futility  of  the  defence,  that  he  suddenly  decided  to  lay
down  his  arms.  He  came  forth  from  the  city  with  his  mother  Nehushta,  the
ofBcers  of  his  house,  his  ministers,  and  his  eunuchs,  and  prostrated  himself  at
the  feet  of  his  suzerain.  The  Chaldfean  monarch  was  not  iucliued  to  proceed  to
extremities ;  he  therefore  exiled  to  Babylon  Jehoiachin  and  the  whole  of  his
seditious  court  who  had  so  ill-advised  the  young  king,  the  best  of  his  officers,  and
the  most  skilful  artisans,  in  all  .3023  persons,  but  the  priests  and  the  bulk  of  the
people  remained  at  Jerusalem.  The  conqueror  appointed  Mattaniah,  the  youngest
son  of  Josiah,  to  be  their  ruler,  who,  on  succeediug  to  the  crown,  changed
his  name,  after  the  example  of  his  predecessors,  adopting  that  of  Zedekiah.
Jehoiachin  had  reigned  exactly  three  months  over  his  besieged  city  (596).^

The  Egyjjtians  made  no  attempt  to  save  their  ally,  but  if  they  felt
themselves  not  in  a  condition  to  defy  the  Chaldieans  on  Syrian  territory,  the
Chaldaiaus  on  their  side  feared  to  carry  hostilities  into  the  heart  of  the  Delta.
Necho  died  two  years  after  the  disaster  at  Jerusalem,  without  having  been
called  to  account  by,  or  having  found  an  opportunity  of  further  annoying,  his
rival,  and  his  son  Psammetichus  II.  succeeded  peacefully  to  the  throne.^  He
was  a  youth  at  this  time,^  and  his  father's  ministers  conducted  the  affairs  of
State  on  his  behalf,  and  it  was  they  who  directed  one  of  his  early  campaigns,  if
not  the  very  first,  against  Ethiopia.^     They  organised  a  small  army  for  him

'  2  Kings  xxiv.  11-17:  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  10.

*  The  length  of  Necho's  reign  is  fixed  at  sixteen  years  by  Herodotus  ([I.  clix.),  and  at  six  or  at
nine  years  by  the  various  abbreviators  of  Manetho  (JIuller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Qrxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.
593,  591).  The  contemporaneous  monuments  have  confirmed  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  on  this
point  as  against  that  of  Manetho,  and  the  stelfe  of  the  Florentine  Museum  (Rosellini,  Monumenti
Storici,  vol.  ii.  pp.  150,  151,  where  tlie  author  gives  only  six  years  to  Necho),  of  tije  Leyden  Museum
(Leemans,  Leltre  a  M.  Fraiifois  Salvolini,  pp.  125-132,  where  Bosellini's  error  is  maintained),  and  of
the  Louvre  (S.  2243,  2244;  cf.  E.  de  Eouge,  Notice  sommaire  des  Mon.  &jyptie7is,  1855,  p.  47)  have
furnished  certain  proof  that  Necho  died  in  the  sixteenth  year,  after  fifteen  and  a  half  years'  reign
(Wiedemann,  Gesch.  -SSgypt.  pp.  116-119).

'  His  sarcophagus,  discovered  in  1883,  and  now  preserved  in  the  Gizeli  Museum,  is  of  such  small
dimensions  that  it  can  have  been  used  only  for  a  youth  (Maspero,  Notes  sur  quelques  points  de
Grammaire  et  d'Histoire,  in  the' Zeitschri/t,  1SS4,  pp.  78-80,  and  Guide  du  Visileur,  pp.  25,  26).

■*  Heuodotds,  II.  clxi.  The  graffiti  of  Abu-Simbel  have  been  most  frequently  attributed  to
Psammeticlius  I.,  and  until  recently  I  had  thought  it  possible  to  maintain  this  opinion  (cf.  Mallet,
Les  Premiers  Etablissements  des  Grecs  en  Eijypte,  pp  82-95).  A.  von  Gutschmid  was  the  first,  in  his
German  translation  of  Sharpe's  History  of  Egypt  (p.  82,  note),  to  restore  them  to  Psammetichus  II.,
and  his  opinion  has  gained  ground  since  Wiedemann's  vigorous  defence  of  it  in  his  works  (Die
Griechische  Inschrifl  von  Ahu-Simbel,  in  the  Ulieinisohes  Museum,  vol.  xsxv.  pp.  3G4-372;  Geschiahle
yEgyptens,  pp.  157,  158  ;  JEgyptische  Geschiclde,  pp.  G31,  632).  The  lalysian  mercenary's  graHito,
oKa  ^aTiK^us  ^Aaffe  rhv  ffrparov  rh  irparoy  [t^/^aSe  a]aa  Ya/iEiTixL"^  • .],  contains  the  Greek  translation  of
the  current  Egyptian  phrase  "when  his  Majesty  came  on  his  first  military  expedition  into  this
country  "  (cf ,  e.g  .  Lepsius,  Denhin.,  iii.  81-91,  1.  5),  which  seems  to  point  to  no  very  early  date  in
a  reign  for  a  first  canipaitjn.  Moreover,  one  of  the  generals  in  command  of  the  expedition  is
a  Psammetichus,  son  of  Theocles,  that  is,  a  Greek  with  an  Egyptian  name  (cf  Psammeticlius,
nephew  of  Periander,  Aristotle,  Politics,  v.  9,  22,  and  Nicolas  op  Damascos,  Fragment  68,  in
MoLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  394).  A  considerable  lapse  of  time  must  have  taken
place  since  Psammetichus'  first  dealings  with  the  Greeks,  for  otherwise  the  person  named  after  the
king  would  not  have  been  of  sufficiently  mature  age  to  be  put  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  troops.


538  TEE  MEDES  AXD    THE   SECOXD    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

composed  of  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Asiatic  mercenaries,  which,  while  the  king
was  taking  up  his  residence  at  Elephantine,  was  borne  up  the  Nile  in  a  fleet  of
large  vessels.^  It  probably  went  as  far  south  as  the  northern  point  of  the
second  cataract,  and  not  having  encountered  any  Ethiopian  force,^  it  retraced
its  course  and  came  to  anchor  at  Abu-Simbel.  The  officers  in  command,  after
having  admired  the  rock-cut  chapel  of  Ramses  II.,  left  iu  it  a  memento  of
their  visit  in  a  fine  inscription  cut  on  the  right  leg  of  one  of  the  colossi.  This
inscription  informs  us  that  "  King  Psammatikhos  having  come  to  Elephantine,
the  people  who  were  with  Psammatikhos,  son  of  Theocles,  wrote  this.  They
ascended  above  Kerkis,  to  where  the  river  ceases;  Potasimto^  commanded
the  foreigners,  Amasis  the  Egyptians.  At  the  same  time  also  wrote  Arkhou,
son  of  Amoibikhos,  and  Peleqos,  son  of  Uhimos."  Following  the  example  of
their  officers,  the  soldiers  also  wrote  their  names  here  and  there,  each  in  his  own
language — lonians,  llhodians,  Carians,  Phoenicians,  and  perhaps  even  Jews ;
e.g.  Elesibios  of  Teos,  Pabis  of  Colophon,  Telephos  of  lalysos,  Abdsakou  son  of
Petiehve,  Gerhekal  son  of  Hallum.*  The  whole  of  this  part  of  the  country,
brought  to  ruin  in  the  gradual  dismemberment  of  Greater  Egypt,  could  not
have  differed  much  from  the  Xubia  of  to-day ;  there  were  the  same  narrow
strips  of  cultivation  along  the  river  banks,  gigantic  temples  half  buried  by
their  own  ruins,  scattered  towns  and  villages,  and  everywhere  the  yellow  sand
creeping  insensibly  down  towards  the  Nile.  The  northern  part  of  this  province
remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Saite  Pharaohs,  and  the  districts  situated  further
south  just  beyond  Abu-Simbel  formed  at  that  period  a  sort  of  neutral  ground

'  The  chief  graffito  at  Abu-Simbel  says,  in  fact,  that  the  king  came  to  Elephantine,  and  that  only
the  troops  accorapanying;  the  General  Psammetichus,  the  son  of  Theocles,  went  beyond  Kerkis.  It
was  probably  during  his  stay  at  Elephantine,  while  awaiting  the  return  of  the  expedition,  that
Psammetichus  II.  had  the  inscriptions  containing  his  cartouches  engraved  upon  the  rocks  of  Bigga,
Abaton,  Philse,  and  Konosso  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  pp.  1G3,  (jl6.
631 ;  Eo-ELLINI,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cxlii.  a,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  120,  130 ;  Lei'SIUS,  Denkm.,  iii.  274  e  ;
J.  DE  MoKGAN,  De  la  Frontiere  de  Nuhie  a  Kom-Omboe,  p.  69,  No.  14),  or  among  the  ruins  of
Elephantine  and  of  Philje  (Champolliox,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  vol.  i.  p.  225 ;  LEPSins,
Denkm.,  iii.  274  d;  J.  DE  Moegax,  De  la  Frontiere  de  Nuhie  d  Kom-Ombos,  p.  114).

'  The  Greek  inscription  says  above  Kerkis.  Wiedemann  {Die  Griechische  Insehrifl  von  Abu-Simhel:
in  the  Eheinisches  Museum,  vol.  xxxv.  p.  372 ;  cf.  Kball,  Pntasimto,  in  Wiener  Studien,  1882,  p.  165)
has  corrected  Kerkis  into  Kortis,  the  Korte  of  the  tirst  cataract,  but  the  reading  Kerkis  is  too  well
established  (Pcesl,  Inscriptiones  Grstcix  antiquissimx,So.  482)  for  there  to  be  any  reason  for  change.
The  simplest  explanation  is  to  acknowledge,  with  Ebers  (^.Egypten  und  die  Bucher  Moses,  pp.  162-164),
that  the  inscription  refers  to  a  place  situated  a  few  miles  above  Abu-Simbel,  towards  W'ady-Halfa.
Mallet  has  reminded  us  of  names  of  similar  for<n  found  in  Nubia  (Les  fremiers  Etahlissements  des
<}recs  en  Egypte,  p.  83,  note  2).

^  On  the  identity  of  the  name  Potasimto  in  the  inscription  with  the  Egyptian  name  Potasimtoui,
cf.  Kkall,  note  Potasimto,  in  Wiener  Studien,  1882,  pp.  164-166,  slightly  amended  by  Mallet,  Les
Premiers  £tablissemenls  des  Orecs  en  Egypte,  p.  85,  note  4.  The  name  signifies  the  gift  of  the  god
Stmtoui,  the  god  who  unites  the  two  lands,  Horus.

'  The  Greek,  Carian,  and  Semitic  graffiti  have  been  collected  for  the  first  time  in  almost  complete
fashion  by  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  vi.  98,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Corpus  Inscriptionum  Semiticarum,  vol.  i.  pp.  128-137.
For  the  rare  Carian  graffiti,  see  Satce,  The  Karian  Language  and  Inscriptions,  in  the  Transactions  of
the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1887,  vol.  ix.  pp.  144,  145.


PSAMMETICHVS  II.   AXD   ZEDEKIAH   OF  JUDAE.


539


between  their  domain  and  that  of  the  Pharaohs  of  Napata.  While  all  this  was
going  on,  Syria  continued  to  plot  in  secret,  and  the  faction  which  sought
security  in  a  foreign  alliance  was  endeavouring  to  shake  off  the  depression
caused  by  the  reverses  of  Jehoiakim  and  his  son ;  and  the  tide  of
popular  feeling  setting  in  the  direction  of  Egypt  became  so  strong,  that
even  Zedekiah,  the  creature  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  was  unable  to  stem  it.  The
prophets  who  were  inimical  to  religious  reform,  persisted  in  their  belief  that
the  humiliation  of  the  country  was  merely  temporary.  Those  of  them  who
still  remained  in  Jerusalem  repeated  at  every  turn,  "  Ye  shall  not  serve  the
King  of  Babylon  .  .  .  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  now  shortly  be
brought  again  from  Babylon."  ^    Jeremiah  endeavoured  to  counteract  the  effect


THE   FACADE   OF
THE  GREAT   TESrPLE
OP   ABU-SI3IBEL.=


of  their  words,  but  in  vaiu  ;  the  people,
instead  of  listening  to  the  prophet,  waxed  wroth
with  him,  and  gave  themselves  more  and  more
recklessly  up  to  their  former  sins.  Incense  was  burnt  every  morning  on  the  roofs
of  the  houses  and  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  in  honour  of  Baal,  lamentations
for  Tammuz  again  rent  the  air  at  the  season  of  his  festival ;  ^  the  temple  was
invaded  by  uncircumcised  priests  and  their  idols,*  and  the  king  permitted  the
priests  of  Moloch  to  raise  their  pyres  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom.^  The  exiled
Jews,  .surrounded  on  all  sides  by  heathen  peoples,  presented  a  no  less  grievous

'  Jer.  xxvii.  9,  16.

=  Drawn  by  Bouditr,  from  a  photograjih  by  Daniel  Heron,  taken  in  18S1.     Cf.  the  general  view
of  the  monntain  of  Abu-Simbel  in  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  413.
'  Ezeh.  viii.  14,  15.     [Cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  178.— Tb.]
*  Jer.  xxxii.  34;  Ezek.  viii.  7-13,  16.  =  Jer.  xxxii.  35  ;  Ezeli.  xvi.  21,  xxiii.  37.


540  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

spectacle  than  their  brethren  at  Jerusalem  ;  some  openly  renounced  the  God  of
their  fathers,^  others  worshipped  their  chosen  idols  in  secret,^  while  thosp  who
did  not  actually  become  traitors  to  their  faith,  would  only  listen  to  such
prophets  as  promised  them  a  speedy  revenge — Ahab,  Zedekiah,  son  of
Maaseiab,  and  Shemaiali.  There  was  one  man,  however,  who  appeared
in  their  midst,  a  priest,  brought  up  from  his  youth  in  the  temple  and
Imbued  with  the  ideas  of  reform — Ezekiel,  son  of  Buzi,  whose  words  might
have  brought  tliem  to  a  more  just  appreciation  of  their  position,  had  they  not
drowned  his  voice  by  their  clamour ;  alarmed  at  their  threats,  he  refrained  from
speech  in  public,  but  gathered  round  him  a  few  faithful  adherents  at  his  house
in  Tel-Abib,  where  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  first  came  upon  him  in  their  presence
about  the  year  592.^  This  little  band  of  exiles  was  in  constant  communication
with  the  mother-country,  and  the  echo  of  the  religious  quarrels  and  of  the
controversies  provoked  between  the  various  factions  by  the  events  of  the
political  world,  was  promptly  borne  to  them  by  merchants,  travelling  scribes,  or
the  king's  legates  who  were  sent  regularly  to  Babylon  with  the  tribute.*  They
learnt,  about  the  year  590,  that  grave  events  were  at  hand,  and  that  the  moment
had  come  when  Judah,  recovering  at  length  from  her  trials,  should  once  more
occupy,  in  the  sight  of  the  sun,  that  place  for  which  Jahveh  had  destined  lier.
The  kings  of  Moab,  Ammon,  Edom,  Tyre,  and  Sidon  had  sent  envoys  to
Jerusalem,  and  there,  probably  at  the  dictation  of  Egypt,  they  had  agreed  on
what  measures  to  take  to  stir  up  a  general  insurrection  against  Chaldaea.^  The
report  of  their  resolutions  had  revived  the  courage  of  the  national  party,  and  of
its  prophets ;  Hanauiah,  son  of  Azzur,  had  gone  through  the  citj  announcing
the  good  news  to  all."  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,
saying,  I  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  King  of  Babylon.  Within  two  full  years
will  I  bring  again  into  this  place  all  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house  .  .  .  and
Jeconiah  the  son  of  Jehoiakim,  King  of  Judah,  with  all  the  captives  of  Judah
that  went  to  Babylon  !  "  But  Jeremiah  had  made  wooden  yokes  and  had  sent
them  to  the  confederate  princes,  threatening  them  with  divine  punishment  if
they  did  not  bow  their  necks  to  Nebuchadrezzar ;  the  prophet  himself  bore
one  on  his  own  neck,  and  showed  himself  in  the  streets  on  all  occasions  thus
accoutred,  as  a  living  emblem  of  the  slavery  in  which  Jahveh  permitted  His
people  to  remain  for  their  spiritual  good.     Hananiah,  meeting  the  prophet  by

'  Jer.  xxix.  21-32.  =  Ezek.  xiv.  1-8.

'  Ezek.  i.  1,  2.    We  see  liim  receiving  the  elders  in  his  house  in  chaps,  viii.  1,  xiv.  1,  xx.  1,  et  seq.

*  Jer.  xxix.  3  gives  the  names  of  two  of  these  tiansmitters  of  the  tribute — Elasah  the  son  of
Shaphan,  and  Gemariah  the  son  of  HUkiah,  to  whom  Jeremiah  had  entrusted  a  message  for  those
of  the  captivity.

'  Jer.  xxvii.  1-3.  The  statement  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter :  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of
Jehoiakim,  contains  a  copyist's  error  ;  the  reading'should  be  :  In  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah
(see  ver.  12).  "^  Jer.  xxvii.,  sxviii.


APRIES.  541

chance,  wrested  the  yoke  from  him  and  broke  it,   exclaiming,  "  Thus  saith
the  Lord  :  Even  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  of  Xebuchadrezzav,  King  of  Babylon,
within  two  full  years  from  off  the  neck  of  all  the  nations."     The  mirth  of  the
bystanders  was  roused,  but  on  the  morrow  Jeremiah  appeared  with  a  yoke  of
iron,  which  Jahveh  had  put  "  upon  the  neck  of  all  the  nations,  that  they  may
serve  Nebuchadrezzar,  King  of  Babylon."     Moreover,  to  destroy  in  the  minds
of  the  exiled  Jews  any  hope  of  speedy  deliverance,  he  wrote  to  them  :  "  Let
not  your  prophets  that  be  in  the  midst  of  you,  and  your  diviners,  deceive  you,
neither  hearken  ye  to  your  dreams  which  ye  cause  to  be  dreamed.     For  they
prophesy  falsely  unto  you  in  My  name  :  I  have  not  sent  them,  saith  the  Lord." '
The  prophet  exhorted  them  to  resign  themselves  to  their  fate,  at  all  events  for
the  time,  that  the  unity  of  their  nation  might  be  preserved  until  the  time  when
it  might  indeed  please  Jahveh  to  restore  it :  "  Build  ye  houses  and  dwell  in
them,  and  plant  gardens  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them  :  take  ye  wives  and  beget
sons  and  daughters,  and  take  wives  for  your  sons,  and  give  your  daughters  to
husbands,  that  they  may  bear  sons  and  daughters ;  and  multiply  ye  there  and
be  not  diminished.     And  seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caused  you
to  be  carried  away  captive,  and  pray  unto  the  liord  lor  it :  for  in  the  peace
thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  ■^

Psammetiohus  II.  died  in  589,^  and  his  reign,  though  short,  was  distinguished
by  the  activity  shown  in  rebuilding  and  embellishing  the  temples.  His  name
is  met  with  everywhere  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile — at  Karnak,  where  he  com-
pleted the  decoration  of  the  great  columns  of  Taharqa,^  at  Abydos,^  at  Heliopolis,
and  on  the  monuments  that  have  come  from  that  town,  such  as  the  obelisk  set
up  in  the  Campus  Martins  at  Kome.'^  The  personal  influence  of  the  young
sovereign  did  not  count  for  much  in  the  zeal  thus  displayed ;  but  the  impulse
that  had  been  growing  during  three  or  four  generations,  since  the  time  of  the
expulsion  of  the  Assyrians,  now  began  to  have  its  full  effect.  Egypt,  well  armed,
well  governed  by  able  ministers,  and  more  and  more  closely  bound  to  Greece  by

'  Jer.  ssis.  8,  9.  "  ^  Jer.  xxix.  5-7.

=  Herodotus  reckoned  the  length  of  the  reign  of  Psammetichus  II.  at  six  years  (II.  clxi.),  in
which  he  agrees  with  the  Syncellus,  while  the  abbreviators  of  Manetho  fix  it  at  seventeen  years
(MvLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grssc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  593,  594).  The  results  given  by  the  reading  of  the
stele  of  the  Louvre  S.  2210  enable  us  to  settle  that  the  figure  6  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  other,  and  tn
reckon  the  length  of  the  reign  at  five  years  and  a  half;  cf.  Wiedemann,  GeschicMe  Jiyyptens,  pp.  117,
118,  172,  173.

■*  Champollion,  Monuments  de  Vt^gypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  p.  8,  et  seq. ;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici
pi.  ii.  pp.  129,  130 ;  Mariette,  Karnak,  Texte,  pp.  9,  20 ;  cf.  what  is  said  of  these  columns  above,
pp.  364,  86.7.  I  would  mention  once  more  (cf.  above,  p.  501,  note  3)  that  the  monuments  recorded  by
the  early  Egyptologists  as  belonging  to  Psammetichus  II.  belong  really  to  Psammetichus  I.,  and
vice  versa.

'  Mariette,  Ahyios,  vol.  i.  pi.  2  h.

"  Ungarelli,  Jnlerpretatio  oheliscorum,  pi.  2,  and  p.  125.  [Two  obelisks  were  set  up  originally  before
the  Teiuple  of  Serapi-s  and  Isis  in  the  Campus  Martins ;  that  in  the  text  now  stands  before  the  Pantheon,
and  though  cut  by  Barneses  II.,  was  appropriated  by  Psammetiohus  II.     See  p.  550,  infra. — Tr.]


542  THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CBALDJ^'AN  EMPIRE.


i?#-


APRIES,   FHOJI   A   SPHINX   IN  THE  LOUTRE.*


both  mercantile  aud  friendly  ties,  had  risen  to  a  very  high  position  in  the  estima-
tion of  its  contemporaries ;  the  inhabitants  of  Elis  had  deferred  to  her  decision
in  the  question  whether  they  should  take  part  in  the  Olympic  o-ames  in  which
they  were  the  judges,  and  following  the  advice  she  had  given  on  the  matter,  they
had  excluded  their  own  citizens  from  the  sports  so  as  to  avoid  the  least  suspicion
of  partiality  in  the  distribution  of  the  prizes.^  The  new  king,  probably  the  brother
of  the  late  Piiaraoh,  had  his  prenomen  of  Uahibri  from  his  "-randfather  Psamme-
tichus  I.,  and  it  was  this  sovereign  that  the  Greeks  called  indift'erently  Uaphres
and  Apries.'-^    He  was  young,  ambitious,  greedy  of  fame  and  military  glory,  and

longed  to  use  the  weapon  that
his  predecessors  had  for  some
fifteen  years  past  been  care-
fully whetting ;  liis  emissaries,
arriving  at  Jerusalem  at  the
moment  when  the  popular
excitement  was  at  its  height,
had  little  difficulty  in  over-
coming Zedekiah's  scruples.
Edom,  Moab,  and  the  Philis-
tines, who  had  all  taken  their  share  in  the  conferences  of  the  rebel  party ,^  hesi-
tated at  the  last  moment,  and  refused  to  sever  their  relations  with  Babylon.  Tyre
and  the  Ammonites  alone  persisted  in  their  determination,  and  allied  themselves
with  Egypt  on  the  same  terms  as  Judah.  Nebuchadrezzai-,  thus  defied  by  three
enemies,  was  at  a  loss  to  decide  upon  which  to  make  his  first  attack.  Ezekiel,
whose  place  of  exile  put  him  in  a  favourable  position  for  learning  what  was
passing,  shows  him  to  us  as  he  "  stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way,  at  the  head  of
the  two  ways,  to  use  divination :  he  shook  the  arrows  to  and  fro,  he  consulted
the  teraphim,  he  looked  in  the  liver,"  ^  Judah  formed  as  it  were  the  bridge
by  which  the  Egyptians  could  safely  enter  Syria,  and  if  Nebuchadrezzar  could
succeed  in  occupying  it  before  their  arrival,  he  could  at  once  break  up  the
coalition  into  three  separate  parts  incapable  of  rejoining  one  another — Ammon
in  the  desert  to  the  east,  Tyre  and  Sidon  on  the  seaboard,  and  Pharaoh  beyond

'  Herodotus,  II.  els. ;  cf.  Wiedemaxs,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buck,  pp.  568,  569.  DiODOKns  SicuLUs,
i.  95,  has  transferred  the  anecdote  to  Amasis,  and  the  decision  given  is  elsewhere  attributed  to  one
of  the  seven  sages.  The  story  is  a  popular  romance,  of  which  Herodotus  gives  the  version  current
among  the  Greeks  in  Egypt.

'  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etablissemenfs  des  Grecs  en  igypte,  p.  116,  note  2.  According  to  Herodotus
(II.  clxi.),  Apries  was  the  son  of  Psammis.  The  size  of  the  sarcophagus  of  Psammetichna  II.,  suitable
only  for  a  youth,  makes  this  filiation  improbable.  Psammetichus,  who  came  to  the  throne  when  he
was  hardly  more  than  a  child,  could  have  left  behind  him  only  children  of  tender  age,  and  Apries
appears  from  the  outset  as  a  prince  of  full  mental  and  physical  development.

'  Cf.  above,  p.  5i0  of  the  present  volume.

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  bronze  statuette  in  the  Louvre  Museum  :  cf.  Pierret,  Catalogue  de
la  Salle  historique,  No.  267,  p.  57.  ^  Ezel:  xxi.  21.


THE  REVOLT   OF   TTEE   AND   JUDAH.


543


his  isthmus  to  the  south-west.  He  therefore  established  himself  iu  a  central
position  at  Kiblah  on  the  Orontes,  from  whence  he  could  observe  the  progress
of  the  operations,
and  hasten  with  his
reserve  force  to  a
threatened  point  in
the  case  of  unfore-
seen diiBcuities  ;
having  done  this,  he
despatched  the  two
divisions  of  his  army
against  his  two
principal  adversa-
ries. One  of  these
divisions  crossed
the  Lebanon,  seized
its  fortresses,  and,
leaving  a  record  of
its  victories  on  the
rocks  of  the  Wady
Brissa,made  its  way
southwards  along
the  coast  to  block-
ade Tyre.i  The
other  force  bore
down  upon  Zede-
kiah,  and  made  war
upon  him  ruthlessly.    It  burnt  the  villages  and  unwalled  towns,  gave  the  rural

'  The  account  of  this  Phoenician  campaign  is  contained  in  one  of  the  inscriptions  discovered  and
commented  on  by  Pogxon,  Leg  Inscriptions  Babyloniennes  du  Wadi  Brissa,  pp.  20-22,  120-126.
Winckler,  the  only  one  to  my  knowledge  who  has  tried  to  give  a  precise  chronological  position  to  the
events  recorded  in  the  inscription,  places  them  at  the  very  beginning  of  tlie  reign,  after  the  victory  of
Carchemish,  about  the  time  when  Nebuchadrezzar  heard  that  his  fatlier  had  just  died  (Altorientalische
Forschungen,  vol.  i.  pp.  504-506).  I  think  that  this  date  is  not  justified  by  the  study  of  the  inscription,
for  the  king  speaks  therein  of  the  great  works  that  he  had  accomplished,  the  restoration  of  the  temples,
the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Babylon,  and  the  digging  of  canals,  all  of  which  take  us  to  the  middle  or
the  end  of  his  reign.  'We  are  therefore  left  to  choose  between  one  of  two  dates,  namely,  that  of  590-587,
during  the  Jewish  war,  and  that  from  the  King's  thirty-seventh  year  to  56S  B.C.,  during  the  war
against  Amasis  which  will  be  treated  below.  I  have  chosen  the  first,  because  of  Nebuchadrezzar's  long
sojourn  at  Eiblah,  which  gave  him  sufficient  time  for  the  engraving  of  the  stelie  on  Lebanon :  the
bas-reliefs  of  Wady  Brissa  could  have  been  cut  before  the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  for  no  allusion  to  the
war  against  the  Jews  is  found  in  them.  The  enemy  mentioned  in  the  opening  lines  is  perhaps  Apries,
whose  fleet  was  scouring  the  Phcenician  coasts.

•  Drawn  by  Bondier,  from  a  photograph  by  POGXOX,  Les  Inscriptions  Bahylonieanes  du  Wady
Brissa,  pi.  ii.  The  figures  have  been  carefully  defaced  with  the  hammer,  but  the  outline  of  the  king
can  still  be  discerned  on  the  left;  he  seizes  the  rampant  lion  by  the  right  paw,  and  while  it  raises  its
left  paw  against  him,  he  plunges  his  dagger  into  the  body  of  the  beast.


STELE    OF   NEBUCHADKEZZAE.^


544  TEE  MEDES  AND    TEE  SECOND    CEALD^AN  EMPIRE.

districts  over  as  a  prey  to  the  Philistines  and  the  Edomites,  surrounded  the  two
fortresses  of  Lachish  and  Azekah,  and  only  after  completely  exhausting  the
provinces,  appeared  before  the  walls  of  the  capital.  Jerusalem  was  closely
beset  when  the  news  reached  the  Chalda^ans  that  Apries  was  approaching  Gaza ;
Zedekiah,  in  his  distress,  appealed  to  him  for  help,  and  the  promised  succour
at  length  came  upon  the  scene.'  The  Chaldeans  at  once  raised  the  siege  with
the  object  of  arresting  the  advancing  enemy,  and  the  popular  party,  reckoning
already  on  a  Chaldjean  defeat,  gave  way  to  insolent  rejoicing  over  the  prophets
of  evil.  Jeremiah,  however,  had  no  hope  of  final  success.  "  Deceive  not  your-
selves,  saying.  The  Chaldtoans  shall  surely  depart  from  us  ;  for  they  shall  not
depart.  For  though  ye  had  smitten  the  whole  army  of  the  Chaldseans  that
fight  against  you,  and  there  remained  but  wounded  men  among  them,  yet  sliould
they  rise  up  every  man  in  his  tent,  and  burn  this  city  with  fire."  ^  What
actually  took  place  is  not  known ;  according  to  one  account,  Apries  accepted
battle  and  was  defeated  ;  ■''  according  to  another,  he  refused  to  be  drawn  into  an
engagement,  and  returned  haughtily  to  Egypt.*  His  fleet  probably  made  some
effective  raiding  on  the  Phoenician  coast.  It  is  easy  to  believe  that  the  sight
of  the  Chaldaean  camp  inspired  him  with  prudence,  and  that  he  thought  twice
before  compromising  the  effects  of  his  naval  campaign  and  risking  the  loss  of
his  fine  army — the  only  one  which  Egypt  possessed — in  a  conflict  in  which  his-
own  safety  was  not  directly  concerned.  Nebuchadrezzar,  on  his  side,  was  not
anxious  to  pursue  so  strongly  equipped  an  adversary  too  hotly,  and  deeming
himself  fortunate  in  having  escaped  the  ordeal  of  a  trial  of  strength  with  him,
he  returned  to  his  position  before  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.

The  city  receiving  no  further  succour,  its  fall  was  merely  a  question  of  time,
and  resistance  served  merely  to  irritate  the  besiegers.  The  Jews  nevertheless
continued  to  defend  it  with  the  heroic  obstinacy  and,  at  the  same  time,  with
the  frenzied  discord  of  which  they  have  so  often  shown  themselves  capable.
During  the  respite  which  the  diversion  caused  by  Apries  afforded  them.
Jeremiah  had  attempted  to  flee  from  Jerusalem  and  seek  refuge  in  Benjamin,
to  which  tribe  he  belonged.  Arrested  at  the  city  gate  on  the  pretext  of  treason,
he  was  unmercifully  beaten,  thrown  into  prison,  and  the  king,  who  had  begun
to  believe  in  him,  did  not  venture  to  deliver  him.  He  was  confined  in  the
court  of  the  palace,  which  served  as  a  gaol,  and  allowed  a  ration  of  a  loaf  of
bread  for  his  daily   food.^     The  courtyard    was  a  public  place,  to  which  all

'  Ezeh.  xvii.  15.  ^  Jer.  xxxvii.  5-10.

'  JosEPncs,  Jewish  Antiquities,  x.  7.  §  .S,  where  the  Hebrew  historian  probably  thought  that  the
lauguage  used  by  Jeremiah  (xxxvii.  7)  implied  a  defeat  of  the  Egyptians.

*  That,  at  least,  is  what  Jeremiah  seems  to  say  (xxxvii.  7):  "Behold,  Pharaoh's  army,  which  is
come  forth  to  help  you,  shall  return  to  Egypt  into  their  own  land."  There  is  no  hint  here  of  defeat
or  even  of  a  battle.

^  Jtr.  xxxvii.  11-21.


TEE  SIEOE  AND   DESTRUCTION   OF  JERUSALEM.


545


comers  had  access  who  desired  to  speak  to  the  prisoners,  and  even  here  the
prophet  did  not  cease  to  preach  and  exhort  the  people  to  repentance  :  "  He
that  abideth  in  this  city  shall  die  by  the  sword,  by  the  famine,  and  by  the
pestilence ;  but  he  that  goeth  forth  to  the  Chaldaeans  shall  live,  and  his  life
shall  be  unto  him  for  a  prey,  and  he  shall  live.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  This  city
shall  surely  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  armj'  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  and  he
shall  take  it."  The  princes  and  officers  of  the  king,  however,  complained  to
Zedekiah  of  him  :  "  Let  this  man,  we  pray  thee,  be  put  to  death  ;  forasmuch
as  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the  men  of  war,  and  the  hands  of  all  the  people


,^:  m^


€'\^-


PRISONERS    UNDER   TORTURE    HAVING    THEIR   TONGUES   TORN    OUT.'

in  speaking  such  words."  Given  up  to  his  accusers  and  plunged  in  a  muddy
cistern,  he  escaped  by  the  connivance  of  a  eunuch  of  the  royal  household,  only
to  renew  his  denunciations  with  greater  force  than  ever.  The  king  sent  for  him
secretly  and  asked  his  advice,  but  could  draw  from  him  nothing  but  threats :
"  If  thou  wilt  go  forth  unto  the  King  of  Babylon's  princes,  then  thy  soul  shall
live,  and  this  city  shall  not  be  burned  with  fire,  and  thou  shalt  live  and  thine
house :  but  if  thou  wilt  not  go  forth  to  the  King  of  Babylon's  princes,  then  shall
this  city  be  given  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldaeans,  and  they  shall  bum  it  with
fire,  and  thou  shalt  not  escape  out  of  their  hand."  -  Zedekiah  would  have  asked
no  better  than  to  follow  his  advice,  but  he  had  gone  too  far  to  draw  back  now.
To  the  miseries  of  war  and  sickness  the  horrors  of  famine  were  added,  but  the
determination  of  the  besieged  was  unshaken  ;  bread  was  failing,  and  yet  they
would  not  hear  of  surrender.^  At  length,  after  a  year  and  a  half  of  sufferings
heroically  borne,  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah,  the  eleventh  month,  and  the
fourth  day  of  the  month,  a  portion  of  the  city  wall  fell  before  the  attacks  of
the  battering-rams,  and  the  Chaldsean  army  entered  by  the  breach.     Zedekiah

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  British  Museum ;   cf.  Layard,
The  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  pi.  47.

-  Jer.  xxxviii.  ^  Jer.  xxxviii.  2,  9,  24-27,  and  2  l\ings  sxv.  3.

2    N


546


THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


assembled  his  remaining  soldiers,  and  took  counsel  as  to  the  possibility  of
cutting  his  way  through  the  enemy  to  beyond  the  Jordan ;  escaping  by  night
through  the  gateway  opposite  the  Pool  of  Siloam,  he  was  taken  prisoner  near
Jericho,  and  carried  off  to  Kiblah,  where  Nebuchadrezzar  was  awaiting  with
impatience  the  result  of  the  operations.  The  Chaldasans  were  accustomed  to
torture  their  prisoners  in  the  fashion  we  frequently  see  represented  on  the
monuments  of  Nineveh,  and  whenever  an  unexpected  stroke  of  good  fortune

brings  to  light  any  decorative  bas-relief  from  their
palaces,  we  shall  see  represented  on  it  the  impaling
stake,  rebels  being  flayed  alive,  and  chiefs  having  their
tongues  torn  out.      Nebuchadrezzar,   whose   patience

was  exhausted,  caused  the
sons  of  Zedekiah  to  be  slain
in  the  presence  of  their
father,  together  with  all  the
prisoners  of  noble  birth,  and
then,  having  put  out  his  eyes,
sent  the  king  to  Babylon
loaded  with  chains.  As  for
the  city  which  had  so  long
defied  his  wrath,  he  gave  it
over  to  Nebuzaradan,  one  of
the  great  officers  of  the
crown,  with  orders  to  de-
molish it  and  give  it  up
systematically  to  the  flames.
The  temple  was  despoiled  of
its  precious  wall-coverings,  the  pillars  and  brazen  ornaments  of  the  time  of
Solomon  which  still  remained  were  broken  up,  and  the  pieces  carried  off  to
Chaldaea  in  sacks,  the  masonry  was  overthrown  and  the  blocks  of  stone  rolled
down  the  hill  into  the  ravine  of  the  Kedron.  The  survivors  among  the
garrison,  the  priests,  scribes,  and  members  of  the  upper  classes,  were  sent
off  into  exile,  but  the  mortality  during  the  siege  had  been  so  great  that  the
convoy  barely  numbered  eight  hundred  and  thirty-two  persons.  Some  of  the
poorer  population  were  allowed  to  remain  in  the  environs,  and  the  fields  and
vineyards  of  the  exiles  were  divided  among  them.^  Having  accomplished  the
work  of  destruction,  the  Chaldaeaus  retired,  leaving  the  government  in  the

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  several  engravings  in  Botta,  Le  Monument  de  Ninive.  Tlie
mutilated  remains  of  several  bas-reliefs  have  been  combined  so  as  to  form  a  tolerably  correct  scene ;
tlie  prisoners  have  a  ring  passed  through  their  lipe,  and  the  king  holds  them  by  a  cord  attached  to  it.

-  2  Kings  sxv.  1-21,  in  Jer.  lii.  6-27,  29;    cf.    Jer.  xxxix.   2-10,   and  2  Chron.  xxsvi.   17-20.


A    KING   PUTTING    OUT    THE   EYES   UF    A    PUIaOSEl;,'


2    js


>    a

H      <


^f?i


548  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.

hands  of  Gedaliah,  son  of  Ahikam,^  a  frieud  of  Jeremiah.  Gedaliah  estab-
lished himself  at  ilizpah,  where  he  endeavoured  to  gather  aroiiud  him  the
remnant  of  the  nation,  and  fugitives  poured  iu  from  Moab,  Ammon,  and  Edom.
It  seemed  that  a  Jewish  principality  was  about  to  rise  again  from  the  ruins  of
the  kingdom.  Jeremiah  was  its  accredited  counsellor,  but  his  influence  could
not  establish  harmony  among  these  turbulent  spirits,  still  smarting  from  their
I'ecent  misfortunes.'^  The  captains  of  the  bauds  which  had  been  roaming  over
the  country  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  refused,  moreover,  to  act  in  concert  with
Gedaliah,  and  one  of  them,  Ishmael  by  name,  who  was  of  the  royal  blood,
assassinated  him,  but,  being  attacked  in  Gibeon  by  Johanan,  the  son  of  Kareah,
was  forced  to  escape  almost  alone  and  take  refuge  with  the  Ammonites.^  These
acts  of  violence  aroused  the  vigilance  of  the  Chaldseans ;  Johanan  feared
reprisals,  and  retired  into  Egypt,  taking  with  him  Jeremiah,  Baruch,  and  the
bulk  of  the  people.^  Apries  gave  the  refugees  a  welcome,  and  assigned  them
certain  villages  near  to  his  military  colony  at  Daphnfe,  whence  they  soon  spread
into  the  neighbouring  nomes  as  far  as  Migdol,  Memphis,  and  even  as  far  as  the
Thebaid.^  Even  after  all  these  catastrophes  Judah's  woes  were  not  yet  at  an
end.  In  581,  the  few  remaining  Jews  in  Palestine  allied  themselves  with  the
Moabites  and  made  a  last  wild  effort  for  iudejjendence ;  a  final  defeat,  followed
by  a  final  exile,  brought  them  to  irretrievable  ruin.^  The  earlier  captives  had
entertained  no  hope  of  advantage  from  these  despairing  efforts,  and  Ezekiel
from  afar  condemned  them  without  pity  :  "  They  that  inhabit  those  waste
places  in  the  land  of  Israel  speak,  saying,  Abraham  was  one,  and  he  inherited
the  land :  but  we  are  many ;  the  laud  is  given  us  for  inheritance.  ...  Ye
lift  up  your  eyes  unto  your  idols  and  shed  blood :  and  shall  ye  possess  the
land  ?      Ye   stand  upon  your  sivord,  ye  work  abomination,  and  ye  defile  every

The  following  is  the  table  of  the  kings  of  Judah  from  the  death  of  Solomon  to  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem : —

I  I

I.  Rehoboam.  VI.  Ahaziah.  XI.  Jotham.  XVI.  Josiah.

I  I  I  _i  i

II.  Abuah.  VII.  Athaliah.  XII.  Ahaz.  XVII.  Jehoahaz.

"  1  I  '"I

III.  Asa.  a  hi.  Joash.  I     XIII.  Hezekiah.         XVIII.  Jehoiakim.

I  I  '  I  •  t

IV.  Jehoshaphat.  IX.  Amaziah.  XIV.  Manasseh.  XIX.  Jehoiaohin.

I  1  1

V.  Jehoram.  I         X.  TJzziah  (Azariah).  XV.  Amon.  XX.  Zedekiah.

I  '  I  ,  I  ■

'  2  Kings  xxv.  22  ;  Jer.  xl.  5-7.

-  For  the  manner  in  which  Jeremiah  was  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  captives,  set  at  liberly
aud  sent  back  to  Gedaliah,  see  Jer.  xxxix.  11-18,  xl.  1-6.

^  2  Kings  xxv.  23-25,  aud  Jer.  xl.  7-16.  sli.  1-15,  where  these  events  are  recorded  at  lengtli.

*  2  Kinqs  XXV.  26;  Jer.  sli.  16-18,  xlii.,  xliii.  1-7.

'  Jer.  xliv.  1,  where  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  spoken  to  "  all  the  Jews  .  .  .  which  dwelt  at  Migdol,
aud  at  Tahpanhes  (Daphnse),  and  at  Noph  (corr.  Moph,  Memphis),  and  in  the  country  of  Pathrns."

"  JosEPHUs,  A}it.  Jud.,  X.  9,  §  7;  11,  §  1,  following  Berosus,  speaks  of  a  war  against  the  Moabites
aud  the  Ammonites,  followed  by  the  conquest  of  Egypt  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  Xebuchadrezzar.
To  this  must  be  added  a  Jewish  revolt  if  we  are  to  connect  with  these  events  the  mention  of  the  third
captivity,  carried  out  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  Xebucliadrezzar  by  Nebuzaradan  (/er.  lii.  30).


THE  LAST  THROES  OF  JVDAH  AND  THE  SUBMISSION  OF  TYRE.       549

one  his  neighbour's  wife :  and  shall  ye  possess  the  land  ?  .  .  .  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God  :  As  I  live,  surely  they  that  are  in  the  waste  places  shall  fall  by  the
sword,  and  him  that  is  in  the  open  field  will  I  give  to  the  beasts  to  be  devoured,
and  they  that  be  in  the  strongholds  and  in  the  caves  shall  die  of  the  pestilence."  ^
The  first  act  of  the  revolution  foreseen  by  the  prophets  was  over ;  the  day  of  the
Lord,  so  persistently  announced  by  them,  had  at  length  come,  and  it  had  seen
not  only  the  sack  of  Jerusalem,  but  the  destruction  of  the  earthly  kingdom  of
Judah.  Many  of  the  survivors,  refusing  still  to  acknowledge  the  justice  of  the
chastisement,  persisted  in  throwing  the  blame  of  the  disaster  on  the  reformers
of  the  old  worship,  and  saw  no  hope  of  salvation  except  in  their  idolatrous
practices.  "  As  for  the  word  that  thou  hast  spoken  unto  us  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  we  will  not  hearken  unto  thee.  But  we  will  certainly  perform  every  word
that  is  gone  forth  out  of  our  mouth,  to  burn  incense  unto  the  queen  of  heaven,
and  to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her,  as  we  have  done,  we  and  our  fathers,
our  kings  and  our  princes,  in  the  cities  of  Judah  and  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  :
for  then  had  we  plenty  of  victuals,  and  were  well  and  saw  no  evil.  But  since
we  left  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven  and  to  pour  out  drink  offer-
ings unto  her,  we  have  wanted  all  things,  and  have  been  consumed  by  the  sword
and  by  the  famine."  '^

There  still  remained  to  these  misguided  Jews  one  consolation  which
they  shared  in  common  with  the  prophets — the  certainty  of  seeing  the
hereditary  foes  of  Israel  involved  in  the  common  overthrow :  Ammon  had
been  already  severely  chastised ;  Tyre,  cut  off  from  the  neighbouring  main-
land, seemed  on  the  point  of  succumbing,  and  the  turn  of  Egypt  must  surely
soon  arrive  in  which  she  would  have  to  expiate  in  bitter  sufferings  the  wrongs
her  evil  counsels  had  brought  upon  Jerusalem.  Their  anticipated  joy,  however,
of  witnessing  such  chastisements  was  not  realised.  Tyre  defied  for  tliirteen
years  the  blockade  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  and  when  the  city  at  length  decided
to  capitulate,  it  was  on  condition  that  its  king,  Ethbaal  III.,  should  continue
to  reign  under  the  almost  nominal  suzerainty  of  the  Chaldseans  (574  B.C.).*
Egypt  continued  not  only  to  preserve  her  independence,  but  seemed  to  increase
in  prosperity  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  hatred  which  she  had  stirred
up  against  her.  Apries  set  about  repairing  the  monuments  and  embellishing
the  temples:  he  erected  throughout  the  country  stelre,  tables  of  offerings,
statiies  and  obelisks,  some  of  which,  though  of  small  size,  like  that  which

>  Ezek.  xxxiii.  23-27.  =  Jur.  xliv.  16-18.

^  Menasder,  FragiH.  2,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fraijm.  Hist.  Graic,  vol.  iv.  p.  447.  The  majority  of
Christian  writers  have  imagined,  contrary  to  tlie  testimony  of  the  Plioenician  anuala,  that  the  island  of
Tyre  was  taken  by  Nebuchadrezzar ;  they  say  that  the  Chaldajans  united  the  island  to  the  mainland
by  a  causeway  simihxr  to  tliat  constructed  subsequently  by  Alexander.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  a
local  tradition,  still  existing  in  the  eleventh  century  of  our  era,  asserted  that  the  besiegers  were  not
successful  in  their  enterprise  (William  of  Tyke,  Hisloria,  xiii.  4).


550


THE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDJEAN  EMPIRE.


adorus  the  Piazza  della  Minerva  at  Rome,*  erected  so  incongruously  on  the
back  of  a  modern  elephant,  are  unequalled  for  purity  of  form  and  delicacy  of
cuttinc.  The  high  pitch  of  artistic  excellence  to  which  the  schools  of  the
reiffn  of  Psammetichus  II.  had  attained  was  maintained  at  the  same  exalted
level.  If  the  granite  sphinxes'  and  bronze  lions  of  this  period  lack  some-
what in  grace  of  form,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  they  display  greater
refinement  and  elegance  in  tlie  technique  of  carving  or  moulding  than  had  yet

been  attained.  While  engaged  in  these  works
at  home,  Apries  was  not  unobservant  of  the
revolutions  occurring  in  Asia,  upon  which  he
maintained  a  constant  watch,  and  in  the  years
which  followed  the  capitulation  of  Tyre,  he
found  the  opportunity,  so  long  looked  for,  of
entering  once  more  upon  the  scene.  The  Phoe-
nician navy  had  suffered  much  during  the
lengthy  blockade  of  their  country,  and  had  be-
come inferior  to  the  Egyptian,  now  well  orga-
nised by  the  lonians :  Apries  therefore  took  the
oifensive  by  sea,  and  made  a  direct  descent
on  the  Phoenician  coasts.  Nebuchadrezzar
opposed  him  with  the  forces  of  the  recently
subjugated  Tyrians,  and  the  latter,  having
cooled  in  their  attachment  to  Egypt  owing  to
the  special  favour  shown  by  the  Pharaoh  to  their  rivals  the  Hellenes,  summoned
their  Cypriote  vassals  to  assist  them  in  repelling  the  attack.  The  Egyptians
dispersed  the  combined  fleets,  and  taking  possession  of  Sidon,  gave  it  up  to
pillage.  The  other  maritime  cities  surrendered  of  their  own  accord,^  including
Gebal,  which  received  an  Egyptian  garrison,  and  where  the  officers  of  Pharaoh
founded  a  temple  to  the  goddess  whom  they  identified  with  the  Egyptian  Hathor.'*

*  [One  of  the  two  obelisks  of  the  Campus  Martins,  on  which  site  the  Ohurcli  of  S.  Maria  Sopra.
Minerva  was  built. — Te.]

'  Above  the  summary  of  the  contents  of  the  present  chapter,  will  be  found  one  of  these  sphinxes
which  was  discovered  in  Home.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin.  from  an  engraving  in  Mariette,  Monuments  divers,  pi.  41 ;  of.
Maspero,  Guide  du  Visiteur  au  Jilus^e  de  Boulaq,  pp.  51,  52,  No.  465.

^  Herodotus,  II.  clxi.,  and  Diodorus  Sioulus,  i.  68,  where  is  inserted  information  gathered  from
another  author,  perhaps  Ephorus  or  Theoponipus.  The  war  of  Apries  against  the  Phcenioians  cannot
have  taken  place  before  the  capitulation  of  Tyre  in  574  B.C.,  because  the  Tyrians  took  part  in  it  by
order  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  cannot  be  put  later  than  56U  B.C.,  the  date  of  the
revolt  of  Amasis;  it  must  therefore  be  assigned  to  about  571  B.C.  Fur  the  reasons  which  determined
the  Phcenicians  to  make  common  cause  with  the  Chaldteans,  cf.  Mallet,  Lee  Premiers  Etahlissements
des  Grecs  en  £gypte,  pp.  118,  119.

*  Eenan,  Mission  de  PMnicie,  pp.  26,  et  seq.,  179,  and  the  memoir  published  concerning  the
Egyptian  remains  at  Byblos,  by  E.  be  Eocge,  Lelires  a  M.  lienan,  in  the  Revue  Arcligblogique,  1864,
vol.  vii.  pp.  194-198.  Wiedemann  (Gesc/t.  Mgyplens,  p.  131 ;  MgijptiscUe  Gesch.,  p.  614)  prefers  to
attribute  these  buildings  to  the  time  of  Psammetichus  I.


BIIONZE   LION   OF  BOHBAIT."


THE   GREEKS   IX  LIBYA   AND    TEE  FOUNDING    OF  CTIiENE.      551


The  object  at  which  Necho  and  Psammetichus  II.  had  aimed  for  fifteen  years
was  thus  attained  by  Apries  at  one  fortunate  blow,  and  he  could  legitimately
entitle  himself  "  more  fortunate  than  all  the  kings  his  predecessors,"  and
imagine,  in  his  pride,  that  "the  gods  themselves  were  unable  to  injure  him."^
The  gods,  however,  did  not  allow  him  long  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  victory.
Greeks  had  often  visited  Libya


since  the  time  when  Egypt  had
been  thrown  open  to  the  trade
of  the  ^gean.  Their  sailors
had  discovered  that  the  most
convenient  course  thither  was  to
sail  straight  to  Crete,  and  then
to  traverse  the  sea  between  this
island  and  the  headlands  of  the
Libyan  plateau;  here  they  fell
in  with  a  strong  current  setting:
towards  the  east,  which  carried
them  quickly  and  easily  as  far
as  Rakotis  and  Canopus,  along
the  Marmarican  shore.  In  these
voyages  they  learned  to  appre-
ciate the  value  of  the  country  ;
and  about  631  B.C.  some  Dorians
of  Thera,  who  had  set  out  to
seek  for  a  new  home  at  the
bidding  of  the  Delj^hic  oracle,
landed  in  the  small  desert
island  of  Platsea,  where  they
built  a  strongly  fortified  settle-
ment. Their  leader,  Battos,-
soon  crossed  over  to  the  main-
land, where,  having  reached  the  high  plateau,  he  built  the  city  of  Cyrene  on
the  borders  of  an  extremely  fertile  region,  watered  by  abundant  springs.  The
tribes  of  the  Labu,  who  had  fought  so  valiantly  against  the  Pharaohs  of  old,  still
formed  a  kind  of  loose  confederation,  and  their  territory  stretched  across  the

'  Herodotus,  IV.  clxix.

-  Herodotus  seems  to  have  been  ignorant  of  the  real  name  of  the  founder  of  Cyrene,  which  has
been  preserved  for  us  by  Pindar  (Pythians,  v.  87),  by  Callimachus  (iHyinn  to  Apollo,  75),  by  the
spurious  Heraclides  of  Poutus  (Mcllek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graic,  vol.  ii.  p.  212),  and  by  the  chrono-
logists  of  the  Christian  epoch.  Herodotus  says  that  Battos  signifies  king  in  the  language  of  Libya
(IV.  civ.) ;  on  the  resemblance  which  has  been  discerned  between  this  name  and  that  of  a  Libyan
chieftain  in  the  time  of  Minephtah,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  431,  note  5.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  at  Eome,  about  1889.


THE  SMALL  OBELISK  IN  THE  PI-\ZZA  DELLA  MINERVA  AT  KOME.^


552


TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMFIHE.


deserts  from  the  Egyptian  frontier  to  the  shores  of  the  Syrtes.  The  chief  of
this  confederation  assumed  the  title  of  king,  as  in  the  days  of  Minephtah
or  of  Eamses  III.^  The  most  civilised  of  these  tribes  were  those  which  now
dwelt  nearest  to  the  coast :  first  the  Adyrmakhides,  who  were  settled  beyond
Marea,  and  had  been  semi-Egyptiauised  ^  by  constant  intercourse  with  the
inhabitants  of  the  Delta ;  then  the  Giligammes,^  who  dwelt  between  the  port
of  Plyiius  and  the  island  of  Aphrodisias  ;  and  beyond  these,  again,  the  Asbystes,
famed  for  their  skill  in  chariot-driving,  the  Cabales,  and  the  Auschises.*  The
oases  of  the  hinterland  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Nasamones  ^  and  of  the
Jlashauasha,  whom  tlie  Greeks  called  Maxyes.^     One  of  the  revolutions  so


Hit.    uAslo    ut     Allu.N    AM)    iHL    ol'UiNG    UF    THE    SUS.'

frequent  among  the  desert  tribes  had  compelled  the  latter  to  remove  from  their
home  near  the  Nile  valley,  to  a  district  far  to  the  west,  on  the  banks  of  the
river  Triton.  There  they  had  settled  down  in  a  permanent  fashion,  dwelling  in
houses  of  stone,  and  giving  themselves  up  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  They
continued,  however,  to  preserve  in  their  new  life  some  of  their  ancient  customs,
such  as  that  of  painting  their  bodies  with  vermilion,  and  of  shaving  off  the
hair  from  their  heads,  with  the  exception  of  one  lock  which  hung  over  the  right
ear.  Tlie  Theban  Pharaohs  had  formerly  placed  garrisons  in  the  most  im-
portant oases,  and  had  consecrated  temples  there  to  their  god  Amon.  One
of  these  sanctuaries,  built  close  to  an  intermittent  spring,  which  gave  forth
alternately  hot  and  cold  water,  had  risen  to  great  eminence,  and  the  oracle  of
these  Aminonians  was  a  centre  of  pilgrimage  from  far  and  near.*     The  first

'  For  what  is  known  of  these  kings,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  pp.  430-437,  456-461,  470-474.
The  description  given  by  Herodotus  of  these  Libyan  tribes  (IV.  clxvii.-cxcviii.)  agrees  with  the
slight  amount  of  information  furnished  by  the  Egyptian  monuments  for  the  thirteenth  century  c.o.

-  Herodotus,  IV.  clsviii.  '  HERODOins,  IV.  clxix.,clsx.

*  Herodotcs,  IV.  clxs.,  olsxi.  ^  Herodotds,  IV.  elsxii.-cxc.

"  Herodotus,  IV.  cxci.  For  the  identity  of  the  Mashauasha  with  the  Maxyes,  cf.  Struggle  of
the  Nations,  p.  430,  note  4.

■  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Minotoli,  Caravaneuzug  durch  die  Libysche  Wiiste,  pi.  v.  No.  1.

'  Herodotus,  IV.  clxxxi.  For  the  temples  of  the  Theban  Amon  erected  in  these  oases,  cf.  the
article  of  Lepsics,  Ueber  de  ividderhSpJigen  Goiter  Amman  und  Chnumis,  «n  Beziehung  cmf  die
Ammont-Oase  und  die  gehornten  Kiipfe  auf  griechischeu  Miinzen,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1S77,  pp.  S-22.


o  n


'•%.<-


LIBYA

in  the  VI*  Cent  B.C.


cfAn^


«


554  yffJ?   MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CEALD^EAN  EMPIRE.

Libj'ans  who  came  iuto  contact  with  the  Greeks,  the  Asbystes  and  the
Gilio-ammes  received  the  new-comers  kindly,  giving  tliem  their  daughters  in
marriao-e;  from  the  fusion  of  the  two  races  thus  brought  about  spraug,  first
under  Battos  and  then  under  his  son  Arkesilas  I.,  an  industrious  and  valiant
race.  The  main  part  of  their  revenues  was  derived  from  commerce  iu  silphium
and  woollen  goods,  and  even  the  kings  themselves  did  not  deem  it  beneath  their

dignity  to  preside  in  person  at  the
weighing  of  the  crop,  and  the  storing
of  the  trusses  in  their  magazines.  The
rapid  increase  in  the  wealth  of  the  city
having  shortly  brought  about  a  breach
in  the  friendly  relations  hitherto  main-
tained between  it  and  its  neighbours,
Battos  the  Fortunate,  the  son  of  Arke-
silas I.,  sent  for  colonists  from  Greece :
numbers  answered  to  his  call,  on  the  faith  of  a  second  oracular  prediction,  and  in
order  to  provide  them  with  the  necessary  land,  Battos  did  not  hesitate  to  dis-
possess his  native  allies.  The  latter  appealed  to  Adikrau,  king  of  the  confederacy,
and  this  prince, persuaded  that  his  irregular  militia  would  not  be  able  to  withstand
the  charge  of  the  hoplites,  thereupon  applied  iu  his  turn  to  Apries  for  assistance.^
There  was  much  tempting  spoil  to  be  had  in  Cyrene,  and  Apries  was  fully
aware  of  the  fact,  from  the  accounts  of  the  Libyans  and  the  Greeks.  His
covetousness  must  have  been  aroused  at  the  prospect  of  such  rich  booty,  and
perhaps  he  would  have  thought  of  appropriating  it  sooner,  had  he  not  been
deterred  from  the  attempt  by  his  knowledge  of  the  superi-
ority of  the  Greek  fleets,  and  of  the  dangers  attendant  on
a  long  and  painful  march  over  an  almost  desert  country
through  disaffected  tribes.  Now  that  he  could  rely  on  the
support  of  the  Libyans,  he  hesitated  no  longer  to  run
these  risks.  Deeming  it  imprudent,  with  good  reason,  to
employ  his  mercenary  troops  against  their  own  compatriots,
Apries  mobilised  for  his  encounter  with  Battos  an  army
exclusively  recruited  from  among  his  native  reserves.  The  troops  set  out
full  of  confidence  in  themselves  and  of  disdain  for  the  enemy,  delighted  more-
over at  an  opportunity  for  at  length  convincing  their  kings  of  their  error  in
preferring  barbarian  to  native  forces.  But  the  engagement  brought  to  nought
all  their  boastings.  The  Egyptians  were  defeated  in  the  first  encounter  near
Irasa,  hard  by  the  fountain  of  Theste,  near  the  spot  where  the  high  plateaus  of

'  Herodotus,  IV.  cl.-clix.     For  the  questions  relating  to  the  primitive  history  of  Cyrene,  I  refer
to  BusoLT,  Griechisclie  GescMchte,  vol.  i.  pp.  342-319,  where  the  bibliograpliy  of  this  subject  is  given.
=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  the  cast  of  a  coin  of  Cyrene,  kindly  furnished  by  M.  Babelon.


THE   SILPHIUM
PLAHT.-


DEFEAT  AT  IRASA   AND    THE  FALL    OF  APEIES.


555


Cyrene  proper  terminate  ia  the  low  cliffs  of  Marmarica  :  and  the  troops  suffered
so  severely  during  the  subsequent  retreat  that  only  a  small  remnant  of  the  army
regained  in  safety  the  frontier  of  the  Delta.'  This  unexpected  reverse  was  the
occasion  of  the  outbreak  of  a  revolution  which  had  been  in  preparation  for
years.  The  emigration  to  Ethiopia  of  some  contingents  of  the  military  class
had  temporarily  weakened   the   factions  hostile  to  foreign  influence;   tiiese


WKIGHINC;    SILPHIUM    IN   PEESKNCE    OP   KINS    AIIKESILAS."

factions  had  felt  themselves  powerless  under  the  rule  of  Psammetichus  I.,  and
had  bowed  to  his  will,  prepared  all  the  while  to  reassert  themselves  when
they  felt  strong  enoughto  do  so  successfully.  The  reorganisation  of  the
native  army  furnished  them  at  once  with  the  means  of  insurrection,  of  which
they  had  temporarily  been  deprived.  Although  Pharaoh  had  lavished  privi-
leges on  the  Hermotybies  and  Calasiries,  he  had  not  removed  the  causes  for
discontent  which  had  little  by  little  alienated  the  good  will  of  the  Mashauasha :
to  do  so  would  have  rendered  necessary  the  disbanding  of  the  Ionian  guard,  the

'  Herodotus,  IV.  clix.,  from  whom  Diodorus  Siculcs,  i.  68,  borrowed  the  story  of  this  expedition.
The  interpretation  I  have  given  to  tlie  sentiments  of  the  Egyptian  army  follows  clearly  enough  from
the  observation  of  Herodotus,  that  "  the  Egyptians,  having  never  experienced  themselves  the  power
of  the  Greeks,  had  felt  for  them  nothing  but  contempt."  The  site  of  Irasa  and  the  fountain  of  Theste
has  been  fixed  with  much  probability  in  the  fertile  district  watered  still  by  the  fountain  of  Ersen,
Erazem,  or  Eras^n  (Paoho,  Voyage  dans  la  Marmarique,  pp.  84,  85).

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  of  the  original  in  the  Coin  Eoom  in  the
Bibliotheque  Natiouale  at  Paris.     The  king  here  represented  is  Arkesilaa  II.  the  Bad.


556  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

object  of  their  jealousy,  and  to  take  this  step  neither  he  nor  his  successors  could
submit  themselves.  The  hatred  of  these  mercenaries,  and  the  irritation  aerainst
the  sovereigns  who  employed  them,  grew  fiercer  from  reign  to  reign,  and  now
wanted  nothing  but  a  pretext  to  breali  forth  openly :  such  a  pretext  was
furnished  by  the  defeat  at  Irasa.  When  the  fugitives  arrived  at  the  entrenched
camp  of  Marea,  exasperated  by  their  defeat,  and  alleging  doubtless  that  it  was  due
to  treachery,  they  found  others  who  affected  to  share  their  belief  that  Pharaoh
had  despatched  his  Egyptian  troops  against  Cyrene  with  the  view  of  consigning
to  certain  death  those  whose  loyalty  to  him  was  suspected,  and  it  was  not
difficult  to  stir  up  the  disaffected  soldiers  to  open  revolt.^  It  was  not  the  first
time  that  a  military  tumult  had  threatened  the  sovereignty  of  Apries.  Some
time  previous  to  this,  in  an  opposite  quarter  of  the  Nile  valley,  the  troops
stationed  at  Elephantine,  composed  partly  of  Egyptians,  partly  of  Asiatic  and
Greek  mercenaries — possibly  the  same  who  had  fought  in  the  Ethiopian  cam-
paign under  Psammetichus  II. — had  risen  in  rebellion  owing  to  some  neglect  in
the  payment  of  their  wages :  having  devastated  the  Thebaid,  they  had  marched
straight  across  the  desert  to  the  port  of  Shashirit,  in  the  hope  of  there  seizing
ships  to  enable  them  to  reach  the  havens  of  Idumsea  or  Nabatiea.  The
governor  of  Elephantiue,  Nsihor,  had  at  first  held  them  back  with  specious
promises ;  but  on  learning  that  Apries  was  approaching  with  reinforcements,
he  attacked  them  boldly,  and  driving  them  before  him,  hemmed  them  in
between  his  own  force  and  that  of  the  king  and  massacred  them  all.^  Apries
thought  that  the  revolt  at  Marea  would  have  a  similar  issue,  and  that  he
might  succeed  in  baiHiug  the  rebels  by  fair  words ;  he  sent  to  them  as  his
representative  Amasis,  one  of  his  generals,  distantly  connected  probably  with
the  royal  honse.^  What  took  place  in  the  camp  is  not  clearly  known,  for  the
actual  events  have  been  transformed  in  the  course  of  popular  transmission  into
romantic  legends.  The  story  soon  took  shape  that  Amasis  was  born  of  humble
parentage  in  the  village  of  fSiuph,  not  far  from  Sais ;  *  he  was  fond,  it  was
narrated,  of  wine,  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  and  women,  and  replenished  his
empty  purse  by  stealing  what  he  could  lay  his  hands  on  from  his  neighbours

'  Hekodotus,  IV.  clxi.

-  Statue  A  90  in  the  Louvre,  published  by  Piebre't,  Becueil  d' inscriptions,  vol.  i.  pp.  21-29,  inter-
preted by  Maspero,  Notes  sur  quelques  points  de  Gram,  et  d'Hist.,  in  the  Zeitsohri/t,  1884,  pp.  87-90,
and  by  Beugsch,  Beitrdge,  in  the  Ztitschri/t,  1881,  pp.  93-97  ;  cf.  Ed.  Meyek,  Gesch.  ^gijptens,  p.  365.
This  is  the  inscription  in  which  Wiedemann  thought  he  discerned  an  allusion  to  the  conquest  oF  Egypt
by  Nebuchadrezzar  {Der  Zag  Nehucadnezar's  gegen  JEgypteti,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1878,  pp.  2-6,  S7-90).

'  Mil.  Piehl  (Pelites  Etudes  Egyptolog.,  pp.  29-36)  and  Ke'villout  {La  Femme  et  la  Mere  d' Amasis,  in
the  Bevue  Egyptologique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  9G-98)  thought  they  had  found  the  wife  and  the  motlier  of  Amasis
on  two  monuments  in  the  Museums  of  Stockholm  and  the  Louvre ;  M.  Piehl  subsequently  abandoned
this  view,  which  he  had  only  brought  forward  as  a  hypothesis  {Doit-on  accepter  Vhypothese  d'un  rigne
simuHane  d' Apries  et  d' Amasis  >  in  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  xsviii.  p.  9,  et  seq.).  In  fact,  nothing  certain  is
known  of  the  relationship  between  Amasis  and  Apries,  and  it  is  merely  a  conjecture  that  the  former
is  connected  with  the  royal  line.     Diodorus,  however,  asserts  that  he  was  of  good  family  (i.  6S).

*  Herodotus,  II.  cUxii. ;  Plato  {Timseus,  ed.  Didot,  vol.  ii.  p.  169)  makes  him  a  native  of  Sais.
Siuph  is  the  present  es-Seffeh.


ELEVATION   OF  AMASIS.  557

or  comrades — a  gay  boon-companion  all  the  while,  with  an  easy  disposition  and
sarcastic  tongue.     According  to  some  accounts,  he  conciliated  the  favour  of
Apries  by  his  invariable  affability  and  good  humour ;  ^  according  to  others,  he
won  the  king's  confidence  by  presenting  him  with  a  crown  of  ilowers  on  his
birthday .2     The  story  goes  on  to  say  that  while  he  was  haranguing  the  rebels,
one  of  them,  slipping  behind  him,  suddenly  placed  on  his  head  the  rounded
helmet  of  the  Pharaohs:  tbe  bystanders  immediately  proclaimed  him  king,  and
after  a  slight  show  of  resistance  he  accepted  the  dignity.     As  soon  as  the
rumour  of  these  events  had  reached  Sais,  Apries  despatched  Patarbemis,  one
of  his  chief  officers,  with  orders  to  bring  back  the  rebel  chief  alive.     The
latter  was  seated  on  his  horse,  on  the  point  of  breaking  up  his  camp  and
marching  against  his  former  patron,  when  the  envoy  arrived.     On  learning  the
nature  of  his  mission,  Amasis  charged  him  to  carry  back  a  reply  to  the  effect
that  he  had  already  been  making  preparation  to  submit,  and   besought  the
sovereign  to  grant  him  patiently  a  few  days  longer,  so  that  he  might  bring
with  him  the  Egyptian  subjects  of  Pharaoh.    Tradition  adds  that,  on  receiving
this  insolent  defiance,  Apries  fell  into  a  violent  passion,  and  without  listening
to  remonstrance,  ordered  the  nose  and  ears  of  Patarbemis  to  be  cut  off,  where-
upon the  indignant  people,  it  is  alleged,  deserted  his  cause  and  ranged  themselves
on  the  side  of  Amasis.     The  mercenaries,  however,  did  not  betray  the  confidence
reposed  in  them  by  their  Egyptian  lords.     Although  only  thirty  thousand
against  a  whole  people,  they  unflinchingly  awaited  the  attack  at  Momemphis
(569  B.C.) ;  but,  being  overwhelmed  by  the  numbers  of  their  assailants,  disbanded
and  fled,  after  a  conflict  lasting  one  day.^     Apries,  taken  prisoner  in  the  rout,
was  at  first  well  treated  by  the  conqueror,  and  seems  even  to  have  retained  for
a  time  the  external  pomp  of  royalty ;  but  the  populace  of  Sais  demanding  his
execution  with  vehemence,  Amasis  was  at  length  constrained  to  deliver  him
up  to  their  vengeance,  and   Apries  was   strangled   by  the  mob.^     He  was
honourably  interred  between  the  royal  palace  and  the  temple  of  Nit,  not  far

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxxiv.

'^  Hellaxiocs  of  Lesbos,  Fragm.  151,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  i.  p.  66.     The
king  to  whom  Amasis  made  this  offering  is  called  Patarmis,  and  the  similarity  of  this  name  with
the  Patarbemis  of  Herodotus   seems  to   indicate  a  variant  of  the   legend,  in   which  Patarmis  or
■  Patarbemis  took  the  place  of  Apries.

^  Herodotds,  II.  clsii.,  clxiii.,  clxix. ;    cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  571,  511,
580-583.    DioDOKrs  Sicolus,  i.  G8,  places  the  scene  of  the  engagement  near  Marea  itself.

*  Herodotus,  II.  clxix.  Dr.  Wiedemanu  thought  he  had  discovered  some  monuments  of  this  joint
reiga,  one  on  a  bas-relief  in  Cairo  (Champollion,  Monuments  de  I'Egijpte  el  de  la  Nuhie,  pi.  ccccxliii.
1),  the  other  on  a  seal  of  fine  clay  (Wiedemann,  Der  Zug  Nebucadnezar's  gegen  .Egypten,  in  the
ZciUclirift,  1878,  pp.  5,  6,  and  Notes  et  Re.marques,  in  tlie  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xx.  pp.  103,  134).
M.  Piehl  has  shown  reason  to  believe  that  the  former  monument  contains  an  ancient  usurpation  or  an
error  in  the  reading  of  the  cartouche  (Doit-on  accepter,  etc.,  in  the  Zeilschrift,  vol.  xxviii.  pp.  9-15),
and  the  testimony  of  the  other  monument  does  not  appear  to  be  decisive.  The  account  given  by
Herodotus  does  not  render  less  likely  the  hypothesis  that  there  was  a  kind  of  fictitious  joint
leign,  during  which,  the  two  kings  having  existed  side  by  side,  it  was  possible  to  place  the  name  of
the  conquered  monarch  beside  that  of  his  conqueror.


558  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

from  the  spot  where  his  predecessors  reposed  in  their  glory.i  and  the  usurper
made  himself  sole  master  of  the  country.  It  was  equivalent  to  a  chano-e  of
dynasty,  and  Amasis  had  recourse  to  the  methods  usual  in  such  cases  to  con-
solidate his  power.  He  entered  into  a  marriage  alliance  with  princesses  of  the
Saite  line,  and  thus  legitimatised  his  usurpation  as  far  as  the  north  was  con-
cerned.^ In  the  south,  the  "  divine  worshippers  "  had  continued  to  administer  the
extensive  heritage  of  Amon,  and  Nitocris,  heiress  of  Shapenuapit,  had  adopted
in  her  old  age  a  daughter  of  her  great-nephew,  Psammetichus  II.,  named
Ankhnasnofiribri :  this  princess  was  at  this  time  in  possession  of  Thebes,  and
Amasis  appears  to  have  entered  into  a  fictitious  marriage  with  her  in  order
to  assume  to  himself  her  rights  to  the  crown.^  He  had  hardly  succeeded  in
establishing  his  authority  on  a  firm  basis  when  he  was  called  upon  to  repel  the
Chaldaean  invasion.  The  Hebrew  prophets  had  been  threatening  Egypt  with
this  invasion  for  a  long  time,  and  Ezekiel,  discounting  the  future,  had  already
described  the  entrance  of  Pharaoh  into  Hades,  to  dwell  among  the  chiefs  of  the
nations — Assur,  Elam,  Meshecb,  Tubal,  Edom,  and  Philistia — who,  having
incurred  the  vengeance  of  Jahveli,  had  descended  into  the  grave  one  after  the
other :  "  Pharaoh  and  all  his  army  shall  be  slain  by  the  sword,  saith  the  Lord
God !  For  I  have  put  this  terror  in  the  land  of  the  living :  and  he  shall  be
laid  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised,  with  them  that  are  slain  by  the  sword,
even  Pharaoh  and  all  his  multitude,  saith  the  Lord  God !  "  ^  Nebuchadrezzar
had  some  hesitation  in  hazarding  his  fortune  in  a  campaign  on  the  banks  of
the  Nile  :  he  realised  tolerably  clearly  that  Babylon  was  not  in  command  of
such  resources  as  had  been  at  the  disposal  of  Nineveh  under  Esarhaddon  or
Assur-bani-pal,  and  that  Egypt  in  the  hands  of  a  Saite  dynasty  was  a  more
formidable  foe  than  when  ruled  by  the  Ethiopians.  The  report  of  the  revolu-
tion of  which  Apries  had  become  a  victim  at  length  determined  him  to  act ;
the  annihilation  of  the  Hellenic  troops,  and  the  dismay  which  the  defeat  at
Irasa  had  occasioned  in  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians,  seemed  to  offer  an
opportunity  too  favourable  to  be  neglected.  The  campaign  was  opened  by
Nebuchadrezzar  about  568,  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  his  reign,^  but  we

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxis.,  clsx.  It  was  probably  from  this  necropolis  that  the  coffin  of  Psamme-
tichus II.  came,  referred  to  supra,  p.  537,  note  4.

'  The  wife  of  Amasis,  who  was  mother  of  Psammetichus  III.,  the  qneen  Tintkhiti,  daughter  of
Petenit,  prophet  of  Phtah,  was  probably  connected  with  the  royal  family  of  Sais  (S  4034  in  the  Louvre,
cf.  E.  DE  KouGE,  Notice  de  quelques  Textes  Hkroglyphiques,  pp.  56,  57).

'  For  the  adoptiou  of  the  queen  Ankhnasnofiribri  by  Nitocris,  and  for  the  filiation  of  this
princess,  cf.  Ekman,  in  ScHWErNFtJRTH,  Alte  Baureste,  p.  22,  and  Zu  den  Legrain' schen  luschriften,  in
the  Zeitsclirift,  vol.  xxxv.  pp.  21-29 ;  Maspebo,  Les  Mamies  roijales  de  Deir-el-Bahar't,  pp.  75S,  759  ;
Dabessy,  Nutes  et  Remarques,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xx.  p.  84.

■'  Ezek.  xxxii.  31,  32.

'  A  fragment  of  his  Annals,  discovered  by  Pinches,  mentions  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  his  reign
a  campaign  against  [Ah]masu,  King  of  Egypt;  and  Wiedemann,  from  the  evidence  of  this  document
combined  with  the  information  derived  from  one  of  the  monuments  in  the  Louvre  (A  90,  Piereet.
Recueil  d' Inscriptions  higroglypliiques  ingdites,  pp.  21-26),  thought  that  the  fact  of  a  conquest  o
Egypt  as  far  as  Syene  might  be  admitted ;  at  that  point  the  Egyptian  general  Nsihor  would  have


RELATIONS  BETWEEN  NEBUCHADREZZAR    AND    ASTYAGES.      559

have  no  certain  information  as  to  the  issue  of  his  enterj^rise.  According  to
Chaldsean  tradition,  Nebuchadrezzar  actually  invaded  the  valley  of  the  Nile
and  converted  Egypt  into  a  Babylonian  province,  with  Amasis  as  its  satrap.^
We  may  well  believe  that  Amasis  lost  the  conquests  won  by  his  predecessor  in
Phoenicia,  if,  indeed,  they  still  belonged  to  Egypt  at  his  accession  :  but  there  is
nothing  to  indicate  that  the  Chaldseans  ever  entered  Egypt  itself  and  repeated
the  Assyrian  exploit  of  a  century  before.

This  was  Nebuchadrezzar's  last  war,  the  last  at  least  of  which  history
makes  any  mention.  As  a  fact,  the  kings  of  the  second  Babylonian  empire
do  not  seem  to  have  been  the  impetuous  conquerors  which  we  have  fancied
them  to  be.  We  see  them  as  tliey  are  depicted  to  us  in  the  visions  of  the
Hebrew  prophets,  who,  regarding  them  and  their  nation  as  a  scourge  in  the
hands  of  God,  had  no  colours  vivid  enough  or  images  sufBciently  terrible  to
portray  them.  They  had  blotted  out  Nineveh  from  the  list  of  cities,  humiliateil
Pharaoh,  and  subjugated  Syria,  and  they  had  done  all  this  almost  at  their  first
appearance  in  the  field — such  a  feat  as  Assyria  and  Egypt  in  the  plenitude  of
their  strength  had  been  unable  to  accomplish :  they  had,  moreover,  destroyed
Jerusalem  and  carried  Judah  into  captivity.  There  is  nothing  astonishing  in
the  fact  that  this  Nebuchadrezzar,  whose  history  is  known  to  us  almost  entirely
from  Jewish  sources,  should  appear  as  a  fated  force  let  loose  upon  the  world.
"  0  thou  sword  of  the  Lord,  how  long  will  it  be  ere  thou  be  quiet  ?  put  up
thyself  into  the  scabbard  ;  rest  and  be  still !  How  canst  thou  be  quiet,  seeing
the  Lord  hath  given  thee  a  charge  ?  "  -  But  his  campaigns  in  Syria  and  Africa,
of  which  the  echoes  transmitted  to  us  still  seem  so  formidable,  were  not  nearly
so  terrible  in  reality  as  those  in  which  Elam  had  perished  a  century  previously ;
they  were,  moreover,  the  only  conflicts  which  troubled  the  peace  of  his  reign.
The  Arabian  chroniclers  afSrm,  indeed,  that  the  fabulous  wealth  of  Yemen  had
incited  him  to  invade  that  region.  Nebuchadrezzar,  they  relate,  routed,  not  far
from  the  town  of  Dhat-irk,  the  Joctanides  of  Jorhom,  who  had  barred  his  road
to  the  Kaabah,  and  after  seizing  Mecca,  reached  the  borders  of  the  children  of
Himyar :  the  exhausted  condition  of  his  soldiers  having  prevented  him  from

defeated  the  Chaldseaus  and  repelled  the  invasion,  and  this  event  would  have  taken  place  during
tlie  joint  reign  of  Apries  and  Amasis  (Der  Zug  Nehucadnezar' s  gegeii  JHyypteii,  and  Nebucadnezar  nnd
JEgyyIen,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1878,  pp.  2-6,  87-89).  A  more  attentive  esamiuatiou  of  the  Egyptian
monument  shows  that  it  refers  not  to  a  Chaldsean  war,  but  to  a  rebellion  of  the  garrisons  in  the  south
of  Egypt,  iucludiug  the  Greek  and  Semitic  auxiliaries  (Maspero,  Notes  sur  qiielques  points  de  Gram,
el  d'Hist.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1884,  pp.  87-90,  and  Bbugsch,  Beitrtige,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  188-1,  pp.  93-97) ;
M.  Wiedemann  has,  nevertheless,  held  to  his  own  interpretation  {Jl^gypt.  Gesch.,  Supplement,  p.  70),
which  lias  been  adopted  by  many  historians  who  are  not  Egyptologists  (Tiele,  Bab.-dss.  Gesch.,  pp.  4H3-
438  ;  WiNCKLER,  Gesch.  Bub.  mid  Ass.,  pp.  312, 313).  Winckler  {Alt.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  511-515)  thought
lie  recognised  in  the  Chaldajan  fragment  tlie  mention  of  Pitlacus  of  Lesbos  as  the  ally  of  Amasis.

'  JosEPHUS,  Ant.  Jud.,  x.  9,  §  7 ;  11,  §  1,  ibllowing  Bcrosus.  These  events  would  have  taken  place
in  the  twenty-thiid  year  of  Ncbucliadrezzar;  the  reigning  kiug  (Apries)  being  killed  and  his  place
taken  bypne  of  his  generals  (Amasis),  who  remained  a  satrap  of  the  Babylonian  empire.

2  Jer.  xlvii.  6,  7.


560  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

pressing  further  forward  in  his  career  of  conquest,  he  retraced  his  steps  and
returned  to  Babylon  with  a  great  number  of  prisoners,  including  two  entire
tribes,  those  of  Hadhura  and  Uabar,  whom  he  established  as  colonists  in
Chaldjea.'  He  never  passed  in  this  direction  beyond  the  limits  reached  by
Assur-bani-pal,  and  his  exploits  were  restricted  to  some  successful  raids  against
the  tribes  of  Kedar  and  Nabata-a.^  The  same  reasons  which  at  the  commence-
ment of  his  reign  had  restrained  his  ambition  to  extend  his  dominions  towards
the  east  and  north,  were  operative  up  to  the  end  of  his  life.  Astyages  had  not
inherited  the  martial  spirit  of  his  father  Cyaxares,  and  only  one  warlike
expedition,  that  against  the  Cadusians,  is  ascribed  to  him.^  Naturally  indolent,
lacking  in  decision,  superstitious  and  cruel,  he  passed  a  life  of  idleness  amid
tlie  luxury  of  a  corrupt  court,  surrounded  by  pages,  women,  and  eunuchs,  with
no  more  serious  pastime  than  the  chase,  pursued  within  the  limits  of  his  own
parks  or  on  the  confines  of  the  desert.  But  if  the  king  was  weak,  his  empire
was  vigorous,  and  Nebuchadrezzar,  brought  up  from  his  youth  to  dread  the
armies  of  Media,  retained  his  respect  for  them  up  to  the  end  of  his  life,  even
when  there  was  no  longer  any  occasion  to  do  so.  Nebuchadrezzar  was,  after
all,  not  so  much  a  warrior  as  a  man  of  peace,  whether  so  constituted  by  nature
or  rendered  so  by  political  necessity  in  its  prof>er  sense,  and  he  took  advantage
of  the  long  intervals  of  quiet  between  his  campaigns  to  complete  the  extensive
works  which  more  than  anything  else  have  won  for  him  his  renown.  During
the  century  which  had  preceded  the  fall  of  Nineveh,  Babylonia  had  had  several
bitter  experiences ;  it  had  suffered  almost  entire  destruction  at  the  hands  of
Sennacherib ;  it  had  been  given  up  to  pillage  by  Assur-bani-pal,  not  to  mention
the  sieges  and  ravages  it  had  sustained  in  the  course  of  continual  revolts.^  The
other  cities  of  Babylonia,  Sippara,  Borsippa,  Kutlia,  Nipur,  Uruk,  and  Uru,  had
been  subjected  to  capture  and  recapture,  while  the  surrounding  districts,
abandoned  in  turn  to  Elamites,  Assyrians,  and  tlie  Kalda,  had  lain  uncultivated
for  many  years.  The  canals  at  the  same  time  had  become  choked  with  mud,
the  banks  had  fallen  in,  and  the  waters,  no  longer  kept  under  control,  had  over-
flowed the  land,  and  the  plains  long  since  reclaimed  for  cultivation  had  returned
to  tlieir  original  condition  of  morasses  and  reed-beds;  at  Babylon  itself  the
Arakhtu,  still  encumbered  with  the  debris  cast  into  it  by  Sennacherib,  was  no
longer  navigable,  and  was  productive  of  more  injury  than  profit  to  the  city  :^

'  Caussin  de  Pebceval,  Histoire  des  Arabes,  vol.  i.  pp.  81-99.  Most  of  the  Arabic  legends  relating
to  these  conquests  of  NebuchaJrezzar  are  indirectly  derived  from  the  biblical  story  ;  but  it  is  possible
that  the  liistory  of  the  expeditions  against  Central  Arabia  are  founded  on  fact.

'  This  seems  to  follow  from  Jeremiah's  imprecations  upon  Kedar  (Jer.  xlix.  28-33).

'  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragra.  61,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hid.  Grmc,  vol.  iii.  p.  399.
Moses  of  Chorene  (i.  23-29)  attributes  to  him  long  wars  against  an  Armenian  king  named  Tigranes  ;
but  this  is  a  fiction  of  a  later  age.

*  For  the  destruction  by  Sennacherib  and  the  sack  by  Assur-bani-pal,  cf.  supra,  pp.  307-309,  and
422,  423.  '  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  357.


TBE  FORTIFICATIONS    OF  BABYLON.  561

in  some  parts  the  aspect  of  the  country  must  have  been  desolate  and  neglected
as  at  the  present  day,  and  the  work  accomplished  by  twenty  generations  had  to
be  begun  entirely  afresli.  Nabopolassar  had  already  applied  himself  to  the
task  in  spite  of  the  anxieties  of  his  Assyrian  campaigns,  and  had  raised  many
earthworks  in  both  the  capital  and  the  provinces.'  But  a  great  deal  more  still
remained  to  be  done,  and  Nebuchadrezzar  pushed  forward  the  work  planned  by
his  father,  and  carried  it  to  completion  undeterred  and  undismayed  by  any
difficulties."  The  combined  system  of  irrigation  and  navigation  introduced
by  the  kings  of  the  first  Babylonian  empire  twenty  centuries  previously,  was
ingeniously  repaired ;  the  beds  of  the  principal  canals,  the  Koyal  river  and  the
Arakhtu,  were  straightened  and  deepened  ;  the  drainage  of  the  country  between
the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  was  regulated  by  means  of  subsidiary  canals  and
a  network  of  dykes ;  the  canals  surrounding  Babylon  or  intersecting  in  the
middle  of  the  city  were  cleaned  out,  and  a  waterway  was  secured  for  navigation
from  one  river  to  the  other,  and  from  the  plateau  of  Mesopotamia  to  the  Nar-
Marratum.^    We  may  well  believe  that  all  Nebuchadrezzar's  undertakings  were

'  The  works  undertaken  by  Nabopolassar  are  known  to  us  from  the  evidence  of  several  contem-
porary documents  :  (1)  a  cylinder  published  and  translated  into  German  by  Strassmaier,  Inschri/ten
von  Nabopolassar  und  Smerdis,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  106-113,  129-136,  and
by  WlNCKLER,  Inschri/ten  Nahopolagsar's,  in  Schrader,  Eeil.  Bibl,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  2-7 ;  (2)
a  cylinder  published  by  Strassmaier  and  Winckler,  Bin  Text  Nabopolastar's,  in  the  Zeitschrift,
vol.  ii.  pp.  69-75,  H4,  145,  which  deals  with  the  restoration  of  the  canal  at  Sippara;  (3)  a  cylinder
published  by  Strassmaier  and  Winckler,  Nachlrag  zu" Bin  Text  Nabopolaisar's,"  in  the  Zeitschrift,
vol.  ii.  pp.  144-147,  172,  173,  which  concerns  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  of  Belit  at  Sippara.  These
last  two  texts  are  reproduced  by  Winoklek,  Inschriften  Nabopolassar' s,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.
iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  6-9.

^  The  only  long  inscriptions  of  Nebuchadrezzar  which  we  possess,  are  those  commemorating  the
great  works  he  designed  and  executed  :  (1)  the  long  Inscription  of  the  East  India  Company  (and  its
duplicate  the  Broken  Cylinder  of  Ker  Porter),  published  in  1803  by  the  care  of  Harford  Jones
Bridoes,  An  Inscription  of  the  Size  of  the  Original,  copied  from  a  Stone  lately  found  among  the  Ruins  of
Babylon,  reproduced  in  archaic  characters,  and  transcribed  in  H.  Rawlinson,  Can.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.
pis.  53-64  ;  transl.  into  French  by  Oppert,  B'Inscr.  de  Nabuchodonosor  sur  les  meroeilles  de  Babylone,
1866  (read  at  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Reims,  1865),  and  by  Menant,  .Ba6(//one  et  la  Chald^e,  pp.
200-208 ;  into  English  by  Rodwell,  Inscription  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,
pp.  111-135,  and  by  Ball,  Inscriptions  of  Nebukadrezzar.  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,
1887-1888,  vol.  x.  pp.  87-120;  into  German  by  Fle.mming,  Bie  Crosse  Steinplatteninschrift  Nebuhad-
nezzar's  II.  in  transcribierten  Babylonischen  Grundtext,  nebst  Uebersetzung  und  Commentar,  1883,  and
by  Winckler,  Inschr.  Nebuhadnezar's,  in  Schrader,  Keil.  Bibl.,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  10-31  ;  (2)  the
Cylinder  of  Philipps,  published  by  Grqtefend,  Bemerkungen  zur  Inschrift  eines  Thongef asses  mit
Babylonischer  Keilschrift,  1848  (extract  from  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Gdttingen,
vol.  iv.).  and  in  H.  Rawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pp.  65,  66 ;  transl.  into  French  by  Oppekt,
Expedition  en  Mesopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  230,  et  seq.,  and  by  Menant,  op.  cit.,  pp.  208-212;  into  English
by  Ball,  op.  cit.,  pp.  215-230;  into  German  by  Winckler,  op.  cit.,  pp.  32-39;  (3)  the  Inscriptions
of  Wady  Brissa,  discovered,  publ.  and  transl.  into  French  by  Pognon,  les  Inscr.  Babyloniennes  du
Ouady  Brissa,  1887 ;  (4)  Ball's  Cylinder,  publ.  and  transl.  into  Englisli  by  Ball,  op.  cit.,  pp.  358-368  ;
transl.  into  German  by  Winckler,  op.  cit,  pp.  46-53.  To  these  must  be  added  a  series  of  lesser
inscriptions  enumerated  in  Bezold,  Kurzgefasster  VeberUick  Uber  die  babylonish-assyrische  Literatur,
pp.  126-135,  the  bibliography  of  which  I  shall  indicate  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  them.

'  Tlie  irrigation  works  of  Nebuchadrezzar  are  described  at  length,  and  perhaps  exaggerated,  by
Abydenus,  Fragm.  9,  in  Mcller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Greec,  vol.  iv.  p.  284,  who  merely  quotes  Berosus
more  or  less  inaccurately.  The  completion  of  the  quays  along  the  Arakhtu,  begun  by  Nabopolassar.
is  noticed  in  the  East  India  Cumpany's  Inscription,  col.  v.  U.  2-33.      A  special  inscription,  publ.  by

2  o


562


THE  MEDES   AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.


carried  out  in  accordance  with  a  carefully  prepared  scheme  for  perfecting  the
defences  of  the  kingdom  while  completing  the  system  of  internal  communication.
The  riches  of  Karduniash,  now  restored  to  vigour  by  continued  peace,  and
become  the  centre  of  a  considerable  empire,  could  not  fail  to  excite  the  jealousy
of  its  neighbours,  and  particularly  that  of  the  most  powerful  among  them,  the
Medes  of  Ecbatana.  It  is  true  that  the  relations  between  Nebuchadrezzar  and
Astyages  continued  to  be  cordial,  and  as  yet  there  were  no  indications  of  a
rupture ;  but  it  was  always  possible  that  under  their  successors  the  good  under-
standing between  the
two  courts  might  come
to  an  end,  and  it  was
needful  to  provide
against  the  possibility
of  the  barbarous  tribes
of  Iran  being  let  loose
upon  Babylon,  and  at-
tempting to  inflict  on
her  the  fate  they  had
brought  upon  Nineveh.
Nebuchadrezzar,  there-
fore, was  anxious  to  in-
terpose, between  himself
and  these  possible  foes,  such  a  series  of  fortifications  that  the  most  persevering
enemy  would  be  worn  out  by  the  prolonged  task  of  forcing  them  one  after
another,  provided  that  they  were  efficiently  garrisoned.  He  erected  across  the
northern  side  of  the  isthmus  between  the  two  rivers  a  great  embankment,  faced
with  bricks  cemented  together  with  bitumen,  called  the  imll  of  Media ;  this
wall,  starting  from  Sippara,  stretched  from  the  confluence  of  the  Saklauiyeh
with  the  Euphrates  to  the  site  of  the  modern  village  of  Jibbara  on  the  Tigris ;
on  both  sides  of  it  four  or  five  deep  trenches  were  excavated,  which  were
passable  on  raised  causeways  or  by  bridges  of  boats,  so  arranged  as  to  be  easily
bi-oken  up  in  case  of  invasion.^     The  eastern  frontier  was  furnished  with  a

H.  Eawlinson,  Cun.  Ins.  W.  As.,  vol.  i.  pi.  52,  note  4,  and  transl.  into  French  by  Oppebt,  Exp^dilton
de  Mesopotamie,  vol.  ii.  p.  285,  et  seq.  (cf.  Menant,  Babylone  et  la  Chaldie,  pp.  213,  214),  into  German
by  WiNOKLER,  Inschr.  Ntbukadnezar's,  in  Schkader,  Eeil.  Bill.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  60,  61,  gives  an  account
of  tlie  repairing  of  the  canal  Libil-khigallu,  which  crossed  Babylon ;  cf.  for  these  operations,  and  the
possible  plan  of  some  of  the  canals,  Delattre,  Les  Travaux  liydrauUques  en  Bahjlonie,  pp.  43,  44.

'  Drawn  by  Fancher-Gudln,  from  a  bas-relief  of  the  time  of  Sargon,  in  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre ;
cf.  M.  DiEULAFOT,  L'Acro2wlede  Suse,  p.  195.

'  The  building  of  this  wall  of  Media  is  referred  to  in  L' Inscription  en  caracteres  cursi/s  de  I'Oimdy
Brissa,  col.  vi.  11.  15-31;  edit.  Pognon,  pp.  16,  17;  cf.  Layard,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  who  has
partially  restored  the  plan  from  the  ruius  of  the  wall,  and  also,  for  the  interpretation  of  these  texts,
WiNCKLER,  Altoiient.  Forsch.,  vol.  i.  pp.  507-510,  and  above  all,  Billekbeck,  Geographische  Unter-
euchungen,  pp.  1-6.     The  wall  of  Media  is  shortly  described  in  Xenophon,  Anabasis,  II.  Iv.  §  12.


CITY    DEFENDED   BY    A    TRIPLE    WALL.'


THE  BEBUILDIXG  OF  THE  CITT  WALL  AXD  OF  THE  ZIGGURAT.       563

rampart  protected  by  a  wide  moat,  following,  between  Jibbara  and  Nipur,  the
contours  of  a  low-lying  district  which  could  be  readily  flooded.^  The  western
boundary  was  already  protected  by  the  Pallakottas,  and  the  lakes  or  marshes
of  Bahr-i-Nejif :  Nebuchadrezzar  multiplied  the  number  of  the  dikes,  and  so
arranged  them  that  the  whole  country  between  the  suburbs  of  Borsippa  and
Babylon  could  be  inundated  at  will.^  Babylon  itself  formed  as  it  were  the
citadel  in  tlie  midst  of  these  enormous  outlying  fortifications,  and  the  engineers
both  of  Nabopolassar »  and  of  his  son  expended  all  the  resources  of  their  art
on  rendering  it  impregnable.  A  triple  rampart  surrounded  it  and  united  it  to
Borsippa,  built  on  the  model  of  those  whose  outline  is  so  frequently  found  on
the  lowest  tier  of  an  Assyrian  bas-relief.     A  moat  of  great  width,  with  banks  of


m


PliOBABLE    SIXTIO.V    OP    THE    TlilPLK    WALL    OF    BABTLOX.'

masonry,  communicating  with  the  Euphrates,  washed  the  foot  of  the  outer  wall,
which  retained  the  traditional  name  of  Imgur-bel  ;  behind  this  wall  rose
Nimitti-bel,  the  true  city  wall,  to  a  height  of  more  than  ninety  feet  above  the
level  of  the  plain,  appearing  from  a  distance,  with  its  battlements  and  towers,
more  like  a  mountain  chain  than  a  rampart  built  by  the  hand  of  man ;  finally'
behind  Nimitti-bel  ran  a  platform  on  the  same  level  as  the  curtain  of  Imgur-
bel,  forming  a  last  barrier  behind  which  the  garrison  could  rally  before  finally
owning  itself  defeated  and  surrendering  the  city.  Large  square  towers  rose  at
intervals  along  the  face  of  the  walls,  to  the  height  of  some  eighteen  feet  above
the  battlements;  a  hundred  gates  fitted  witli  bronze-plated  doors,  which  could
be  securely  shut  at  need,  gave  access  to  the  city.'^

■  The  works  on  the  east  front  are  described  by  Nebuchadrezzar  himself  in  the  East  India
Company  s  InscnpUon,  col.  iv.  11.  39-52;  cf.,  for  the  probable  plau  of  the  lines  of  fortification  the
observations  of  Billerbeck,  GeographucU  Untersuchungen  pp  6-8

en  1mo2:  p^'^S."'*''"''^'^  ""^  ''''  Bideof  Babylon,  cf.D.LAXXK.,  LesTra.au.  UyarauU.ues
'  The  restoration  of  Imgur-bel  and  Nimitti-bel  had  been  begun  hy  Nabopolassar,  as  is  testified  by
Nebuchadrezzar  himself,  East  India  Company's  Liscription.  col.  iv.  11.  66-73  col  v  11    1-4
^  ^'^Eeproduced    by   Faucher-Gudin    from  the    restoration   by   Dieulafo;,  L'Acropole' de    Suse,

'The  description  of  the  fortifications  of  the  city  is  furnished  by  Herodotus,  I.  clxxviii    cUxix
who  himself  saw  them  st.ll  partially  standing ;  the  account  of  their  construction  has  been  .-ivea  b;
Nebuchadrezzar  h.mseli,  m  the  East  India  Company's  Liscription,  col.  iv.  11,  G6-73,  col    v  !l    1-65


5G4  TEE  MEDES  AND    THE   SECOND    CHALDzEAN  EMPIRE.

■  The  space  within  the  walls  was  by  no  means  completely  covered  by  houses,
but  contained  gardens,  farms,  fields,  and,  here  and  there,  the  ruins  of  deserted
buildings.  As  in  older  Babylon,  the  city  proper  clustered  round  the  temple  of
Merodach,  with  its  narrow  winding  streets,  its  crowded  bazaars,  its  noisy  and
dirty  squares,  its  hostelries  and  warehouses  of  foreign  merchandise.  The
pyramid  of  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-bani-pal,  too  hastily  built,  had  fallen  into

ruins :    Nebuchadrezzar   reconstructed


its  seven  stages,  and  erected  on  the
topmost  platform  a  shrine  furnished
with  a  table  of  massive  gold,  and  a
couch  on  which  the  priestess  chosen  to
be  the  spouse  of  the  god  might  sleep  at
night.'  Other  smaller  temples  were
erected  here  and  there  on  both  banks
of  the  river,-  and  the  royal  palace,
built  in  the  marvellously  short  space
of  fifteen  days,  was  celebrated  for  its
hanging  gardens,  where  the  ladies  of
the  harem  might  walk  unveiled,  secure
from  vulgar  observation.^  No  trace  of
all  these  extensive  works  remains  at
the  present  day.  Some  scattered  frag-
ments of  crumbling  walls  alone  be-
tray the  site  of  the  great  ziggurat,  a  few  bas-reliefs  are  strewn  over  the
surface  of  the  ground,  and  a  lion  of  timeworn  stone,  lying  on  its  back  in  a
depression  of  the  soil,  is  perhaps  the  last  survivor  of  those  which  kept  watch,

col.  vi.  11.  1-55;  cf.  the  Inscriptions  of  Ouady  Brissa,  eJ.  Poonon,  pp.  15-19.  One  special
inacriptioa  on  terra-eotta  cylinders  has  been  published  in  H.  Rawlinson,  Ca,i.  Ins  W.  As.,  vol.  i^
pi.  52,  note  3,  and  translated  into  French  by  Oppert,  Exp^d.  en  Mgsopotamie,  vol.  i.  p.  232  et  seq.,  and
by  Men-ant,  Bahylone  et  la  Chaldge,  pp.  212,  213  ;  into  English  by  B*ll,  Imcr.  of  hehuchadrezzar  II.,
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1SS7-1S8S,  vol.  x.  pp.292,  203  ;  into  German  by  Winokler,
Inschr.  Nebukadnezar's.  in  Schrader,  Eeil.  Bill,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  54-59.  For  the  height  of  the
walls  and  the  distribution  of  the  means  of  defence,  I  refer  the  reader. to  Marcel  Dieui.apoy,
L'Acropole  de  Suse,  pp.  183-198,  whose  conclusions  I  have  adopted.

•  For  the  reconstruction  of  the  temple  of  Merodach  by  Esarhaddon  and  Assur-bani-pal,  see  supra,
pp.  357,358,382,383,415.  The  restoration  by  Nebuchadrezzar  is  mentioned  m  the  J^ast  India
Company's  Inscription,  col.  ii.  11.  40-65,  col.  iii.  11.  1-10,  and  more  or  less  at  length  in  the  other  known
inscriptions  of  this  king.     We  only  know  the  object  of  the  uppermost  platform  from  the  testimony  of

Hebodotds,  I.  clxxxi.  „  „„      i   ■     11   i_(U

=  For  these  other  temples,  cf.  the  East  India  Company's  hiscr.,  col.  lu.  11.  lo-/-,  col.  iv.  l'  ^  '■i;
'  The  building  of  the  royal  palace  is  referred  to  in  ibid.,  col.  vii.  U.  34-63,  col.  viu.,  col.  '^- '1- J-*-  =
the  account  given  by  Berosus  (Fraqm.  14,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  But.  Gi-ec  vol.  u.  p.  50/)  also
stated  that  the  palace  was  erected  in  iifteen  days.  Tlie  liangiug  gardens  are  only  known  to  us  from
the  testimony  of  the  classical  writers.  Berosus  CFragm.  14,  in  MtiLLER-DmOT,  Fragm.  Uist.  hrxc,
vol.  ii.  p.  507),  Biodorua  Siculus  (ii.  10),  and  Strabo  (XVI.  i.  §  5,  p.  738).

«  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  sketch  in  Latabd,  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  p.  433.


fragment   of  a   BABY-
LONIAN BAS-RELIEF.'


THE  SUCCESSOES    OF  NEBUCEADREZZAE.


565


according  to  custom,  at  the  gates  of  the  palace.  But  the  whole  of  this  vast
work  of  reconstruction  and  ornamentation  must  not  be  attributed  to  Nebuchad-
rezzar alone.  The  plans  had  been  designed  by  Nabopolassar  under  the
influence  of  one  of  his  wives,  who  by  a  strange  chance  bears  m  classic  tradition
the  very  Egyptian  name  of  Nitocris ;  ^  but  his  work  was  insignificant  compared
with  that  accomplished  by  his  son,  and  the  name  of  Nebuchadrezzar  was  justly
connected  with  the  marvels  of  Babylon  by  all  ancient  writers.  But  even  his  reign
of  fifty-five  years  did  not  suffice  for  the  completion  of  all  his  undertaking?,  and
many  details  still  remained  imperfect  at  his  death  in  the  beginning  of  .562  B.C.


KClSb  OF  THE  ZIGGURAT    OF    THE    TEMPLE   OF    BEL."


Though  of  Ealdu  origin,  and  consequently  exposed  to  the  suspicions  and  secret
enmity  of  the  native  Babylonians,  as  all  of  his  race,  even  Merodach-Baladan
himself,  had  been  before  him,^  he  had  yet  succeeded  throughout  the  whole  of
his  reign  in  making  himself  respected  by  the  turbulent  inhabitants  of  his
capital,  and  in  curbing  the  ambitious  pretensions  of  the  priests  of  Merodaeh.
As  soon  as  his  master-hand  was  withdrawn,  the  passions  so  long  repressed
broke  forth,  and  proved  utterly  beyond  the  control  of  his  less  able  or  less
fortunate  successors.*     As  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge  by  the  documents  which

'  Herodotus,  I.  clxxxv.-clxxxviii.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Guiiin,  from  a  sketch  in  Layabd,  Sineveh  and  Bahyhn,  p.  415.
'  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  251,  et  seq.

'  The  sequel  of  this  history  is  known  from  the  narr.itive  of  Bekoscs,  Fragm.  14,  in  Mullek-Didot,
Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  507,  oOS.     Its    authenticity  ia  proved  by  passages  on  the  Cylinder


5G6  THE  MEDES  AND    TEE   SECOND    CHALD^'AN  EMPIRE.

have  come  down  to  us,  two  factions  had  arisen  iu  the  city  since  the  fall  of
Nineveh,  both  of  which  aspired  to  power  and  strove  to  gain  a  controlling
influence  with  the  sovereign.  The  one  comprised  the  descendants  of  the  Kalda
who  bad  delivered  the  city  from  the  Assyrian  yoke,  together  with  tliose  of  the
ancient  military  nobility.  The  other  was  composed  of  the  great  priestly
families  and  their  adherents,  who  claimed  for  the  gods  or  their  representatives
the  right  to  control  the  affairs  of  the  state,  and  to  impose  the  will  of  heaven  on
the  rulers  of  the  kingdom.  The  latter  faction  seems  to  have  prevailed  at  first
at  the  court  of  Amil-marduk,  the  sole  surviving  son  and  successor  of  Nebuchad-
rezzar. This  prince  on  his  accession  embraced  a  policy  contrary  to  that
pursued  by  his  father :  and  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to  release  Jehoiachin,  King
of  Judah,  who  had  been  languishing  in  chains  for  twenty-seven  years,  and  to
ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  other  expatriated  Jews.^  The  ofiicial  history
of  a  later  date  represented  him  as  having  been  an  unjust  sovereign,  but  we
have  no  information  as  to  his  misdeeds,  and  know  only  that  after  two  years  a
conspiracy  broke  out  against  him,  led  by  his  own  brother-in-law,  Nergal-sharuzur,
who  assassinated  him  and  seized  the  vacant  throne  (560  B.c.).^  Nergal-sharuzur
endeavoured  to  revive  the  policy  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  and  was  probably  supported
by  the  military  party,  but  his  reign  was  a  short  one ;  he  died  in  556  B.C.,  leaving
as  sole  heir  a  youth  of  dissipated  character  named  Labashi-marduk,  whose  name
is  stigmatised  by  the  chroniclers  as  that  of  a  prince  who  knew  not  how  to  rule.*
He  was  murdered  at  the  end  of  nine  months,  and  his  place  taken  by  a  native
Babylonian,  a  certain  Xabonaid  (Nabonidus),  son  of  Nabo-balatsu-ikbi,  who  was
not  connected  by  birth  with  his  immediate  predecessors  on  the  throne  (556-
555  B.C.).*

of  Nabonidus,  col.  iv.  U.  1-42,  col.  v.  11.  1-31,  with  which  it  has  been  compared  by  Messerschmidt
{Die  Inschrift  der  Stele  Nabuna'ids,  pp.  17-22).  Messerschmidt  considers  that  Amil-marduk  and
Labashi-marduk  were  overthrown  by  the  priestly  faction,  but  a  passage  on  the  Cylinder  (col.  v.
11.  14-lS),  which  he  does  not  seem  to  have  noticed,  in  which  Nabonidus  represents  himself  as  inherit-
ing the  political  views  of  Nebuchadrezzar  and  Nergal-sharuzur,  leads  me  to  take  the  opposite  view.
We  know  wliat  hatred  Nabonidus  roused  in  the  minds  of  the  priests  of  Merodacli  (cf.  what  is  stated
infra,  in  Chap.  VI.)  because  his  principles  of  government  were  opposed  to  theirs :  the  severe  judgment
he  passed  on  the  rule  of  Amil-marduk  and  Labashi-marduk  seems  to  prove  that  he  considered  them
as  belonging  to  the  rival  party  in  the  state,  that  is,  to  the  priestly  faction.  The  forms  of  the  names
and  the  lengths  of  the  several  reigns  have  been  confirmed  by  contemporary  monuments,  especially  by
the  numerous  contract  tablet-i.  The  principal  inscriptions  belonging  to  the  reign  of  Nergal-sharuzur
(Bezold,  luschriften  Neriglissar's,  in  Schradeb,  A'ei7.  Bibl,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  70-79)  deal  only
with  public  works  and  the  restoration  of  monuments.

'  2  Kings  xxv.  27-30 ;  cf.  Jer.  Iii.  31-34.

'  Beroscs,  Fragm.  14,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  D07,  where  the  expression
TrpocTcts  rOiv  Trpay^druv  avo/iuts  Kal  ao'e\7(iy  seems  almost  a  translation  of  a  passage  on  the  Cylinder  of
Nabonidus,  (!ol.  iv.  11.  25-34,  as  Messerschmidt  has  observed  {Die  Luchr.  der  Stele  Nabuna'ids,  p.  18) ;
Berosus,  although  belonging  to  the  priestly  caste,  had  as  his  sole  sources  of  information  documents
proceeding  from  the  opposite  party,  which  was  unfavourable  to  Labashi-marduk.

^  Berosus,  Fragm.  14,  in  Muller-Didot,  i^rajm.  Hist.  Gr«c.,  vol.  ii.  p.  507;  cf.  the  Cylinder  of
Nabonidus,  col.  v.  11.  34-42.

'  Berosus,  Fragn.  14,  iu  Mvller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  508.


NABONIDUS.


567


No  Oriental  empire  could  escape  from  the  effects  of  frequent  and  abrupt
changes  in  its  rulers :  like  so  many  previous  dynasties,  that  of  Nabopolassar
became  enfeebled  as  if  from  exhaustion  immediately  after  the  death  of  its  most
illustrious    scion,   and    foundered    in    imbecility   and    decrepitude.     Popular
imagination,  awe-struck  by  such  a  sudden  downfall  from  exalted  prosperity,
recognised  the  hand  of  God  in  the  events  which  brought  about  the  catastrophe.
A  Chaldgean  legend,  current  not  long  after,  related  how  Nebuchadrezzar,  being
seized  towards  the  end  of  his  life  with  the  sjjirit  of  prophecy,  mounted  to  the
roof  of  his   palace,  and  was
constrained,  as  a  punishment
for  his  pride,  to  predict  to  his
people,  with  his  own  lips,  tlie
approaching    ruin    of    their
city ;  thereupon  the  glory  of
its  monarch  suffered  an  eclipse
from    which    there    was    no
emerging.^  The  Jews, nourish-
ing undying  hatred   for  tlie
conqueror    who     had     over-
thrown  Jerusalem    and    de-
stroyed the  Temple  of  Solo-
mon, were  not  satisfied  with
a  punishment  so  inadequate.     According  to  them,  Nebuchadrezzar,  after  his
victorious  career,  was  so  intoxicated  with  his  own  glory  that  he  proclaimed
himself  the  equal  of  God.     "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,"  he  cried,  "  which  I
have  built  for  the  royal  dwelling-place,  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the
glory  of  my  majesty  !  "  and  while  he  thus  spake,  there  came  a  voice  from
heaven,  decreeing  his  metamorpliosis  into  the  form  of  a  beast.     "  He  was  driven
from  men,  and  did  eat  grass  as  oxen,  and  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of
heaven,  till  his  hair  was'  grown  like  eagles'  feathers,  and  his  nails  like  birds'
claws."     For  seven  years  the  king  remained  in  this  state,  to  resume  his  former
shape  at  the  end  of  this  period,  and  recover  his  kingdom  after  having  magnified
the  God  of  Israel.^     The  founder  of  the  dynasty  which  replaced  that  of  Nebu-
chadrezzar, Nabonidus,  was  certainly  ill  fitted  to  brave  the  storms  already
threatening  to  break  over  his  kingdom.     It  has  not  been  ascertained  whether
he  had  any  natural  right  to  the  throne,  or  by  what  means  he  attained  supreme

'  Abydexus,  Fragnt.  S,  quoted  from  Berosiis,   in  Ecsebius,   Prxparalio  evangelica,  ix.    41 ;  cf.
MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Eist.  Grsec,  Tol.  iv.  p.  2S3.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  kindly  furnished  by  Father  Scheil.
'  Dan.  iv.


TUL    STOSi;    LION    OF    BAUYLUN.'


5G8  THE  MEDES  AND    THE  SECOND    CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.

power,  but  the  way  in  which  he  dwells  on  the  names  of  Nebuchadrezzar  and  Ner-
gal-sbaruzur  renders  it  probable  that  he  was  raised  to  the  throne  by  the  military
faction.  He  did  not  prove,  as  events  turned  out,  a  good  general,  nor  even  a
soldier  of  moderate  ability,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  he  also  lacked  that  fierce
courage  of  which  none  of  his  predecessors  was  ever  destitute.  He  allowed  his
array  to  dwindle  away  and  his  fortresses  to  fall  into  ruins ;  the  foreign  alliances
existing  at  his  accession,  together  with  those  which  he  himself  had  concluded,
were  not  turned  to  the  best  advantage ;  his  provinces  were  badly  administered,
and  his  subjects  rendered  discontented :  his  most  salient  characteristic  was
an  insatiable  curiosity  concerning  historical  and  religious  antiquities,  which
stimulated  him  to  undertake  excavations  in  all  the  temples,  in  order  to  bring
to  light  monuments  of  ages  long  gone  by.  He  was  a  monarch  of  peaceful
disposition,  who  might  have  reigned  with  some  measure  of  success  in  a  century
of  unbi'oken  peace,  or  one  troubled  only  by  petty  wars  with  surrounding  inferior
states ;  but,  unfortunately,  the  times  were  ill  suited  to  such  mild  sovereignty.
The  ancient  Eastern  world,  worn  out  by  an  existence  reckoned  by  thousands  of
years,  as  well  as  by  its  incessant  conflicts,  would  have  desired,  indeed,  no  better
fate  than  to  enjoy  some  years  of  repose  in  the  condition  in  which  recent  events
had  left  it;  but  other  nations,  the  Greeks  and  the  Persians,  by  no  means
anxious  for  tranquillity,  were  entering  the  lists.  For  the  moment  the  efforts
of  the  Greeks  were  concentrated  on  Egypt,  where  Pharaoh  manifested  for  them
inexhaustible  good  will,  and  on  Cyprus,  two-thirds  of  which  belonged  to  them  :
the  danger  for  Chaldcea  lay  in  the  Persians,  kinsfolk  and  vassals  of  the  Medes,
whose  semi-barbarous  chieftains  had  issued  from  their  mountain  homes  some
eighty  years  previously  to  occupy  the  eastern  districts  of  Elam.


In


'^^


if


THE    IRANIAN    CONQUEST.


THE    lUANI.VN     IlEUGIOSS — CYltUS     IX   LYDIA    A.\D    AT    BABYLON  ;     CA.MUYSES     IX    EGYPT — DAKIUS
^VXD   THE    ORGANISATION   OF   TUE   EMPIRE.

Hie  constihUion  of  the  Median  empire  borroived  from  the  ancient  peoples  of  the  Euphrates  :
its  religion  only  is  peculiar  to  itself — Legends  concerning  Zoroaster,  his  laws;  the  Avesta  and  its
history — Elements  contained  in  it  of  primitive  religion — Tlie  supreme  god  Ahura-mazda  and  his
Amesha-spentas :  the  Yazatas,  the  Fravashis—Angru-mainyus  and  his  agents,  the  Daivas,  the
Pairikas,  their  struggle  with  Ahura-mazda — The  duties  of  man  here  below,  funerals,  his  fate
after  death — Worship)  and  temples:  fire-altars,  sacrifices,  the  Magi.

Cyrus  and  tlie  legends  concerning  his  origin:  his  revolt  against  Astgages  and  the  fall  of  the
Median  empire — The  early  years  of  the  reign  of  Nabonklus  :  revolutions  in  Tyre,  the  taking  of
Harrdn — The  eiul  of  the  reign  of  Alyattes,  Lydian  art  and  its  earliest  coinage — Croesus,  his
relatio)is  icith  continental  Greece,  his  conquests,  his  alliaiices  with  Babylon  and  Egypt — The  war
between  Lydia  and  Persia  :  the  defeat  of  the  Lydians,  tlie  taking  of  Sardes,  the  death  of  Crcesus
and  subsequent  legends  relating  to  it — Tlie  submission  of  the  cities  of  the  Asiatic  littoral.

Gyrus  in  Bactriana  and,  in  tlie  eastern  regions  of  tlie  Iranian  table-land  — The  impression
produced  on  the  Chaldcean  people  by  his  victories  ;  the  Jewish  exiles,  Ezekid  and  his  dreams  of
restoration,  the  new  temple,  the  prophecies  against  Babylon ;  general  discontent  with  Nabonidus
— The  attack  of  Cgrus  and  the  battle  of  Zalzallat,  the  taking  if  Babylon  and  the  fall  of
Nabonidus  :  the  eml  of  the  Chaldaan  empire  and.  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews.


(      570      )

Egypt  wilder  Amasis :  building  works,  support  given  to  the  Greeks;  Naukratis,  its  temples,
its  coiistitntion,  (ttul  its  prosperity — Preparations  for  defence  and  the  unpopxiXariUj  of  Aniasis
xcith  the  native  Egyptians — The  death  of  Cyrus  awl  legends  relating  to  it :  his  palace  at
Pasargadce  ami  his  tomb — Cambyses  and  Smerdis — Hie  legendary  causes  of  the  tear  inth  Egypt
^Psammetichus  III.,  the  battle  of  Pelusium  ;  Egypt  reduced  to  a  Persian  province.

Cambyses'  plans  for  conquest :  the  abortive  expeditions  to  the  Oasis  of  Amnion  ami  Carthage —
The  kingihm  of  Ethiopia,  its  kings,  its  customs:  the  Persians  fail  to  reach  Napatu,  the  madness
of  Cambyses — The  fraud  of  Gamnata,  the  death  of  Cambyses  and  the  reign  of  the  pseudo-
Smerdis,  the  accession  of  Darius — The  revolution  in  Susiawt,  Clicddcea,  a)id  Media :  Nebuchad-
rezzar III.  and  the  fall  of  Babylon,  the  death  of  Orcetes,  the  defeat  of  Khshatrifa,  restoration  of
peace  throughout  Asia,  Egyptian  affairs  and  the  re-establishment  of  the  royal  power.

Hie  organisation  of  the  country  and  its  division  into  satrapies:  the  satrap,  the  military
commander,  the  royal  secretary ;  couriers,  nutin  roads,  the  Eyes  ami  Ears  of  the  king — The
financial  system  and  the  provincial  taxes :  the  daric — Advantages  and  drawbacks  of  the  system
of  division  into  satrapies ;  the  royal  guard  and  the  military  organisation  of  the  empire — Tlie
conqiiest  of  the  Hapta-TIindu  nnd  the  prospect  of  uar  unth  Greece.


THE   KUIXS   or    PERSKPOLIS,    AS   SKEN   FKOM    THE    NORTH.'


CHAPTER    VI.

THE     IRANIAN     CONQUEST.

The  Iranian  religions— Cyrus  in  Lydia  and  at  Babylon  ;  Cambyseg  in  Egypt— Darius
and  the  organisation  of  the  empire.

rriHE  Median  empire  is  the  least  known  of  all  those  which
held  sway  for  a  time  over  the  destinies  of  a  portion  of
Western  Asia.  The  reason  of  this  is  not  to  be  ascribed
to  the  shortness  of  its  duration :  the  Chaldtean  empire  of
Nebuchadrezzar  lasted  for  a  period  quite  as  brief,  and  yet
the  main  outlines  of  its  history  can  be  established  with
some  certainty  in  spite  of  large  blanks  and  much  obscurity.
Whereas  at  Babylon,  moreover,  original  documents  abound,
enabling  us  to  put  together,  feature  by  feature,  the  picture
of  its  ancient  civilisation  and  of  the  chronology  of  its  kings,
we  possess  no  contemporary  monuments  of  Ecbatana  to
furnish  direct  information  as  to  its  history.  To  form
any  idea  of  the  Median  kings  or  their  people,  we  are  reduced  to  hap-
hazard notices  gleaned  from  the  chroniclers  of  other  lands,  retailing  a  few
isolated  facts,  anecdotes,  legends,  and  conjectures,  and,  as  these  materials  reach

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  in  Coste  and  Flandin,  La  Perse  Antique,  pi.  67.  The
initial,  drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  was  designed  from  a  statuette  in  terra-cotta,  found  in  Southern
Russia,  representing  a  young  Scythian;  of.  Koxdakop  and  Eeinach,  Les  AntiquiiCs  de  la  Bussie
M^ridionale,  p.  204.


572  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

us  through  the  medium  of  the  Babylonians  or  the  Greeks  of  the  fifth  or  sixth
century  B.C.,  the  picture  which  we  endeavour  to  compose  from  them  is  always
imperfect  or  out  of  perspective.  We  seemingly  catch  glimpses  of  ostentatious
luxury,  of  a  political  and  military  organisation,  and  a  method  of  government
analogous  to  that  which  prevailed  at  later  periods  among  the  Persians,  but  more
imperfect,  ruder,  and  nearer  to  barbarism — a  Persia,  in  fact,  in  the  rudimentary
stage,  with  its  ruling  spirit  and  essential  characteristics  as  yet  undeveloped.^  The
machinery  of  state  had  doubtless  been  adopted  almost  in  its  entirety  from  the
political  organisations  which  obtained  in  the  kingdoms  of  Assyria,  Elam,  and
Chaldjea,  with  which  sovereignties  the  founders  of  the  Median  empire  had
held  in  turns  relations  as  vassals,  enemies,  and  allies ;  ^  but  once  we  penetrate
this  veneer  of  Mesopotamian  civilisation  and  reach  the  inner  life  of  the  people,
we  find  in  the  religion  they  profess^mingled  with  some  borrowed  traits — a
world  of  unfamiliar  myths  and  dogmas  of  native  origin.

The  main  outlines  of  this  religion  were  already  fixed  when  the  Medes  rose
in  rebellion  against  Assur-bani-pal ;  and  the  very  name  of  (7oJ^/esso»•— Fravartish
— applied  to  the  chief  of  that  day,  proves  that  it  was  the  faith  of  the  royal
family.^  It  was  a  religion  common  to  all  the  Iranians,  the  Persians  as  well  as
the  Medes,  and  legend  honoured  as  its  first  lawgiver  and  expounder  an  ancient
prophet  named  Zarathustra,  known  to  us  as  Zoroaster.*  Most  classical  writers
relegated  Zoroaster  to  some  remote  age  of  antiquity — thus  he  is  variously  said
to  have  lived  six  thousand  years  before  the  death  of  Plato,^  five  thousand  before
the  Trojan  war,^  one  thousand  before  Moses,'^  and  six  hundred  before  Xerxes'
campaign  against  Athens ;  **  while  some  few  only  afiirmed  that  he  had  lived  at

'  NoLDEKE,  Aufmlze  zur  Persische  Geschichte,  pp.  11,  12,  where  tte  ruder  aspect  of  the  Median
civilisation  ia  left  a  little  too  much  in  the  background.

-  G.  Rawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  i)p.  310-312.

'  For  the  meaning  of  the  name,  of.  supra,  p.  455,  note  I.

*  The  name  Zarathustra  has  been  interpreted  in  a  score  of  different  ways.  The  Greeks  sometimes
attributed  to  it  the  meaning  of  ao-TpofliiTTjj,  worshipper  of  the  stars,  probably  by  reason  of  the
similarity  in  sound  of  the  termination  -oo-Tprjs  of  Zoroaster  with  the  word  aarpov  (Dixon,  Fragm.  5,
in  MCller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  ii.  p.  90).  Among  modern  writers,  H.  Rawlinson  derived
it  from  the  Assyrian  Ziru-Ishtar,  the  Seed  of  Ishtar  (^Notes  on  the  Early  Histonj  of  Babylonia,  in  tlie
J.  B.  As.  Soc,  1S55,  vol.  xv.  p.  245,  note  2),  but  the  etymology  now  most  generally  accepted  is  that  of
Burnouf,  according  to  which  it  would  signify  •'  the  man  with  gold-coloured  camels,"  the  "  possessor
of  tawny  camels;"  cf.  .Jaues  Darmesteteb,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  p.  Ixxvi.,  note  1,  who,  after
proposing  the  meaning  red,  gold-colour  (Ormvzd  et  Ahriman,  p.  194),  fell  back  on  the  explanation  of
Burnouf.  The  ordinary  Greek  form  Zoroaster  seems  to  be  derived  from  some  name  quite  distinct
from  Zarathustra  (JusTi,  Iranisches  Xamenbuch,  p.  381).

'  This  was,  as  Pliny  records  (Eist.  Nat.,  xxx.  1,  §  2),  the  opinion  of  Eudoxus ;  not  Eudoxus  of
Cnidus,  pupil  of  Plato,  as  is  usually  stated,  but  a  more  obscure  personage,  Eudoxus  of  Rhodes.

'  This  was  the  statement  of  Hermodorus  (Diogexes  LAERTros,  Proanniuni,  2)  and  Hermippus
(McLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  53, 54  ;  cf.  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  §  46,  ed.  Parthet,  p.  81).

'  Plikt,  H.  Nat.,  xxx.  1,  §  2.

'  XANTHrs  OF  Ltdia,  Fragm.  29,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  i.  p.  44,  where  the
alteration  of  600  into  6000  is  supported,  in  accordance  with  the  testimony  of  two  manuscripts  of
Diogenes  Laertius  ;  but  this  reading  seems  to  have  been  interpolated  in  the  text  from  a  desire  to  make
the  testimony  of  the  ancient  historian  agree  with  that  of  the  followers  of  Plato,  and  Rapp  justly


ZOROASTER   AND   HIS   LEGENDARY  HISTORY.  573

a  comparatively  recent  period,  and  made  him  out  a  disciple  of  the  philosopher
Pythagoras,  who  flourished  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.c.^  According
to  the  most  ancient  national  traditions,  he  was  born  in  the  Aryanem-vaejo,  or,
in  other  words,  in  the  region  between  the  Araxes  and  the  Kur,  to  the  west  of
the  Caspian  Sea.^  Later  tradition  asserted  that  his  conception  was  attended
by  supernatural  circumstances,  and  the  miracles  which  accompanied  his  birth
announced  the  advent  of  a  saint  destined  to  regenerate  the  world  by  the
revelation  of  the  True  Law.  In  the  belief  of  an  Iranian,  every  man,  every
living  creature  now-  existing  or  henceforth  to  exist,  not  excluding  the  gods
themselves,  possesses  a  Frohar,  or  guardian  spirit,  who  is  assigned  to  him  at
his  entrance  into  the  world,  and  who  is  thenceforth  devoted  entirely  to  watching
over  his  material  and  moral  well-being.^  About  the  time  appointed  for  the
appearance  of  the  prophet,  his  Frohar  was,  by  divine  grace,  imprisoned  in  the
heart  of  a  Haoma,*  and  was  absorbed,  along  with  the  juice  of  tiie  plant,  by
the  priest  Purushaspa,^  during  a  sacrifice,  a  ray  of  heavenly  glory  descending
at  the  same  time  into  the  bosom  of  a  maiden  of  noble  race,  named  Dughdova,
whom  Purushaspa  shortly  afterwards  espoused.  Zoroaster  was  engendered
from  the  mingling  of  the  Frohar  with  the  celestial  ray.^  The  evil  spirit,  whose
supremacy  he  threatened,  endeavoured  to  destroy  him  as  soon  as  he  saw  the
light,  and  despatched  one  of  his  agents,  named  Bouiti,  from  the  country  of
the  far  north  to  oppose  him  ;  but  the  infant  prophet  immediately  pronounced
the  formula  with  which  the  psalm  for  the  offering  of  the  waters  opens  :  "  The
will  of  the  Lord  is  the  rule  of  good  !  "  and  proceeded  to  pour  libations  in  honour

prefers  the  lower  figure  of  the  ordinary  manuscripts  (Dje  Religimi  und  Sifte  der  Perser  und  iihrlgen
Iranier  nach  den  griechischen  und  romischen  Quellen,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgcnl.  Geaelh.,  vol.  six.  pp.  25,
26).  The  authenticity  of  the  testimony  of  Xanthus  has  been  most  recently  contested  by  J.  Marquart,
Die  Assyriaha  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologns,  Supplement,  vol.  vi.  pp.  530,  531.

'  Porphyry,  Life  of  Pythagoras,  ed.  Nauok,  p.  12,  which  Is  supposed  by  a  passage  in  the  Byzan-
tine historian  Agathias  (ii.  24),  according  to  whom  "  the  Persians  of  the  present  day  assert  that
Zoroaster  lived  in  the  reign  of  Hystaspes,  without  making  it  clear  whether  they  refer  to  the  father  of
Darius  or  to  another  Hystaspes."  This  legend  rests  on  the  confusion  of  the  well-known  Hystaspes,
father  of  Darius,  with  Vlshtaspa  or  Hystaspes,  who  is  said  to  have  been  King  of  Baotria  in  the  days
of  the  prophet.

^  Windischmann,  Zoroastrische  Studien,  p.  47.  ot  seq.,  has  collected  and  commented  upon  all  the
passages  of  the  Avesta  and  the  Bundehesh  which  locate  the  birthplace  and  earliest  home  of  Zoroaster
in  the  Aryanem-Vaejo  (for  the  position  of  tliis  country,  cf.  supra,  p.  452,  note  1).  Most  Western
historians  of  the  classical  period  adopted  the  legend  which  locates  the  birthplace  of  Zoroaster  to  the
east  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  in  Bactriana  (Rapp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  29,  30).

^  The  Fravashi  (for  fravarti.  from  fra-var.  "to  support,  nourish"),  or  the  frohar  {feruer),  is,
properly  speaking,  the  nurse,  the  genius  who  nurtures  (Oppert,  Inscriptions  des  Achffmi'nides,  p.  105)  ;
on  his  role  and  history,  cf.  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  500-505,  and  the  TastlS,
which  is  entirely  occupied  with  the  glorification  of  tlie  Fravashis.  Many  of  the  practices  relating  to
the  conception  and  cult  of  the  Fravashis  seem  to  me  to  go  back  to  the  primitive  period  of  the  Iranian
religions.

*  The  haoma  is  an  Asclepias  Sarcostema  Viminalie.

^  The  name  signifies  "He  who  has  many  horses;"  cf.  JcSTi,  Iranisches  Namenhuch,  pp.  254,  255.

"  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  p.  Isxviii.,  where  the  contents  of  the  seventh  book  of
the  Dinkart  are  summed  up  in  a  few  lines.


574  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

of  the  river  Darcja,i  on  the  banks  of  which  he  had  been  born  a  moment  before,
reciting  at  the  same  time  tlie  profession  of  f;\ith  which  puts  evil  spirits  to  flight.
Bouiti  fled  aghast,  but  his  master  set  to  work  upon  some  fresh  device.  Zoroaster
allowed  him,  however,  no  time  to  complete  his  plans ;  he  rose  up,  and  undismayed
by  the  malicious  riddles  propounded  to  him  by  his  adversary,  advanced  against
him  with  his  hands  full  of  stones — stones  as  large  as  a  house — with  which  the
good  deity  supplied  him.  The  mere  sight  of  him  dispersed  the  demons,  and
they  regained  the  gates  of  their  hell  in  headlong  flight,  shrieking  out,  "  How
shall  we  succeed  in  destroying  him  ?  For  he  is  the  weapon  which  strikes  down
evil  beings ;  he  is  the  scourge  of  evil  beings."  '^  His  infancy  and  youth  were
spent  in  constant  disputation  with  evil  spirits :  ever  assailed,  he  ever  came  out
victorious,  and  issued  more  perfect  from  each  attack.  When  he  was  thirty
years  old,  one  of  the  good  spirits,  Vohumano,  appeared  to  him,  and  conducted
him  into  the  presence  of  Ahura-mazda,  the  Supreme  Being.  When  invited  to
question  the  deity,  Zoroaster  asked,  "  Which  is  the  best  of  the  creatures  which
are  upon  the  earth  ?  "  The  answer  was,  that  the  man  whose  heart  is  pure,  he
excels  among  his  fellows.  He  next  desired  to  know  the  names  and  functions
of  the  angels,  and  the  nature  and  attributes  of  evil.  His  instruction  ended,  he
crossed  a  mountain  of  flames,  and  underwent  a  terrible  ordeal  of  purification,
during  which  his  breast  was  pierced  with  a  sword,  and  melted  lead  poured  into
his  entrails  without  his  suffering  any  pain  :  only  after  this  ordeal  did  he  receive
from  the  hands  of  Ahura-mazda  the  Book  of  the  Law,  the  Avesta,  and  he  was
then  sent  back  to  his  native  land  bearing  his  precious  burden.^  At  that  time,
Vishtaspa,  son  of  Aurvataspa,  was  reigning  over  Bactria.  For  ten  years
Zoroaster  had  only  one  disciple,  his  cousin  Maidhyoi-Maonha,  but  after  that
he  succeeded  in  converting,  one  after  the  other,  the  two  sons  of  Hvogva,  the
grand  vizir  Jamaspa,  who  afterwards  married  the  prophet's  daughter,  and
Frashaoshtra,  whose  daughter  Hvogvi  he  himself  espoused  ;  the  queen,  Hutaosa,
was  the  next  convert,  and  afterwards,  through  her  persuasions,  the  king
Vishtaspa  himself  became  a  disciple.  The  triumph  of  the  good  cause  was
hastened  by  the  result  of  a  formal  disputation  between  the  prophet  and  the
wise  men  of  the  court :  for  three  days  they  essayed  to  bewilder  him  with  their
captious  objections  and  their  magic  arts,  thirty  standing  on  his  right  hand  and
thirty  on  his  left,  but  he  baffled  their  wiles,  aided  by  grace  from  above,  and
having   forced   them  to  avow  themselves   at   the  end   of  their  resources,  he

'  Bundehesh,  xxiv.  15 ;  ct.Vendidad, Fargard,  19,  §  4  (J.  Dabmestetee,  Le Zend-Avesta,  vol. ii.  p.  260).

'  Veiididad,  Fargard,  19,  which  is  devoted  entirely  to  this  episode  ;  of.  J.  Dabmesteter,  op.  cit.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  250-275.  The  context  shows  that  tlie  attuck  was  directed  against  the  prophet  at  the  very
moment  after  his  birth.  Cf.,  for  the  legends  relating  to  the  birth  of  Zoroaster  and  the  miracles  which
preceded,  accompanied,  or  followed  that  event,  the  documents  brought  together  by  Spiegel,  Eranische
Alterthumshunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  6S8-692.

"  Spieuel,  Eranische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  693-697.


TEE  AVESTA   AXD   ITS  HISTORY.  575

completed  his  victory  by  reciting  the  Avesta  before  them.^  The  legend  adds,  that
after  rallying  the  majority  of  the  people  round  him,  he  lived  to  a  good  old  age,
honoured  of  all  men  for  his  saintly  life.  According  to  some  accounts,  he  was
stricken  dead  by  lightning,'  while  others  say  he  was  killed  by  a  Turanian
soldier,  Bratrok-resh,  in  a  war  against  the  Hyaonas.*

The  question  has  often  been  asked  whether  Zoroaster  belongs  to  the  domain
of  legend  or  of  history.  The  only  certain  thing  we  know  concerning  him  is  his
name ;  all  the  rest  is  mythical,  poetic,  or  religious  fiction.*  Classical  writers
attributed  to  him  the  composition  or  editing  of  all  the  writings  comprised  in
Persian  literature:  the  whole  consisted,  they  said,  of  two  hundred  thousand
verses  which  had  been  expounded  and  analysed  by  Hermippus  in  his  com-
mentaries on  the  secret  doctrines  of  the  Magi.^  The  Iranians  themselves
averred  that  he  had  given  the  world  twenty-one  volumes — the  twenty-one
JVasJcs  of  the  Avesta,'^  which  the  Supreme  Deity  had  created  from  the  twenty-
one  words  of  the  Magian  profession  of  faith,  the  Ahuna  Vairya.  King
Vishtaspa  is  said  to  have  caused  two  authentic  copies  of  the  Avesta — which
contained  in  all  ten  or  twelve  hundred  chapters'' — to  be  made,  one  of  which
was  consigned  to  the  archives  of  the  empire,  the  other  laid  up  in  the  treasury
of  a  fortress,  either  Shapigau,  Shizigan,  Samarcand,  or  Persepolis.^     Alexander

'  Spiegel,  Eranische  AUerthumslcunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  697-703.

-  This  is,  under  very  diverse  forms,  the  version  preferred  by  Western  historians  of  the  post-classical
period  (Eapp,  Die  Eeligion  und  Sitte  der  Perser  und  uhrigen  Iranler,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  GeselL,
vol.  XXX.  pp.  34-45).

'  J.  Dakmestetek,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  19,  and  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ixxviii.,  Ixxix. ;  cf.  Spiegel,
Erdnhche  Altertlnimsliunde,  vol.  i.  p.  706.

*  The  mythical  conception  of  Zoroaster  has  been  defended  more  especially  by  Dutch  critics,  by
Kern  (^Ocer  liet  woord  Zarathustra  en  den  mythisclien  Persoon  van  dien  Naam,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the
Academy  of  Sciences  at  Amsterdam,  1867),  by  Tiele  (7s  Zarathustra  een  mythisch  Persoon,  in  the  same
Memoirs,  immediately  following  the  preceding),  and  accepted  in  other  countries,  among  others,  by
Justi  (Gottinger  gelehrte  Anzeigen,  1S67,  note  51)  and  by  Darmesteter.  Spiegel,  on  the  contrary,
admits  the  possibility  of  his  having  been  a  real  person  (Erdnitche  AUerthumskunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  707-710)  ;
cf.  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  p.  540.

'  Plky,  H.  Nat.,  XXX.  2  ;  cf.,  for  the  other  testimonies  in  classical  writers,  Eapp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  35,  36.

'  The  word  Avesta,  in  Pehlevi  Apastdk,  whence  come  the  Persian  forms  dvasta,  osld,  is  derived
from  the  Achsemeniau  word  Abasta,  which  signifies  lauj  in  the  inscriptions  of  Darius  (Oppert,  Note
sur  les  mots  Avesta  et  Zend,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1872,  vol.  xix.  pp.  293-297  ;  cf.  J.  de  Harlez,
Note  sur  le  sens  des  mots  Avesta-Zend,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1876,  vol.  viii.  p.  487,  et  seq.  The
term  Zend-Avesta,  commonly  used  to  designate  the  sacred  book  of  the  Persians,  is  iucoriectly  derived
from  the  expression  Apastdh  u  Zend,  which  in  Pehlevi  designates  first  the  law  itself,  and  then  the
translation  and  commentary  in  more  modem  language  which  conduces  to  a  Icnoicledge  (Zend)  of  the
law.  The  customary  application,  therefore,  of  the  name  Zend  to  the  language  of  the  Avesta  is  in-
correct (J.  Darme.stetek,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxxix.-xli.).

'  The  Dinkart  (viii.  1,  §  20)  fixes  the  number  of  chapters  at  1000,  and  the  Shah-Namak  at  1200.
written  on  plates  of  gold  (Blochet,  Liste  Gibgraphique  desvilles  de  Vlrdn,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,
vol.  xvii.  pp.  165, 171).  According  to  Masudi  {Les  Prairies  d'or,  ed.  Baebieb  de  Metnabd,  vol.  ii.
p.  125),  the  book  itself  and  the  two  commentaries  formed  12,000  volumes,  written  in  letters  of  gold,
the  twenty-one  Nasks  each  contained  200  pages,  and  the  whole  of  these  writings  had  been  inscribed
on  12,000  cow-hides.

'  The  site|of  Shapigan  or  Shaspigan  (West,  Diniart,  p.  413,  note  4)  is  unknown.  J.  Darmesteter
suggests  that  it  ought  to  be  read  as  Shizigdn,  which  would  permit  of  the  identification  of  the  place
with  Shiz,  one  of  the  ancieut  religious  centres  of  Iran,  whose  temple  was  visited  by  the  Sassanids  on
their  accession  to  the  throne  {Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  p.  xxi.,  n.  2).    Accordiug  to  the  Arda-Viraf  the


576  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

is  said  to  have  burnt  the  former  copy :  the  latter,  stolen  by  the  Greeks,  is
reported  to  have  been  translated  into  their  language  and  to  have  furnished  them
with  all  their  scientific  knowledge.  One  of  the  Arsacids,  Vologesus  I.,  caused
a  search  to  be  made  for  all  the  fragments  which  existed  either  in  writing  or  in
the  memory  of  the  faithful,^  and  this  collection,  added  to  in  the  reign  of  the
Sassanid  king,  Ardashir  Babagan,  by  the  high  priest  Tansar,*^  and  fixed  in  its
present  form  under  Sapor  I.,  was  recognised  as  the  religious  code  of  the  empire
in  the  time  of  Sapor  II.,  about  the  fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era.^  The
text  is  composed,  as  may  be  seen,  of  three  distinct  strata,  which  are  by  no
means  equally  ancient ;  ^  one  can,  nevertheless,  make  out  from  it  with  sufficient
certainty  the  principal  features  of  the  religion  and  cult  of  Iran,  such  as  they
were  under  the  Acha^menids,  and  perhaps  even  under  the  hegemony  of  the
Medes.  It  is  a  complicated  system  of  religion,  and  presupposes  a  long  period
of  development.  The  doctrines  are  subtle ;  the  ceremonial  order  of  worship,
loaded  witli  strict  observances,  is  interrupted  at  every  moment  by  laws  pre-
scribing minute  details  of  ritual,^  which  were  only  put  in  practice  by  priests
and  strict  devotees,  and  were  unknown  to  the  mass  of  the  faithful.  The
primitive  base  of  this  religion  is  difficult  to  discern  clearly:  but  we  may
recognise  in  it  most  of  those  beings  or  personifications  of  natural  phenomena
which  were  the  chief  objects  of  worship  among  all  the  ancient  nations  of
Western  Asia — the  stars,  Sirius,  the  moon,  the  sun,  water  and  fire,  plants,
animals  beneficial  to  mankind,  such  as  the  cow  and  the  dog,  good  and  evil
spirits  everywhere  present,  and  beneficent  or  malevolent  souls  of  mortal  men,
but  all  systematised,  graduated,  and  reduced  to  sacerdotal  principles,  according
to  the  prescriptions  of  a  powerful  priesthood.*     Families  consecrated  to  the

law  was  preserved  at  Istakhr,  or  Peraepolis,  according  to  the  Shah-Xamak  at  Samaroand  in  the  temple
of  the  Fire-god  (Blochet,  Lisfe  G^ogr.  des  villes  de  I'Irda,  in  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  165).

»  Tradition  speaks  simply  of  a  King  Valkaah,  without  specifying  which  of  the  four  kings  named
Vologesus  is  intended.  James  Darmesteter  has  given  good  reasons  for  believing  that  this  Valkash  is
Vologesus  I.  (50-7.5  a.d.),  the  contemporary  of  Xero  (r/i«  Zend-Aresta,  vol.  i.  pp.  xsxiii.-xxxv..  Le
Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  pp.  xxii-xxiv.).

-  For  the  high  priest  Tansar,  cf.  the  notice  whlcli  J.  Daemesteter.  Lettre  au  roi  de  Taharistan
(in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1894,  vol.  iil.  pp.  1S5-18S),  has  placed  at  the  commencement  of  his  edition
of  a  writing  of  this  high  priest.

^  This  is  the  tradition  reproduced  in  two  versions  of  the  Dinkart  (West,  Dinhart,  pp.  xxx.,  xxxi.,
412-115) ;  it  has  been  contested  by  Spiegel,  Erdiiisehe  Alterthmmkunde,  vol.  iii.  p.  782,  note  1,
defended  and  authenticated  by  J.  Dakmesteter,  The  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxxii.-xxxviii.,  and
Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  pp.  xx.-xxxvi.

*  Darmesteter  (Xe  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ixx.-lxxiv.)  declares  that  ancient  Zoroastrianism  is,
in  its  main  lines,  the  religion  of  the  Median  JIagi,  even  though  he  assigns  the  latest  possible  date
to  the  composition  of  the  Avesta  as  now  existing,  and  thinks  he  can  discern  in  it  Greek,  Jewish,
and  Christian  elements  (Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  pp.  xlii.-lxxii.).

*  Eenan  defined  the  Avesta  as  "  the  Code  of  a  very  small  religious  sect ;  it  is  a  Talmud,  a  book  of
casuistry  and  strict  observance.  I  have  difBculty  in  believiug  that  the  great  Persian  empire,  which,
at  least  in  religious  matters,  professed  a  certain  breadth  of  ideas,  could  have  had  a  law  so  strict.  I
think,  that  had  the  Persians  possessed  a  sacred  book  of  this  description,  the  Greeks  must  have
mentioned  it"  (Ilapport  aur  les  Travaux  de  la  Soci^^  Asiatique,  1880,  vol.  vii.  p.  29).

■^  To  distinguish  the  ideas  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  ancient  religions  of  Iran  other  than


TEE   ORIGINAL    GBABACTER    OF  AEURA-MAZDA.


577


service  of  the  altar  had  ended,  as  among  the  Hebrews,  by  separating  them-
selves from  the  rest  of  the  nation  and  forming  a  special  tribe,  that  of  the  Magi,
which  was  the  last  to  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  nation  in  historic  times.'
All  the  Magi  were  not  necessarily  devoted  to  the  service  of  religion,  but  all  who
did  so  devote_,  themselves  sprang  from  the  Magian  tribe ;  the  Avesta,  in  its


THK  AHDHA-MAZDA  OP  THE   EAS-RELIJ.FS  OF  PEESEPOLIS."

oldest  form,  was  the  sacred  book  of  the  Magi,  as  well  as  that  ot  the  priests  who

handed  down  their  religious  tradition  under  the  various  dynasties,  native  or

foreign,  who  bore  rule  over  Iran.

The  Creator  was  described  as  "  the  whole  circle  of  the  heavens,"  ^  "  the  most

steadfast  among  the  gods,"  for  "  he  clothes  himself  with  the  solid  vault  of  the

firmament  as  his  raiment,"  *  the  most  beautiful,  the  most  intelligent,  he  whose

members  are  most  harmoniously  proportioned ;  his  body  was  the  light  and  the

sovereign  glory,"  the  sun  and  the  moon  were  his  eyes."^     The  theologians

had  gradually   spiritualised  the  conception  of  this  deity    without   absolutely

disconnecting  him  from  the  material  universe.     He  remained  under  ordinary

circumstances  invisible  to_  mortal  eyes,  and  he  could  conceal  his  identity  even

Zoroastrianism,  cf.  the  resume  of  M.  Ed.  Lehmann,  in  Chantepie  de  la  Satjssate,  Lehrbuch  der
Eeligions-gescMchte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  164-172.

'  For  the  Median  tribes,  cf.  supra,  p.  452.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Flaxdin  and  Coste,  La  Perse  Ancienne,  pi.  clvi. ;  ef.  pi.  clxiv.

^  Hekodotus,  I.  cxxxi. ;  rhv  kvkAov  TavTo.  ToC  ovpavov  Am  KaAeovTfs,  where  Ahura-mazda  is
identified  with  Zeus,  as  in  the  bilingual  inscription,  in  Greek  and  Pehlevi,  on  the  bas-relief  at  Nakhsh-
i-Rustem,  which  represents  Ardashir  receiving  the  investiture  from  the  Supreme  Deity  (Dieulapot,
L'Art  Antique  de  la  Perse,  vol.  v.  p.  114,  and  pi.  xiv.);  cf.  the  illustration  on  p.  579,  supra.

*  Yasna  30,  §  5,  in  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  221,  222.

^  Yasna  1,  §  1,  in  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  7,  8 ;  cf.  the  passage  of  Porphtrt,  Life  of  Pythagoras,  ed.  Xauce,
p.  41,  ^Clpofid^ov  eoiK^pai  rh  f.ihy  (ToijUa  <pwTi.

'  Yasna  68,  §  22,  in  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  423,  where  mention  is  made  of  the
"prayer  addressed  to  the  two  eyes  of  Ahura-mazda  ;  "  the  pair  formed  by  the  moon  and  the  sun,  as
shown  by  the  title  assumed  by  the  Sassanids,  brother  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  (Ammianus  Maecellinus,
svii.  5,  §  3,  xxiii.  6,  §  5).

2  p


578


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


from  the  highest  gods,  but  he  occasionally  manifested  himself  in  huumn  form.^
He  borrowed  in  such  case  from  Assyria  the  symbol  of  Assur,  and  the  sculptors
depict  him  with  the  upper  part  of  his  body  rising  above  that  winged  disk
which  is  carved  in  a  hovering  attitude  on  the  pediments  of  Assyrian  monu-
ments or  stelee.^     In  later  days  he  was  portrayed  under  the  form  of  a  king

of  imposing  stature  and
■p^^?'*''  1 J  '•"vr-  majestic  mien,  who  re-
vealed himself  from  time
to  time  to  the  princes  of
Iran.-'  He  -was  named
Ahuro-mazdao  or  Ahura-
mazda,  the  omniscient
lord,''  Spento  -  mainyus,
the  spirit  of  good,
Mainyus -S2:)enisht6,^  the
most  beneficent  of  spirits.
Himself  uncreate,  he  is
the  creator  of  all  things,
but  he  is  assisted  in  the
administration  of  the
universe  by  legions  of
beings,  who  are  all  subject  to  him.''   The  most  powerful  among  his  ministers  were

'  For  the  nature  of  the  body  of  Ahura-mazda  and  his  manifestations,  cf.  Dakmesteter,  Le  Zend-
Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  7,  8,  note  4.

^  Spiegel,  Erdnuclie  AlterthumsJcunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  24,  25.

'  In  a  passage  of  Philo  of  Byblos  the  god  is  described  as  having  the  head  of  a  falcon  or  an  eagle
(Fragm.  9,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  572,  573),  perhaps  by  confusion  with
one  of  the  genii  represented  on  the  walls  of  the  palaces.

*  Ahura  is  derived  from  Ahu,  =  Lord:  ilazdao  can  be  analysed  into  the  component  parts,  maz  =
great,  and  dao  =  he  irho  Tcnous  (J.  Dabmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  21,  notes  1,  2).  At  first
the  two  terms  were  interchangeable,  and  even  in  the  Gathas  the  form  Mazda  Ahura  is  employed
much  more  often  than  the  form  Ahura  Mazda  (Tiele,  Zar  Frage  nach  dem  Alter  des  Avesta,  in  the
Archie fiir  Religionsicissencha/t,  vol.  i.  pp.  355-357).  In  the  Acbsemenian  inscriptions,  Auramazda
is  only  found  as  a  single  word,  except  in  an  inscription  of  Xerxes,  where  the  two  terms  are  in  one
passage  separated  and  declined  Aurahya  mazddha  CWeissbach  and  Ban's,  Die  Altpersischen  Keilin-
schriften,  pp.  42,  43).  The  Greelis  transliterated  it  as  Aupofi.a.a5T]s.  'npofid^ris,  'Op/xiaSas  (JusTi,
Iranisches  Namenhuch,  p.  7)  ;  the  form  Ormuzd,  Ormazd,  usually  employed  by  Europeans,  is  that
assumed  by  the  name  in  modern  Persian.

'  These  two  names  are  given  to  him  more  especially  in  connection  with  his  antagonism  to  Angro-
mainyus.  The  interpretation  of  this  name  and  of  its  superlative  form  are  but  approximative  (J.
Darhiestetek,  Le  Zend-Atesta,  vol.  i.  p.  21) ;  the  real  sense  would  be  "the  spirit  of  increase'"
(Spiegel,  Erdnische  Alterthumsltunde,  vol.  ii.  p.  22).

"  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.

'  Darius  styles  Ahura-mazda,  mathishta  bagdndm,  the  greatest  of  the  gods  (Weissbaoh  and  Baxg,
op.  cit.,  pp.  34,  35),  and  Xerxes  invokes  the  protection  of  Ahura-mazda  along  with  that  of  the
gods,  Atiramazdd  .  .  .  hadd  bagaibish  (Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  40-45).  The  classical  writers  also  mention
gods  alongside  of  Ahura-mazda,  as  recognised  not  only  among  the  Achsemenian  Persians,  but  alto
among  the  Parthians,  and  a  list  of  the  principal  passages  which  mention  them  has  been  made  up
by  Eapp,  Die  Seligion  und  Sitte  dcr  Perser  U7id  Ubrigen  Iranier  nach  den  Griechischen  und  Ilomischen
Quellen,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xxx.  pp.  45-47.     Darmesteter  considers  that  the  earliest


AN   IRANIAN   GENIUS  IN   FORM   OF  A  WINGED  BULL."


AHURA-MAZDA    THE  SUPREME   GOD.


579


originally  nature-gods,  such  as  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  earth,  the  winds,  and  the
waters.*  The  sunny  plains  of  Persia  and  Media  afforded  abundant  witnesses  of
their  power,  as  did  the  snow-clad  peaks,  the  deep  gorges  through  which  rushed
roaring  torrents,  and  the  mountain  ranges  of  Ararat  or  Taurus,  where  the  force  of
the  subterranean  fires  was  manifested  by  so  many  startling  exhibitions  of  spon-
taneous conflagration.^     The  same  spiritualising  tendency  which  had  already


AHUKA-MAZDA   BESTOWING   THE    TOKENS  OF   ROYALTY    ON    AN    lUANIAN    KING.'


considerably  modified  the  essential  concept  of  Ahura-mazda,  affected  also  that  of
the  inferior  deities,  and  tended  to  tone  down  in  them  the  grosser  traits  of  their
character.  It  had  already  placed  at  their  head  six  genii  of  a  superior  order,  six
ever-active  energies,  who,  after  assisting  their  master  at  the  creation  of  the  uni-
verse, now  presided  under  his  guidance  over  the  kingdoms  and  forces  of  nature.*

Aohsemenids  worshipped  Ahura-mazda  alone,  "  placing  the  other  goda  together  in  a  subordinate  and
anonymous  group :  May  Ahura-mazda  and  the  other  gods  protect  me,"  hadd  vithaibifh  bagabish  (Le
Zend-Avesta,  vol.  it.  pp.  304,  305)  ;  Tiele  has  established  the  real  senao  of  the  passage  {Zur  Frage  nach
dem  Alter  des  Aveafa,  in  the  Arcldofur  Beligionswissenchaft,  vol.  i.  p.  338,  note  1).

Herodotus,  I.  cssxi.:  Buouui  5e  T]\t(f:  re  koI  (reKTjvr]  Kal  y^a.  Kat  irvpl  Koi  uSat  Koi  av^ixoiai.

-  All  these  inferior  deities,  heroes,  and  genii  who  presided  over  Persia,  the  royal  family,  and
the  dilferent  parts  of  the  empire,  are  often  mentioned  in  the  most  ancient  classical  authors  that
have  come  down  to  us — Herodotus  (III.  Ixv.,  V.  cvi.,  VII.  liii. :  fleol,  o'i  nepo-iSa  ^e'ai'  \fX6yxa.<ri),
Xenophon  (Cyrojuedia,  II.  i.  §  1,  III.  iii.  §  22),  and  the  later  writers  whose  evidence  has  been
collected  by  Rait,  Vie  Religion  und  Sitte  der  Perser  mid  vhriijen  Iraaier,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.
Gesells.,  vol.  xxs.  pp.  00-68.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Dieulafoy,  L'AH  Antique  de  la  Perse,  vol.  iv.  pi.  xiv.,
and  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  408.

*  The  six  Amesha-spentas,  with  their  several  characteristics,  are  enumerated  in  a  pjissage  of  the
De  hide  (§  47,  ed.  Parthev,  p.  82) :  xal  d  fih  e^  fieoi/s  i-Koiriae,  rhv  jxiv  ivpSiTov  ivi/oCas,  thv  5e  hiimpov


580


TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


MAO,  THE  MOON-GOD.'


VATO.  GOD  OP  THE
WIXD.°


These  benevolent  and  immortal  beings — Amesha-spentas ' — were,  in  the  order
of  precedence,  Voliu-mauo  (good  thought),  Asha-vahista  (perfect  holiness),
Khshathra-vairya  (good  government),  Spenta-armaiti  (meek  piety),  Haiirvatat
(health),  Ameretat  (immortality).  Each  of  them  had  a  special  domain  assigned
to  him  in  which  to  display  his  energy  untrammelled  :  Vohu-mano  had  charge
of  cattle,  Asha-vahista  of  fire,  Khshathra-vairya  of  metals,  Spenta-armaiti  of
the  earth,  Haurvatat  and  Ameretat  of  vegetation  and  of  water."  They  were
represented  in  human  form,  either  mascu-
line as  Vohu-mauu  and  Asha-vahista,^  or
feminine^as  Spenta-armaiti, the  daughter
and  spouse  of  Ahura-mazda,  who  became
the  mother  of  the  first  man,  Gayomaretan,
and,  through  Gayomaretan,  ancestress  of
the  whole  human  race.''  Sometimes
Ahura-mazda  is  himself  included  among  the  Amesha-spentas,  thus  bringing
their  number  up  to  seven ;  ^  sometimes  his  place  is  taken  by  a  certain  Sraosha
(obedience  to  the  law),  the  first  who  offered  sacrifice  and  recited  the  prayers  of
the  ritual.^      Subordinate  to  these  great  spirits  were  the  Yazatas,  scattered  by

oATjdcfas,  rhv  56  Tpirov  ivvofiias,  Ta>f  Se  \onrujy  Thy  )U€f  (TO(pias,Thi'  5e  ttXovtov,  tov  Se  Twf  iirl  to7s  koAois
r]S(uv  STj/uioiry-iii/.  This  exposition  of  Persian  doctrine  is  usually  attributed  to  Theopompus,  from  which
we  may  deduce  the  existence  of  a  belief  in  the  Amesha-spentas  in  the  Achsemenian  period.  J.
Darmesteter  (ie  Zend-Aveeta,  vol.  iii.  p.  Ixv.,  note  3)  affirms,  on  the  contrary,  that  "the  author
describes  the  Zoruastrianlsm  of  his  own  times  (the  second  century  a.d.),  and  quotes  Theopompus  for
a  special  doctrine,  that  of  the  periods  of  the  world's  life."  Although  this  last  point  is  correct,  the
first  part  of  Darmesteter's  theory  does  not  seem  to  me  justified  by  investigation.  The  whole  passage
of  Plutarch  is  a  well-arranged  composition  of  uniform  style,  which  may  be  regarded  as  an  exposition
of  the  system  described  by  Theopompus,  probably  in  the  eiglith  of  his  Philippics ;  cf.  Tiele,  Zur
Frage  nach  dem  Alter  des  Ai-esta,  in  the  Archie  fiir  Religionnoissenschaft,  vol.  i.  pp.  341-344.

'  The  translation  of  this  word  is  only  approximate.  Anquetil-Duperron  and  Eugene  Burnouf
(Commentaire  sur  le  Yafna,  p.  172)  proposed  the  heneficent  Immortals;  a  more  literal  translation
would  be  the  Immortah  who  give  increase,  with  the  sense  of  Spenta  as  indicated  above,  supra,  p.  578,
note  U.  The  current  French  term  to  designate  them,  Amschaspand,  is  borrowed  from  mc<lern
Persian.

'  For  the  nrder,  the  functions  and  attributes  of  the  Amesha-spentas,  cf.  Spiegel,  Eranische
AUerthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28-40  ;  also  J.  Darkesteteb,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  23-25,  and
especially  vol.  ii.  pp.  307-322,  where  is  given  the  translation  of  Siroza,  in  which  these  beings  are  defined.

'  The  image  of  Asha-vahista  is  known  to  us  from  coins  of  the  Indo-Scythian  kings  of  Bactriana
(AcEEL  Stein,  Zoroastrian  Deities  on  Indo-Scythian  Coins,  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Becord,
vol.  i.  pp.  165,  166).     "Vohu-mano  is  described  as  a  young  man.

'  For  the  dilierentiation  of  the  Amesha-spentas  into  male  and  female,  cf.  Tasna  21,  in  J.  Dakme-
STETER,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  175-177.  Haurvatat  and  Ameretat  are  feminine  by  the  form  of
their  names,  and  are  classed  among  the  female  Amesha-spentas.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudiu,  from  a  coin  of  King  Kanishka,  published  by  Percy  Gardner,  The
Coins  of  the  Greek  and  Scythian  Kings  of  Bactria  and  India,  pi.  xxvi.  No.  9.

'  Ibid.,  pi.  sxvti.  No.  6.

'  On  the  Khetiik-das  or  incestuous  marriage  of  Spenta-armaiti  with  her  father  Ahura-mazda,  and
then  with  her  own  son  Gayomaretan,  cf.  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  12S,  129.

'  Spiegel,  Eranische  AUerthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  27-29.

'  For  Sraosha,  cf.  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  87-91,  and  J.  Darjiesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.
357-372,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  481-489,  where  is  given  a  translation  with  commentary  of  the  two  Tashts
relating  to  this  goddess.


i


TEE  AME8HA-SPENTAS  AND    TEE    YAZATAS.


581


ATAR,    THE    GOD    OP
FIRE.'


ACRVATASPA.'


thousands  over  creation,  presiding  over  the  machinery  of  nature  and  maintain-
ing it  in  working  order.^  Most  of  them  received  no  special  names,  but  many
exercised  wide  authority,  and  several  were  accredited  by
the  people  with  an  influence  not  less  than  that  of  the
greater  deities  themselves.  Such  were  the  regent  of  the
stars — Tishtrya,  the  bull  with  golden  horns,  Sirius,  the
sparkling  one ;  ^  Mao,  the  moon-god;''
the  wind,  Vato;  the  atmosphere,  Vayu,  the
strongest  of  the  strong,  the  warrior  with
golden  armour,  who  gathers  the  storm  and  hurls  it  against
the  demon  ;^  Atar,  fire  under  its  principal  forms,  divine
fire,  sacred  fire  and  earthly  fire  ; '  Vere-
thraghna,  the  author  of  war  and  giver
of  victory ;  ^  Aurvataspa,  the  son  of  the  waters,  the  light-
ning bora  among  the  clouds ;  and  lastly,  the  spirit  of  the
dawn,  the  watchful  Mithra,  "  who,  first  of  the  celestial
Yazatas,  soars  above  Mount  Hara,^  before  the  immortal
sun  with  his  swift  steeds,  who,  first  in  golden  splendour,
passes  over  the  beautiful  mountains  and  casts  his  glance  benign  on  the  dwell-
ings of  the  Aryans."  "    Mithra  was  a  charming  youth  of  beautiful  countenance,

'  For  the  Yazatas,  cf.  Spiegel,  Erdnische  AlterthumsJcunde,  vol.  ii.  p.  41,  et  seq.,  and  J.  Darme-
STETER,  Le  Zeud-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  5-19,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  296-322,  where  we  have  the  translation
with  commentary  of  the  texts  whicli  supply  the  list  of  the  most  important  of  these  divinities.
Yaiata,  in  modern  Persian  izat,  ized,  yazd,  signifies  literally  he  who  should  receioe  tlie  sacrifice.

'  Spiegel.  Erdnische  Alterthumshunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  70-70.

3  Id.,  ibid.,  p.  70 ;  lor  the  representation  of  Mao  on  coins  of  the  Indo-Soythian  kings  of  Bactriana,
cf.  AuREL  Stein,  Zoruadrian  Deities  on  Indo-Scijthian  Coins,  in  the  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record.
vol.  i.  p.  157,  aud  the  illustration  on  p.  580,  supra.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  ol  King  Kanishka,  published  by  Percy  Gardner,  The
Coins  of  the  Greek  and  Scythian  Kinrjt,  pi.  sxvi.  No.  4.

'  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  101-104 ;  and  for  the  representation  of  the  god,  Aurel  Stein,  on  cit
p.  158.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  coin  published  by  Percy  Gardner,  op.  cit.,  pi.  xxvi.  No.  7.

'  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41-51 ;  J.  Dariiesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  149-157;  and  for  the
representation  of  the  god,  Acrel  Stein,  op.  cit.,  pp.  158,  159;  cf.  the  illustration  given  above.

»  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  pp.  98-101,  where  Aurvataspa  is  studied  under  the  form  Apaiim-napat ;  for
the  representation  of  the  god,  cf.  Aurel  Stein,  op.  cit.,  pp.  157,  158,  and  the  objections  urged  by
J.  Darjiestetek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  432.

»  Hara  is  Haroberezaiti,  or  Elburz,  the  mountain  over  which  the  sun  rises,  "  around  which  many  a
star  revolves,  where  there  is  neither  night  nor  darkness,  no  wind  of  cold  or  heat,  no  sickness  leading
to  a  thousand  kinds  of  death,  nor  infection  caused  by  the  Daevas,  and  whose  summit  is  never
reached  by  the  clouds  "  (  Yasht  12,  §  23,  in  J.  Daumesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  490).

'»  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  of  King  Huvishka,  published  by  Percy  Gardner,
op.  cit.,  pi.  xxviii.  No.  5.

"  This  is  the  Mithra  whose  religion  became  so  powerful  in  Alexandrian  and  Roman  times.  His
sphere  of  action  is  defined  in  the  Bundehesli  (J  Darjiestetek,  Xe  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  314,  315);
cf.,  for  information  about  this  deity  borrowed  from  Iranian  documents,  Spiegel,  Erdnische  AlterthumJ-
hunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  77-87,  aud,  from  classical  authors,  Eapp,  Die  Religion  und  Sitte  der  Perser,  in  the
Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xxx,  pp.  53-00.


582


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


MTLITTA-ANAUITA.'


his  head  surroiimled  with  a  radiant  halo.  The  nymph  Anahita  was  adored
under  the  form  of  one  of  the  incarnations  of  the  Babylonian  goddess  Mylitta,
a  youthful  and  slender  female,  with  well-developed  breasts  and  broad  hips,

sometimes  represented  clothed  in  furs  and  sometimes

nude.^     Like  the  foreign  goddess  to  whom   she  was
assimilated,  she  was  the  dispenser  of  fertility  and  of
love;  the  heroes  of  antiquity,  and  even  Ahura-mazda
himself,  had  vied  witii  one  another  in  their  worship  of
her,  and  she  had  lavished  her  favours  freely  on  all.^
The  less  important  Yazatas  were  hardly  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  innumerable  multitude  of  Fra-
vashis.     The  Fravashis  are  the  divine   types   of  all
intelligent   beings.^      They  were   originally  brought
into  being  by  Ahura-mazda  as  a  distinct  species  from
the  human,  but  they  had  allowed  themselves  to  be
entangled  in  matter,  and  to  be  fettered  in  the  bodies  of  men,  in  order  to  hasten
the  final  destruction  of  the  demons  and  the  advent  of  the  reign  of  good.'^
Once   incarnate,  a  Fravashis  devotes  himself  to  the  well-
being  of  the  mortal  with  whom  lie  is  associated ;  ^  and  when
once  more  released  from  the  flesh,  he  continues  the  struggle
against  evil  with  an  energy  whose  efficacy  is  proportionate
to  the  virtue  and  purity  displayed  in  life  by  the  mortal  to
whom  he  has  been  temporarily  joined.     The  last  six  days
of   the  year  are  dedicated  to  the  Fravashis.     They  leave
their  heavenly  abodes  at  this  time  to  visit  the  spots  which
were  their  earthly  dwelling-jjlaces,   and   they  wander  through  the  villages
inquiring,  "  Who  wishes  to  hire  us  ?     Who  will  offer  us  a  sacrifice  ?     Who
will  make  us  their  own,  welcome  us,  and    receive  us  with  plenteous  offerings
of  food  and  raiment,  with  a  prayer  which  bestows  sanctity  on  him  who  offers

'  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  AUpersischen  Keilinschriften,  pp.  4-):-47 ;  the  popularity  of  these  two
deities  was  already  well  established  at  the  period  we  are  dealing  with,  for  Herodotus  mentions
Mithra  and  confuses  him  with  Anahita  (I.  csxxi.).  He  is  represented  as  described  in  the  text  on  the
coins  of  the  Indo-Scythian  kings ;  cf.  Acbel  Stein,  Zoroaslrian  Deities  on  Jndo-Scijthian  Coins,  in  the
Babylonian  and  Oriental  Record,  vol.  i.  pp.  156,  157.

^  Yaslit  5,  in  J.  Daemesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  363-397,  where  the  full  list  of  favourites
of  the  goddess  is  given.  Her  name  Ardvi-Sura  Anahita  seems  to  signify  the  lofty  and  immaculate
power  (JrsTi,  Handhuch  der  Zendspraclie,  p.  30 ;  J.  Daeiiestetek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  363).  For  her
nature,  cf  Spiegel,  Eraniscke  Alterlhumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  54-60,  and  J.  Darmestetek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.
pp.  363-366.

'  This  is  the  definition  given  by  Eugene  Burnonf  (Commentaire  sur  le  Yapia,  p.  270).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Loftus,  Chaldaia  and  Susiana,  p.  379).

'  The  legend  of  the  descent  of  the  Fravashis  to  dwell  among  men  is  narrated  in  the  Buudehesh  ;
cf.  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  93 ;  J.  Daemestetee,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  502.

'  Cf.,  for  the  interpretation  of  the  name  as  "  nourisher,"  supra,  p.  573,  note  3.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  of  King  Huvishka,  published  by  Pekct  Gakdnee,  The
Coins  of  the  Greeh  and  Scythian  Kings,  pi.  sxriii.  No.  10.


XANA-ANAHITA.


ANGBO-MAINTUS  AND   HIS  ALLIES.  583

it  ?  "  And  if  they  find  a  man  to  hearken  to  their  request,  they  bless  him :
"  May  his  house  be  blessed  with  herds  of  oxen  and  troops  of  men,  a  swift  horse
and  a  strongly  built  chariot,  a  man  who  knoweth  how  to  pray  to  God,  a  chief-
tain in  the  council  who  may  ever  offer  us  sacrifices  with  a  hand  filled  with  food
and  raiment,  with  a  prayer  which  bestows  sanctity  on  him  who  offers  it !  "  ^

Ahura-mazda  created  the  universe,  not  by  the  work  of  bis  hands,  but  by
the  magic  of  his  word,  and  he  desired  to  create  it  entirely  free  from  defects.
His  creation,  however,  can  only  exist  by  the  free  play  and  equilibrium  of
opposing  forces,  to  which  he  gives  activity :  the  incompatibility  of  tendency
clisj)layed  by  these  forces,  and  their  alternations  of  growth  and  decay,  inspired
the  Iranians  with  the  idea  that  they  were  the  result  of  two  contradictory
principles,  the  one  beneficent  and  good,  the  other  adverse  to  everything
emanating  from  the  former."  In  opposition  to  the  god  of  light,  they  necessarily
formed  the  idea  of  a  god  of  darkness,  the  god  of  the  underworld,  who  presides
over  death,  Angro-mainyus.^  The  two  opposing  principles  reigned  at  first,
each  ia  his  own  domain,  as  rivals,  but  not  as  irreconcilable  adversaries :  they
were  considered  as  in  fixed  opposition  to  each  other,  and  as  having  coexisted
for  ages  without  coming  into  actual  conflict,  separated  as  they  were  by  the
intervening  void.  As  long  as  the  principle  of  good  was  content  to  remain  shut
up  inactive  in  his  barren  glory,  the  principle  of  evil  slumbered  unconscious  in
a  darkness  that  knew  no  beginning;  but  when  at  last  "the  spirit  who  giveth
increase  " — Spento-mainyus — determined  to  manifest  himself,  the  first  throes
of  his  vivifying  activity  roused  from  inertia  the  spirit  of  destruction  and  of
pain,  Angro-mainyus.*  The  heaven  was  not  yet  in  existence,  nor  the  waters,
nor  the  earth,  nor  ox,  nor  fire,  nor  man,  nor  demons,  nor  brute  beasts,  nor  any
living  thing,  when  the  evil  spirit  hurled  himself  upon  the  light  to  quench  it
for  ever,  but  Ahura-mazda  had  already  called  forth  the  ministers  of  his  will —
Amesha-spentas,  Yazatas,  Fravashis — and  he  recited  the  prayer  of  twenty-one
words  in  which  all  the  elements  of  morality  are  summed  up,  the  Ahuna-vairya :
"  The  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  rule  of  good.     Let  the  gifts  of  Vohu-mano  be

'  Yaaht  13,  §§  49-52,  ia  .J.  Dakmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  518,  519.

^  Spiegel,  who  at  firBt  conBidored  that  the  Iranian  dualism  was  derived  from  polytheism,  and  was
a  preliminary  stage  in  the  development  of  monotheism,  held  afterwards  that  a  rigid  monotheism  had
preceded  this  dualism  {ErunUclie  AlterthumsJmnde,  vol.  ii.  p.  vi.).  The  classical  writers,  who  knew
Zoroastrianism  at  the  height  of  its  glory,  never  suggested  that  the  two  priuciijlea  might  be  derived
from  a  superior  principle,  nor  that  they  were  subject  to  such  a  principle,  as  is  shown  by  the  passages
collected  together  by  Rapp,  Die  Religion  tind  Sitte  der  Perser  und  iibrigen  Iranier,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.
Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  ssx.  pp.  83-89,  which  are  the  more  significant  as  Rapp  does  not  believe  in  the
dualism.  The  Iranian  books  themselves  nowhere  definitely  aflirm  that  there  existed  a  single  principle
distinct  from  the  two  opposing  principles,  and  the  existence  of  the  dualism,  as  known  from  their
testimony,  is  admitted  for  the  Achsmenian  and  Median  periods  by  J.  Darmesteter  (Le  Zend-Avesta
vol.  iii.  pp.  Ixvi.-lxix.).

'  Herodotus,  VII.  cxiv. :  ti^  Inrh  yehv  Myoixivuihai  6i<f,  to  whom  human  sacrifices  were  offered.

*  Spiegel,  Eranische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  p.  143,  following  the  first  chapter  of  the  Bundehesh.


584  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

bestowed  on  the  works  accomplished,  at  this  momeut,  for  Mazda.    He  makes
Ahura  to  reign,  he  who  protects  the  poor." '     The  effect  of  this  prayer  was
irresistible :  ''  When  Ahura   had   pronounced   the  first  part  of  the  formula,
Zanak  Minoi,  the  spirit  of  destruction,  bowed  himself  with  terror ;   at  the
second  part  he  fell  upon  his  knees ;  and  at  the  third  and  last  he  felt  himself
powerless  to  hurt  the  creatures  of  Ahura-mazda." '^    The  strife,  kindled  at
the  beginning  of  time  between   the  two  gods,  has   gone  on  ever  since  with
alternations  of  success  and  defeat;  each  in  turn  has  the  victory  for  a  regular
period  of  three  thousand  years ;  but  when  these  periods  are  ended,  at  the
expiration  of  twelve  thousand  years,  evil  will  be  finally  and  for  ever  defeated.^
While  awaiting  this  blessed  fulness  of  time,  as  Spento-mainyus  shows  himself
in  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful,  in  light,  virtue,  and  justice,  so  Angro-mainyus
is  to  be  perceived  in  all  that  is  hateful  and  ugly,  in  darkness,  sin,  and  crime.
Against  the  six  Amesha-spentas  he  sets  in  array  six  spirits  of  equal  power —
Akem-mano,  evil  thought ;  Andra,  the  devouring  fire,  who  introduces  discontent
and  sin  wherever  he  penetrates  ;  Sauru,  the  flaming  arrow  of  death,  who  inspires
bloodthirsty  tyrants,  who  incites  men   to  theft   aad    murder  ;    Naongaithya,
arrogance  and  pride ;  Tauru,  thirst ;  and  Zairi,  hunger.*     To  the  Yazatas  he
opi^osed  the  Daevas,  who  never  cease  to  torment  mankind,  and  so  through  all
the  ranks  of  nature  he  set  over  against  each  good  and  useful  creation  a  counter-
creation  of  rival   tendency.^     "  '  Like  a  fly  he  crept  into '  and  infected  '  the
whole  universe.'     He  rendered  the  world  as  dark  at  full  noonday  as  in  the
darkest  nisrht.    He  covered  the  soil  with  vermin,  with  his  creatures  of  venomous
bite  and  poisonous  sting,  with  serpents,  scorpions,  and  frogs,  so  that  there  was  not
a  space  as  small  as  a  needle's  point  but  swarmed  with  his  vermin.     He  smote
vegetation,  and  of  a  sudden  the  plants  ^a  ithered.  .  .  .  He  attacked  the  flames,
and  mingled  them  with  smoke  and  dimness.     The  planets,  with  their  thousands

'  For  this  act  of  creation  by  the  Ahuna-vairya,  refer  to  the  translatioa  with  commentary  of  Hd  19
of  the  Yasna,  in  J.  Dakmestetek,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  161-171,  which  is  entirely  devoted  to  this
episode.

-  Theopompus  (Frajm.  71,  in  MiJLLEE-DrDOT,  Fragni.  Hid.  Grsec,  vol.  i.  p.  279)  was  already
aware  of  this  alternation  of  good  and  bad  periods.  According  to  the  tradition  enshrined  in  the  first
chapter  of  the  Bundehesh,  it  was  the  result  of  a  sort  of  compact  agreed  upon  at  the  beginning  by
Ahura-mazda  and  Angro-mainyus.  Ahura-mazda,  fearing  to  be  overcome  if  he  entered  upon  the
struggle  immediately,  but  sure  of  final  victory  if  he  could  gain  time,  proposed  to  his  adversary  a
truce  of  nine  thousand  years,  at  the  expiration  of  which  the  battle  should  begin.  As  soon  as  the
compact  was  made,  Angro-mainyus  realised  that  he  had  been  tricked  into  taking  a  false  step,  but  it
was  not  till  after  tlu'ee  thousand  years  that  he  decided  to  break  the  truce  and  open  the  conflict.
Cf.  Dakmesteteb,  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  pp.  114-117.

*  Tasim  30,  §§  3-8,  in  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  220-223 ;  of.  Tasyia  45,  §  2,  in
Id.,  ibid.,  p.  296.

•>  The  last  five  of  these  spirits  are  enumerated  in  the  Vendidad,  10,  §§  9,  10  (J.  Dabmesteteb,  Le
Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175, 176),  and  the  first,  Akem-mano,  is  there  replaced  by  Nasu,  the  chief  spirit
of  evil.

°  Spiegel,  Erdnische  Alterthumslcunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  125,  126,  where  it  is  remarked  that  the  Daevas
appear  to  be  above  all  things  of  the  male  sex.  For  the  meaning  of  the  word  itself,  cf.  Darme-
STETEK,  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  pp.  265-272.     The  modern  form  is  Dev,  Div.


THE  BAEVAS  AND    TEE  PAIRlKAb.


585


ONE   OF   THE  BAD  GENU,  SUBJECT   TO   ANGKO-JIAINYLs."


of  demons,  dashed  against  the  vault  of  heaven  and  waged  war  on  tlie  stars,  and
the  universe  became  darkened  like  a  space  which  the  fire  blackens  with  its
smoke."  And  the  conflict  grew  ever  keener  over  the  world  and  over  man,  of
whom  the  evil  one  was  jealous,  and  whom  he  sought  to  humiliate.  The  children
of  Angro-mainyus  disguised  themselves  under  those  monstrous  forms  in  which
the  imagination  of  the  Chaldaeans  had  clothed  the  allies  of  Mummu-Tiamat,
such  as  lions  with  bulls'  heads,  and  the  wings  and  claws  of  eagles,  wliich
the     Achsemenian     king

combats  on  behalf  of  his      ^  ,      ■      ,      ,

subjects,  boldly  thrusting
them    through    with     his
short   sword.     Aeshma  of
the  blood  -  stained   lance,
terrible  in  wrath,   is   the
most    trusted    leader    of
these    dread    bauds,^   the
chief    of     twenty    other
Daevas  of  repulsive  aspect
—  Asto  -  vidhotu,        the
demon     of     death,     who
would  devote  to  destruc-
tion the  estimable  Fravashis ;  ^  Apaosha,  the  enemy  of  Tishtrya,  the  wicked
black  horse,  the  bringer  of  drought,  who  interferes  with  the  distribution  of  the
fertilising  waters;  ^  and  Buiti,  who  essayed  to  kill  Zoroaster  at  his  birth.*'     The
female  demons,  theDruges,''  thelncubi(Yatus),  the  Succubi  (Pairika),  the  Peris
of  our  fairy  tales,  mingled  familiarly  with  mankind  before  the  time  of  the
prophet,  and  contracted  witli  them  fruitful  alliances,  but  Zoroaster  broke  up
their  ranks,  and  prohibited  them  from  becoming  incarnate  in  any  form  but  that
of  beasts  ;  their  hatred,  however,  is  still  unquenched,  and  tlieir  power  will  only
be  effectually  overthrown-at  the  consummation  of  time.''     It  is  a  matter  of  uncer-
tainty whether  the  Medes  already  admitted  the  possibility  of  a  fresh  revelation,

'  Spiesel,  Erdnische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  131-133 ;  the  name  Aeshma  means  anger.  He
is  the  Asmodeus,  Aeshmo-daevo,  of  Rabbinic  legends.

-  Id.,  ibid;  p.  133.  The  name  of  this  demon  signifies  Hn  wlio  seixirates  the  bones  (E.  Buknouf,
Commentaire  sur  U  yapia,  p.  465).

=  Drawn  by  Fauchei-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  from  the  original  bas-relief  in  glazed  tiles
in  the  Louvre  ;  cf.  Marcel  Dieulafoy,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  pi.  si.

■•  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  133, 134.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  573.  The  Greater  Bundehesh  connects  the  demon  Biiiti  with  the  lodiau  Buddha,
and  J.  Darmesteter  (Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  250,  note  4)  seems  inclined  to  accept  this  interpreta-
tion. In  this  case  we  must  either  admit  that  the  demon  Buiti  is  of  relatively  late  origin,  or  that  he
has,  in  the  legend  of  Zoroaster,  taken  the  place  of  a  demon  whose  name  resembled  his  own  closely
enough  to  admit  of  the  assimilation.

'  Spiegel,  Erdnische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  130,  137.

'  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  13S-140,  14t;-14S.


586  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

preparing  the  latest  generations  of  mankind  for  the  advent  of  the  reign  of  good.
The  traditions  enshrined  in  the  sacred  books  of  Iran  announce  the  coming  of  three
prophets,  sons  of  Zoroaster — Ukhshyatereta,  Ukhshyatnemo,  and  Saoshyaut  ^^
who  shall  bring  about  universal  salvation.  Saoshyaiit,  assisted  by  fifteen  men  and
fifteen  pure  women,  who  have  already  lived  on  earth,  and  are  awaiting  their  final
destiny  in  a  magic  slumber,  shall  offer  the  final  sacrifice,  the  virtue  of  which
shall  bring  about  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  "  The  sovereign  light  shall
accompany  him  and  his  friends,  when  he  shall  revivify  the  world  and  ransom
it  from  old  age  and  death,  from  corruption  and  decay,  and  shall  render  it
eternally  living,  eternally  growing,  and  master  of  itself"  The  fatal  conflict
shall  be  protracted,  but  the  champions  of  Saoshyant  sliall  at  length  obtain  the
victory.  ''Before  them  shall  bow  Aeshma  of  the  blood-stained  lance  and  of
ominous  renown,  and  Saoshyant  shall  strike  down  the  she-demon  of  the  unholy
light,  the  daughter  of  darkness.  Akem-mano  strikes,  but  Vohu-mano  shall  strike
him  in  his  turn ;  the  lying  word  shall  strike,  but  the  word  of  truth  shall  strike
him  in  his  turn  ;  Haurvatatand  Ameretat  shall  strike  down  hunger  and  thirst;
Haurvatat  and  Ameretat  shall  strike  down  terrible  hunger  and  terrible  thirst."  ^
Angro-mainyus  himself  shall  be  paralysed  with  terror,  and  shall  be  forced  to
confess  the  supremacy  of  good :  he  shall  withdraw  into  the  depths  of  hell,
whence  he  shall  never  again  issue  forth,  and  all  the  reanimated  beings  devoted
to  the  Mazdean  law  shall  live  an  eternity  of  peace  and  contentment.*

Man,  therefore,  incessantly  distracted  between  the  two  principles,  laid  wait
for  by  the  Daevas,  defended  by  the  Yazatas,  must  endeavour  to  act  according
to  law  and  justice  in  the  condition  in  which  fate  has  placed  him.*  He  has  been
raised  up  here  on  earth  to  contribute  as  far  as  in  him  lies  to  the  increase  of  life
and  of  good,  and  in  proportion  as  he  works  for  this  end  or  against  it,  is  he
the  asharan,  the  pure,  the  faithful  one  on  earth  and  the  blessed  one  in  heaven,
or  the  anashavan,  the  lawless  miscreant  who  counteracts  purity.^  The  highest
grade  in  the  hierarchy  of  men  belongs  of  right  to  the  IMage  or  the  athravan,  to
the  priest  whose  voice  inspires  the  demons  with  fear,  or  the  soldier  whose  club
despatches  the  impious,  but  a  place  of  honour  at  their  side  is  assigned  to  the

'  The  legend  ran  that  they  had  been  conceived  in  the  -waters  of  the  lalie  Kaiisu  (SriEOEL,
Eranisehe  AlUrlhumshunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  705,706,  vol.  ii.  pp.  101,  162;  J.  Dakmesteteb,  Ormuzd  and
Ahrimaii,  pp.  224-238).  The  name  Saoshyaut  signifies  the  useful  one,  the  saviour;  Uksliyatereta,  he
who  mahes  the  good  increase  ;  Ulishyatnemo,  he  xcho  makes  prayer  increase.

-  Yasht  19,  §§  89-96 ;  J.  Dakmesteteb,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  636-G38.

^  For  the  classical  texts  which  prove  that  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  existed  in
the  time  of  the  Achtemenids,  cf.  Wisdisohmann,  Zoroastrische  Stiidien,  p.  236 ;  Rapp,  Die  SeUgion
und  Sitte  der  Perser  und  iiljrigen  Iranier,  in  the  Z.  d.  T).  Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xx.  p.  57,  et  seq. ;  Spiegel,
op.  cit.,  pp.  158-160  ;  J.  Dakmesteteb,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ixvi.,  Isvii.

*  For  the  idea  of  destiny  in  the  Iranian  religion,  cf.  Spiegel,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  11,  and  J.  Dabme-
STETER,  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  p.  322.

"  J.  Dakmestetek,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21,  22,  where  the  author  has  greatly  simplified  the
over-subtle  definition  he  had  given  of  tlie  atha  m  his  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  pp.  7-18.


THE  DUTIES    OF  MAN  HERE  BELOW.


587


peasant  who  reclaims  from  the  power  of  Angro-mainyus  the  dry  and  sterile
fields.  Among  the  places  where  the  earth  thrives  most  joyously  is
reckoned  that  "  where  a  worshipper  of  Ahura-mazda  builds  a  house,  with  a
chaplain,  with  cattle,  with  a  wife,  with  sons,  with  a  fair  flock  ;  where  man  grows
the  most  corn,  herbage,  and  fruit  trees;  where
he  spreads  water  on  a  soil  without  water,  and
drains  off  water  where  there  is  too  much  of  it."
He  who  sows  corn,  sows  good,  and  promotes  the
Mazdean  faith ;  "  he  nourishes  the  Mazdean
religion  as  fifty  men  would  do  rocking  a  child
in  the  cradle,  five  hundred  women  giving  it
suck  from  their  breasts.^  When  the  corn  was
created  the  Daevas  leaped,  when  it  sprouted  the
Daevas  lost  courage,  when  the  stem  set  the  Daevas
wept,  when  the  ear  swelled  the  Daevas  fled.  lu
the  house  where  corn  is  mouldering  the  Daevas
lodge,  but  when  the  corn  sprouts,  one  might  say
that  a  hot  iron  is  being  turned  round  in  their
mouths."  And  the  reason  of  their  horror  is  easily
divined  :  '•'  Whoso  eats  not,  has  no  power  either  to
accomplish  a  valiant  work  of  religion,  or  to  labour
with  valour,  or  yet  to  beget  children  valiantly  ;  it
is  by  eating  that  the  universe  lives,  and  it  dies
from  not  eating."  ^  The  faithful  follower  of  Zoro-
aster owes  no  obligation  towards  the  impious  man
or  towards  a  stranger,*  but  is  ever  bound  to  render
help  to  his  coreligionist.  He  will  give  a  garment  to  the  naked,  and  by  so
doing  will  wound  Zemaka,  the  demon  of  winter.^  He  will  never  refuse  food
to  the  hungry  labourer,  under  pain  of  eternal  torments,*^  and  his  charity  will

■  The  original  test  saya  in  a  more  enigmatical  fashion,  "  ho  nourishes  the  religion  of  Mazda  as  a
hundred  feet  of  men  and  a  thousand  breasts  of  women  might  do."

"  Vendidad,3,  §§  2-4,  30-33,  in  J.  Daiimesteter,  Le Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  34,  42-44.

"  Charity  is  called  in  Parsee  language,  asho-ddd,  the  gift  to  a  pious  man,  or  the  gift  of  piety
(J.  Daemestetek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  44,  63),  and  the  pious  man,  the  ashavan,  is  by  definition  the
worsliipper  of  Ahura-mazda  alone.

*  Drawn  by  Boudier.  from  tlie  photograph  in  Makcel  Dieulafoy,  L'Art  de  la  Perse  Antique,
vol.  iv.  pi.  xvii. ;  cf.  J.  Dieulafoy,  La  Perse,  la  Chald€e  et  la  Susiaiie,  p.  401.

=  Vendidad,  4,  §  49",  in  J.  Darmesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  62.  The  passage  is  translated  thus :
" He  strives  against  the  winter,  clothing  himself  in  the  thinnest  raiment;  "  but  it  seems  as  if,  later
on,  the  translator  reverted  to  the  traditional  rendering  I  have  indicated  in  the  text,  for  in  the  index
of  vol.  iii.  p.  235,  he  refers  to  this  phrase  for  the  name  of  the  demon  Zemaka.  Allusion  is  made  to  the
gift  of  raiment  in  the  Vendidad,  18,  §  34 ;  cf.  J.  Darmesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  248,  note  44.

'  Vendidad,  18,  §  29,  in  J.  Darmesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  247 ;  in  Vendidad,  3,  §  35  (J.  Dakme-
bteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  44,  45),  he  "  who  has  not  given  charity  to  the  faithful  cultivator  of  the
soil  "  is  threatened  with  hell.


the  king   STRUGGLlNt.   A0.A1NST   AN
EVIL  GENIUS.*


588  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

extend  even  to  the  brute  beasts,  provided  that  they  belong  to  the  species
created  by  Ahura-mazda :  he  has  duties  towards  them,  and  their  complaints,
heard  in  heaven,  shall  be  fatal  to  him  later  on  if  he  has  provoked  them.
Asha-vahista  will  condemn  to  hell  the  cruel  man  who  has  ill-treated  the  ox,
or  allowed  his  flocks  to  suffer ;  ^  and  the  killing  of  a  hedgehog  is  no  less  severely
punished — for  does  not  a  hedgehog  devour  the  ants  who  steal  the  grain  ?  -  The
dog  is  in  every  case  an  especially  sacred  animal — the  shepherd's  dog,  the  watch-
dog, the  hunting-dog,  even  the  prowling  dog.  It  is  not  lawful  to  give  any  dog
a  blow  which  renders  him  impotent,  or  to  slit  his  ears,  or  to  cut  liis  foot,  without
incurring  grave  responsibilities  in  this  world  and  in  the  next;  it  is  necessary  to
feed  the  do"  well,  and  not  to  throw  bones  to  him  which  are  too  hard,  nor  have
his  food  served  hot  enough  to  burn  his  tongue  or  his  throat.^  For  the  rest,  the
faithful  Zoroastrian  was  bound  to  believe  in  his  god,  to  offer  to  him  the
orthodox  prayers  and  sacrifices,  to  be  simple  in  heart,  truthful,  the  slave  of  his
pledged  word,  loyal  in  his  very  smallest  acts.^  If  he  had  once  departed  from
the  right  way,  he  could  only  return  to  it  by  repentance  and  by  purification,
accompanied  by  pious  deeds  :  to  exterminate  noxious  animals,  the  creatures  of
Angro-maiuyus  and  the  abode  of  his  demons,  such  as  the  frog,  the  scorpion,  the
serpent  or  the  ant,  to  clear  the  sterile  tracts,  to  restore  impoverished  land,  to
construct  bridges  over  running  water,  to  distribute  implements  of  husbandry
to  pious  men,  or  to  build  them  a  house,  to  give  a  pure  and  healthy  maiden  in
marriage  to  a  just  man, — these  were  so  many  means  of  expiation  appointed
by  the  prophet.'^  Marriage  was  strictly  obligatory,''  and  seemed  more  praise-
worthy in  proportion  as  the  kinship  existing  between  the  married  pair  was
the  closer:   not  only  was  the  sister  united  in  marriage  to  her  brother,  as  in

'  Tasna,  29,  §  3,  in  J.  Daemestetee,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  p.  215.  The  whole  of  chap.  29
is  occupied  with  the  lament  of  the  bull,  and  the  assurances  given  to  him  by  Aliura-mazda  that  he
shall  be  well  treated  as  soon  as  Zoroaster  has  ensured  the  triumph  of  the  law.

'  Vendidad,  13,  §§  1-4,  in  J.  Daemesteter,  op.cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  193-195.

'  For  the  condition  of  the  dug,  cf.  the  thirteenth  Fargard  of  the  Vendidad  (J.  Daemestetee,
op.  cit.,  vol.  u.  pp.  192-209),  which  is  entirely  devoted  to  this  subject;  for  pregnant  bitches,  cf.
the  fifteenth  Fargard  (Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  221,  224-229).

*  HeeODOTUS,  I.  cxsxvi.  :  iraid^vouai   5e  tovs  naiSas  .  .    .  rpia  /xuvt^a,  iTnTev^ii^  Kal  TO^eveiv  Kal  d\i]-

^  For  this  category  of  praiseworthy  actions,  cf ,  among  others,  Vtndidad,  14,  §  10-lG ;  18,  §§  73, 74,
in  J.  Dakmestktek,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  216-218,  254,  255.  There  is  even  enumerated  how  many
noisome  beasts  must  be  slain  to  accomplish  one  full  work  of  expiation — "  to  kill  1000  serpents  of  those
who  drag  themselves  upon  the  belly,  and  2000  of  the  other  species,  1000  land  frogs  or  2000  water
frogs,  1000  ants  who  steal  the  grain,"  and  so  on.

'  Vendidad,  4,  §  47  :  "And  I  tell  thee,  0  Spitama  Zarathustra,  the  mau  who  has  a  wife  is  above
him  who  lives  in  continency  "  (^J-Darheateter,  Le  Zend- A oesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  GO,  61);  and,  as  we  have
seen  in  the  test,  one  of  these  forms  of  expiation  consisted  in  "  marrying  to  a  worthy  mau  a  young  girl
who  has  never  known  a  man  "  (  Vendidad,  14,  §  15).  Herodotus  of  old  remarked  that  one  of  the  chief
merits  in  au  Iranian  was  to  have  many  children  :  the  Kiug  of  Persia  encouraged  fecundity  in  his  realm,
and  awarded  a  prize  each  year  to  that  one  of  his  subjects  who  could  boast  the  most  numerous
progeny  (Heuodotcs,  I.  cxxxvi.).


FUNERAL    CEREMONIES   AND    THE  AFTER-LIFE.  589

Egypt,^  but  the  father  to  his  daughter,  and  the  mother  to  her  son,  at  least  among
the  Magi.-  Polygamywas  also  encouraged  and  widely  practised:  the  code  imposed
no  limit  on  the  number  of  wives  and  concubines,  and  custom  was  in  favour  of  a
man's  having  as  many  wives  as  his  fortune  permitted  him  to  maintain.^  On
the  occasion  of  a  death,  it  was  forbidden  to  burn  the  corpse,  to  bury  it,  or  to  east
it  into  a  river,  as  it  would  have  polluted  the  fire,  the  earth,  or  the  water — an
unpardonable  offence.'*  The  corpse  could  be  disposed  of  in  different  ways.
The  Persians  were  accustomed  to  cover  it  with  a  thick  layer  of  wax,  and  then
to  bury  it  in  the  ground :  the  wax  coating  obviated  the  pollution  which  direct
contact  would  have  brought  upon  the  soil.^  The  Magi,  and  probably  also  strict
devotees,  following  their  example,  exposed  the  corpse  in  the  open  air,  abandoning
it  to  the  birds  or  beasts  of  prey."  It  was  considered  a  great  misfortune  if  these
respected  the  body,  for  it  was  an  almost  certain  indication  of  the  wrath  of
Ahura-mazda,  and  it  was  thought  that  the  defunct  had  led  an  evil  life.'  When
the  bones  had  been  sufBciently  stripped  of  flesh,  they  were  collected  together,
and  deposited  either  in  an  earthenware  urn  or  in  a  stone  ossuary  with  a  cover,
or  in  a  monumental  tomb  either  hollowed  out  in  the  heart  of  the  mountain  or
in  the  living  rock,  or  raised  up  above  the  level  of  the  ground.^     Meanwhile  the

'  For  the  Egyptian  marriages  between  brothers  and  sisters,  especially  in  the  royal  family,  cf.
Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  50,  Jl,  270.

'  The  information  given  by  the  classical  authors  on  these  various  marriage  connections  lias  been
brought  together  in  Rapp,  Die  Bdigion  und  Sitte  der  Perser  und  iihrigen  Iranier  nach  den  Griecldschen
und  Eomischen  Quellen,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  GenelU.,  vol.  sxx.  pp.  112,  113  ;  cf.  Spiegel,  Erdnische
Altertliumskunde,  vol.  ii.  p.  300,  note  1,  vol.  iii.  pp.  678,  679,  and  more  particularly  J.  Dakmesteter,
Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  i.  pp.  126-134,  where  the  evidence  from  Iranian  sources  is  given  as  well  as  that
from  classical  authors.

•*  HeRODOTCS,  I.  CSSSV.  ;  Fa/ieoucri  Se  eVaffTos  aijTUV  jroWas  KovpiSias  ywaiKas,  -jroWcf  5*  ert  7rA.eoi'as
T-oAAaKcis  KTiprai.  For  the  passages  from  other  classical  writers  confirming  the  statement  of  Herodotus,
cf.  Eapp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  107,  108.

*  Cf.,  for  the  legal  prohibitioa  to  burn  the  corpse,  Herodotus,  III.  xvi. ;  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  57
(in  Mt'LLEK-DiDOT,  Clesi<e  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  57);  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  68  (in  Mijller-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  iii.  p.  409);  the  penalty  of  death  was  inflicted  on  him  who  was  guilty
of  perpetrating  this  crime  (Stkabo,  XV.  iii.  §  14,  p.  732).  For  the  prohibition  to  pollute  the  water
or  throw  into  it  anything  dead,  cf.  Herodotds,  I.  cxxxviii.,  and  Stbabo,  XV.  iii.  §  16,  p.  733.

'  HERODOTrs,  I.  cxl.,  where  the  author  seems  to  imply  that  it  was  more  especially  the  custom  of
the  Persians  :  KCLTaKripwrravr^s  ^e-S>v  ruv  v4kvv  Hepaai  y€aK  pvTTTovai.  Cf.  CiCERO,  Dis/).  Tusculan.,  i.  45,
and  Steabo,  XV.  iii.  §  20,  p.  735,  who  establishes,  as  Herodotus  had  done,  a  distinction  of  usage
between  the  Persians  and  the  Magi.  The  kings  seem  to  have  been  buried  in  this  fashion ;  cf.  the
legend  of  the  death  and  burial  of  Astyages,  in  Ctesias  (^Fragm.  29,  §  5,  in  Mijller-Didot,  Ctesix
Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  46,  47).

*  Herodotus,  I.  cxl.,  and,  among  the  Bactrians,  Onesiceitus,  Fragm.  6,  in  Muller-Didot,  Scriptores
rerum  Alexandri  Magni,  pp.  49, 50.  The  other  classical  authors  agree  in  declaring  that,  at  least  in  the
Parthian  epoch,  the  skeleton  was  buried  as  soon  as  the  flesh  had  been  destroyed,  as  results  from  the
passages  collected  by  Eapp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  55,  56,  and  by  Spiegel,  Erdnische  Altertliumskunde,  vol.  iii.
pp.  703-705.

'  QuiNTUS  CuBTius,  VII.  V.  §  40,  probably  following  Aristobulus.  For  this  belief  and  its  develop-
ment in  later  times,  see  the  modern  evidences  brought  together  in  A.  Hovelacque,  L'Avesta,
Zoroastre  et  le  Mazd^ieme,  p.  470,  et  seq.

'  Marcel  Dieulafoy  discovered  funeral  urns  at  Susa  {V Acropole  de  Suse,  pp.  426-428),  aud
Malcolm    brought    back   from  Bushire    a   stone   ossuary,  which,  according  to    the   testimony   of


590  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

soul  remainetl  in  the  neighbourhood  for  three  days,  hovering  near  the  head  of
the  corpse,  and  by  the  recitation  of  prayers  it  experienced,  according  to  its
condition  of  purity  or  impurity,  as  much  of  joy  or  sadness  as  the  \vhole  world
experiences.  When  the  third  night  was  past,  the  just  soul  set  forth  across
luminous  plains,  refreshed  by  a  perfumed  breeze,  and  its  good  thoughts  and
words  and  deeds  took  shape  before  it  "  under  the  guise  of  a  young  maiden,
radiant  and  strong,  with  well-developed  bust,  noble  mien,  and  glorious  face,
about  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  as  beautiful  as  the  most  beautiful ; "  the
unrighteous  soul,  on  the  contrary,  directed  its  course  towards  the  north,
through  a  tainted  land,  amid  the  squalls  of  a  pestilential  hurricane,  and  there
encountered  its  past  ill  deeds,  under  the  form  of  an  ugly  and  wicked  young
woman,  the  ugliest  and  most  wicked  it  had  ever  seen.  The  genius  Rashnu
Razishta,  the  essentially  truthful,  weighed  its  virtues  or  vices  in  an  un-
erring balance,  and  acquitted  or  condemned  it  on  the  impartial  testimony
of  its  past  life.  On  issuing  from  the  judgment-hall,  the  soul  arrived  at  the
approach  to  the  bridge  Cinvaut,  which,  thrown  across  the  abyss  of  hell,  led  to
paradise.  The  soul,  if  impious,  was  unable  to  cross  this  bridge,  but  was  hurled
down  into  the  abyss,  where  it  became  the  slave  of  Angro-mainyus.  If  pure,  it
crossed  the  bridge  without  difficulty  by  the  help  of  the  angel  Sraosha,  and  was
welcomed  by  Yohu-mano,  who  conducted  it  before  the  throne  of  Ahura-mazda,
in  the  same  way  as  he  had  led  Zoroaster,  and  assigned  to  it  the  post  which  it
should  occupy  until  the  day  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body.^

The  religious  observances  enjoined  on  the  members  of  the  priestly  caste
were  innumerable  and  minute.  Ahura-mazda  and  his  colleagues  had  not,  as
was  the  fashion  among  the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians,^  either  temples  or
tabernacles,  and  though  they  were  represented  sometimes  under  human  or
animal  forms,  and  even  in  some  cases  on  bas-reliefs,  yet  no  one  ever  ventured
to  set  up  in  their  sanctuaries  those  so-called  animated  or  prophetic  statues
to  which  the  majority  of  the  nations  had  rendered  or  were  rendering  their

Mr.  Jivanji  MoJi  {Qutlques  Observations  sur  lee  oseuaires  rapport^i  de  Perse  par  M.  Dieulafoy  et
di'pos^s  au  Mus^e  du  Louvre,  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcad&nie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles- Lettres,
1S89,  pp.  369-371),  represents  the  Astoddn  described  in  the  Vendidad  (6,  §  51,  in  J.  Darmestetek,
Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  93)  as  being  constructed  of  stone,  plaster,  or  clay.  We  shall  find  later  on,
in  Chapter  VII.,  some  illustrations  giving  the  tombs  of  the  Aohsemenid  kings.

'  All  this  picture  of  tlie  fate  of  the  soul  is  taken  from  the  Vendidad,  19,  §§  28-34  (J.  Daejiesteter,
Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  209-271),  where  the  fate  of  the  just  is  described,  and  in  the  Yasht,  22  (Id.,
ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  651-(J5S),  where  the  condition  of  faithful  and  impious  souls  respectively  is  set
forth  on  parallel  lines.  The  classical  authors  teach  us  nothing  on  this  subject,  and  the  little  they
actually  say  only  proves  that  the  Persians  believed  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  (Rapp,  Die  Eeligion
und  sate  der  Perser,  ia  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xx.  pp.  57-(j2).  The  main  outlines  of  the
picture  here  set  forth  go  back  to  the  times  of  the  Achaemenids  and  the  Medes,  except  the  abstract
conception  of  the  goddess  who  leads  the  soul  of  the  dead  as  an  incarnation  of  his  good  or  evil  deeds.

-  Hef.odotcs,  I.  cxxxi. ;  Xexopbon,  Cijropxdia,\Il.  vii.  §  3;  Dison,  Frajm.  9, in  Muller-Didot,
Fragm.  Hist.  Graic.  vol.  ii.  p.  91 ;  and  the  passages  from  other  classical  authors  collected  by  Kapp,
op.  cit.,  pp.  SO,  SI.


RELIGIOUS   CULT,    TEMPLES,   ALTAR.


591


solicitous  homage.  Altars,  however,  were  erected  on  the  tops  of  hills.i  in
palaces,  or  in  the  centre  of  cities,  on  which  fires  were  kindled  in  honour  of  the
inferior  deities  or  of  the  supreme  god  himself.  Two  altars  were  usually  set
up  together,  and  they  are  thus  found  here  and  there  among  the  ruins,  as  at
Nakhsh-i-Kustem,  the  necropolis  of  Persepolis,  where  a  pair  of  such  altars
exist ;  these  are  cut,  each  out  of  a  single  block,  in  a  rocky  mass  which  rises
some  thirteen  feet  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding  plain.     They  are  of


THE   TWO   IRANIAN   ALTAES    AT   NAKHSH-I-BCSTEII.


cubic  form  and  squat  appearance,  looking  like  towers  flanked  at  the  four  corners
by  supporting  columns  which  are  connected  by  circular  arches;  above  a  narrow
moulding  rises  a  crest  of  somewhat  triangular  projections ;  the  hearth  is  hollowed
out  on  the  summit  of  each  altar.^  At  Meshed-i-Murgab,  on  the  site  of  the  ancient
Pasargadse,  the  altars  have  disappeared,  but  the  basements  on  which  they
were  erected  are  still  visible,  as  also  the  flight  of  eight  steps  by  which  they
were  approached.*  Those  altars  on  which  burned  a  perpetual  fire  were  not  left
exposed  to  the  open  air :  they  would  have  run  too  great  a  risk  of  contracting

'  See  in  Gobineau,  Histoire  des  Perses,  vol.  i.  pp.  31,  32,  the  descrlptioa  of  an  artificially  formed
platform  on  tlie  top  of  a  hill  opposite  Demavend,  which  must  be  one  of  these  "  high  places "
destined  to  sacrificial  rites  (Pkkeot  and  Chipiez,  Hutoire  de  I'Art,  vol.  v.  p.  610).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  heliogravure  in  3Iarcel  Dieulafoy,  L'Art  Antique  de  la  Perse,
vol.  iii.  pi.  v.

^  According  to  Perrot  and  Chipiez  (L' Histoire  de  I'Art,  voL  v.  p.  6io),  "  it  is  not  impossible  that
these  altars  were  older  than  the  great  buildings  of  Persepolis,  and  that  they  were  erected  for  the  old
Persian  town  which  Darius  raised  to  the  position  of  capital."

*  Mabcel  DiiULAFOY,  VAcroiiole  de  Suse,  p.  391,  et  seq.


592


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


impurities,  such  as  dust  borne  by  the  wind,  flights  of  birds,  dew,  rain,  or
snow.  They  were  enclosed  in  slight  structures,  well  protected  by  walls,  and
attaining  in  some  cases  considerable  dimensions,  or  in  pavilion-shaped  edifices
of  stone  adorned  with  columns.*  The  sacrificial  rites  were  of  long  duration,
and  frequent,  and  were  rendered  very  complex  by  interminable  manual  acts,
ceremonial  gestures,  and  incantations.  In  cases  where  the  altar  was  not  de-
voted to  maintaining  a  perpetual  fire,  it  was  kindled  when  necessary  with  small
twigs  previously  barked  and  purified,^  and  was  subsequently  fed  with  precious
woods,  preferably  cypress  or  laurel ;  ^  care  was  taken  not  to  quicken  the  flame

by   blowing,   for   the    human   breath


THE  TWO   IRANIAN   ALTARS   OP  MlRGjiB.*


would  have  desecrated  the  fire  by
merely  passing  over  itj  death  was  the
punishment  for  any  one  who  volun-
tarily committed  such  a  heinous  sacri-
lege.* The  recognised  offering  con-
sisted of  flowers,  bread,  fruit,  and
perfumes,  but  these  were  often  ac-
companied, as  in  all  ancient  religions,
by  a  bloody  sacrifice;  the  sacrifice  of
a  horse  was  considered  the  most  efii-
cacious,*  but  au  ox,  a  cow,  a  sheep,  a  camel,  an  ass,  or  a  stag  was  frequently
offered ; '  in  certain  circumstances,  especially  when  it  was  desired  to  con-
ciliate the  favour  of  the  god  of  the  underworld,  a  human  victim,  probably
as  a  survival  of  very  ancient  rites,  was  preferred.^     The  king,  whose  royal

'  Such  is  the  temple  of  Firoz-Abad,  notes  of  which  were  taken  by  Flandin  and  Coste  QPerse
Ancienne,  pp.  36-38,  and  pi.  xsxWi.);  cf.  the  restoration  by  Coste,  published  by  Perrot  and  Chipiez
(Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  p.  647),  who  assign  good  reasons  for  placing  the  date  of  the
monument  in  the  age  of  the  Achsemenids.  For  another  temple  belonging  to  the  same  period,  which
has  been  discovered  at  Susa,  see  Marcel  DiErLAroT,  L'AcropoJe  d'Suse,  pp.  391,  411-416.

-  Stkabo,  XV.  iii.  §  15,  p.  733.

'  Nicolas  of  DAMAScrs,  Fragm.  66,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  405 ;
Pausanias,  who  witnessed  the  cult  as  practised  at  Hierocsesaraea,  remarked  the  curious  colour  of  the
ashes  heaped  upon  the  altar  (V.  xxvii.  §  3).

*  Stkabo,  XV.  iii.  §  14,  p.  732 ;  ixpa-nTovtriv,  e\aiov  Karaxeoi/Tes,  oh  <pv(rwvTes,  aAA.a  ^tTri^ovT^s'  rovs
5e  iputrTjtTavTas  ^  vfKphv  eVt  nvp  O^vras  t)  $oX&itov  dafdroviTi.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Flandix  and  Coste,  La  Perse  Ancienne,  pi.  cciii.

"  The  sacrifice  of  a  horse  is  mentioned  in  Herodotos,  VII.  cxiii. ;  Xexophon-,  Cyropsedia,  VIII.
iii.  §  24 ;  Aerian,  Anahasis,  \I.  xis.  §  7.  For  the  sacrifice  of  horses  in  the  ancient  Iranian  rites,  cf.
the  Aban  Yaslit,  where  an  enumeration  is  given  of  the  heroes  who  sacrificed  a  hundred  horses  to
Anahita  Ardvi-soura  after  the  revelation  to  Zoroaster  (YasAi  5,  §§  107,  112,  116  ;  cf.  J.  Darmestetek,
Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  pp.  392-394).

"  For  the  offering  of  these  animals  in  sacrifice,  cf.  Herodotus,  VII.  xliii. ;  Hi: raclidks  op  Ccrjia:,
Fragm.  8,  in  Mf  ller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  ii.  p.  96 ;  Arbian,  Anabasis,  VI.  xxix.  §  7.  The
sacrifice  of  bulls  and  sheep  is  mentioned  in  the  same  passages  as  that  of  the  horse  (  Tasht  5,  §§  108,
112,  116  ;  cf.  J.  Darmesteter,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  392-394),  and  elsewhere  (^Vendidad,  18,  §  70  ;  Id.,
ibid.,  p.  254)  that  of  thousands  of  smaller  animals.

'  Heeodotl's,  VII.  cxiii.,  cxiv.    Most  modern  writers  deny  the  authenticity  of  Herodotus'  account.


TEE  SACRIFICES.


593


THE    SACRED    FIRK   BDHNING   ON   THE    ALTAR.'


position   made   him    the    representative   of  Ahura-mazda  on   earth.^   was,  in

fact,  a  high  priest,  and  was  himself  able  to  officiate  at  the  altar,^  but    no  one

else   could  dispense   with   the   mediation   of  the    Magi.^      The   worshippers

proceeded  in  solemn  procession  to  the  spot  where  the  ceremony  was  to  take

place,  and  there  the  priest,  wearing  the  tiara  on  his  head,  recited  an  invocation

in  a  slow  and  mysterious  voice,  and  implored  the  blessings  of  heaven  on  the

king  and  nation.^      He  then  slaughtered  the  victim  by  a  blow  on  the  head,^

and  divided  it  into  portions,  which  he  gave  back  to  the  offerer  without  reserving

any  of  them,  for  Ahura-mazda  required

nothing  but  the  soul ;  in  certain  cases,

the   victim   was  entirely  consumed  by

fire,^  but  more  frequently  nothing  but  a

little  of  the  fat  and  some  of  the  entrails

were  taken  to  feed  and   maintain  the

flame,   and   sometimes    even   this    was

omitted.''     Sacrifices  were   of  frequent

occurrence.      Without   mentioning   the

extraordinary  occasions  on  which  a  king

would   have   a   thousand  bulls  slain   at   one   time,*   the   Achsemenian   kings

killed  each  day  a  thousand  bullocks,  asses,  and  stags :  sacrifice  under  such

circumstances  was  another  name  for  butchery,  the  object  of  which  was  to

because  a  sacrifice  of  this  kind  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  JIagian  religion  (Spiegel,  Erdnische
Allerthumskunde,  vol.  iii.  p.  593),  which  is  undoubtedly  the  case,  aa  far  as  the  latest  form  of  the  religion
is  coucerued  ;  but  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  is  so  plain  that  the  fact  itself  must  be  considered  as
indisputable.  We  may  note  that  the  passage  refers  to  the  foundation  of  a  city ;  and  if  we  remember
how  persistent  was  the  custom  of  human  sacrifice  among  ancient  races  at  the  foundation  of  buildings
(cf.,  for  Egypt,  Lefeeure,  Biteg  Egyptiens,  pp.  -t-G,  19-24,  36-38),  we  shall  be  led  to  the  conclusion
that  the  ceremony  described  by  the  Greek  historian  was  a  survival  of  a  very  ancient  usage,  which  had
not  yet  fallen  entirely  into  desuetude  at  the  Achsemenian  epoch.

'  Phanias  op  Eresos,  Fragm.  9,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hi$t.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  29G :  ti^Si/
iSa'JiAea  Kai  npoffKuye^y  e'iKSva  0eoO  tov  Tvavra.  (Tiii^ovros.

-  Xenophon,  Cyro-p.,  VIII.  v.  §  26,  where  the  sacerdotal  functions  of  the  king  are  clearly  indicated.

'  Herodotus,  I.  cxxxii. :  avev  yap  Sri  fidyou  o6  <ri^i  f^fios  eVn  fluirias  iroieWflai.  Cf.  XenophON,  Cyro-
jpxdia,  VIII.  iii.  §9,  where  it  is  stated  that  in  religious  matters  the  Persians  strictly  obeyed  their  Magi.

'  Herodotus,  I.  csxxii.  '  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §§  13-15,  pp.  732,  733.

'  Xesophon,  Cyropxdia,  V'lII.  iii.  §  24,  the  accuracy  of  which  is  suspected  by  most  historians
(Spiegel,  Erdnische  Alterthums.,  vol.  iii.  p.  592 ;  Rapp,  Die  Religion  und  Sitte  der  Perser,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.
Morgenl.  GeseHs.,  vol.xx.p.  83;  G.  Rawlisson,  TAe  .Fiie  Great Monarcfti'es, 2nd  edit.,  vol.  iL  p.346,  n.  II).

'  Heeodotds,  I.  cxxxii. ;  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  l3,  p.  733,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  part  of  the
victim  cast  on  the  fire  :  toO  e'lriirAiJou  ti  luKphv  Tidiaai,  uis  Xiyovai  rives,  eVl  t6  Trvp.  A  relic  of  this
custom  may  be  discerned  in  the  expiatory  sacrifice  decreed  in  the  Vendidad,  18,  §  70 :  '■  he  shall
sacrifice  a  thousand  head  of  small  cattle,  and  he  shall  place  their  entrails  devoutly  on  the  fire,  with
libations"  (J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  254).

'  Herodotus,  VII.  xliii.  The  number  1000  seems  to  have  had  some  ritualistic  significance,
for  it  often  recurs  in  the  penances  imposed  on  the  faithful  as  expiation  for  their  sins :  thus  it  was
enjoined  to  slay  1000  serpents,  1000  frogs,  1000  ants  who  steal  the  grain  (cf.  supra,  p.  588,  note  5),
1000  head  of  small  cattle  (^Vendidad,  18,  §  70),  1000  swift  horses,  1000  camels,  1000  brown  oxen
(Vendidud,  22,  §§  3,  4  ;  cf.  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  ii.  p.  298).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  impression  of  a  Persian  intaglio.

2   Q


594  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

furnish  the  court  with  a  suiBcient  supply  of  pure  meat.^  The  ceremonial  bore
resemblance  in  many  ways  to  that  still  employed  by  the  modern  Zoroastrians
of  Persia  and  India.  The  ofBciating  priest  covered  his  mouth  with  the  bands
which  fell  from  his  mitre,  to  prevent  the  god  from  being  polluted  by  his
breath ;  he  held  in  his  hand  the  baresman,  or  sacred  bunch  of  tamarisk,^  and
prepared  the  mysterious  liquor  from  the  haoma  plant.^  He  was  accustomed
each  morning  to  celebrate  divine  service  before  the  sacred  fire,^  not  to  speak
of  the  periodic  festivals  in  which  he  shared  the  offices  with  all  the  members  of
his  tribe,  such  as  the  feast  of  Mithra,"  the  feast  of  the  Fravashis,''  the  feast
commemorating  the  rout  of  Angro-mainyus,'  the  feast  of  the  Saksea,  during
which  the  slaves  were  masters  of  the  house.*  All  the  Magi  were  not  necessarily
devoted  to  the  priesthood  ;  but  those  only  became  apt  in  the  execution  of  their
functions  who  had  been  dedicated  to  them  from  infancy,  and  who,  having  received
the  necessary  instruction,  were  duly  consecrated.^  These  adepts  were  divided  into
several  classes,  of  which  three  at  least  were  never  confounded  in  their  functions
— the  sorcerers,  the  interpreters  of  dreams,  and  the  most  venerated  sages —
and  from  these  three  classes  were  chosen  the  ruling  body  of  the  order  and  its
supreme  head.  Their  rule  of  life  was  strict  and  austere,  and  was  encumbered
with  a  thousand  observances  indispensable  to  the  preservation  of  perfect  purity
in  their  persons,  their  altars,  their  victims,  and  their  sacrificial  vessels  and

•  Heraclides  of  Com  k.  Fragm.  2,  iu  Mi  ller-Didot,  Fraqm.  Hist.  Griuc,  vol.  ii.  p.  96 ;  of.  EAPr,
Die  Sltte  und  Ueligion  der  Pereer  und  iihrigen  Tranter,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xx.  p.  83.

'  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §§  14,  lo,  pp.  732,  733.  Dinon  (Fragm.  8,  in  Mullek-Didot,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.
p.  91)  had  already  pointed  out  the  use  of  the  hamsman  for  divination.

'  The  drink  mentioned  by  the  author  of  the  De  Iside  (§  46,  ed.  Partuey,  pp.  81,  82),  which  was
extracted  from  the  plant  Omomi  (iroai'  yap  Tiva  K6TrTovTfs  ufinifii  Ka\ovfiii'Tiv),  and  which  the  Magi
offered  to  the  god  of  the  underworld,  is  certainly  the  haoma.  The  rite  mentioned  by  the  Greek  author,
which  appears  to  be  an  iucantation  against  Ahriman,  required,  it  seems,  a  potion  in  which  the  blood
of  a  wolf  was  a  necessary  ingredient :  this  questionable  draught  was  then  carried  to  a  place  where
the  sun's  rays  never  shone,  and  was  there  sprinkled  on  the  ground  as  a  libation.  J.  Darmesteter
himself  admits  that  the  cult  and  myths  of  the  haoma  were  already  in  existence  in  the  Achsemenian
period  (Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  p.  Isix.).

'  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  15,  p.  733.

*  Ctesias,  Fragm.  55,  in  Muller-Didot,  Ctesiss  Cnidii  Fragm.,  p.  79 ;  Doris  of  Samos,  Fragm.  13,
in  Id.,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  472,  473.

'  Menander,  Fragm.  15,  in  Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  iv.  p.  220,  speaks  of  this  festival  as  conducted  in  his
own  times,  and  tells  us  that  it  was  called  Furdigan ;  modern  authorities  usually  admit  that  it  goes
back  to  the  times  of  the  Achfemenids  or  even  beyond  (RAPr,  oj).  cit.,  p.  92 ;  Spiegel,  Erdnische
Alterihumsliunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  96,  97).

■  Agathias,  ii.  24,  where  every  worshipper  of  Ahura-mazda  is  enjoined  to  kill  the  greatest  possible
number  of  animals  created  by  Angro-maiuyus,  and  bring  to  the  Magi  the  fruits  of  his  hunting.
Herodotus  (I.  cxl.)  had  already  spoken  of  this  destruction  of  life  as  one  of  the  duties  incumbent  on
every  Persian,  and  this  gives  probability  to  the  view  of  modern  writers  that  the  festival  went  back
to  the  Acbaimenian  epoch  (Rapi',  op.  cit.,  p.  92).

'  The  festival  of  the  Sakfea  is  mentioned  by  Ctesias  (i^rag.  16,  in  MiiLLER-DiDOT,  Cles.  Cnid.  Frag.,
pp.  33, 34).  It  was  also  a  Babylonian  festival,  and  most  modern  authorities  conclude  from  this  double
use  of  the  name  that  the  festival  was  borrowed  from  the  Babylonians  by  the  Persians  (Eapp,  op.  cit.,
p.  92),  but  this  point  is  not  so  certain  as  it  is  made  out  to  be,  and  at  any  rate  the  borrowing  must
have  taken  place  very  early,  for  the  festival  was  already  well  established  in  the  Ach^meuian  period

"  J.  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,  vol.  iii.  pp.  Ixxi.,  Ixxii.


.   'NL

•*!»/

fM

fe^vfl

vSfl^^  ^-i

i^*'

m-^^lt

•'"'  1

t  (  i\  t'  i.  1^

TEE  MAQI.

595

implements.  The  Magi  of  highest  rank  abstained  from  every  form  of  living
thing  as  food,  and  the  rest  only  partook  of  meat  under  certain  restrict ions.^
Their  dress  was  unpretentious,  they  wore  no  jewels,-  and  observed  strict  fidelity  to
the  marriage  vow ;  ^  and  the  virtues  with  which  they  were  accredited  obtained
for  them,  from  very  early  times,  unbounded  influence  over  the  minds  of  the  com-
mon people  as  well  as  over  those  of  the  nobles :  the  king  himself  boasted  of  being
their  pupil,^  and  took  no  serious  step  in  state  affairs  without  consulting  Ahura-
mazda  or  the  other  gods  by  their  mediation.^  The  classical  writers  maintain
that  the  Magi  often  cloaked  monstrous  vices  under  their  apparent  strictness,  and
it  is  possible  that  this  was  the  case  in  later  days,  but  even  then  moral  depravity
was  probably  rather  the  exception  tlian  the  rule  among  them :  ^  the  majority
of  the  Magi  faithfully  observed  the  rules  of  honest  living  and  ceremonial
purity  enjoined  on  them  in  the  books  handed  down  by  their  ancestors.

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  Jtagi  were  all-powerful  among  the
Medes,  and  that  the  reign  of  Astyages  was  virtually  the  reign  of  the  priestly
caste ; ''  but  all  the  Iranian  states  did  not  submit  so  patiently  to  their  authority,
and  the  Persians  at  last  proved  openly  refractory.  Their  kings,  lords  of  Susa
as  well  as  of  Pasavgadoe,  wielded  all  the  resources  of  Elam,  and  their  military
power  must  have  equalled,  if  it  did  not  already  surpass,  that  of  their  suzerain
lords.  Their  tribes,  less  devoted  to  the  manner  of  living  of  the  Assyrians  and
Chaldaeans,  had  preserved  a  vigour  and  power  of  endurance  which  the  Medes
no  longer  possessed ;  and  they  needed  but  an  ambitious  and  capable  leader,  to
rise  rapidly  from  the  rank  of  subjects  to  that  of  rulers  of  Iran,  and  to  become
in  a  short  time  masters  of  Asia.      Such  a  chief  they  found  in  Cyrus,*  son

'  For  these  classes  of  Magi,  cf.  the  passages  of  classical  authors  brought  together  in  Eapp,  Die
Religion  und  Sitle  der  Perser,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Gesells.,  vol.  xx.  pp.  72-74.  The  clearest,  that
of  Eubulus  (in  Pokphtey,  De  Abstinentiu,  iv.  p.  16),  speaks  of  three  grades  one  above  the  other.

-  DiOGEXES  Laektius,  Prommium,  §  2.

'  Clement  of  Alexandria  assures  us  that  they  were  strictly  celibate  {Stromates,  iii.  p.  440),  but,
besides  the  fact  that  married  Jtagi  are  mentioned  several  times,  celibacy  is  still  considered  by
Zaroastrians  an  inferior  state  to  that  of  marriage;  cf.  on  this  subject  the  passages  collected  by
HoVELACQUE,  L'Avesta,  Zoroastre  et  le  Mazdeisme,  pp.  461-463.

*  In  the  Greek  period,  a  spurious  epitaph  of  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  was  quoted,  in  which  the
king  says  of  himself,  "  I  was  the  pupil  of  the  Blagi "  (Porphyry,  De  Abstinentia,  iv.  p.  16).

'  Cf.  Rapp,  op.  cit.,  pp.  74,  75,  for  the  passages  of  classical  authors  which  speak  of  the  influence
exercised  by  the  Magi  over  tbe  nobles  and  tlie  sovereigns.

'  These  accusations  are  nearly  all  directed  agaiust  their  incestuous  marriages  (cf.,  for  these
marriages,  supra,  pp.  588,  589)  :  it  seems  that  the  classical  writers  took  for  a  refinement  of  debauchery
what  really  was  before  all  things  a  religious  practice.

'  G.  Eawlinsox,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit,  vol.  ii.  p.  416;  Xuldeke,  Aufmlze  zur
Persischen  Geschichle,  p.  12.

'  The  original  form  of  the  name  is  Kuru,  Kiirush,  with  a  long  u,  as  is  shown  by  the  quantity  of
Ihe  Greek  form  Kvpos  (J3schylcs,  Persx,  768),  which  forces  us  to  reject  the  proposed  connection
(Breal,  De  Persicis  nominibis,  pp.  23,  24  ;  Spiesel,  Eranische  AUerthuimkunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270,  271)
with  the  name  of  the  Indian  hero  Kuru,  in  which  the  u  is  short  (Noldeke,  AufsdLe  zitr  Pertischeu
Geschichle,  p.  14,  note  2).  Numerous  etymologies  of  the  name  Cyrus  have  been  proposed  :  lately,
Sayce  has  derived  it  from  the  Elamite,  and  translated  it  the  Shepherd  {The  Ancient  Empires  of  the
East,  p.  69,  note  3).     The  Persians  themselves  attributed  to  it  the  sense  of  the  Sun  (Plutarch,


59G  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

of  Cambyses;  but  although  no  more  illustrious  name  than  his  occurs  in
the  list  of  the  founders  of  mighty  empires,  the  history  of  no  other  has
suffered  more  disfigurement  from  the  imagination  of  his  own  subjects  or  from
the  rancour  of  the  nations  he  had  conquered.^  The  Medes,  who  could  not
forgive  him  for  having  made  them  subject  to  their  ancient  vassals,  took
delight  in  holding  him  up  to  scorn,  and  not  being  able  to  deny  the  fact  of  his
triumph,  explained  it  by  the  adoption  of  tortuous  and  despicable  methods.
They  would  not  even  allow  that  he  was  of  royal  birth,  but  asserted  that  he
was  of  ignoble  origin,  the  son  of  a  female  goatherd  and  a  certain  Atradates,-
who,  belonging  to  the  savage  clan  of  the  Mardians,  lived  by  brigandage.  Cyrus
himself,  according  to  this  account,  spent  his  infancy  and  early  youth  in  a
condition  not  far  short  of  slavery,  employed  at  first  in  sweeping  out  the
exterior  portions  of  the  palace,  performing  afterwards  the  same  ofiSce  in
the  private  apartments,  subsequently  promoted  to  the  charge  of  the  lamps
and  torches,  and  finally  admitted  to  the  number  of  the  royal  cupbearers  who
filled  the  king's  goblet  at  table.  When  he  was  at  length  enrolled  in  the  body-
guard,^ he  won  distinction  by  his  skill  in  all  military  exercises,  and  having  risen

Artaxerxes,  §  1 ;  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  9,  ia  Mijller-Didot,  Cletix  Cnidii  Fragm., pp.  55-69;  HESYCHitJS,
s.v.  Kvpos).  Tliia  interpretation  is  upheld  by  Oppert  (£e  Peuple  et  la  Langue  des  Medes,  p.  Ill)
and  Jueti  {Iranisclies  Namenhuch,  p.  168).

'  We  possess  two  entirely  different  versions  of  the  history  of  the  origin  of  Cyrus,  but  one,  that  of
Herodotus  (I.  cvii.-cxxx.),  has  reached  us  intact,  while  that  of  Ctesias  is  only  known  to  us  in  frag-
ments from  extracts  made  by  Nicolas  of  Damascus  (Fragm.  66,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hint.
Grxc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  397-106)  and  by  Photins  (Id.,  Cteaix  Cnidii  Fragm.,  pp.  45-47,  59-62).  Spiegel
{Erdiiische  AUerthumskunde,  vol.  ii.  pp.  278,  279)  and  Dunoker  (Gesch.  des  Alterthums,  4th  edit.,  voL
iv.  pp.  281)  thought  to  recognise  in  the  tradition  followed  by  Ctesias  one  of  the  Persian  accounts  of
the  history  of  Cyrus,  but  Bauer  (Die  Kyros-Sage  und  Verwandtes,  pp.  30,  32,  33)  refuses  to  admit  this
hypothesis,  and  prefers  to  consider  it  as  a  romance  put  together  by  the  author,  according  to  the  taste  of
his  own  times,  from  facts  partly  different  from  those  utilised  by  Herodotus,  and  partly  borrowed  from
Herodotus  himself:  but  it  should  very  probably  be  regarded  as  an  account  of  Median  origin,  in
which  the  founder  of  the  Persian  empire  is  portrayed  in  the  most  unfavourable  light  (Noldeke,
Aufsdtze  zur  Persischeti  Gesch.,  p.  14).  Or  perhaps  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  form  of  the  legend
current  among  the  Pharnaspids  who  established  themselves  as  satraps  of  Dascylium  in  the  time  of
the  Achaemenids,  and  to  whom  the  royal  house  of  Cappadocia  traced  its  origin  (cf.  Marquabt,  Die
Assyrialta  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,  Supplement,  vol.  v.  pp.  596-599).  It  is  almost  certain  that  the
account  given  by  Herodotus  represents  a  Median  version  of  the  legend  (DunckjiR,  Oesch.  des  Alterthums.
vol.  iv.  p.  272),  and,  considering  the  important  part  played  in  it  by  Harpagus,  probably  that  version
which  was  current  among  the  descendants  of  that  nobleman  (Noldekx,  op.  cit.,  pp.  13,  14 ;  Prashee,
Medien  und  das  Haus  des  Kyaxares,  pp.  16,  17).  The  historian  Dinon,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  from
the  extant  fragments  of  his  work  (Fragm.  7,  in  Mijller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  90,  91),
and  from  the  abridgment  made  by  Trogus  Pompeius  (Jcstix,  I.  iv.-vi.),  adopted  tlie  narrative
of  Ctesias,  mingling  with  it,  however,  some  details  taken  from  Herodotus  and  the  romance  of
Xeuophon,  the  Cyropsedia.  For  an  analysis  of  the  elements  composing  the  legend  of  Cyrus  and  the
analogies  to  it  discovered  among  the  different  nations  of  the  East  and  the  West,  cf.  the  instances
collected  by  Bauer,  Die  Kyros-Sage  und  Verwandtes,  1882.

=  According  to  one  of  the  historians  consulted  by  Strabo  (XV.  iii.  §  6,  p.  729),  perhaps  Polyclitus  of
Lariasa  (J.  Marqcart,  op.  cit.,  pp.  560-562),  Cyrus  himself,  and  not  his  father,  was  called  Atradates.

'The  tradition  reproduced  by  Dinon  narrated  that  Cyrus  had  begun  by  serving  among  the  Kavasses,
the  three  hundred  staff-bearers,  lia$So<p6poi,  who  accompanied  the  sovereign  wlien  he  appeared  in  public,
and  that  he  passed  next  into  the  royal  body-guard  (Fragm.  7,  in  MCller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,
vol.  ii.  pp.  90,  91),  and  that  once  having  attained  this  rank,  he  passed  rapidly  through  all  the  superior
grades  of  the  military  profession.


CYRUS  AND   HIS  LEGENDARY  HISTORY.


597


from  rank  to  rank,  received  command  of  an  expedition  against  the  Cadusians.
On  tbe  march  he  fell  in  with  a  Persian  groom  named  CEbaras/  who  had  been
cruelly  scourged  for  some  misdeed,  and  was  occupied  in  the  transportation  of
manure  in  a  boat:  in  obedience  to  an  oracle  the  two  united  their  fortunes,
and  together  devised  a  vast  scheme  for  liberating  their  compatriots  from
the  Median  yoke.  How  Atradates  secretly  prepared  the  revolt  of  the  Mardians  ;
how  Cyrus  left  his  camp  to  return  to  the  court  at  Ecbatana,  and  obtained  from


A    ItOYAL    HUNTIKG-l'Al'.ry    IN    IIIAN."


Astyages  permission  to  repair  to  his  native  country  under  pretext  of  offer-
ing sacrifices,  but  in  reality  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  conspirators ;
how,  finally,  the  indiscretion  of  a  woman  revealed  the  whole  plot  to  a  eunuch  of
the  harem,  and  how  he  warned  Astyages  in  the  middle  of  his  evening  banquet
by  means  of  a  musician  or  singing-girl,  was  frequently  narrated  by  the
Median  bards  in  their  epic  poems,  and  hence  the  story  spread  until  it
reached  in  later  times  even  as  far  as  the  Greeks.^  Astyages,  roused  to  action
by  the  danger,  abandons  the  pleasures  of  the  chase  in  which  his  activity  had
hitherto  found  vent,  sets  out  on  the  track  of  the  rebel,  wins  a  preliminary
victory  on  the  Hyrbu,  and  kills  the  father  of  Cyrus :  some  days  after,  he  again
overtakes  the  rebels,  at  the  entrance  to  the  defiles  leading  to  Pasargadaj,  and

'  This  CEIjaras  whom  Ctesias  makes  the  accomplice  of  Cyrus,  seems  to  be  an  antedated  forestall-
ment  of  the  CEbaras  whom  the  tradition  followed  by  Herodotus  (III.  Ixxsv.)  knows  as  master  of  the
horse  under  Darius,  and  to  whom  that  kiug  owed  his  elevation  to  the  throne  (Noldeke,  Aufsatze  zur
Persisclien  Gesch.,  p.  14,  note  1 ;  J.  Maeqcart,  Die  Assyriaka  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,  Supplement^
vol.  V.  pp.  .")96-598).  For  the  resemlilances  between  the  story  of  the  origin  of  Cyrus  and  that  of  the
founder  of  the  Sassanid  monarchy,  Ardashir-i-Papakan,  cf.  Gutsohmid,  Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  iii.  pp.
133,  134,  and  Noldekk,  Das  Iranische  Nationalepos,  in  the  Grundriss  der  Iratiischen  Philologie,
vol.  ii.  p.  132;  popular  imagination  must  have  transferred  the  legend  of  the  ancient  hero  to  his
successor  of  a  later  age  (Noldeke,  Aufidtze  zur  Persisclien  Gesch.,  pp.  91,  92).

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  silver  vase  iu  the  Museum  ol'  Uie  Hermitage,  reproduced  in
Gomptes  rendus  de  la  Commission  Arch^ologique,  1866,  pi.  iv.  1.

=  According  to  Ctesias  (Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  66,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Mist.  Graic,
vol.  iii.  p.  403),  it  was  a  singing-girl  who  revealed  the  existence  of  the  plot  to  Astyages  ;  according  to
Dinon  (Fragm.  7,  in  Id.,  ibid.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  90,  91),  it  was  the  bard  Angares.  AVindisohmann  (Zoroas-
trische  Studien,  p.  277)  has  compared  this  name  with  that  of  the  Vedic  guild  of  singers,  the  Angira ;  of.
A.  Webek,  Epigches  im  Vedischen  Ritual,  in  the  Sitzungsherichie  of  Acad,  of  Berlin,  1891,  p.  16,  note.


598  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

for  the  second  time  fortune  is  on  the  point  of  declaring  in  his  favour,  when  the
Persian  women,  bringing  back  their  husbands  and  sous  to  the  conflict,  urge  them
on  to  victory.'  The  fame  of  their  triumph  liaving  spread  abroad,  the  satraps  and
provinces  successively  declared  for  the  conqueror ;  Hyrcania,  first,  followed  by
the  Parthians,  the  Sakaj,  and  the  Bactrians :  ^  Astyages  was  left  almost  alone,  save
for  a  few  faithful  followers,  in  the  palace  at  Ecbatana.  His  daughter  Amytis
and  his  son-in-law  Spitamas  concealed  liim  so  successfully  on  the  top  of  the
palace,  that  he  escaped  discovery  up  to  the  moment  when  Cyrus  was  on  the
point  of  torturing  his  grandchildren  to  force  them  to  reveal  his  hiding-place :
thereupon  he  gave  himself  up  to  his  enemies,  but  was  at  length,  after  being
subjected  to  harsh  treatment  for  a  time,  set  at  liberty  and  entrusted  with  the
government  of  a  mountain  tribe  dwelling  to  the  south-east  of  the  Caspian
Sea,  that  of  the  13arcanians.^  Later  on  he  perished  through  the  treachery  of
CEbaras,  and  his  corpse  was  left  unburied  in  the  desert,  but  by  divine  inter-
position relays  of  lions  were  sent  to  guard  it  from  the  attacks  of  beasts  of  prey :
Cyrus,  acquainted  with  this  miraculous  circumstance,  went  in  search  of  the  body
and  gave  it  a  magnificent  burial.*  Another  legend  asserted,  on  the  contrary,
that  Cyrus  was  closely  connected  with  the  royal  line  of  Cyaxares ;  this  tradi-
tion was  originally  circulated  among  the  great  Median  families  who  attached
themselves  to  the  Achsemenian  dynasty.^  According  to  this  legend  Astyages
had  no  male  heirs,  and  the  sceptre  would  have  naturally  descended  from
him  to  his  daughter  Mandane  and  her  sons.  Astyages  was  much  alarmed  by
a  certain  dream  concerning  his  daughter :  he  dreamt  that  water  gushed  forth
so  copiously  from  her  womb  as  to  flood  not  only  Ecbatana,  but  the  whole  of
Asia,  and  the  interpreters,  as  much  terrified  as  himself,  counselled  him  not  to

•  This  anecdote  is  omitted  by  Dinon  in  Trogus  Pompeius  (jDSTDf,  i.  §  \i.),  and  by  Nicolas  of
Damascus  in  Poly.-enus  (vii.  45, 2).  For  the  criticism  of  tliis  part  of  Ctesias'  narrative,  cf.  Mauqcart,
Die  Assyriala  des  Ktesias,  in  the  PhUologus,  Suppl,  vol.  v.  pp.  (JUO,  6Ul,  who  considers  that  it  contains
traces  of  the  same  epic  legends  which  have  been  partially  utilised  in  the  more  recent  traditions  relative
to  the  taking  of  Balkh  from  Lohrasp.  father  of  Gushtasp  (Spiegel,  Erdn.  Alterthums.,  vol.  i.  pp.  714,  715).

'  This  is  the  end  of  the  narrative  of  Ctesias  as  known  to  us  through  Nicolas  of  Damascus
(Fragm.  66,  in  IIcller-Didot,  Fragm.  llift.  Gnec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  307-406).  Herodotus  places  the  sub-
mission of  the  tribes  of  Central  Asia  after  the  fall  of  Crcesus  (I.  clsxvii.).

^  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  5  (Mi"Li,ER-Dii)OT,  Clesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  46,  60,  61),  has
Barcanians  where  Trogus  Pompeius  has  Hyrcanians  (Justin,  I.  vi.),  perhaps  following  Dinon,
or  else  by  an  unauthorised  substitution  of  a  well-known  name  lor  one  of  rare  occurrence.  Ancient
geographers  distinguished  between  the  two;  thus  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  s.r.  BapKavioi,  (Bms  toTs
•rpxaflois  o/iopop;  cf.  DiODOKCs  SicuLus,  ii.  2,  and  Quintcs  Curtius,  iii.  2,  5.  Blanjuart  proposes  to
identify  their  country  with  the  modern  Farghana  (op.  cit.').  pp.  013,  614).  It  is,  however,  possible
that  we  have  here  two  difterent  transcriptions  of  the  name  Vehrkana  (cf.  supra,  p.  451,  note  3).

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §§  2,  5,  in  Muller-Didot,  Ctesia;  Cnidii  Fragm.,  pp.  45-47.  The  passage  in
Herodotus  (IIL  Ixii.)  leads  Marquart  to  believe  that  the  murder  of  Astyages  formed  part  of  the
primitive  legend,  but  was  possibly  attributed  to  Cambyses,  son  of  Cyrus,  rather  than  to  ffibaras,  the
companion  of  the  conqueror's  early  years.

=  This  is  the  legend  as  told  to  Herodotus  in  Asia  Minor,  probably  by  the  members  of  the  family  of
Harpagus  (cf.  supra,  p.  596,  note  1),  which  the  Greek  historian  tried  to  render  credible  by  interpreting
the  miraculous  incidents  in  a  rationalising  manner  (Bauer,  Die  Kyros-Sageund  Verwandtes,  pp.  9,  10).


THE  SEVOLT  OF  CYRUS  AND  TEE  FALL  OF  TEE  MEDIAN  EMPIRE.      599


BEMAINS   OF   THE    PALACK    OP    ECBATANA.'


give  Mandane  in  marriage  to  a  Mede.  He  therefore  bestowed  her  haud  on  a
Persian  noble  of  the  race  of  the  Achsemenids,  named  Cambyses;  but  a  second
dream  soon  troubled  the  security  into  which  this  union  had  lulled  him :  he
saw  issuing  from  his  daughter's  womb  a  vine  whose  branches  overshadowed
Asia,  and  the  interpreters,  being  once  more  consulted,  predicted  that  a  grand-
son was  about  to  be  born  to  him  whose  ambition  would  cost  him  his  crown.
He  therefore  bade  a  certain
nobleman  of  his  court,
named  Harpagus — he  whose
descendants  preserved  this
version  of  the  story  of
Cyrus — to  seize  the  infant
and  put  it  to  death  as  soon
as  its  mother  should  give
it  birth;  but  the  man,
touched  with  pity,  caused
the  child  to  be  exposed  in
the  woods   by  one   of  the

royal  shepherds.  A  bitch  gave  suck  to  the  tiny  creature,  who,  however,  would
soon  have  succumbed  to  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  had  not  the  shepherd's
■wife,  being  lately  delivered  of  a  still-born  son,  persuaded  her  husband  to  rescue
the  infant,  whom  she  nursed  with  the  same  tenderness  as  if  he  had  been  her
own  child.  The  dog  was,  as  we  know,  a  sacred  animal  among  the  Iranians :
the  incident  of  the  bitch  seems,  then,  to  have  been  regarded  by  them  as  an
indication  of  divine  intervention,  but  the  Greeks  were  shocked  by  the  idea,
and  invented  an  explanation  consonant  with  their  own  customs.  They  supposed
that  the  woman  had  borne  the  name  of  Spako :  Spako  signifying  hitch  in  the
language  of  Media.^  Cyrus  grew  to  boyhood,  and  being  accepted  by  Mandane
as  her  son,  returned  to  the  court;  his  grandfather  consented  to  spare  his  life,
but,  to  avenge  himself  on"  Harpagus,  he  caused  the  limbs  of  the  nobleman's  own
son  to  be  served  up  to  him  at  a  feast.  Thenceforth  Harpagus  had  but  one
idea,  to  overthrow  the  tyrant  and  transfer  the  crown  to  the  young  prince  :  his
project  succeeded,  and  Cyrus,  having  overcome  Astyages,  was  proclaimed  king

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Goste  and  rLANDi>f,  Voyage  en  Perse,  pi.  xsv.

'  Herodotus  (I.  ex.)  asserts  that  the  child's  foster-mother  was  called  in  Greek  Kyno,  in  Median
Spalid,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  for  spalca  means  bitch  in  Median.  Further  on  he  asserts  that  the
parents  of  the  child  heard  of  the  name  of  his  nurse  with  joy,  as  being  of  good  augury ;  "  and,  in
order  that  the  Persians  might  think  that  Cyrus  had  been  preserved  alive  by  divine  agency,  theif
spread  abroad  the  report  that  Cyrus  had  been  suchled  by  a  bitch.  And  thus  arose  the  fable  commonly
accepted"  (I.  cxxii.).  Trogus  Pompeius  received  the  original  story  probably  through  Dinon,  and
inserted  it  in  his  book  (Justin,  I.  v.) :  "  Invenit  justa  infantem  canem  feminam,  parvulo  ubera  prai-
bentem,  et  a  feris  alitibusque  defendentem."  For  the  sacred  character  of  the  dog  among  the  Iranians,
cf.  what  is  slated  supra,  p.  5S8.


600  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

by  the  Medes  as  well  as  by  the  Persians.  The  real  history  of  Cyrus,  as
far  as  we  can  ascertain  it,  was  less  romantic.  We  gather  that  Kurush,  known
to  us  as  Cyrus,  succeeded  his  father  Cambyses  as  ruler  of  Anslian  about  559  or
558  B.c.,^  and  that  he  revolted  against  Astyages  in  553  or  552  b.c.,^  and  defeated
him.  The  Median  army  thereupon  seizing  its  own  leader,  delivered  him  into  the
hands  of  the  conqueror:  Eebatana  was  taken  ^  and  sacked,  and  the  empire  fell
at  one  blow,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  underwent  a  transformation  (550  B.C.).*
The  transformation  was,  in  fact,  an  internal  revolution  in  which  the  two  peoples
of  the  same  race  changed  places.  The  name  of  the  Medes  lost  nothing  of  the
prestige  which  it  enjoyed  in  foreign  lands,  but  that  of  the  Persians  was  hence-
forth united  with  it,  and  shared  its  renown  :  like  Astyages  and  his  predecessors,
Cyrus  and  his  successors  reigned  equally  over  the  two  leading  brandies  of  the
ancient  Iranian  stock,  but  whereas  the  former  had  been  kings  of  the  Medes
and  Persians,  the  latter  became  henceforth  kings  of  the  Persians  and  Medes.^

The  change  effected  was  so  natural  that  their  nearest  neighbours,  the
Chaldseans,  showed  no  signs  of  uneasiness  at  the  outset.  Tiiey  confined
themselves  to  the  bare  registration  of  the  fact  in  their  annals  at  the  appointed
date,  without  comment,  and  Nabonidus  in  no  way  deviated  from  the  pious
routine  which  it  had  hitherto  pleased  him  to  follow.  Under  a  sovereign  so
good-natured  there  was  little  likelihood  of  war,  at  all  events   with  external

'  The  length  of  Cyrus'  reign  is  fixed  at  thirty  years  by  Ctesias  {Fragm.  27,  §  8,  In  Muller-
DiDOT,  Ciegix  Cnidii  Fragm.,  p.  47),  followed  by  Diaon  {Fragni.  10,  in  Id.,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.
p.  91)  and  Trogus  Pompoius  (Justin,  i.  8, 14),  but  at  twenty-nine  years  by  Herodotus  (I.  ccsiv.),  whose
computation  I  here  follow.  Hitherto  the  beginning  of  his  reign  has  been  made  to  coincide  with  the
fall  of  Astyages,  which  was  consequently  placed  in  569  or  568  B.C.,  but  the  discovery  of  the  Annah
of  Nabonidus  obliges  us  to  place  the  taking  of  Eebatana  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  Babylonian  king
(SoHRADER,  Die  Nabonid-Cyrus-Clironik,  in  Keil.  Bihl.,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  128-131),  which  corre-
sponds to  the  year  550  B.C.,  and  consequently  to  hold  that  Cyrus  reckoned  his  twenty-nine  years  from
the  moment  when  lie  succeeded  his  father  Cambyses.

■  The  inscription  on  the  Rassam  Cylinder  of  Abu-Habha,  col.  i.  11.  28-33,  seems  to  make  the  fall
of  the  Median  king,  who  was  suzerain  of  tho  Scythians  of  Harran,  coincide  with  the  third  year  of
Nabonidus,  or  the  year  553-2  B.C.  But  it  is  only  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  hostilities  between
Cyrus  and  Astyages  which  is  here  furnished,  and  this  manner  of  interpreting  the  text  agrees  with  the
statement  of  the  Median  tradilions  handed  down  by  the  classical  authors,  that  three  combats  took
place  between  Astyages  and  Cyrus  before  the  final  victory  of  the  Persians.

'  Antials  of  Nabonidus,  col.  ii.  11. 1-4 ;  cf.  Sohkadkr,  op.  cit.,  pp.  128-131,  and  Hagkn,  Keilschriftur-
liunden  zur  Geschichle  des  KSnigi  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  218,  219,  236.

*  Rassam  Cylinder  of  Abu-Habba,  col.  i.  11.  16-27;  cf.  Latkille,  Der  Nubonidcylinder  V  Bawl.  64
umschrieben,  iibersetzt  und  erMart,  in  the  Zeitsehrifl  fiir  Keilfurschung,  vol.  ii.  pp.  242-215,  and  Peiseb,
Inschriften  Nabonids,  in  Scheadek,  Keil.  Bibl,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  98,  99.

'  This  equality  of  the  two  peoples  is  indicated  by  the  very  terms  employed  by  Darius,  when  he
speaks  of  them,  in  the  Great  Inscription  of  Behistun.  He  Siiys,  for  example,  in  connection  with  the  revolt
of  the  false  Smerdis,  that  "  the  deception  prevailed  greatly  in  the  land,  in  Persia  and  Media  as  well  as  in
the  other  provinces  "  (col.  i.  11.  34,  35);  and  further  on,  that  "  the  whole  people  rose,  and  passed  over  from
Cambyses  to  him,  Persia  and  Media  as  well  as  the  other  countries''  (col.  i.  11.  40,  41 ;  cf.  11.  46,  47).
In  tlie  same  way  he  mentions  "  the  army  of  Persians  and  Medes  which  was  with  him  "  (col.  ii.  1.  18),
and  one  sees  that  be  considered  MeJes  and  Persians  to  be  on  exactly  the  same  footing.  The  evidence
of  classical  authors,  confirming  this  information  and  showing  the  complete  equality  of  the  two  peoples,
has  been  collected  in  Max  Budinger,  Der  Ausgang  des  Medisclien  Reiches,  pp.  8-16.


REVOLVTIONS  IN   T7RE  AND    2HE   TAKING    OF  EABRAN.        601

foes,  but  insurrections  were  always  breaking  out  in  different  parts  of  his
territory,  and  we  read  of  difBculties  in  Khume  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,^  in
Hamath  in  his  second  year,^  and  troubles  in  Phoenicia  in  the  third  year,  which
afforded  an  opportunity  for  settling  the  Tyrian  question.  Tyre  had  led  a  far
from  peaceful  existence  ever  since  the  day  when,  from  sheer  apathy,  she  had
accepted  the  supremacy  of  Nebuchadrezzar.^  Baal  II.  had  peacefully  reigned
there  for  ten  years  (574-564),  but  after  his  death  the  people  had  overthrown
the  monarchy,  and  various  suffetes  had  followed  one  another  rapidly — Eknibaal
ruled  two  months,  Khelbes  ten  months,  the  high  priest  Abbar  three  months,
the  two  brothers  IMutton  and  Gerastratus  six  years,*  all  of  them  no  doubt  in  the
midst  of  endless  disturbances  ;  whereupon  a  certain  Baalezor  restored  the  royal
dignity,  but  only  to  enjoy  it  for  the  space  of  one  year.  On  his  death,  the  inhabi-
tants begged  the  Chaldseans  to  send  them,  as  a  successor  to  the  crown,  one  of
those  princes  whom,  according  to  custom,  Baal  had  not  long  previously  given
over  as  hostages  for  a  guarantee  of  his  loyalty,  and  Nergal-sharuzur  for  this
purpose  selected  from  their  number  Mahar-baal,  who  was  probably  a  sou  of
Ithobaal  (558-557).^  When,  at  the  end  of  four  years,  the  death  of  Mahar-baal
left  the  throne  vacant  (554-553),  the  Tyrians  petitioned  for  his  brother  Hirom,
and  Nabonidus,  who  was  then  engaged  in  Syria,  came  south  as  far  as  Phcenicia
and  installed  the  prince.^  This  took  place  at  the  very  moment  when  Cyrus  was
preparing  his  expedition  against  Astyages ;  and  the  Babylonian  monarch  took
advantage  of  the  agitation  into  which  the  Medes  were  thrown  by  this  invasion,
to  carry  into  execution  a  project  which  he  had  been  planning  ever  since  his
accession.  Shortly  after  that  event  he  had  had  a  dream,  in  which  Marduk,  tiie
great  lord,  and  Sin,  the  light  of  heaven  and  earth,  had  appeared  on  either  side

'  Annah  of  Nahonidui,  col.  i.  1.  7  ;  cf.  Schsadeb,  Die  Nahonid-Cyrut-ChTonik,  in  the  Keilinschrift-
liche  Bibliotheh,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  12S,  129,  and  Hagen,  Eeilschri/iurhunden  zur  Geschichte  dea
Konigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  214-217.

'  Annah  of  Nabonidus,  col.  i.  1.  9 ;  this  affair  is  dated  in  the  month  Tebeth  :  cf.  Schkauer,  Die
Nahonid-Cyrus-Chronik,  in  the  Eeil.  Bill.,  vol.  iu.,  2ud  part,  pp.  128,  129,  and  Hagen,  KeiUchriflur-
hunden  zur  Geschichte  des  KSnigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21G,  217,  235.

'  All  these  events  are  known  -through  the  excerpt  from  Meuander  preserved  to  us  by  Josephus  in
his  treatise  Against  Apion,  i.  21  {Fragm.  2,  in  Mcller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  446,
447);  on  the  value  of  this  fragment,  and  on  its  ascription  to  Menander  the  historian,  cf.  Gutschmid
Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  iv.  pp.  545-555.

*  Movers,  Das  PhSnizische  Alterthum,  2nd  part,  vol.  i.  pp.  463,  534,  and  Gutsohmid  Kleine
Schriften,  vol.  ii.  p.  71,  suppose  that  one  of  the  two  suffetes  had  in  his  jurisdiction  that  part  of  Tyie
which  was  on  the  island,  and  the  other  the  part  on  the  mainland.

'  The  fragment  ofMenauder  does  not  give  the  Babylonian  king's  name,  but  a  simple  chronological
calculation  proves  him  to  have  been  Nergal-sharuzur.

^  An7mls  of  Nabonidus,  col.  i.  II.  14-17,  where  mention  is  made  of  a  certain  Nabu-makhdan-uzur
— but  the  reading  of  the  name  is  uncertain — who  seems  to  be  in  revolt  against  the  Chaldjeans  •  cf.
Keilinschriflliche  BiUiothele,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  128,  129.  Floigl  has  very  ingeniously  harmonised
the  dates  of  the  Annate  with  those  obtained  from  the  fragment  of  Meuander  {Fragm.  2,  in  Mulleb-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  iv.  pp.  440,  447),  and  has  thence  concluded  that  the  object  of  the
expedition  of  the  third  year  was  the  enthroning  of  Hirom  which  is  mentioned  in  the  frao-ment  and
during  whose  fourteenth  year  Cyrus  became  King  of  Babylon  (Floigl,  Cyrus  und  Herodot,  p.  56  note)


002  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

of  his  couch,  the  former  addressing  him  iu  the  following  words:  "Nabonidus,
King  of  Babylon,  with  the  horses  of  thy  chariot  bring  brick,  rebuild  E-khul-
khul,  the  temple  of  Harran,  that  Sin,  the  great  lord,  may  take  up  his  abode
therein."  Nabonidus  had  respectfully  pointed  out  that  the  town  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Scythians,  who  were  subjects  of  the  Medes,'  but  the  god  had
replied:  "The  Scythian  of  whom  thou  speakest,  he,  his  country  and  the  kings
his  protectors,  are  no  more."  Cyrus  was  the  instrument  of  the  fulfilment  of
the  prophecy.  Nabonidus  took  possession  of  Hanun  without  difficulty,  and
immediately  put  the  necessary  work  iu  hand.^  This  was,  indeed,  the  sole  benefit
that  he  derived  from  the  changes  which  were  taking  place,  and  it  is  probable
that  his  inaction  was  the  result  of  the  enfeebled  condition  of  the  empire.  The
country  over  which  he  ruled,  exhausted  by  the  Assyrian  conquest,  and  de-
populated by  the  Scytiiian  invasions,  had  not  had  time  to  recover  its  forces
since  it  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Chalda3ans ;  and  the  wars  which
Nebuchadrezzar  had  been  obliged  to  undertake  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
his  own  power,  though  few  in  number  and  not  fraught  with  danger,  had  tended
to  prolong  the  state  of  weakness  into  which  it  had  sunk.  If  the  hero  of  the
dynasty  who  had  conquered  Egypt  had  not  ventured  to  measure  his  strength
with  the  Median  princes,  and  if  he  had  courted  the  friendship  not  only  of  the
warlike  Cyaxares  but  of  the  effeminate  Astyages,''  it  would  not  be  prudent  for
Nabonidus  to  come  into  collision  with  the  victorious  new-comers  from  the  heart
of  Iran.  Chaldnea  doubtless  was  right  in  avoiding  hostilities,  at  all  events  so
long  as  she  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  them  alone,  but  other  nations  had  not  the
same  motives  for  exercising  prudence,  and  Lydia  was  fully  assured  that  the
moment  had  come  for  her  to  again  take  up  the  ambitious  designs  which  the
treaty  of  585  had  forced  her  to  renounce.  Alyattes,  relieved  from  anxiety  with
regard  to  the  Medes,  had  confined  his  energies  to  establishing  firmly  his
kingdom  in  the  regions  of  Asia  Minor  extending  westwards  from  the  Halys  and
the  Anti-Taurus.  The  acquisition  of  Colophon,  the  destruction  of  Smyrna,  the
alliance  with  the  towns  of  the  littoral,*  had  ensured  him  undisputed  possession
of  the  valleys  of  the  Caicus  and  the  Hermus,  but  the  plains  of  the  Maeander  in
the  south,  and  the  mountainous  districts  of  Mysia  in  the  north,  were  not  yet
fully  brought  under  his  sway.  He  completed  the  occupation  of  the  Troad  and
Mysia  about  584,  and  afterwards  made  of  the  entire  province  an  appanage  for
Adramyttios,  who  was  either  his  son  or  his  brother."     He  even  carried  his  arms

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  516,  note  2,  519,  of  the  present  volume.

-  Bassam  Cylinder  of  Ahu-EaUa,  col.  i.  11.  8-53,  and  col.  ii.  11.  1-46 ;  cf.  Peiser,  Inschri/len
Nahonid'i,  in  Schradek,  EeilinschriJtUche  BibliotheTt,  vol.  iii.,  2001  part,  pp.  96-103.

»  Cf.  supra,  pp.  518-520,  530,  5G0.

*  For  the  wars  of  Alyattes  against  the  coast  towns,  and  for  his  relations  with  the  Greeks,  cf.
above,  pp.  523-525.

=  The  doings  of  Alyattes  in  Troas  and  in  Mysia  are  vouched  for  by  the  anecdote  related  by


TEE  END    OF  THE  BEIGN   OF  ALYATTES.  603

into  Bithynia,  where,  to  enforce  his  rule,  he  built  several  strongholds,  one  of
which,  called  Alyatta,  commanded  the  main  road  leading  from  the  basin  of  the
Rhyndacus  to  that  of  the  Sangarius,  skirting  the  spurs  of  Olympus.^  He
experienced  some  difficulty  in  reducing  Caria,  and  did  not  finally  succeed  in
his  efforts  till  nearly  the  close  of  his  reign  in  566.  Adramyttios  was  then  dead,
and  his  fief  had  devolved  on  his  eldest  surviving  brother  or  nephew,  Crcesus,
whose  mother  was  by  birth  a  Carian.  This  prince  had  incurred  his  father's
displeasure  by  his  prodigality,  and  an  influential  party  desired  that  he  should
be  set  aside  in  favour  of  his  brother  Pantaloon,  the  son  of  Alyattes  by  an
Ionian.  Croesus,  having  sown  his  wild  oats,  was  anxious  to  regain  his  father's
favour,  and  his  only  chance  of  so  doing  was  by  distinguishing  himself  in  the
coming  war,  if  only  money  could  be  found  for  paying  his  mercenaries.  Sadyattes,
the  richest  banker  in  Lydia,  who  had  already  had  dealings  with  all  the  members
of  the  royal  family,  refused  to  make  him  a  loan,  but  Theokharides  of  Priene
advanced  him  a  thousand  gold  staters,  which  enabled  Croesus  to  enroll  his
contingent  at  Ephesus,  and  to  be  the  first  to  present  himself  at  the  rallying-
place  for  the  troops."  Caria  was  annexed  to  the  kingdom,  but  the  conditions
under  which  the  annexation  took  place  are  not  known  to  us ;  ^  and  Croesus
contributed  so  considerably  to  the  success  of  the  campaign,  that  he  was
reinstated  in  popular  favour.  Alyattes,  however,  was  advancing  in  years,  and
was  soon  about  to  rejoin  his  adversaries  Cyaxares  and  Nebuchadrezzar  in  Hades.
Like  the  Pharaohs,  the  kings  of  Lydia  were  accustomed  to  construct  during
their  lifetime  the  monuments  in  which  they  were  to  repose  after  death.  Their
necropolis  was  situated  not  far  from  Sardes,  on  the  shores  of  the  little  lake
Gygtea  ;  it  was  here,  close  to  the  resting-place  of  his  ancestors  and  their  wives,
that  Alyattes  chose  the  spot  for  his  tomb,*  and  his  subjects  did  not  lose  the

Plutarch  {Banquet  of  the  Seven  Sages,  §  10,  in  Dubneb-Didot,  Moralia,  vol.  i.  p.  1S2)  concerning  this
king's  relations  with  Pittakos.  Tlie  founding  of  Adramyttium  is  attributed  to  him  by  Stephen  of
Byzantium  {s.v.  'ASpanvTTnoy),  after  Aristotle,  who  made  Adramyttios  the  brother  of  Croesus
(Fragm.  191,  in  Mlxleu-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  ii.  p.  163).  Eadet  'gives  good  reasons  for
believing  that  Adramyttios  was  brother  to  Alyattes  and  ancle  to  Crcesus  {La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec
au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  200,  note  1),  and  the  same  person  as  Adramys,  the  eon  of  Sadyattes,
according  to  Xanthus  of  Lydia  (Nicolas  op  Damascus,  Fragm.  68,  in  MCller-Didot,  Frag.  Hist.
Crrsec,  vol.  iii.  p.  30G).    Eadet  (op.  cit.,  p.  199,  note  1)  gives  the  year  5S1  for  the  date  of  these  events.

•  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  s.r.  'AKvarTa.  Radet  places  the  operations  in  Bitiiynia  before  the
Median  war,  towards  o91  at  the  latest  (op.  cit..  p.  201,  note  1).  I  think  that  they  are  more  probably
connected  with  those  in  Mysia,  and  that  they  form  part  of  the  various  measures  taken  after  the
Median  war  to  achieve  the  occupation  of  the  regions  west  of  the  Halys.

'  Xanthcs  of  Lydia,  in  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  65,  in  Mulleu-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,
vol.  iii.  p.  397.  A  mutilated  extract,  in  Suidas,  of  the  same  passage,  seems  to  carry  these  events
back  to  the  time  of  the  war  against  Priene,  towards  the  beginning  of  the  reign  (ef.  above,  p.  253).
The  united  evidence  of  the  accompanying  circumstances  proves  that  they  belong  to  the  time  of  the
old  age  of  Alyattes,  and  makes  it  very  likely  that  they  occurred  in  56(j,  the  date  proposed  by  Kadet
for  the  Carian  campaign  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Greo  an  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  196,  note  2).

'  The  fragment  of  Nicolas  of  Damascus  does  not  speak  of  the  result  of  the  war,  but  it  was
certainly  favourable,  for  Herodotus  counts  tlie  Carians  among  Croesus'  subjects  (I.  xxviii.).

*  Herodotus,  I.  xciii. ;  cf.  Stkauo,  XIII.  iv.  §  7,  p.  627.     The  only  one  of  these  monuments.


G04


TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.


THE  TIMULUS  OF  ALYATTES  AND  THE  ENTRAKCE  TO  THE
I'ASSAGE."


opportiinity  of  proving  to  what  extent  be  bad  gained  their  afiectious.     His

predecessors  had  been
obliged  to  finish  their  work
at  their  own  expense  and
by  forced  labour  ;i  but  in
the  case  of  Alyattes  the
three  wealthiest  classes  of
the  population,  the  mer-
chants, the  craftsmen,  and
the  courtesans,  all  imited
to  erect  for  him  an  enor-
mous tumulns,the  remains
of  which  still  rise  220  feet

above  the  plains  of  the  Hermus.    The  sub-structure  consisted  of  a  circular  wall  of

great  blocks  of  limestone  resting

on  the  solid  rock,  and  it  contained

in    the  centre  a  vault  of  grey

marble  which  was  reached  by  a

vaulted  passage.  A  liuge  mound

of  red  clay  and  yellowish  earth

was  raised  above  the  chamber,

surmounted  by  a  small  column

representing  a  phallus,  and  by

four  stelae  covered  with  inscrip-

tions,erected  at  the  four  cardinal

points.^  It  follows  the  tradi-
tional type  of  burial-places  in

use    among    the     old    Asianie

races,   but    it    is   constructed    with  greater    regularity   than    most   of  them :

besides  that  of  Alyattes,  which  is  mentioned  by  the  ancients,  belonged  to  one  of  the  favourites
of  Gyges,  and  was  called  the  Tomb  of  the  Courtesan  (Cleakchus  of  Soli,  Fragm.  34,  in  Mijlleb-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Jlht.  Grxc.,  vol.  ii.  p.  314).  Strabo,  by  a  manifest  error,  has  applied  this  name  to  the
tomb  of  Alyattes  (Schubert,  Geschichte  der  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  56,  57).

'  This,  at  least,  seems  to  be  the  import  of  the  passage  in  Clearchus  of  Soli  (Fragm.  34,  in
MiiLLEB-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  314),  where  that  historian  gives  an  account  of  the
erection  of  the  Tomb  of  the  Courtesan.

•  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  sketch  by  Spiegelthal,  in  Olfees,  Ueher  die  Lyditchen  ESnigsgraber,
pi.  iv.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.  Cf.  another  specimen  of  Lydian  ornaments,  also
preserved  in  the  Louvre,  which  is  reproduced  as  a  tailpiece,  supra,  p.  56S.

*  HEKODOTrs,  I.  xciii.,  xciv.  The  tomb  of  Alyattes  was  excavated  for  the  first  time  in  1853-1854,
by  Spiegelthal,  Prussian  consul  at  Smyrna,  and  his  observations  have  been  published  and  arranged  by
Olfeks,  Veber  die  Lydischen  Ebnigsgraber  bet  Sardes  und  den  Grabhiigel  des  Alyattes  (in  the  Memoirs
of  the  Berlin  Academy  of  Sciences,  1S58,  pp.  539-556) ;  cf.  Pekrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art
dans  V Anti^uit^,  vol.  v.  pp.  265-274.     Olfers  thought  that  he  could  conclude  from  Herodotus'  remarks


ONE  OF  THE  LYDIAN  ORNAMENTS  IN  THE  LOUVRE/"


ART  IN  LYDIA.


605


Alyattes   was   laid   within   it   in   561,   after   a    glorious   reign   of  forty-nine

years.^

It  was  wholly  due  to

him    that  Lydia   was   for

the  moment  raised  to  the

level  of  the  most  powerful

states  which  then  existed

on    the  eastern  shores  of

the    Mediterranean.      He

was  by  nature  of  a  violent

and   uncontrolled  temper,

and     during    his    earlier

years  he  gave  way  to  fits

of    anger,    in    which    he

would  rend  the  clothes  of

those  who  came  in  his  way  *'°^^''  """^  jewellery  of  lyman  origin.''

or  would  spit  in  their  faces,  but  with  advancing  years  his  character  became

more  softened,  and  he
finally  earned  the  repu-
tation of  being  a  just  and
moderate  sovereign.''
The  little  that  we  know
of  his  life  reveals  an
energy  and  steadfast-
ness of  purpose  quite
unusual ;  he  proceeded
slowly  but  surely  in  his

undertakings,  and  if  he  did  not  succeed  in  extending  his  domains  as  far  as  he

had  hoped  at  the  beginning  of  his  campaigns  against  the  Medes,  he  at  all

events  never  lost  any  of  -the  provinces  he  had  acquired.     Under  his  auspices


A  LYDIAN  FUKERART  COUCH.*


that  the  latter  was  speaking  of  the  tomb  from  the  observation  of  another  person,  but  the  comparison
that  Herodotus  makes  between  it  and  the  Egyptian  pyramids  and  the  Chaldsean  ziggurats  (II.  xciii.)
proves  that  he  had  seen  it  during  one  of  his  journeys  (Schubert,  Geacliichte  der  KSniije  von  Lydien,
p.  56).

'  Herodotus,  I.  xxv.,  gave  fifty-seven  years'  length  of  reign  to  Alyattes,  whilst  the  chronographers,
who  go  back  as  far  as  Xanthus  of  Lydia,  through  Julius  Africanus,  attribute  to  him  only  forty-nine
(EusEBius,  Chronicon,  ed.  Schcene,  vol.  i.  69, 220)  ;  historians  now  prefer  the  latter  figures,  at  least  as
representing  the  maximum  length  of  reign  (Schobekt,  Geschiclite  dcr  KSnige  von  Lydien,  pp.  14,  15 ;
GuTSOHMiD,  Kleine  Scliri/ttn,  vol.  ii.  pp.  474,  475;  Eadet,  La  Lydie  el  le  Monde  Grec  au  tempi  des
Mermnades,  pp.  141-148,  191,  193,  note  4).

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph.

=  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  64,  in  BIuller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  396,  397.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  CuoiSY,  Kate  sur  Us  Tombeaux  Lydiens  de  Sardei,  fig.  13.


606


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


LYBIAN  COIN  BEARING  A  RUNNING  KOX.


LYDIAN   COIN    WITH
A    UAIIE.'-


LTDIAN   COIN    WITH
A   LION.*


agriculture  flourished,  and  manufactures  attained  a  degree  of  perfection  hitherto
unknown.  None  of  the  vases  in  gold,  silver,  or  wrought-iron,  which  he  dedi-
cated and  placed  among  the  treasures  of  the
Greek  temples,  has  come  down  to  us,  but
at  rare  intervals  ornaments  of  admirable
workmanship  are  found  in  the  Lydian  tombs.
Those  now  in  the  Louvre
exhibit,  in  addition  to
Imman  figures  somewhat
awkwardly  treated,  heads
of  rams,  bulls,  and  griffins  of  a  singular  delicacy  and
faithfulness  to  nature.  These  examples
reveal  a  blending  of  Grecian  types  and
methods  of  production  with  those  of  Egypt  or  Ghaldaea,
the  Hellenic  being  predominant,^  and  the  same  combination
of  heterogeneous  elements  must  have  existed  in  the  other
domains  of  industrial  art — in  the  dyed  and  embroidered
stuflfs,^  the  vases,^  and  the  furniture.''  Lydia,  inheriting  the
traditions  of  Phrygia,®  and  like  that  state  situated  on  the  border  of  two  worlds,
allied  moreover  with  Egypt  as  well  as  Babylon,  and  in  regular  communication

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gutlin,  from  a  specimen  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles:  u  stater  of  electrum
weighing  14'19  grammes.  I  owe  the  cast  of  this  coin  to  M.  Babelon,  who  also  has  kindly  undertaken
the  selection  of  the  other  coins  reproduced  below  in  the  present  work.

*  [These  illustrations  are  larger  than  the  original  pieces. — Tn.]

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Midailles.  I  am  indebted  to  the
courtesy  of  M.  Babelon  for  a  cast  of  this  coin.

^  For  Lydian  jewellery,  see  Pebrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Ari  dans  V Antiqnittf,  vol.  v.
pp.  294-303,  where  Egyptian  influence  is  rightly  asserted.  The  ornaments,  of  which  we  have  now
no  specimens,  but  only  the  original  moulds  cut  in  serpentine,  such  as  the  one  reproduced  above  on
p.  605,  betray  imitation  of  Assyria  and  Chalda3a  (S.  Eeinach,  Deux  Monies  Asiatiques  en  serpentine,
in  the  Revue  Arch€ologiqu,e,  1885,  vol.  vi.  pp.  58-60).

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Mfdailles.  I  am  indebted  to  the
courtesy  of  M.  Babelon  for  a  cast  of  this  coin.

'  On  the  transparent  muslins  called  sandylces,  from  the  name  of  the  jdant  used  to  dye  them  a  rosy
flesh-colour,  see  the  passage  in  John  of  Ltl>ia,  Roman  Magistracies,  iii.  64.  The  custom  of  clothing
themselves  in  dyed  and  embroidered  stufl's  was  one  of  the  effeminate  habits  with  which  the  poet
Xenophanes  reproached  the  lonians  as  having  been  learned  from  their  Lydian  neighbours.

"  For  the  rare  fragments  of  Lydian  pottery  which  have  come  down  to  us,  see  Perrot  and
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  292-204.  M.  Perrot  points  out  that  one  of  the
vases  discovered  by  G.  Dennis  at  Bintepe  is  an  evident  imitation  of  the  Egyptian  and  Phoenician
chevroned  glasses  (^Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  V Antiquiti',  vol.  v.  p.  905).  The  shape  of  the  vase  is  one
of  those  found  represented,  with  the  same  decoration,  on  Egyptian  monuments  subsequent  to  the
Middle  Empire,  where  the  chevroned  lines  seem  to  be  derived  from  the  undulations  of  ribbon-
alabaster.

'  The  stone  funerary  couches  which  have  been  discovered  in  Lydian  tombs  (Choist,  Note  eur  les
Tomheaux  Lydiens  de  Sardes,  in  the  Revue  ArcMologique,  1876,  vol.  xxxii.  pp.  78-81;  cf.  the  illus-
tration, supra,  p.  605)  are  evidently  copied  from  pieces  of  wooden  furniture  similarly  arranged  and
decorated  (Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dans  la  Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  303,  304).

*  On  the  mixed  character  of  Lydian  art  and  civilisation,  cf.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art
dans  I'Antiquil^,  vol.  v.  pp.  305-308,  and  more  especially  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps
des  Mermnades,  pp.  260-302.


THE  EABLIEST  COINS.  G07

with  the  Delta,  borrowed  from  each  that  which  fell  in  with  her  tastes  or  seemed
likely  to  be  most  helpful  to  her  in  her  commercial  relations.  As  the  country
produced  gold  in  considerable  quantities,  and  received  still  more  from  extraneous
sources,  the  precious  metal  came  soon  to  be  employed  as  a  means  of  exchange
under  other  conditions  than  those  which  had  hitherto  prevailed.  Besides
acting  as  commission  agents  and  middle-men  for  the  disposal  of  merchandise
at  Sardes,  Ephesus,  Miletus,  Clazomenpe,  and  all  the  maritioie  cities,  the
Lydians  performed  at  the  same  time  the  functions  of  pawnbrokers,  money-
changers, and  bankers,  and  they  were  ready  to  make  loans  to  private  individuals
as  well  as  to  kings.  Obliged  by  the  exigencies  of  their  trade  to  cut  up  the  large
gold  ingots  into  sections  sufficiently  small  to
represent  the  smallest  values  required  in  daily
life,  they  did  not  at  first  impress  upon  these
portions  any  stamp  as  a  guarantee  of  the  exact
COIN  WALTON'S  weight  or  of  the  purity  of  the  metal :  they  ^^.^  beaking  head
"''*°-'  were  estimated,  like  the  tahomo  of  the  Egyp-    «^ «o«.lon goat.=

tians,^  by  actual  weighing  on  the  occasion  of  each  business  transaction.  The
idea  at  length  occurred  to  them  to  impress  each  of  these  pieces  with  a  common
stamp,  serving,  like  the  trade-marks  employed  by  certain  guilds  of  artisans,  to
testify  at  once  to  their  genuineness  and  their  exact  weight :  in  a  word,  they
were  the  inventors  of  money.  The  most  ancient  coinage  of  their  mint  was  like
a  flattened  sphere,  more  or  less  ovoid,  in  form  :  it  consisted  at  first  of  electrum,
and  afterwards  of  smelted  gold,  upon  which  parallel  stria3  or  shallow  creases
were  made  by  a  hammer.  There  were  two  kinds  of  coinage,  differing  con-
siderably from  each  other;  one  consisted  of  the  heavy  stater,  weighing  about
14'20  grammes,  perhaps  of  PhcBnician  origin,  the  other  of  tlie  light  stater,
of  some  10*80  grammes  in  weight,  which  doubtless  served  as  money  for  the
local  needs  of  Lydia  :  both  forms  were  subdivided  into  pieces  representing
respectively  the  third,  the  sixth,  the  twelfth,  and  the  twenty-fourth  of  the  value
of  the  original.*  The  stamp  which  came  to  be  impressed  upon  the  money
was  in  relief,  and  varied  with  the  banker  ;*  when  political  communities  began  to
follow  the  example  of  individuals,  it  also  bore  the  name  of  the  city  where  it
was  minted.  The  type  of  impression  once  selected,  was  little  modified  for  fear
of  exciting  mistrust  among  the  j^eople,  but  it  was  more  finely  executed  and

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  cuin  in  the  Cabinet  des  MAiailles,  of  which  I  am  indebted
for  a  cast  to  the  courtesy  of  M.  Babelon.     Another  specimen  has  been  reproduced  oa  p.  570.

"  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coio  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles.  I  am  indebted  to  the
courtesy  of  M.  Babelon  for  a  cast  of  it.

'  On  the  iabonu  of  Egypt,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  4'JU.

*  Babelon,  Les  Origines  de  la  Monnaie  considd'r^es  aii,  point  de  vue  historique  et  fconomique,
pp.  103-12t,  where  this  origin  of  coinage  has  been  shown  for  the  first  time.

*  [The  best  English  numismatists  do  not  agree  with  M.  Bibelon's  "  banker  "  theory.  Cf.  Barclay
V.  Head,  Uistoria  Nummorum,  p.  xxxiv. — Tr.]


GO 8  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

enlarged  so  as  to  cover  one  of  the  faces,  that  which  we  now  call  the  obverse.
Several  subjects  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  design,  each  being  impressed
by  a  special  punch  :  thus  in  the  central  concavity  we  find  the  figure  of  a  running
fox,  emblem  of  Apollo  Bassareus,  and  in  two  similar  depressions,  one  above  and
the  other  below  the  central,  appear  a  horse's  or  stag's  head,  and  a  flower  with
four  petals.  Later  on  the  design  was  simplified,  and  contained  only  one,  or  at
most  two  figures — a  hare  squatting  under  a  tortuous  climbing  plant,  a  roaring
lion  crouching  with  its  head  turned  to  the  left,  the  grinning  muzzle  of  a  lion,
the  horned  profile  of  an  antelope  or  mouflon  sheep  :  rosettes  and  flowers,
included  within  a  square  depression,  were  then  used  to  re-
place the  striaj  and  irregular  lines  of  the  reverse.  These
first  efforts  were  without  inscriptions;  it  was  not  long,  how-
ever, before  there  came  to  be  used,  in  addition  to  the  figures,
legends,  from  which  we  sometimes  learn  the  name  of  the

MOSEY   OF   ClitESra."  in-  T  1  I         /.  T.1

banker ;  we  read,  for  instance,  "  I  am  the  mark  of  Phannes,
on  a  stater  of  electrum  struck  at  Ephesus,  with  a  stag  grazing  on  the  right.^
We  are  ignorant  as  to  which  of  the  Lydian  kings  first  made  use  of  the  new
invention,  and  so  threw  into  circulation  the  gold  and  electrum  which  filled
his  treasury  to  overflowing.  The  ancients  say  it  was  Gyges,  but  the  Gygads
of  their  time  cannot  be  ascribed  to  him ;  they  were,  without  any  doubt,
simply  ingots  marked  with  the  stamp  of  the  banker  of  the  time,  and  were
attributed  to  Gyges  either  out  of  pure  imagination  or  by  mistake.^  The
same  must  be  said  of  the  pieces  of  money  which  have  been  assigned  to
his  successors,  and,  even  when  we  find  on  them  traces  of  writing,  we  cannot
be  sure  of  their  identification ;  one  legend  which  was  considered  to  contain
the  name  of  Sadyattes  has  been  made  out,  without  producing  conviction,  as
involving,  instead,  that  of  Clazomense.*  There  is  no  certainty  until  after  the
time  of  Alyattes,  that  is,  in  the  reign  of  Croesus.  It  is,  as  a  fact,  to  this  prince
that  we  owe  the  fine  gold  and  silver  coins  bearing  on  the  obverse  a  demi-Iion

1  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  cuin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medailles,  a  cast  of  which  I  owe  to  the
courtesy  of  M.  Babelon.

^  Babelon,  Melangei  de  Numiamatique,  vol.  iii.  p.  123.  The  coin  is  of  electrum  found  at  Halicar-
nassus,  and  is  preserved  in  the  British  AluBeum :  it  weighs  11'06  grammes,  and  bears  the  inscription
<l>a^^os  ffii  (Tiifia,  written  from  left  to  right.

'  The  gold  of  Gyges,  6  TvyiSas  xP""'"^'  i^  known  to  us  through  a  passage  in  Pollux  (Onomasticou,
iii.  87 ;  of.  vii.  98).  Ft.  Lenormaat  attributed  to  Gyges  (^Monnaies  roijaUe  de  la  Lydie,  pp.  3,  4.
14,  15,  21  ;  La  Monnaie  dans  I'Antiquitg,  vol.  i.  pp.  128,  132, 133)  the  coins  which  Babelon  restores  to
the  banks  of  Asia  Minor  (Xes  Origines  de  la  Monnaie,  pp.  222-226).  Babelon  sees  in  the  Gygads  only
"  ingots  of  gold,  struck  possihly  in  the  name  of  Gyges,  capable  of  being  used  as  coin,  doubtless
represeuting  a  definitely  fixed  weight,  but  still  lacking  that  ultimate  perfection  which  characterises
the  coinage  of  civilised  peoples ;  from  the  standpoint  of  circulation  in  the  market  their  shape  was
defective  and  inconvenient ;  their  subdivision  did  not  extend  to  such  small  fractious  as  to  make  all
payments  easy ;  they  were  too  large  and  too  dear  for  easy  circulation  through  many  hands."

*  Babelon,  Melanges  Numismatigues,  vol.  iii.  p.  138.


THE   CONQUESTS   OF   CRCESUS.


609


couchant  confronting  a  bull  treated  similarly.^  The  two  creatures  appear  to
threaten  one  another,  and  the  introduction  of  the  lion  recalls  a  tradition  regarding
the  city  of  Sardes ;  it  may  represent  the  actual  animal  which  was  alleged  to  have
been  begotten  by  King  Meles  of  one  of  his  concubines,  and  which  he  caused
to  be  carried  solemnly  round  the  city  walls  to  render  them  impregnable.^

Croesus  did  not  succeed  to  the  throne  of  his  father  without  trouble.     His
enemies  had  not  laid  down  their  arms  after  the  Carian  campaign,  and  they


endeavoured  to  rid  themselves  of  him  by  all  the  means  in  use  at  Oriental  courts.
The  Ionian  mother  of  his  rival  furnished  the  slave  who  kneaded  the  bread  with
poison,  telling  her  to  mix  it  with  the  dough,  but  the  woman  revealed  the  in-
tended crime  to  her  master,  who  at  once  took  the  necessary  measures  to  frustrate
the  plot ;  later  on  in  life  he  dedicated  in  the  temple  at  Delphi  a  statue  of  gold
representing  the  faithful  bread-maker.*  The  chief  of  the  rival  party  seems  to
have  been  Sadyattes,  the  banker  from  whom  Croesus  had  endeavoured  to  borrow

'  Lenormant  ascribed  an  issue  of  coins  without  inscriptions  to  the  kings  Ardys,  Sadyattes,  and
Alyattes  {Monnaies  royales  de  Lydie,  pp.  4-7),  but  this  has  since  been  believed  not  to  have  been  their
work.

'  On  this  tradition,  cf.  supra,  p.  337.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph.

*  Pltitakoh,  De  Pytlnai  Oraculis,  §  16,  in  B.a;HK-DiDOT,  Opera  Moralia,  vol.  i.  p.  490,  where  the
author  simply  says  the  lung's  second  wife ;  he  evidently  designates  thus  the  mother  of  Pautaleon
(Radet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  208).  Herodotus  mentions  the  statue
of  the  bread-maker,  giving  no  reason  why  Croesus  dedicated  it.  The  antliorquoted  by  Plutarch  would
have  it  that  in  revenge  he  made  his  half-brothers  eat  the  poisoned  bread.

2    R


€10  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

money  at  the  beginning  of  his  career,^  but  several  of  the  Lydian  nobles,  whose

exercise  of  feudal  rights  had  been  restricted  by  the  growing  authority  of  the

Mermnadse,  either  secretly  or  openly  gave  their  adhesion  to  Pantaleon,  among

them  being  Glaucias   of  Sideue;    the   Greek  cities,  always   ready  to   chafe

at  authority,  were  naturally  inclined  to  support  a  claimant  born  of  a  Greek

mother,  and    Pindarus  the  tyrant  of   Ephesus,  and  grandson  of  the  Melas

who  had  married  the  daughter  of  Gyges,  joined  the  conspirators.     As  soon

as  Alyattes  was  dead,  Croesus,  who  was  kept  informed  by  his  spies  of  their

plans,  took  action  with  a  rapidity  which  disconcerted  his  adversaries.      It

is  not  known  what  became  of  Pantaleon,  whether  he  was  executed  or  fled  the

country,  but  his  friends  were  tortured  to  death  or  had  to  purchase  their  pardon

dearly.     Sadyattes  was  stretched  on  a  rack  and  torn  with  carding  combs.^

Glaucias,  besieged  in  his  fortress  of  Sidene,  opened  its  gates  after  a  desperate

resistance ;  the  king  demolished  the  walls,  and  pronounced  a  solemn  curse  on

those  who  should  thereafter  rebuild  them.^     Pindarus,  summoned  to  surrender,

refused,    but   as  he  had  not  sufficient  troops  to  defend  the  entire  city,  he

evacuated  the  lower  quarters,  and  concentrated  all  his  forces  on  the  defence  of

the  citadel ;  he  refused  to  open  negotiations  until  after  the  fall  of  a  tower  at

the  moment  when  a  practicable   breach  had    been  made,  and   succeeded  in

obtaining  an  honourable  capitulation  for  himself  and  his  people  by  a  ruse.    He

dedicated  the  town  to  Artemis,  and  by  means  of  a  rope  connected  the  city  walls

with  the  temple,  which  stood  nearly  a  mile  away  in  the  suburbs,  and  then

entreated  for  peace  in  the  name  of  the  goddess.     Croesus  was  amused  at  the

artifice,  and  granted  favourable  conditions  to  the  inhabitants,  but  insisted  on

the  expulsion  of  the  tyrant.    The  latter  bowed  before  the  decree,  and  confiding

the  care  of  his  children  and  possessions  to  his  friend  Pasicles,  left  for  the

Peloponnesus  with  his  retinue.''     Ephesus  up  to  this  time  had  been  a  kind  of

allied  principality,  whose  chiefs,  united  to  the  royal  family  of  Lydia  by  marriages

from  generation  to  generation,  recognised  the  nominal  suzerainty  of  the  reigning

king  rather  than  his  effective  authority.    It  was  in  fact  a  species  of  protectorate,

which,  while  furthering  the  commercial  interests  of  Lydia,  satisfied  at  the  same

time  the  passion  of  the  Greek  cities  for  autonomy.     Croesus,  encouraged  by  his

first  success,  could  not  rest  contented  with  such  a  compromise.     He  attacked,

'  Cf.  mpra,  p.  603.

'  The  history  of  Sadyattes  and  of  his  part  in  the  conspiracy  results  from  points  of  agreement  which
have  been  established  between  various  passages  in  Herodotus  (I.  scii.)  and  in  Nicolas  of  Damascus
{Fragm.  65,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  iii.  p.  397),  where  the  person  is  sometimes
named  and  sometimes  not;  cf.  Schubert,  Geschichle  der  Konige  von  Lydien,  p.  61,  and  Kadet,  La
Lydie  et  h  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  206-208.

'  Strabo,  XIII.  i.  §  42,  p.  601,  probably  from  Xanthus  of  Lydia,  as  the  Fragment  24  of  that
author,  in  Mi;LLER-Di»OT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  p.  43,  seems  to  show.

*  Herodotus,  I.  xxvi.,  where  the  outline  of  the  story  is  given ;  the  detailed  account  found  in
PoLT^sus,  Stratagems,  vi.  50,  and  in  ^Elian,  Hist.  Var.,  iii.  26,  is  probably  taken  from  Xanthus.


RELATIONS  OF  CBOJSUS  WITH  THE  OODS  AXD  CITIES  OF  GREECE.     611

successively,  3Iiletus  and  the  various  Ionian,  J^olian,  and  Dorian  communities
of  the  littoral,  and  brought  them  all  under  his  sway,  promising  on  their
capitulation  that  their  local  constitutions  should  be  respected  if  they  became
direct  dependencies  of  his  empire.^  He  placed  garrisons  in  such  towns  as
were  strategically  important  for  him  to  occupy,  but  everywhere  else  he  razed
to  the  ground  the  fortresses  and  ramparts  which  might  afford  protection  to  his
enemies  in  case  of  rebellion,  compelling  the  inhabitants  to  take  up  their  abode
on  the  open  plain  where  they  could  not  readily  defend  themselves.-  The
administration  of  the  affairs  of  each  city  was  entrusted  to  either  a  wealthy  citizen,
or  an  hereditary  tyrant,  or  an  elected  magistrate,  who  was  held  responsible  for
its  loyalty ;  the  administrator  paid  over  the  tribute  to  the  sovereign's  treasurers,
levied  the  specified  contingent  and  took  command  of  it  in  time  of  war,  settled
any  quarrels  which  might  occur,  and  was  emjDowered,  when  necessary,  to  exile
turbulent  and  ambitious  persons  whose  words  or  actions  appeared  to  him  to
be  suspicious.^  Croesus  treated  with  generosity  those  republics  which  tendered
him  loyal  obedience,  and  affected  a  special  devotion  to  their  gods.  He  gave  a
large  number  of  ex-voto  offerings  to  the  much-revered  sanctuary  of  Branchidte,
in  the  territory  of  Miletus ;  ^  he  dedicated  some  golden  heifers  at  the  Artemision
of  Ephesus,  and  erected  the  greater  number  of  the  columns  of  that  temple  at
his  own  expense.^  At  one  time  in  his  career  he  appears  to  have  contemplated
extending  his  dominion  over  the  Greek  islands,  and  planned,  as  was  said,  the
equipment  of  a  fleet,  but  he  soon  acknowledged  the  imprudence  of  such  a
project,  and  confined  his  efforts  to  strengthening  his  advantageous  position  on
the  littoral  by  contracting  alliances  with  the  island  populations  and  with
the  nations  of  Greece  proper."  Following  the  diplomacy  of  his  ancestors,  he
began  by  devoting  himself  to  the  gods  of  the  country,  and  took  every  pains  to
gain  tlie  good  graces  of  Apollo  of  Delphi.  He  dispensed  his  gifts  with  such
liberality  that  neither  his  contemporaries  nor  subsequent  generations  grew
weary  of  admiring  it.  On  one  occasion  he  is  said  to  have  sacrificed  three
thousand  animals,  and  burnt,  moreover,  on  the  pyre  the  costly  contents  of  a
palace — couches  covered  with  silver  and  gold,  coverlets  and  robes  of  purple,

'  Herodotus,  I.  xs\'i.,  xxviii.  Mention  of  these  capitulations,  aiji/BriKai,  is  made  with  reference  to
Ephesus,  in  Polt^snus,  Stratagems,  vi.  50.

=  He  treated  thus  the  Ephesians  (Stkabo,  XIV.  i.  §  21,  p.  610)  and  the  Ilians  (Stkabo,  XIII.
i.  §  25,  p.  593).

'  For  the  organisation  of  the  dominion  over  Lydia  under  Croesus,  see  the  ingenious  proof  in  Kadet.
in  Lydie  el  le  Monile  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  210-215.

'  Herodotus,  I.  xcii.,  and  V.  xssvi.

'  Hekodotus,  I.  xcii.  The  fragments  of  columns  brought  from  this  temple  by  Wood  and  preserved
in  the  British  Museum  have  on  one  of  the  bases  the  remains  of  an  inscription  confirming  the  testi-
mony of  Herodotus  :  Ba[o-i\6i>s]  Kfpoio-os]  a>'e'[fl')K'6]i'  (MuBEAT,  Eemains  of  the  Archaic  Temple  of
Artemis  at  Ephesus,  in  the  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,  vol.  x.  pp.  1-10).

°  Herodotus,  I.  xxvii. ;  Diodoeus  Siculus,  ix.  25 ;  Poltjesus,  Stratagems,  ii.  26.  He  seems  to
have  been  deterred  from  his  project  by  a  sarcastic  remark  made,  as  some  say,  by  Pittakos  the
Mitylenian,  or  according  to  others,  by  Bias  of  Priene.


612  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

and  golden  vials.  His  subjects  were  commauded  to  contribute  to  the  offering,
and  he  caused  one  hundred  and  seventeen  hollow  half-bricks  to  be  cast  of  the
gold  which  they  brought  him  for  this  purpose.  These  bricks  were  placed  in
regular  layers  w'ithin  the  treasury  at  Delphi  where  the  gifts  of  Lydia  from  the
time  of  Alyattes  were  deposited,  and  the  top  of  the  pile  was  surmounted  by  a
lion  of  fine  gold  of  such  a  size  that  the  pedestal  and  statue  together  were  worth
£1,200,000  of  our  present  money.  These,  however,  formed  only  a  titlie  of  his
gifts ;  many  of  the  objects  dedicated  by  him  were  dispersed  half  a  century
(548  B.C.)  later  when  the  temple  was  burnt,  and  found  their  way  into  the
treasuries  of  the  Greek  states  which  enjoyed  the  favour  of  Apollo — among  them
being  an  enormous  gold  cup  sent  to  Clazomenaj,  and  four  barrels  of  silver  and
two  bowls,  one  of  silver  and  one  of  gold,  sent  to  the  Corinthians.  The  people
at  Delphi,  as  well  as  their  god,  participated  in  the  royal  largesse,  and  Croesus
distributed  to  them  the  sum  of  two  staters  per  head.  No  doubt  their  gratitude
led  them  by  degrees  to  exaggerate  the  total  of  the  benefits  showered  upon  them,
especially  as  time  went  on  and  their  recollection  of  the  king  became  fainter ;  but
even  when  we  reduce  the  number  of  the  many  gifts  which  they  attributed  to
him,  we  are  still  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  they  surpassed  anything  hitherto
recorded,  and  that  they  produced  throughout  the  whole  of  Greece  the  effect
that  Croesus  had  desired.  The  oracle  granted  to  him  and  to  the  Lydians  the
rights  of  citizenship  in  perpetuity,  the  privilege  of  priority  in  consulting  it
before  all  comers,  precedence  for  his  legates  over  other  foreign  embassies,  and
a  place  of  honour  at  the  games  and  at  all  religious  ceremonies.^  It  was,  in
fact,  the  admission  of  Lydia  into  the  Hellenic  concert,  and  the  offerings  which
Croesus  showered  upon  the  sanctuaries  of  lesser  fame — that  of  Zeus  at  Dodona,^
of  Amphiaraos  at  Oropos,^  of  Trophonios  at  Lebadaja,^  on  the  oracle  of  Abse  in
Phocis,  and  on  the  Ismenian  Apollo  at  Thebes  ^ — secured  a  general  approval
of  the  act.  Political  alliances  contracted  with  the  great  families  of  Athens,
the  Alcmseonidte  and  Eupatridte,^  with  the  Cypselidae  of  Corinth,''  and
with  the  Heraclidse  of  Sparta,*  completed  the  policy  of  bribery  which  Crcesus

'  Herodotus.  I.  1.,  li. ;  Theopompus,  Fragm.  184,  ia  Mulleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  C-r^c.,\o\.  i.
pp.  309,  310;  Phaxias  of  Eresos,  Fragm.  12,  la,  vol.  ii.  p.  297.

'  Herodotus,  I.  xlvi.

'  Herodotus,  I.  slvi,  xlix.,  lii.,  xcii. ;  cf.  the  allusion  to  the  consultation  of  the  oracle  in  the  scene
at  the  funeral  pile  as  described  by  Nicolas  of  Damascus,  Fragm.  68,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Sist.
Grmc.,  vol.  iii.  p.  408.

••  Herodotus,  I.  xlvi.  ^  Herodotus,  I.  xlvi.,  xcii.

"  For  Croesus*  relations  with  Alcmseon,  cf.  the  traditions  preserved  by  Herodotus,  VI.  exxv.  :
Tbe  king  compelled  the  inhabitants  of  Lampsacus,  his  vassals,  to  release  the  elder  Miltiades,  whom
they  had  taken  prisoner  (Herodotus,  VI.  xxxvii.),  and  thus  earned  the  gratitude  of  the  Eupatridse.

'  Alyattes  had  been  the  ally  of  Periander,  as  is  proved  by  an  anecdote  in  Herodotus,  III.  xlviii.
This  friendship  continued  under  Croesus,  for  after  the  fall  of  the  monarchy,  when  the  special  treasuries
of  Lydia  were  suppressed,  the  ex-voto  offerings  of  the  Lydian  kings  were  deposited  in  the  treasury
of  Corinth  (Herodotus,  1. 1.,  li. ;  cf.  Pausa2»ias,  x.  13).

"  Herodotus,  I.  Ixix.,  Ixx.     According  to  Theopompus  (Fragm.  219,  in  Mlxler-Didot,  Fragm.


THE    WAR   BETWEEN  LYDIA   AND   PERSIA.  613

had  inaugurated  in  the  sacerdotal  republics,  with  the  result  that,  towards  548,
being  in  the  position  of  uncontested  patron  of  the  Greeks  of  Asia,  he  could
count  upon  the  S3'mpathetic  neutrality  of  the  majority  of  their  compatriots  in
Europe,  and  on  the  effective  support  of  a  smaller  number  of  them  in  the  event
of  his  being  forced  into  hostilities  with  one  or  other  of  his  Asiatic  rivals.

This,  however,  constituted  merely  one  side  of  his  policy,  and  the  nego-
tiations which  he  carried  on  with  his  western  neighbours  were  conducted
simultaneously  with  his  wars  against  those  of  the  east.  Alyattes  had  asserted
his  supremacy  over  the  whole  of  the  country  on  the  western  side  of  the  Halys,
but  it  was  of  a  very  vague  kind,  having  no  definite  form,  and  devoid  of  practical
results  as  far  as  several  of  the  districts  in  the  interior  were  concerned.  Croesus
made  it  a  reality,  and  in  less  than  ten  years  all  the  peoples  contained  within
it,  the  Lycians  excepted — Mysians,  Phrygians,  Mariandynians,  Paphlagonians,
Thynians,  Bithynians,  and  Pamphylians — had  rendered  him  homage.^  In
its  constitution  his  empire  in  no  way  differed  from  those  which  at  that  time
shared  the  rule  of  Western  Asia ;  the  number  of  districts  administered  directly
by  the  sovereign  were  inconsiderable,  and  most  of  the  states  comprised  in  it
preserved  their  autonomy.  Phrygia  had  its  own  princes,  who  were  descendants
of  Midas,"  and  in  the  same  way  Caria  and  Mysia  also  retained  theirs ;  but
these  vassal  lords  paid  tribute  and  furnished  contingents  to  their  liege  of
Sardes,  and  garrisons  lodged  in  their  citadels  as  well  as  military  stations  or
towns  founded  in  strategic  positions,  such  as  Prusa  ^  in  Bithynia,  Oibyra,*  Hyda,
Grimenothyrae,  and  Temenothyras,'  kept  strict  watch  over  them,  securing  the
while  free  circulation  for  caravans  or  individual  merchants  throughout  the  whole
country.  Crcesus  had  achieved  his  conquest  just  as  Jledia  was  tottering  to  its
fall  under  the  attacks  of  the  Persians.  Their  victory  placed  the  Lydian  king  in
a  position  of  great  perplexity,  since  it  annulled  the  treaties  concluded  alter  the
eclipse  of  585,  and  by  releasing  him  from  the  obligations  then  contracted,
afforded  him  an  opportunity  of  extending  the  limits  within  which  his  father
had  confined  himself.     Now  or  never  was  the  time  for  crossing  the  Halys  in

Hiit.  Grsec,  vol.  i.  p.  314),  the  Lacedsemonians,  wishing  to  gild  the  face  of  the  statue  of  the  Amyoljean
Apollo,  and  finding  no  gold  in  Greece,  consulted  the  Delphian  prophetess :  by  her  advice  they  sent
to  Lydia  to  buy  the  precious  metal  from  Croesus.     Cf.  Pausanias,  III,  s.  §  10.

'  Hebodotus,  I.  xxviii.

"  This  is  proved  by  the  history  of  the  Prince  Adrastus  in  HEEODOTrs,  I.  xxxv.-xlv. ;  cf.  supra,  p.  522.

'  f>TEABO,  XII.  iv.  §  8,  p.  564,  with  the  correction  Kpoiaou  toO  irphs  Kipof  TroAe/jVio-acTos.  As
Eadet  points  out  (^La  Lydie  el  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  del  Mermnades,  p.  222,  note  2),  Herodotus
probably  alluded  to  this  colonisation  by  Croesus,  when  he  said  that  the  Mysians  of  Olympus  were
descendants  of  Lydian  colonists  (VII.  Ixxiv.).

*  Stkabo,  XIII.  iv.  §  17,  p.  631,  merely  says  that  the  Kibyrates  were  descended  from  the  Lydian  s
who  dwelt  in  Cabalia  :  since  Crcesus  was,  as  far  as  we  kuow,  the  only  Lydian  king  who  ever  possessed
this  part  of  Asia,  Radet,  with  good  reason,  concludes  that  Kibyra  was  colonised  by  him  (La  Lydie
et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  222,  note  3).

*  Radet  has  given  good  reasons  for  believing  that  at  least  some  of  tliese  towns  were  enlarged  and
fortified  by  Crcesus  (ta  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  221-223).


614  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

order  to  seize  those  mineral  districts  with  which  his  subjects  had  so  long  had
commercial  relations ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  unexpected  energy  of  which  the
Persians  had  just  given  proof,  their  bravery,  their  desire  for  conquest,  and  the
valour  of  their  leader,  all  tended  to  deter  him  from  the  project:  should  he  be
victorious,  Cyrus  would  probably  not  rest  contented  with  tlie  annexation  of  a
few  unimportant  districts  or  the  imposition  of  a  tribute,  but  would  treat  his
adversary  as  he  had  Astyages,  and  having  dethroned  him,  would  divide  Lydia
into  departments  to  be  ruled  by  one  or  other  of  his  partisans.  Warlike  ideas,
nevertheless,  prevailed  at  the  court  of  Sardes,  and,  taking  all  into  consideration,
we  cannot  deny  that  they  had  reason  on  their  side.  The  fall  of  Ecbatana  had
sealed  the  fate  of  Media  proper,  and  its  immediate  dependencies  had  naturally
shared  the  fortunes  of  the  capital ;  but  the  more  distant  provinces  still  wavered,
and  they  would  probably  attempt  to  take  advantage  of  the  cliange  of  rule  to
regain  their  liberty.  Cyrus,  obliged  to  take  up  arms  against  them,  would  no
longer  have  liis  entire  forces  at  his  disposal,  and  by  attacking  him  at  that
juncture  it  might  be  possible  to  check  his  power  before  it  became  irresistible.'
Having  sketched  out  his  plan  of  campaign,  Crcesus  prepared  to  execute  it  with
all  possible  celerity.  Egypt  and  Chaldiea,  like  himself,  doubtless  felt  them-
selves menaced ;  he  experienced  little  difficulty  in  persuading  them  to  act  in
concert  with  him  in  face  of  the  common  peril,  and  he  obtained  from  both
Amasis  and  Nabonidus  promises  of  effective  co-operation.^  At  the  same  time
he  had  recourse  to  the  Greek  oracles,  and  that  of  Delphi  was  instrumental  in
obtaining  for  him  a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship  with  Sparta.^  Negotiations
had  been  carried  on  so  rapidly,  that  by  the  end  of  548  all  was  in  readiness  for
a  simultaneous  movement ;  Sparta  was  equipping  a  fleet,  and  merely  awaited
the  return  of  the  favourable  season  to  embark  her  contingent ;  *  Egypt  had
already  despatched  hers,  and  her  Cypriot  vassals  were  on  the  point  of  starting,
while  bands  of  Thracian  infantry  were  marching  to  reinforce  the  Lydian  army.^
These  various  elements  represented  so  considerable  a  force  of  men,  that,  had
they  been  ranged  on  a  field  of  battle,  Cyrus  would  have  experienced  consider-
able difficulty  in  overcoming  them.  An  unforeseen  act  of  treachery  obliged
the  Lydians  to  hasten  their  preparations  and  commence  hostilities  before  the
moment  agreed  on.  Eurybatos,  an  Ephesian,  to  whom  the  king  had  entrusted
large  sums  of  money  for  the  purpose  of  raising  mercenaries  in  the  Peloponnesus,

'  This  13  the  motive  ascribed  to  him  by  Herodotus  :  ef  kois  SvvtuTo,  irpli/  p.iydKovs  yei/e<r8ai  toI-s
nepiros  K:aTa\a$eii>  avTuv  av^ayoneyfj"  '^h"  Si/Va/tit/  (I.  slvi.),  to  which  elsewhere  he  adds  that  of
avenging  his  brotlier-in-law  Astyages  (I.  Ixxiii.).

-  Hekodotcs,  I.  Ixxvii.

'  Hebodotus,  I.  slvii.-lvi.  ;  it  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  gave  to  the  Greek  gods  part  of  the
presents  described  above,  pp.  611,  612.    For  the  treaty  of  alliance  with  Sparta,  cf.  Hekodotus,  I.  Ixix.

'  Herodotus,  I.  Isx.,  Ixxxiii.

^  Xesophon,  Cyropsedia,  VII.  ii.  §  10,  from  some  author  now  lost.


TEE  DEFEAT  OF  CBCESUS  IN  PTERIA.  615

fled  with  his  gold  into  Persia,  and  betrayed  the  secret  of  the  coalition.^  The
Achaemenian  sovereign  did  not  hesitate  to  forestall  the  attack,  and  promptly
assumed  the  offensive.  The  transport  of  an  army  from  Ecbatana  to  the  middle
course  of  the  Halys  would  have  been  a  long  and  laborious  undertaking,  even
had  it  kept  within  the  territory  of  the  empire ;  it  would  have  necessitated
crossing  the  mountain  groups  of  Armenia  at  their  greatest  width,  and  that  at
a  time  when  the  snow  was  still  lying  deep  upon  the  ground  and  the  torrents
were  swollen  and  unfordable.  The  most  direct  route,  which  passed  through
Assyria  and  the  part  of  Mesopotamia  south  of  the  Masios,  lay  for  the  most
part  in  the  hands  of  the  Chaldseans,  but  their  enfeebled  condition  justified
Cyrus's  choice  of  it,  and  he  resolved,  in  the  event  of  their  resistance,  to  cut  his
way  through  sword  in  hand.  He  therefore  bore  down  upon  Arbela  by  the
gorges  of  Rowandiz  in  the  month  Nisan,  making  as  though  he  were  bound  for
Karduniash  ;  but  before  the  Babylonians  had  time  to  recover  from  their  alarm
at  this  movement,  he  crossed  the  river  not  far  from  Nineveh  and  struck  into
Mesopotamia.  He  probably  skirted  the  slopes  of  the  Masios,  overcoming  and
killing  in  the  month  lyyar  some  petty  king,  probably  the  ruler  of  Armenia,^  and
debouched  into  Cappadocia.  This  province  was  almost  entirely  in  the  power  of
the  enemy ;  ^  Nabonidus  had  despatched  couriers  by  the  shortest  route  in  order
to  warn  his  ally,  and  if  necessary  to  claim  his  promised  help.  Croesus,  when  he
received  them,  had  with  him  only  the  smaller  portion  of  his  army,  the  Lydian
cavalry,  the  contingents  of  his  Asiatic  subjects,  and  a  few  Greek  veterans,
and  it  would  probably  have  been  wiser  to  defer  the  attack  till  after  the
disembarkation  of  the  Lacedasmonians ;  but  hesitation  at  so  critical  a  moment
might  have  discouraged  his  followers,  and  decided  his  fiite  before  any  action  had
taken  place.  He  therefore  collected  his  troops  together,  fell  upon  the  right
bank  of  the  Halys,**  devastated  the  country,  occupied  Pteria  and  the  neighbour-

'  DiODORUs  SicuLUs,  is.  32.

'  Annals  of  Nabonidus,  col.  ii.  II.  15-18;  cf.  Schrader,  Die  Nahonid-Cijrus-Chronil!,  in  the  Keilin-
schri/tlicJie BihliotheJc,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  180,  131,  and  Hagex,  Keilschrifturkunden  zur  Geschichte
des  Konigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriolor/ie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21S-221.  Floigl(_Cyrus  und  Serodol,
pp.  125,  126)— the  first  to  refer  this  passage  in  the  Annals  to  the  expedition  against  Croesus —
restored  Is[parda]  as  the  name  of  the  country  mentioned,  and  saw  even  the  capture  of  Sardes  in  the
events  of  the  month  lyyar,  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  Greek  tradition.  The  connection  between
the  campaign  beyond  the  Tigris  and  the  Lydian  war  seems  to  me  incontestable,  but  the  Baby-
lonian chronicler  has  merely  recorded  the  events  which  affected  Babylonia.  Cyrus'  object  was  both
to  intimidate  Nabonidus  and  also  to  secure  possession  of  the  most  direct,  and  at  the  same  time  the
easiest,  route  :  by  cutting  across  Mesopotamia  he  avoided  tlie  difficult  marches  in  the  mountainous
districts  of  Armenia.  A  reminiscence  of  this  invasion  of  Clialdaea  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  brief
notice  of  Justin  (I.  viii.  §  3)  :  "  Quum  adversus  Bahylonios  helium  gereret,  Babyloniis  res  Lydorum
Croesus,  cujus  opes  et  divitiaj  insignes  ea  tempestate  erant,  in  auxilium  venit."  Perhaps  we  should
combine,  with  the  information  of  the  Annals,  the  passage  of  Xenophon  {Cijropiedia,  II.  iv.  §  12),  where
it  is  said  that  the  Armenians  refused  tribute  and  service  to  the  King  of  Persia  :  Cyrus  would  have
punished  the  rebels  on  his  way,  after  crossing  the  Euphrates.

'  DioDORrs  SicrLUs,  is.  31.

■•  On  this  point  Herodotus  (I.  Ixsv.)  tells  a  current  story  of  his  time :  Thales  had  a  trench  dug  behind


616  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

ing  towns,  and  exiled  the  inhabitants  to  a  distance.^  He  had  just  completed
the  subjection  of  the  White  Syrians  when  he  was  met  by  an  emissary  from
the  Persians ;  Cyrus  offered  him  his  life,  and  confirmed  his  authority  on  con-
dition of  his  pleading  for  mercy  and  taking  the  oath  of  vassalage.^  Croesus
sent  a  proud  refusal,  which  was  followed  by  a  brilliant  victory,  after  which
a  truce  of  three  months  was  concluded  between  the  belligerents.^  Cyrus
employed  the  respite  in  attempting  to  win  over  the  Greek  cities  of  the  littoral,
which  he  pictured  to  himself  as  nursing  a  bitter  hatred  against  the  Mermnadse  ;
but  it  is  to  be  doubted  if  his  emissaries  succeeded  even  in  wresting  a  declara-
tion of  neutrality  from  the  Milesians;  the  remainder,  lonians  and  ^olians,
all  continued  faithful  to  their  oaths.*  On  the  resumption  of  hostilities,  the
tide  of  fortune  turned,  and  the  Lydians  were  crushed  by  the  superior  forces
of  the  Persians  and  the  Medes;  Crcesus  retired  under  cover  of  nisrht,
burning  the  country  as  he  retreated,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  following
him,  and  crossed  the  Halys  with  the  remains  of  his  battalions.  The  season
was  already  far  advanced;  he  thouglit  that  the  Persians,  threatened  in  the
rear  by  the  Babylonian  troops,  would  shrink  from  the  prospect  of  a  winter
campaign,  and  he  fell  back  upon  Sardes  without  further  lingering  in  Phrygia.
But  Nabonidus  did  not  feel  himself  called  upon  to  show  the  same  devotion
that  his  ally  had  evinced  towards  him,  or  perhaps  the  priests  who  governed  in
his  name  did  not  permit  him  to  fulfil  his  engagements.^     As  soon  as  peace  was

the  army,  which  was  probably  encamped  in  one  of  the  benda  made  by  the  Halys ;  he  then  diverted
the  stream  into  this  new  bed,  with  the  result  that  the  Lydians  found  themselves  on  the  right  bank
of  the  river  without  having  had  the  trouble  of  crossing  it.

'  HEROBOirs,  I.  Ixxvi.

'  DiODOKCs  SicuLCS,  ix.  31.  Nicolas  of  Damascus  records  that  Cyrus,  after  the  capture  of  Sardes,
for  a  short  time  contemplated  making  Crcesus  a  vassal  king,  or  at  least  a  satrap  of  Lydia  (Fragm.  68,
in  MuLLEB-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  iii.  p.  409).

'  We  have  two  very  different  accounts  of  this  campaign,  viz.  that  of  Herodotus  (I.  Ixxvi.,  Ixxvii.),
aud  that  of  Polyajnus  (^Stratagems,  vii.  8).  According  to  Herodotus,  Croesus  gave  battle  only  once  in
Pteria,  with  indecisive  result,  and  on  the  next  day  quietly  retired  to  his  kingdom,  thinking  that
Cyrus  would  not  dare  to  pursue  him.  According  to  Polysenus,  Croesus,  victorious  in  a  first  engage-
ment owing  to  a  more  or  less  plausible  military  stratagem,  cousented  to  a  truce,  but  on  the  day  after
was  completely  defeated,  and  obliged  to  return  to  his  kingdom  with  a  routed  army.  Herodotus'
account  of  the  fall  of  Croesus  aud  of  Sardes,  borrowed  partly  from  a  good  written  source,  Xanthus  or
Charon  of  Lampsacus,  partly  from  the  tradition  of  the  Harpagidae,  seems  to  have  for  its  object  the
soothing  of  the  vanity  both  of  the  Persians  and  of  the  Lydians,  since,  if  the  result  of  the  war  could
not  be  contested,  the  issue  of  the  battle  was  at  least  left  uncertain.  If  he  has  given  a  faithful
account,  no  one  can  understand  why  Croesus  should  have  retired  and  ceded  White  Syria  to  a  rival  who
bad  never  conquered  him.  The  account  given  by  Polyajnus,  in  spite  of  the  improbability  of  some  of
its  details,  comes  from  a  well-informed  author  :  the  defeat  of  the  Lydians  in  the  second  battle  explains
the  retreat  of  Croesus,  who  is  without  excuse  in  Herodotus'  version  of  the  affair.  Pompeius  Trogus
adopted  a  version  similar  to  that  of  Polysenus  (Justin,  i.  7).

'  Hekodotcs,  I.  Ixxvi.,  where  the  attempted  corruption  of  the  lonians  is  made  to  date  from  the
beginning  of  the  war,  even  before  Cyrus  took  the  field  ;  cf.  Herodotus,  I.  clxi.,  clxix.

'  The  author  followed  by  Pompeius  Trogus  has  alone  preserved  the  record  of  this  treaty.  The
fact  is  important  as  explaining  Croesus'  behaviour  after  his  defeat  (Justin,  i.  7),  but  Schubert
goes  too  far  when  he  re-establishes  on  this  ground  an  actual  campaign  of  Cyrus  against  Babylon
(fieschichte  der  Konige  mn  Lydien.  pp.  101,  102):  Radet  has  come  back  to  the  right  view  in  seeing
only  a  treaty  made  with  Nabonidus  (La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec,  p.  248).


THE   TAKING    OF  SAEDES.  617

proposed,  he  accepted  terms,  without  once  considering  the  danger  to  which  the
Lydians  were  exposed  by  his  defection.  The  Persian  king  raised  his  camp  as
soon  as  all  fear  of  an  attack  to  rearward  was  removed,  arid,  falling  upon  defence-
less Phrygia,  pushed  forward  to  Sardes  in  spite  of  the  inclemency  of  the  season.
No  movement  could  have  been  better  planned,  or  have  produced  such  startling
results.  Crcesus  had  disbanded  the  greater  part  of  his  feudal  contingents,  and
had  kept  only  his  body-guard  about  him,  the  remainder  of  his  army — natives,
mercenaries,  and  allies — having  received  orders  not  to  reassemble  till  the
following  spring.  The  king  hastily  called  together  all  his  available  troops,
both  Lydians  and  foreigners,  and  confronted  his  enemies  for  the  second  time.
Even  under  these  unfavourable  conditions  he  hoped  to  gain  the  advantage*
had  his  cavalry,  the  finest  in  the  world,  been  able  to  take  part  in  the  engage-
ment. But  Cyrus  had  placed  in  front  of  his  lines  a  detachment  of  camels,
and  the  smell  of  these  animals  so  frightened  the  Lydian  horses  that  they
snorted  and  refused  to  charge.^  Cro3sus  was  again  worsted  on  the  confines  of
the  plain  of  the  Hermus,  and  taking  refuge  in  the  citadel  of  Sardes,  he
despatched  couriers  to  his  allies  in  Greece  and  Egypt  to  beg  for  succour
without  delay."  The  Lacedaemonians  hurried  on  the  mobilisation  of  their
troops,  and  their  vessels  were  on  the  point  of  weighing  anchor,  when  the  news
arrived  that  Sardes  had  fallen  in  the  early  days  of  December,  and  that  Croesus
himself  was  a  prisoner.^

How  the  town  came  to  be  taken,  the  Greeks  themselves  never  knew,  and
their  chroniclers  have  given  several  different  accounts  of  the  event.^     The


&"


'  Herodotua'  (I.  Ixxx.)  mention  of  the  use  of  camels  ia  confirmed,  with  various  readings,  by  Xeno-
phon  {Cijropxdia,  VII.  i.  §  18),  by  Polyaenus  (Stratagems,  vii.  6),  and  by  Julian  {Hist.  Animal.,  iii.  7) ;
their  employment  does  not  necessarily  belong  to  a  legendary  form  of  the  story,  especially  if  we
suppose,  with  Radet  {La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Gree  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  250,  note  3),  that  the
camel,  unknown  before  in  Asia  Minor,  was  first  introduced  there  by  the  Persian  army.  The  site  of
the  battle  is  not  precisely  known.  According  to  Herodotus  (I.  Ixxs.)  the  tight  took  place  in  the
great  plain  before  Sardes,  whicii  is  crossed  by  several  small  tributaries  of  the  Hermus,  amongst  others
the  Hyllus  (ia  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  249,  note  4,  310).  Eadet
recognises  that  the  Hyllus  of  Herodotus  is  tlie  whole  or  part  of  the  stream  now  called  the  Kusu-tchai,
and  he  places  the  scene  of  action  near  the  township  of  Adala,  which  would  correspond  with  Xeno-
phon's  Thymbrara  {Cyropaidia,  VI.  ii.  §  11).  This  continues  to  be  the  most  likely  hypothesis.  After
the  battle  Crcesus  would  liave  fled  along  the  Hermus  towards  Sardes  (Herodotus,  I.  Iv.).  Xenophon's
story  is  a  pure  romance  iCyrop.,  vii.  1),  and  Schubert  in  vain  attempts  to  defend  some  of  its  details
(Geschichte  der  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  103,  104).

^  Herodotus,  I.  Ixxxi.

'  Herodotus,  I.  Ixxxiii.  Eadet  {La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Gree  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  p.  250,  note  7)
gives  the  date  of  the  capture  of  Sardes  as  about  November  15,  546 ;  but  the  number  and  importance
of  the  events  occurring  between  the  retreat  of  Crcesus  and  the  decisive  catastrophe— the  negotiations
with  Babylon,  the  settling  into  winter  quarters,  the  march  of  Cyrus  acroas  Phrygia — must  have  re-
quired a  longer  time  than  Radet  allots  to  them  in  his  hypotliesis,  and  I  make  the  date  a  mouth  later.

*  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §  4,  in  BIuller-Didot,  Ctesias  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  46)  aad  Xenophou
Cyrop.,  VII.  ii.)  seem  to  depend  on  Herodotus,  the  former  with  additional  fabulous  details  concerning
his  Qibaras,  Cyrus'  counsellor  (cf.  what  is  said  of  this  individual,  supra,  pp.  596,  597),  which  show  the
probable  origin  of  his  additions.  Polyienus  (Stratagems,  vii.  6  and  vii.  S)  had  at  his  disposal  a
different  etory,  the  same  probably  that  he  used  for  his  account  of  the  campaign  in  Cappadocia,  for  in


618  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

least  improbable  is  that  found  in  Herodotus.     The  blockade  hud  lasted,  so  he

tells  us,  fourteen  days,  when  Cyrus  announced  that  he  would  richly  reward  the

first  man  to  scale  the  walls.     Many  were  tempted  by  his  promises,  but  were

unsuccessful  in  their  efforts,  and    their  failure  had  discouraged  all  further

attempts,  when  a  Mardian  Boldier,  named  Hyreades,  on  duty  at  the  foot  of  the

steep  slopes  overlooking  the  Tmolus,  saw  a  Lydian  descend  from  rock  to  rock

in  search  of  his  helmet  which  he  had  lost,  and  regain  the  city  by  the  same  way

without  any   great   difficulty.     He   noted   carefully   the   exact   spot,  and   in

company  with  a  few  comrades  climbed  up  till  he  reached  the  ramparts;  others

followed,  and  taking  the  besieged  unawares,  they  opened  the  gates  to  the

main  body  of  the  army.'     Croesus  could  not  bear  to  survive  the  downfall  of  his

kingdom  :  he  erected  a  funeral  pyre  in  the  courtyard  of  his  palace,  and  took  up

his  position  on  it,  together  with  his  wives,  his  daughters,  and  the  noblest  youths

of  his  court,  surrounded  by  his  most  precious  possessions.     He  could  cite  the

example  of  more  than  one  vanquished  monarch  of  the  ancient  Asiatic  world  in

choosing  such  an  end,  and  one  of  the  fabulous  ancestors  of  his  race,  Sandon-

Herakles,  had  perished  after  this  fashion  in  the  midst  of  the  flames.^     Was  the

sacrifice  carried  out  ?     Everything  leads  us  to  believe  that  it  was,  but  popular

feeling  could  not  be  resigned  to  the  idea  that  a  prince  who  had  shown  such

liberality  towards  the  gods  in  his  prosperity  should  be  abandoned  by  them  in  the

time  of  his  direst  need.     They  came  to  believe  that  the  Lydian  monarch  had

expiated  by  his  own  defeat  the  crime  by  the  help  of  which  his  ancestor  Gyges

had  usurped  the  throne.^     Apollo  had  endeavoured  to  delay  the  punishment

till  the  next  generation,  that  it  might  fall  on  the  son  of  his  votary,  but  he  had

succeeded  in  obtaining  from  fate  a  respite  of  three  years  only.     Even  then  he

had  not  despaired,  and  had  warned  Croesus  by  the  voice  of  the  oracles.     They

had  foretold  him  that,  in  crossing  the  Halys,  the  Lydians  would  destroy  a  great

empire,  and  that  their  power  would  last  till  the  day  when  a  mule  should  sit

upon  the  throne  of  Media.     Croesus,  blinded  byiate,  could  not  see  that  Cyrus,

who  was  of  mixed  race,  Persian  by  his  father  and  Median  by  his  mother,  was

the  predicted  mule.     He  therefore  crossed  the  Halys,  and  a  great  empire  fell,

but  it  was  his  own.*     At  all  events,  the  god  might  have  desired  to  show  that

it  can  be  recognised  the  wish  to  satisfy,  within  possible  limits,  the  pride  of  the  Lydians  :  here  again
the  decisive  success  is  preceded  by  a  check  given  to  Cyrus  and  a  three  months'  truce.  For  the  critical
examination  of  these  sources,  see  Schubert,  Gesckichte  der  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  106-108,  and  Eadet,
La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnades,  pp.  251-253.

•  Hekodotcs,  I.  Ixxxiv.  About  tliree  and  a  half  centuries  later  Sardes  was  captured  in  the  same
way  by  one  of  the  generals  of  Antiochus  the  Great  (Polybics,  vii.  4-7).

-  See  what  is  said  with  regard  to  the  death  of  Shamash-shumukia,  supra,  pp.  422,  42^.  The  first
to  recognise  the  true  meaning  of  this  final  scene  was  K.voll-Koohette,  Sar  VRercule  Assyrien  et
Ph€iiicien,  in  the  Me'inoires  de  I'Acade'inie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-Lettres,  vol.  xvii.,  2iid  part,  p.  271,
et  seq.,  whose  opinion,  though  long  contested,  is  now  generally  adopted  ;  see,  nevertheless,  the  objec-
tions lately  raised  against  it  by  Schubert,  Gesch.  der  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  124-128.

^  Cf.  supra,  pp.  389-391.  '  Herodotus,  I.  xc,  xci.


TEE  DEATH   OF  CSCESUS  AND    THE  LEGEND    OF  THE  PTBE.     619


to  honour  Lis  altars  and  adorn  his  temple  was  in  itself,  after  all,  the  best  of
treasures.  "  When  Sardes,  suffering  the  vengeance  of  Zeus,  was  conquered  by
the  army  of  the  Persians,  the  god  of  the  golden  sword,  Apollo,  was  the  guardian
of  Crcesus.  When  the  day  of  despair  arrived,  the  king  could  not  resign  himself
to  tears  and  servitude ;  within  the  brazen-walled  court  he  erected  a  funeral
pyre,  on  which,  together  with  his  chaste  spouse  and  his  bitterly  lamenting
daughters  of  beautiful  locks,  he  mounted;  he  raised  his  hands  towards  the
depths  of  the  ether  and  cried :  '  Proud  fate,  where  is  the  gratitude  of  the
gods,  where  is  the  prince,  the
child  of  Leto  ?  Where  is  now
the  house  of  Alyattes  ?  .  .  .
The  ancient  citadel  of  Sardes
has  fallen,  the  Pactolus  of
golden  waves  runs  red  with
blood  ;  ignominiously  are  the
women  driven  from  their  well-
decked  chambers !  That  which
was  once  my  hated  foe  is  now
my  friend,  and  the  sweetest
thing  is  to  die ! '  Thus  he
spoke,  and  ordered  the  softly
moving  eunuch  ^  to  set  fire  to
the  wooden  structure.  The
maidens  shrieked  and  threw
their  arms  around  their  mother,
for  the  death  before  them  was
that  most  hated  by  mortals.  But  just  when  the  sparkling  fury  of  the  cruel  fire  had
spread  around,  Zeus,  calling  up  a  black-flanked  cloud,  extinguished  the  yellow
flame.  Nothing  is  incredible  of  that  which  the  will  of  the  gods  has  decreed  :
Apollo  of  Delos,  seizing  the'  old  man,  bore  him,  together  with  his  daughters  of
tender  feet,  into  the  Hyperborean  land  as  a  reward  for  his  piety,  for  no  mortal
had  sent  richer  offerings  to  the  illustrious  Pytho !  "  ^  This  miraculous  ending
delighted  the  poets  and  inspired  many  fine  lines,  but  history  could  with  difficulty
accommodate  itself  to  such  a  materialistic  intervention  of  a  divine  being,  and

'  The  word  translated  "softly  moving  eunueli  "  is  here  perhaps  a  proper  name  :  the  slave  whose
duty  it  was  to  kindle  the  pyre  was  called  Abrobatas  in  the  version  of  the  story  chosen  by
Bacchylides,  while  that  adopted  by  the  potter  whose  work  is  reproduced  above  on  this  page,  calls
bim  EuthymoB.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  Museum  of  the
Louvre.

'  Bacchylides,  Ode  III.,  23-C2.


CRtESUS  OK   HIS   PyiSE."


620  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

sought  a  less  fabulous  solution.  The  legend  which  appeared  most  probable  to
the  worthy  Herodotus  did  not  even  admit  that  the  Lydian  king  took  his  own
life ;  it  was  Cyrus  who  condemned  him,  either  with  a  view  of  devoting  the  first-
fruits  of  his  victory  to  the  immortals,  or  to  test  whether  the  immortals  would
save  the  rival  whose  piety  had  been  so  frequently  held  up  to  his  admiration.
The  edges  of  the  pyre  had  already  taken  light,  when  the  Lydian  king  sighed
and  thrice  repeated  the  name  of  Solon.  It  was  a  tardy  recollection  of  a  con-
versation in  which  the  Athenian  sage  had  stated,  without  being  believed,  that
none  can  be  accounted  truly  happy  while  they  still  live.  Cyrus,  applying  it  to
himself,  was  seized  with  remorse  or  pity,  and  commanded  the  bystanders  to
quench  the  fire,  but  their  efforts  were  in  vain.  Thereupon  Croesus  implored
the  pity  of  Apollo,  and  suddenly  the  sky,  which  up  till  then  had  been  serene
and  clear,  became  overcast ;  thick  clouds  collected,  and  rain  fell  so  heavily
that  the  burning  pile  was  at  once  extinguished.^  Well  treated  by  his
conqueror,  the  Lydian  king  is  said  to  have  become  his  friend  and  most  loyal
counsellor ;  he  accepted  from  him  the  fief  of  Barene  in  Media,  often  accom-
panied him  in  his  campaigns,  and  on  more  than  one  occasion  was  of  great
service  to  him  by  the  wise  advice  which  he  gave.^  We  may  well  ask  what
would  have  taken  place  had  he  gained  the  decisive  victory  over  Cyrus  that  he
hoped.  Cbaldsea  possessed  merely  the  semblance  of  her  former  greatness  and
power,  and  if  she  still  maintained  her  hold  over  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  Phoenicia,
and  parts  of  Arabia,  it  was  because  these  provinces,  impoverished  by  the
Assyrian  conquest,  and  entirely  laid  waste  by  the  Scythians,  had  lost  the  most
energetic  elements  of  their  populations,  and  felt  themselves  too  much  enfeebled
to  rise  against  their  suzerain.  Egypt,  like  Chaldsea,  was  in  a  state  of  decadence,
and  even  though  her  Pharaohs  attempted  to  compensate  for  the  inferiority  of
their  native  troops  by  employing  foreign  mercenaries,  their  attempts  at  Asiatic
rule  always  issued  in  defeat,  and  just  as  the  Babylonian  sovereigns  were  unable
to  reduce  them  to  servitude,  so  they  on  their  part  were  powerless  to  gain
an  advantage  over  the  sovereigns  of  Babylon.  Hence  Lydia,  in  her  youth
and  vigour,  would  have  found  little  difficulty  in  gaining  the  ascendency  over
her  two  recent  allies,  but  beyond  that  she  could  not  hope  to  push  her  success  ;

'  Heeodotus,  I.  Ixxxv.-lssxvii.,  from  LyJian  traditions.  The  story  told  by  Nicolas  of  Damascus
CFragm.  6S,  in  Mullee-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iii.  pp.  400-409)  comes  down  probably  from
Xanthus  of  Lydia,  but  with  many  additions  borrowed  directly  from  Herodotus  (ScnrBEET,  Geschichte
der  Konige  von  Lydien,  pp.  120-124)  and  rhetorical  developments  by  the  author  himself.  Most  other
writers  who  tell  the  story  depend  for  their  information,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  on  Herodotus :  in
later  times  it  was  supposed  that  the  Lydian  king  was  preserved  from  the  flames  by  the  use  of  some
talisman  such  as  the  Ephesian  letters.

-  Heeodotus,  I.  Ixxxvii.-xc,  civ.,  clvi.,  ccvii.,  ccviii.,  ccxi.,  and  later,  in  the  reign  of  C'ambyses,
III.  xxxiv.-xxxvi. ;  for  his  fief  of  Barene,  see  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  4,  in  MiJLLEB-DiDOT,  Ctesise  Cnidii
Fragmenta,  p.  46,  and  the  author  followed  by  Pompeius  Trogus  (JcsTix,  i.  7).


THE  SUBMISSION   OF  TEE   GBEEK   CITIES   OF   THE  LITTORAL.     621

her  restricted  territory,  sparse  population,  and  outlying  position  would
always  have  debarred  her  from  exercising  any  durable  dominion  over  them,
and  though  absolute  mistress  of  Asia  Minor,  the  countries  beyond  the  Taurus
were  always  destined  to  elude  her  grasp.  If  the  Achamenian,  therefore,
had  confined  himself,  at  all  events  for  the  time  being,  to  the  ancient  limits
of  his  kingdom,  Egypt  and  Chaldsea  would  have  continued  to  vegetate
each  within  their  respective  area,  and  the  triumph  of  Croesus  would,  on
the  whole,  have  caused  but  little  change  in  the  actual  balance  of  power  in
the  East.

The  downfall  of  Croesus,  on  the  contrary,  marked  a  decisive  era  in  the  world's
history.    His  army  was  the  only  one,  from  the  point  of  numbers  and  organisation,
which  was  a  match  for  that  of  Cyrus,  and  from  the  day  of  its  dispersion  it  was
evident  that  neither  Egypt  nor  Chaldfea  had
any  chance  of  victory  on  the  battle-field.     The
subjection  of  Babylon  and  Harran,  of  Hamath,
Damascus,  Tyre  and  Sidon,  of  Memphis  and
Thebes,  now  became  merely  a  question  of  time,
and  that  not  far  distant ;  the  whole  of  Asia,  and
that  part  of  Africa  which  had  been  the  oldest
cradle  of  human  civilisation,  were  now  to  pass        a  pebsian  king  fighting  with
into  the  hands  of  one  man  and  form  a  single

empire,  for  the  benefit  of  the  new  race  which  was  issuing  forth  in  irresistible
strength  from  the  recesses  of  the  Iranian  table-land.  It  was  destined,
from  the  very  outset,  to  come  into  conflict  with  an  older,  but  no  less
vigorous  race  than  itself,  that  of  the  Greeks,  whose  colonists,  after  having
swarmed  along  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean,  were  now  beginning  to  quit
the  seaboard  and  penetrate  wherever  they  could  into  the  interior.  They  had
been  on  friendly  terms  with  that  dynasty  of  the  Mermnadae  who  had  shown
reverence  for  the  Hellenic  gods;  they  had,  as  a  whole,  disdained  to  betray
Croesus,  or  to  turn  upon  him  when  he  was  in  difficulties  beyond  the  Halys  ;  -
and  now  that  he  had  succumbed  to  his  fate,  they  considered  that  the  ties  which
had  bound  them  to  Sardes  were  broken,  and  they  were  determined  to  preserve
their  independence  at  all  costs.  This  spirit  of  insubordination  would  have  to
be  promptly  dealt  with  and  tightly  curbed,  if  perpetual  troubles  in  the  future
were  to  be  avoided.  The  Asianic  peoples  soon  rallied  round  their  new  master
— Phrygians,  Mysians,  the  inhabitants  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  and

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-GudiD,  from  an  intaglio  reproduced  in  the  AiitiquiUs  du  Bosphore  cimmerien,
pi.  xvi.  Nos.  2,  3.

■  On  the  subject  of  these  unsuccessful  negotiations  of  Cyrus  with  the  Greek  cities  on  the  coast  of
Asia  Minor,  cf.  lupra,  p.  616  of  the  present  work.


622  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

those  of  the  ramphylian  coast; '  even  Cilicia,  which  had  held  its  own  against
Chaldsea,  Media,  and  Lydia,  was  now  brought  under  the  rising  power,  and  its
kings  were  henceforward  obedient  to  the  Persian  rule.^  The  two  leagues  of
the  lonians  and  ^olians  had  at  first  offered  to  recognise  Cyrus  as  their  suzerain
iinder  the  same  conditions  as  those  with  which  Croesus  had  been  satisfied ;  but
he  had  consented  to  accept  it  only  in  the  case  of  Miletus,  and  had  demanded
from  the  rest  an  unconditional  surrender.  This  they  had  refused,  and,  uniting
in  a  common  cause  perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  their  existence,  they  had
resolved  to  take  up  arms.  As  the  Persians  possessed  no  fleet,  the  Greeks  had
nothing  to  fear  from  the  side  of  the  JEgean,  and  the  severity  of  the  winter
prevented  any  attack  being  made  from  the  land  side  till  the  following  spring.
They  meanwhile  sought  the  aid  of  their  mother-country,  and  despatched  an
embassy  to  the  Spartans  ;  the  latter  did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  lend  them
troops,  as  they  would  have  done  in  the  case  of  Croesus,  but  they  authorised  La-
krines,  one  of  their  principal  citizens,  to  demand  of  the  great  king  that  he  should
respect  the  Hellenic  cities,  under  pain  of  incurring  their  enmity.  Cyrus  was  fully
occupied  with  the  events  then  taking  place  in  the  eastern  regions  of  Iran ;
Babylon  had  not  ventured  upon  any  move  after  having  learned  the  news  of  the
fall  of  Sardes,  but  the  Bactrians  and  the  Sakte  had  been  in  open  revolt  during
the  whole  of  the  year  that  he  had  been  detained  in  the  extreme  west,  and  a
still  longer  absence  might  risk  the  loss  of  his  prestige  in  Media,  and  even  in
Persian  itself.^  The  threat  of  the  Lacediemonians  had  little  effect  upon  him  ;
he  inquired  as  to  what  Sparta  and  Greece  were,  and  having  been  informed,  he
ironically  begged  the  Lacedaemonian  envoy  to  thank  his  comjiatriots  for  the
good  advice  with  which  they  had  honoured  him  ;  "  but,"  he  added,  "  take  care
that  I  do  not  soon  cause  you  to  babble,  not  of  the  ills  of  the  lonians,  but  of
your  own."*  He  confided  the  government  of  Sardes  to  one  of  his  officers,
named  Tabalos,  and  having  entrusted  Paktyas,  one  of  the  Lydians  who  had
embraced  his  cause,  with  the  removal  of  the  treasures  of  Croesus  to  Persia,  he
hastily  set   out  for  Ecbatana.     He   had   scarcely  accomplished  half  of  his

'  None  of  the  documents  actually  say  this,  but  the  general  tenor  of  Herodotus'  account  seems  to
show  clearly  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  Greek  cities  of  the  Carians  and  Lycians,  all  the  jjeoples
who  had  formed  part  of  the  Lydian  dominion  under  Crcesus  submitted,  without  any  appreciable
resistance,  after  the  taking  of  Sardes.

'  XeuophoD,  Cyrop.,  VII.  iv.  §  2 ;  Herodotus  mentions  a  second  Syennesis  king  of  Cilicia  forty
years  later  at  the  time  of  the  Ionian  revolt  (V.  cxviii.).

'  The  tradition  followed  by  Ctcsias  (cf.  supra,  p.  597)  maintained  that  the  submission  of  the
eastern  peoples  was  an  accomplished  fact  when  the  Lydian  war  began.  That  adopted  by  Herodotus
placed  this  event  after  the  fall  of  Cro3sus  (I.  clsxvii.)  ;  at  any  rate,  it  showed  that  fear  of  tlie  Bactrians
and  the  Sak.'c,  as  well  as  of  the  Babylonians  and  Egyptians  (I.  cliii.),  was  the  cause  that  hastened
Cyrus'  retreat.

'  Herodotus,  I.  clii.,  cliii.,  aud  following  him,  but  probably  through  Ephorus,  Diodorus
SicDLUS,  ix.  36.


TEE   SUBMISSION   OF   CAB  I  A   AND   LYCIA.


G23


journey  when  a  revolt  broke  out  in  his  rear ;  Paktyas,  instead  of  obeying  his
instructions,  intrigued  with  the  lonians,  and,  with  the  mercenaries  he  had
hired  from  them,  besieged  Tabalos  in  the  citadel  of  Sardes.  If  the  place
capitulated,  the  entire  conquest  would  have  to  be  i-epeated ;  fortunately  it
held  out,  and  its  resistance  gave  Cyrus  time  to  send  its  governor  reinforce-
ments, commanded  by  Mazares  the  Median.     As  soon  as  they  approached  the


THE   PRESENT   SITE    OP    3HLETUS.'

city,  Paktyas,  conscious  that  he  had  lost  the  day,  took  refuge  at  Kyme.  Its
inhabitants,  on  being  summoned  to  deliver  him  up,  refused,  but  helped  him  to
escape  to  Mytilene,  where  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  attempted  to  sell  him
to  the  enemy  for  a  large  sum  of  money.  The  Kymaeans  saved  him  a  second
time,  and  conveyed  him  to  the  temple  of  Athene  Poliarchos  at  Chios.  The
citizens,  however,  dragged  him  from  his  retreat,  and  delivered  him  over  to  the
Median  general  in  exchange  for  Atarneus,  a  district  of  Mysia,  the  possession  of
which  they  were  disputing  with  the  Lesbians.^  Paktyas  being  a  prisoner,  the
Lydians  were  soon  recalled  to  order,  and  ilazares  was  able  to  devote  his  entire
energies  to  the  reduction  of  the  Greek  cities ;  but  he  had  accomplished  merely
the  sack  of  Priene,^  and  the  devastation  of  the  suburbs  of  Magnesia  on  the

'  Drawn  by  Boiidier,  from  a  photograph.

■  A  passage  which  has  been  preserved  of  Charon  of  Lampsacus  (_Fragm.  1,  in  Muller-Didot,
Fragm.  Hist.  Griec,  vol.  i.  p.  32)  sums  up  in  a  few  words  the  account  given  by  Herodotus  of  the
adventures  of  Paktyas  (I.  clvii.-clx.),  but  without  mentioning  the  treachery  of  the  islanders  :  he  con-
fines himself  to  saying  Cyrus  caught  the  fugitive  after  the  latter  had  successively  left  Chios  and
Mytilene.

=  Herodotus,  I.  clxi. ;  Pausanias,  YII.  ii.  §  10,  attributes  the  taking  of  this  city  to  the  Persian
Tabules,  who  is  evidently  the  Tabalos  of  Herodotus.


624  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

Masander,  when  he  died  from  some  illness.  The  Median  Harpagus,  to  whom
tradition  assigns  so  curious  a  part  as  regards  Astyages  and  the  infant  Cyrus,
succeeded  him  as  governor  of  the  ancient  Lydian  kingdom,  and  completed
the  work  which  he  had  begun.  The  first  two  places  to  be  besieged  were  Phocfea
and  Teos,  but  their  inhabitants  preferred  exile  to  slavery  ;  the  Phocajans  sailed
away  to  found  Marseilles  in  the  western  regions  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  the
people  of  Teos  settled  along  the  coast  of  Thracia,  near  to  the  gold-mines
of  the  Pangfeus,  and  there  built  Abdera  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  Clazo-
menian  colony.  The  other  Greek  towns  were  either  taken  by  assault  or
voluntarily  opened  their  gates,  so  that  ere  long  both  lonians  and  ^olians
were,  with  the  exception  of  the  Samiaus,  under  Persian  rule.  The  very
position  of  the  latter  rendered  them  safe  from  attack;  without  a  fleet  they
could  not  be  approached,  and  the  only  people  who  could  have  furnished  Cyrus
with  vessels  were  the  Phoenicians,  who  were  not  as  yet  under  his  power.  The
rebellion  having  been  suppressed  in  this  quarter,  Harpagus  made  a  descent
into  Caria;  the  natives  hastened  to  place  themselves  under  the  Persian  yoke,
and  the  Dorian  colonies  scattered  along  the  coast,  Halicarnassus,  Cnidos,  and
the  islands  of  Cos  and  Ehodes,  followed  their  examples,  but  Lycia  refused  to
yield  without  a  struggle.  Its  steep  mountain  chains,  its  sequestered  valleys,  its
towns  and  fortresses  perched  on  inaccessible  rocks,  all  rendered  it  easy  for  the
inhabitants  to  carry  on  a  successful  petty  warfare  against  the  enemy.  The
inhabitants  of  Xanthos,  although  very  inferior  in  numbers,  issued  down  into
the  plain  and  disputed  the  victory  with  the  invaders  for  a  considerable  time ;
at  length  their  defeat  and  the  capitulation  of  their  town  induced  the  remainder
of  the  Lycians  to  lay  down  arms,  and  brought  about  the  final  pacification  of
the  peninsula.i  It  was  parcelled  out  into  several  governorships,  according  to
its  ethnographical  affinities ;  as,  for  instance,  the  governorship  of  Lydia,  that
of  Ionia,  that  of  Phrygia,^  and  others  whose  names  are  unknown  to  us.
Harpagus  appears  to  have  resided  at  Sardes,  and  exercised  vice-regal  functions
over  the  various  districts,  but  he  obtained  from  the  king  an  extensive  property
in  Lycia  and  in  Caria,  which  subsequently  caused  these  two  provinces  to  be
regarded  as  an  appanage  of  his  family.

While  thus  consolidating  his  first  conquest,  Cyrus  penetrated  into  the
unknown  regions  of  the  far  East.  Nothing  would  have  been  easier  for  him
than  to  have  fallen  upon  Babylon  and  overthrown,  as  it  were  by  the  way,  the
decadent  rule  of  Nabonidus  ;  but  the  formidable  aspect  which  the  empire  still
presented,  in  spite  of  its  enfeebled  condition,  must  have  deceived  him,  and  he

'  Heeodotus,  I.  clxi.-clxxvii.

'  Herodotus,  III.  cxx.,  cxxvi.,  calls  a  certain  Mitrobates  satrap  of  Daskylion ;  lie  had  perhaps
been  already  given  this  office  by  Cyrus  (Krl'Mbholz,  De  Asix  Minoris  Salrapis  Persicis,  pp.  27.  28).
Oicetes  had  been  made  governor  of  Ionia  and  Lydia  by  Cyrus  (Hbkodotds,  III.  cxx.,  et  seq.).


THE   AXNEXATION   OF   THE  BEGIONS   EAST   OF   THE   IBAX.       625


was  unwilling  to  come  into  conflict  with  it  until  he  had  made  a  final  reckoning
with  the  restless  and  unsettled  peoples  between  the  Caspian  and  the  slopes  on
the  Indian  side  of  the  table-land  of  Iran.  As  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge,  they
were  for  the  most  part  of  Iranian  extraction,  and  had  the  same  religion,
institutions,  and  customs  as  the  Modes  and  Persians.^  Tradition  had  already
referred  the  origin  of  Zoroaster,  and  the  scene  of  his  preaching,  to  Bactriana,
that  land  of  heroes  whose  exploits  formed  the  theme  of  Persian  epic  song.^  It
is  not  known,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark,  by  what  ties  it  was
bound  to  the  empire  of  Cyaxares,  nor  indeed  if  it  ever  had  been  actually
attached  to  it.  We  do  not  possess,  unfortunately,  more  than  almost  worthless
scraps  of  information  on  this  part
of  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  perhaps  the
most  important  period  of  it,  since
then,  for  the  first  time,  peoples  who
had  been  hitherto  strangers  to  the
Asiatic  world  were  brought  within
its  influence.  If  Ctesias  is  to  be
credited,  Bactriana  was  one  of  the
first  districts  to  be  conquered.  Its
inhabitants  were  regarded  as  being
among  the  bravest  of  the  East,  and
furnished  the  best  soldiers.  They
at  first  obtained  some  successes,  but  laid  down  arms  on  hearing  that  Cyrus  had
married  a  daughter  of  Astyages.*  This  tradition  was  prevalent  at  a  time
when  the  Achaemenianswere  putting  forward  tiie  theory  that  they,  and  Cyrus
before  them,  were  the  legitimate  successors  of  the  old  Median  sovereigns  ;  they
welcomed  every  legend  which  tended  to  justify  their  pretensions,  and  this
particular  one  was  certain  to  please  them,  since  it  attributed  the  submission
of  Bactriana  not  to  a  mere  display  of  brute  force,  but  to  the  recognition  of
an  hereditary  right.  The  annexation  of  this  province  entailed,  as  a  matter
of  course,  that  of  Margiana,  of  the  Khoramnians,"  and  of  Sogdiana.     Cyrus

'  For  the  Iranian  origin  of  most  of  these  peoples,  see  the  testimony  of  ancient  authors  collected  by
Rapp,  Die  Religion  und  Sitte  tier  Perser  unci  iibrigen  Iranier,  in  the  Z.  d.  D.  Morgenl.  Geselh.,  vol.  xix
pp.  11-21.

-   Cf.  supra,  p.  572,  et  seq.

'  The  rock  and  tombs  of  Tlos,  drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  view  in  Fellows,  Lycia  and
Caria,  pi.  yi.

'  This  is  tlie  campaign  which  Ctesias  places  before  the  Lydian  war  (^Fragm.  29,  §  2,  in  Mullek-
DiDOT,  Ctesix  Ciiidii  Fragmenta,  p.  -IG),  but  which  Herodotus  relegates  to  a  date  after  the  capture  of
Sardes  (I.  cliii.,  clxxvii.).

'•  Ctesias  must  have  spolien  of  the  submission  of  these  peoples,  for  a  few  words  of  a  description
which  he  gave  of  the  Khoramnians  have  been  preserved  to  us  {Fragm.  34,  in  Muller-Dldot,  Ctesix
Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  61).

2  s


A   LYCIAN   CITY   UPON   ITS  LKACCESSIBLE   EOCK.^


626  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

constructed  fortresses  in  all  these  districts,  the  most  celebrated  being  that
of  Kyropolis,  which  commanded  one  of  the  principal  fords  of  the  laxartes.^
The  steppes  of  Siberia  arrested  his  course  on  the  nortli,  but  to  the  east,  in
the  mountains  of  Chinese  Turkestan,  the  Sakaj,  who  were  renowned  for
their  wealth  and  bravery,  did  not  escape  his  ambitious  designs.  The  account
which  has  come  down  to  us  of  his  campaigns  against  them  is  a  mere  romance
of  love  and  adventure,  in  which  real  history  plays  a  very  small  part.  He
is  said  to  have  attacked  and  defeated  them  at  the  first  onset,  taking  their
King  Amorges  prisoner ;  but  this  capture,  which  Cyrus  considered  a  decisive
advantage,  was  supposed  to  have  turned  the  tide  of  fortune  against  him.
Sparethra,  the  wife  of  Amorges,  rallied  the  fugitives  round  her,  defeated  the
invaders  in  several  engagements,  and  took  so  many  of  their  men  captive,  that
they  were  glad  to  restore  her  husband  to  her  in  exchange  for  the  prisoners  she
had  made.  The  struggle  finally  ended,  however,  in  the  subjection  of  the  Sakse ;
they  engaged  to  pay  tribute,  and  thenceforward  constituted  the  advance-guard
of  the  Iranians  against  the  Nomads  of  the  East.^  Cyrus,  before  quitting  their
neighbourhood,  again  ascended  the  table-land,  and  reduced  Ariana,  Thatagus,
Harauvati,  Zaranka,  and  the  country  of  Cabul ;  ^  and  we  may  well  ask  if  he
found  leisure  to  turn  southwards  beyond  Lake  Hamun  and  reach  the  shores  of
the  Indian  Ocean.  One  tradition,  of  little  weight,  relates  that,  like  Alexander
at  a  later  date,  he  lost  his  army  in  the  arid  deserts  of  Gedrosia ;  the  one
fact  that  remains  is  that  the  conquest  of  Gedrosia  was  achieved,  but  the  details
of  it  are  lost.^  The  period  covered  by  his  campaigns  was  from  five  to  six
years,  from  545  to  539,^  but  Cyrus  returned  from  these  expeditions  into  the
unknown  only  to  plan  fresh  undertakings.  There  remained  nothing  now  to
hinder  him  from  marching  against  the  Chakhoans,  and  the  discord  prevailing
at  Babylon  added  to  his  chance  of  success.  Nabonidus's  passion  for  archjeology
had  in  no  way  lessened  since  the  opening  of  his  reign.  The  temple  restorations
prompted  by  it  absorbed  the  bulk  of  his  revenues.  He  made  excavations  in
the  sub-structures  of  the  most  ancient  sanctuaries,  such  as  Larsam,  Uruk,  Uru,
Sippar,  and  Nipur ;  and  when  his  digging  was  rewarded  by  the  discovery  of
cylinders  placed  there  by  his  predecessors,  his  delight  knew  no  bounds.     Such

'  Stkabo,  XI.  xi.  §  4,  p.  517,  and  Arrian,  Anabasis,  III.  ii.  §  1,  iii.  §  1-5  :  there  would  bave  been
altars  dedicated  by  the  conqueror  in  these  cities  (Plisy,  Nat.  Hist.,  vi.  49).  Tomaschek  identifies  Kyra
or  Kyropolis  with  the  present  TJra-Tepe  (_Centralasiatische  Studieii,  I.,  Sogdiana,  pp.  57-59),  but
distinguishes  it  from  the  Kyreskhata  of  Ptolemy,  to  which  he  assigns  a  site  near  Usgent.

-  Ctesias,  Ftagm.  29,  §  3,  in  Mijller-Didot,  Ctesias  Onidii  Fragmenta,  p.  46.

^  Arrian,  Sistoria  Indica,  i.  §  3,  where  all  these  peoples  are  confused  under  the  general  appella-
tion of  Indians  on  this  side  of  the  Indus.

*  Neaschus,  Fragm.  23,  in  Muller-Didot,  Scriptores  Berum  Alexandri  Magni,  p.  65.

'  Herodotus,  I.  clsxvii.,  sums  up  his  conquests  in  few  words  :  Ta  5e  ayw  avrrjs  [tjjs  'A(rn)s]  outus
Kvpos  [ocaffTaTa  eiroUe],  nai'  ^dfos  KaTaarpecpofi^vos  ical  ovdey  niipuis.


ITS  EFFECTS   ON   THE  RACES  SUBJECT  TO  BABYLON.  627

finds  coBstituted  the  great  events  of  his  life,  in  comparison  with  which  the
political  revolutions  of  Asia  and  Africa  diminished  in  importance  day  by  day.^
It  is  difficult  to  tell  whether  this  indifiference  to  the  weighty  affairs  of  govern-
ment was  as  complete  as  it  appears  to  us  at  this  distance  of  time.  Certain
facts  recorded  iu  the  official  chronicles  of  that  date  go  to  prove  that,  except  in
name  and  external  pomp,  the  king  was  a  nonentity.  The  real  "power  lay  in  the
hands  of  the  nobles  and  generals,  and  Bel-sharuzur,  the  king's  son,  directed
affairs  for  them  in  his  father's  name.  ZSTabonidus  meanwhile  resided  in  a  state
of  inactivity  at  his  palace  of  Tima,  and  it  is  possible  that  his  condition  may
have  really  been  that  of  a  prisoner,  for  he  never  left  Tima  to  go  to  Babylon,
even  on  the  days  of  great  festivals,  and  his  absence  prevented  the  celebration
of  the  higher  rites  of  the  national  religion,  with  the  procession  of  Bel  and  its
accompanying  ceremonies,  for  several  consecutive  years.'-  The  people  suffered
from  these  quarrels  iu  high  places ;  not  only  the  native  Babylonians  or  Kalda,
who  were  thus  deprived  of  their  accustomed  spectacles,  and  whose  piety  was
scandalised  by  these  dissensions,  but  also  the  foreign  races  dispersed  over
Mesopotamia,  from  the  confluence  of  the  Khabur  to  the  mouths  of  the
Euphrates.  Too  widely  scattered  or  too  weak  to  make  an  open  declaration  of
their  independence,  their  hopes  and  their  apprehensions  were  alternately  raised
by  the  various  reports  of  hostilities  which  reached  their  ears.  The  news  of
the  first  victories  of  the  Persians  aroused  in  the  exiled  Jews  the  idea  of  speedy
deliverance,  and  Cyrus  clearly  appeared  to  them  as  the  hero  chosen  by  Jahveh
to  reinstate  them  in  the  country  of  their  forefathers.

The  number  of  the  Jewish  exiles,  which  perhaps  at  first  had  not  exceeded
20,000,^  had  largely  increased  iu  the  half-century  of  their  captivity,  and  even
if  numerically  they  were  of  no  great  importance,  their  social  condition  entitled
them  to  be  considered  as  the  elite  of  all  Israel.  There  had  at  first  been  the
two  kings,  Jehoiachin  and  Zedekiah,  their  families,  the  aristocracy  of  Judah,
the  priests  and  pontiff  of  the  temple,  the  prophets,  the  most  skilled  of  the
artisan  class  and  the  soldiery.^     Though  distributed  over  Babylon  and  the

'  The  description  of  tliese  worlis  occupies  most  of  tlie  cylinder  inscriptions  of  Nabouidus;  cf.
Peiser,  Inschr ij'ten  Nahonid's,  in  ScaSADER,  Keilinschriftliche  Biblioihel:,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  81-119.

■  Annals  of  Nabonidus,  col.  ii.  11.  d-25;  cf.  Schrader,  Die  Nahonid-Cyrus-Chronih,  in  the  Keilin-
scbriftliche  Bibliolhek,  vol.  iii.,  2ud  part,  pp.  130-133,  and  Hagen,  Keihclirifiur'kunden  zur  Geschichte
des  KSnigs  Ci/rus,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  218-221.

'  The  body  of  exiles  of  597  consisted  of  ten  thousand  persons,  of  whom  seven  thousand  belonged
to  the  wealthy,  and  one  thousand  to  the  artisan  class,  wbile  the  remainder  consisted  of  people  attached
to  the  court  (2  Kings  xxiv.  14-16).  In  the  body  of  587  are  reckoned  three  thousand  and  twenty-
three  inhabitants  of  Judah,  and  eight  hundred  and  thirty-two  dwellers  in  Jerusalem  (cf.  su])ra,  p.  546).
But  the  body  of  exiles  of  581  numbers  only  seven  hundred  and  forty-five  persons  {Jer.  Iii.  30 ;
for  this  third  deportation,  see  supra,  p.  548,  note  8).  These  numbers  are  sufficiently  moderate  to  be
possibly  exact,  but  tliey  arc  far  from  being  certain.

*  Cf.  supra,  p.  537.


628  TEE  ISANIAN  CONQUEST.

neighbouring  cities,  we  know  from  authentic  sources  of  only  one  of  their
settlements,  that  of  Tell-Abib  ou  the  Chebar,^  though  many  of  the  Jewish
colonies  which  flourished  thereabouts  in  Eoman  times  could  undoubtedly  trace
their  origin  to  the  days  of  the  captivity  ;  one  legend  found  in  the  Talmud
affirmed  that  the  synagogue  of  Shafyathib,  near  Nehardaa,  had  been  built
by  King  Jehoiachin  with  stones  brought  from  the  ruins  of  the  temple  at
Jerusalem.^  These  communities  enjoyed  a  fairly  complete  autonomy,  and  were
free  to  administer  their  own  affairs  as  they  pleased,  provided  that  they  paid
their  tribute  or  performed  their  appointed  labours  without  complaint.  The
shekhs,  or  elders  of  the  family  or  tribe,  who  had  played  so  important  a  part
in  their  native  land,  still  held  their  respective  positions ;  the  Chaldaeans  had
permitted  them  to  retain  all  the  possessions  which  they  had  been  able  to  bring
with  them  into  exile,  and  recognised  them  as  the  rulers  of  their  people,  who
were  responsible  to  their  conquerors  for  the  obedience  of  those  under  them,
leaving  them  entire  liberty  to  exercise  their  authority  so  long  as  they  main-
tained order  and  tranquillity  among  their  subordinates.^  How  the  latter  existed,
and  what  industries  they  pursued  in  order  to  earn  their  daily  bread,  no  writer  of
the  time  has  left  on  record.  The  rich  plain  of  the  Euphrates  difl'ered  so  widely
from  the  soil  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  in  the  land  of  Judah,  with
its  bare  or  sparsely  wooded  hills,  slopes  cultivated  in  terraces,  narrow  and  ill-
watered  wadys,  and  tortuous  and  parched  valleys,  that  they  must  have  felt
themselves  much  out  of  their  element  in  their  Chaldsean  surroundings.  They
had  all  of  them,  however,  whether  artisans,  labourers,  soldiers,  gold-workers,  or
merchants,  to  earn  their  living,  and  they  succeeded  in  doing  so,  following  mean-
while the  advice  of  Jeremiah,  by  taking  every  precaution  that  the  seed  of
Israel  should  not  be  diminished.^  The  imagination  of  pious  writers  of  a  later
date  delighted  to  represent  the  exiled  Jews  as  giving  way  to  apathy  and  vain
regrets :  "  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon,  there  we  sat  down,  yea,  we  wept,  when  we
remembered  Zion.  Upon  the  willows  in  the  midst  thereof  we  hanged  up  our
harps.  For  there  they  that  led  us  captive  required  of  us  songs,  and  they  that
wasted  us  required  of  us  mirth,  saying,  Sing  us  one  of  the  songs  of  Zion.
How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land  ?  "  ^  This  was  true  of  the
priests  and  scribes  only.  A  blank  had  been  made  in  their  existence  from  the
moment  when  the  conqueror  had  dragged  them  from  the  routine  of  daily  rites

'  Ezek.iii.lb.  The  Chebar  or  Kebar  has  been  erroneously  identified  with  the  Khabur;  cuueii'orm
documents  show  that  it  was  one  of  the  canals  near  Nipur.

■  Neubaceb,  La  G<<bgrapMe  du  Talmud,  p.  322.  note  4,  pp.  350,  351.

^  Cf.  the  assemblies  of  these  chiefs  at  the  house  of  Ezekiel  and  their  action  (viii.  1  ;  xiv  1  ■
XX.  1).

*  Jer.  xxix.  1-7  ;  cf  xupra,  p.  541.

'  Ft.  cxsxvii.  1-4.


TEE  JEWISH   COMMUNITY  DUEINO    THE   CAPTIVITY.  629

which  their  duties  in  the  temple  service  entailed  upon  them.     The  hours  which
had  been  formerly  devoted  to  their  offices  were  now  expended  in  bewailing
the  misfortunes  of  their  nation,  in  accusing  themselves  and  others,  and  in
demanding  what  crime  had  merited  this  punishment,  and  why  Jahveh,  who
had  so  often  shown  clemency  to  their  forefathers,  had  not  extended  His  forgive-
ness to  them.     It  was, however, by  the  long-suffering  of  God  that  His  prophets,
and  particularly  Ezekiel,  were  allowed  to  make  known  to  them  the  true  cause  of
their  downfall.      The  more  Ezekiel  in  his  retreat  meditated  upon  their  lot,  the
more  did  the  past  appear  to  him  as  a  lamentable  conflict  between  divine  justice
and  Jewish  iniquity.     At  the  time  of  their  sojourn  in  Egypt,  Jahveh  had  taken
the  house  of  Jacob  under  his  protection,  and  in  consideration  of  His  help  had
merely  demanded  of  them  that  they  should  be  faithful  to  Him.     "  Cast  ye
away  every  man  the  abominations  of  his  eyes,  and  defile  not  yourselves  with
the  idols  of  Egypt ;  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."     The  children  of  Israel,  however,
had  never  observed  this  easy  condition,  and  this  was  the  root  of  their  ills ;  even
before  they  were  liberated  from  the  yoke  of  Piiaraoh,  they  had  betrayed  their
Protector,  and  He  had  thought  to  punish  them  :  "  But  I  wrought  for  My  name's
sake,  that  it  should  not  be  profaned  in  the  sight  of  the  nations,  among  whom
they  were,  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known  unto  them.  ...  So  I  caused
them  to  go  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  brought  them  into  the  wilderness.
And  I  gave  them  My  statutes,  and  showed  them  My  judgments,  which  if  a  man
do,  he  shall  live  in  them.     Moreover  also  I  gave  them  My  sabbaths,  to  be  a
sign  between  Me  and  them  ...  but  the  house  of  Israel  rebelled  against  Me."
As  they  had  acted  in  Egypt,  so  they  acted  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  and  again
Jahveh  could  not  bring   Himself  to  destroy  them  ;  He  confined  Himself  to
decreeing  that  none  of  those  who  had  offended  Him  should  enter  the  Promised
Laud,  and   He  extended  His  goodness  to  their  children.     But  these  again
showed   themselves   no  wiser  than  their  fathers;   scarcely   had   they   taken
possession  of  the  inheritance  which  had  fallen  to  them,  "  a  land  flowing  with
milk  and  honey  .  .  .  the- glory  of  all  lands,"  than  when  they  beheld  "every
high  hill  and  every  thick  tree  .  .  .  they  offered   there   their  sacrifices,  and
there  they  presented  the  provocation  of  their  offering,  there  also  they  made
their  sweet  savour,  and   they  poured  out   there  their  drink  offerings."     ISTot
contented  with  profaning  their  altars  by  impious  ceremonies  and  offerings,
they  further  bowed  the  knee  to  idols,  thinking  in  their  hearts,  "  We  will  be  as
the  nations,  as  the  families  of  the  countries,  to  serve  wood  and  stone."     "  As  I
live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  surely  with  a  mighty  hand  and  with  a  stretched  out
arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out,  will   I    be  King  over  you."  i     However  just
the  punishment,  Ezekiel  did  not  believe  that  it  would   last   for   ever.     The

'  Ezeh.  XX.


G30  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

righteousness  of  God  would  not  permit  future  generations  to  be  held  responsible
for  ever  for  the  sins  of  generations  past  and  present.     "  What  mean  ye,  that  ye
use  this  proverb  concerning  the  land  of  Israel,  saying,  The  fathers  have  eaten
sour  grapes,  and  the  cliildren's  teeth  are  set  on  edge?     As  I  live,  saith  the
Lord  God,  ye  shall  not  have  occasion  to  use  this  proverb  any  more  in  Israel !
Behold,  all  souls  are  Mine ;   as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of
the  son  is  Mine ;  the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die.     But  if  a  man  be  just  .  .   .
he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God."     Israel,  therefore,  was  master  of  his
own  destiny.     If  he  persisted  in  erring  from  the  right  way,  the  hour  of  salvation
was  still  further  removed  from  him;  if  he  repented  and  observed  the  law,  the
Divine  anger  would  be  turned  away.     "  Therefore  ...  0  house  of  Israel  .  .  .
cast  away  from  you  all  your  transgressions  wherein  ye  have  transgressed ;  and
make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit ;  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?
For  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  .  .  .  wherefore  turn
yourselves  and  live."  ^     There  were  those  who  objected  that  it  was  too  late  to
dream  of  regeneration  and  of  hope  in  the  future  :  "  Our  bones  are  dried  up  and
our  hope  is  lost ;  we  are  clean  cut  off."     The  prophet  replied  that  the  Lord
had  carried  him  in  the  spirit  and  set  him  down  in  the  midst  of  a  plain  strewn
with  bones.     "  So  I  prophesied  .  .  .  and  as  I  prophesied  there  was  a  noise  .  .  .
and  the  bones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone.     And  I  beheld,  and  lo,  there
were  sinews  upon  them,  and  flesh  came  up  and  skin  covered  them  above ;  but
there  was  no  breath  in  them.     Then  said  (the  Lord)  unto  me,  Prophesy  unto
the  wind,  prophesy,  son  of  man,  and  say  to  the  wind.  Thus  saith  the  Lord
God  :  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,  and  breathe  upon  these  slain,  that
they  may  live.     So  I  prophesied  as  He  commanded  me,  and  the  breath  came
into  them  and  they  lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding  great
army.     Then  He  said  unto  me  .  .  .  these  bones  are  tlie  whole  house  of  Israel.
.  .  .  Behold,  I  will  open  your  graves  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your
graves,  0  my  people ;  and  I  will  bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel.  .  .  .  And  I
will  put  My  Spirit  in  you  and  ye  shall  live,  and  I  will  place  you  in  your  own
land ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it  and  performed  it,
saith  the  Lord."  ^

A  people  raised  from  such  depths  would  require  a  constitution,  a  new  law
to  take  the  place  of  the  old,  from  the  day  when  the  exile  should  cease.  Ezekiel
would  willingly  have  dispensed  with  the  monarchy,  as  it  had  been  tried  since
the  time  of  Samuel  with  scarcely  any  good  results.  For  every  Hezekiah
or  Josiah,  how  many  kings  of  the  type  of  Ahaz  or  Manasseh  had  there
been !  The  Jews  were  nevertheless  still  so  sincerely  attached  to  the  house  of
'  Ezeh.  xviii.  2  Eeeh.  xxxvii.  1-14.


EZEEIEL.  631

David,  that  the  prophet  judged  it  inopportune  to  exclude  it  from  his  plan  for
their  future  government.  He  resolved  to  tolerate  a  king,  but  a  king  of  greater
piety  and  with  less  liberty  than  the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  had
pictured  to  himself,^  a  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  whose  principal  function
should  be  to  provide  the  means  of  worship.  Indeed,  the  Lord  Himself  was  the
only  Sovereign  whom  the  prophet  fully  accepted,  though  his  concept  of  Him
differed  greatly  from  that  of  his  predecessors :  from  that,  for  instance,  of  Amos —
the  Lord  God  who  would  do  nothing  without  revealing  "  His  secret  unto  His
servants  the  prophets ;  "  -  or  of  Hosea — who  desired  "  mercy,  and  uot  sacrifice  ;
and  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offerings."  ^  The  Jahveh  of
Ezekiel  no  longer  admitted  any  intercourse  with  the  interpreters  of  His  will.
He  held  "  the  son  of  man  "  at  a  distance,  and  would  consent  to  communicate
with  him  only  by  means  of  angels  who  were  His  messengers.  The  love  of  His
people  was,  indeed,  acceptable  to  Him,  but  He  preferred  their  reverence  and
fear,  and  the  smell  of  the  sacrifice  offered  according  to  the  law  was  pleasing  to
His  nostrils.  The  first  care  of  the  returning  exiles,  therefore,  would  be  to  build
Him  a  house  upon  the  holy  mountain.  Ezekiel  called  to  mind  the  temple  of
Solomon,  in  which  the  far-off  years  of  his  youth  were  spent,  and  mentally  re-
built it  on  the  same  plan,  but  larger  and  more  beautiful ;  first  the  outer  court,
then  the  inner  court  and  its  chambers,  and  lastly  the  sanctuary,  the  dimensions
of  which  he  calculates  with  scrupulous  care  :  "And  the  breadth  of  the  entrance
was  ten  cubits ;  and  the  sides  of  the  entrance  were  five  cubits  on  the  one  side  and
five  cubits  on  the  other  side  :  and  he  measured  the  length  thereof,  forty  cubits;
and  the  breadtli,  twenty  cubits  " — and  so  forth,  with  a  wealth  of  technical  details
often  diflicult  to  be  understood.*  And  as  a  building  so  well  proportioned
should  be  served  by  a  priesthood  worthy  of  it,  the  sons  of  Zadok  only  were  to
bear  the  sacerdotal  office,  for  they  alone  had  preserved  their  faith  unshaken ;
the  other  Levites  were  to  fill  merely  secondary  posts,  for  not  only  had  they
shared  in  the  sins  of  the  nation,  but  they  had  shown  a  bad  example  in  practising
idolatry.  The  duties  and  prerogatives  of  each  one,  the  tithes  and  offerings,  the
sacrifices,  the  solemn  festivals,  the  preparation  of  the  feasts, — all  was  foreseen
and  prearranged  with  scrupulous  exactitude.^  Ezekiel  was,  as  we  have  seen,
a  priest;  the  smallest  details  were  as  dear  to  him  as  the  noblest  offices  of  his
calling,  and  the  minute  ceremonial  instructions  as  to  the  killing  and  cooking
of  the  sacrificial  animals  appeared  to  him  as  necessary  to  the  future  prosperity

'  See  what  is  said  of  the  king  iu  Deuteronomy,  supra,  p.  509.

*  Amos  iii.  7.
=  Hos.  vi.  6.

*  Ezek.  xl.  5-xlvi.  24  ;  for  the  explanation  of   these  passages,  cf.  Pekeot  and   Chipiez,  Histoire
de  VArt  dans  I'Antiquit^,  vol.  iv.  pp.  243-271.

^  Ezeh.  sliv.  1-xlvi.  21.


(;32  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

of  his  people  as  the  moral  law.  Towards  the  end,  however,  the  imagination  of
the  seer  soared  above  the  formalism  of  the  sacrificing  priest ;  he  saw  in  a  vision
waters  issuing  out  of  the  very  threshold  of  the  divine  house,  flowing  towards
the  Dead  Sea  through  a  forest  of  fruit  trees,  "  whose  leaf  shall  not  wither,
neither  shall  the  fruit  thereof  fail."  The  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  alike  those  of
whom  a  remnant  still  existed  as  well  as  those  which  at  different  times  had
become  extinct,  were  to  divide  the  regenerated  land  by  lot  among  them — Dan
in  the  extreme  north,  Reuben  and  Judah  in  the  south ;  and  they  would  unite
to  found  once  more,  around  Mount  Sion,  that  new  Jerusalem  whose  name  hence-
forth was  to  be  Jahveh-shammah,  "  The  Lord  is  there."  ^  The  influence  of
Ezekiel  does  not  seem  to  have  extended  beyond  a  restricted  circle  of  admirers.
Untouched  by  his  preaching,  many  of  the  exiles  still  persisted  in  their  worship
of  the  heathen  gods ;  most  of  these  probably  became  merged  in  the  bulk  of  the
Chaldsean  population,  and  were  lost,  as  far  as  Israel  was  concerned,  as  completely
as  were  the  earlier  exiles  of  Ephraim  under  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  Sargon.
The  greater  number  of  the  Jews,  however,  remained  faithful  to  their  hopes  of
future  greatness,  and  applied  themselves  to  discerning  in  passing  events  the
premonitory  signs  of  deliverance.  "  Like  as  a  woman  with  child,  that  draweth
near  the  time  of  her  delivery,  is  in  pain,  and  crieth  out  in  her  pangs ;  so
have  we  been  before  Thee,  0  Lord.  .  .  .  Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy
chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee :  hide  thyself  for  a  little  moment,
until  the  indignation  be  overpast.  For,  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of
His  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for  their  iniquity :  the  earth
also  shall  disclose  her  blood,  and  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain."  ^  The
condition  of  the  people  improved  after  the  death  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  Amil-
marduk  took  Jehoiachin  out  of  the  prison  in  which  he  had  languished  for
thirty  years,  and  treated  him  with  honour  :  *  this  was  not  as  yet  the  restoration
that  had  been  promised,  but  it  was  the  end  of  the  persecution.  A  period
of  court  intrigues  followed,  during  which  the  sceptre  of  Nebuchadrezzar
changed  hands  four  times  in  less  than  seven  years ;  then  came  the  accession  of
the  peaceful  and  devout  Nabonidus,  the  fall  of  Astyages,  and  the  first  victories
of  Cyrus.  Nothing  escaped  the  vigilant  eye  of  the  prophets,  and  they  began
to  proclaim  that  the  time  was  at  hand,  then  to  predict  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and
to  depict  the  barbarians  in  revolt  against  her,  and  Israel  released  from  the
yoke  by  the  all-powerful  will  of  the  Persians.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  His
anointed,  to  Cyrus,  whose  right  hand  I  have  holden  to  subdue  nations  before

'  Ezek.  xlvii.,  xlviii.     The  image  of  the  river  seems  to  be  borrowed  from  the  vessel  of  water  of
Cbaldtean  mythology.

'  An  anonymous  prophet,  about  570,  in  Isa.  xxvi.  17,  20,  21.
»  2  Kings  sxv.  27-30  ;  of  Jer.  Hi.  31-31.


THE  FEELING   AGAINST  NABONIDUS   IN  BABYLON.  633

him,  and  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings  ;  to  open  the  doors  before  him,  and  the
gates  shall  not  be  shut ;  I  will  go  before  thee  and  make  the  rugged  places
plain  :  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  doors  of  brass,  rend  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron  :
and  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness,  and  hidden  riches  of  secret
places,  that  thou  mayest  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  call  thee  by  thy
name,  even  the  God  of  Israel.  For  Jacob  My  servant's  sake,  and  Israel  My
chosen,  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name :  I  have  surnamed  thee,  though  thou
hast  not  known  Me."  ^  Nothing  can  stand  before  the  victorious  prince  whom
Jahveh  leads  :  "  Bel  boweth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth ;  their  idols  are  upon  the
beasts,  and  upon  the  cattle :  the  things  that  ye  carried  about  are  made  a  load,
a  burden  to  the  weary  beast.  They  stoop,  they  bow  down  together;  they
could  not  deliver  the  burden,  but  themselves  are  gone  into  captivity."  '^  '•  0
virgin  daughter  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground  without  a  throne,  0  daughter
of  the  Chaldteans  :  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  and  delicate.  Take
the  millstones  and  grind  meal :  remove  thy  veil,  strip  off  the  train,  uncover
the  leg,  pass  through  the  rivers.  Thy  nakedness  shall  be  uncovered,  yea,  thy
shame  shall  be  seen.  ...  Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into  darkness,  0
daughter  of  the  Chalda?ans:  for  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  the  lady  of
kingdoms."  ^

The  task  which  Cyrus  had  undertaken  was  not  so  difficult  as  we  might
imagine.  Not  only  was  he  hailed  with  delight  by  the  strangers  who  thronged
Babylonia,  but  the  Babylonians  themselves  were  weary  of  their  king,  and  the
majority  of  them  were  ready  to  welcome  the  Persian  who  would  rid  them  of
him,  as  in  old  days  they  hailed  the  Assyrian  kings  who  delivered  them  from
their  Chaldsean  lords.  It  is  possible  that  towards  the  end  of  his  reign
Nabonidus  partly  resumed  the  supreme  power ;  ^  but  anxious  for  the  future,
and  depending  but  little  on  human  help,  he  had  sought  a  more  powerful  aid  at
the  hands  of  the  gods.  He  had  apparently  revived  some  of  the  old  forgotten
cults,  and  had  applied  to  their  use  revenues  which  impoverished  the  endow-
ment of  the  prevalent  worship  of  his  own  time.  As  he  felt  the  growing  danger
approach,  he  remembered  those  towns  of  secondary  grade — Uru,  Uruk,  Larsam,
and  Eridu — all  of  which,  lying  outside  Nebuchadrezzar's  scheme  of  defence,
would  be  sacrificed  in  the  case  of  an  invasion :  he  had  therefore  brought  away
from  them  the  most  venerated  statues,  those  in  which  the  spirit  of  the  divinity
was  more  particularly  pleased  to  dwell,  and  had  shut  them  up  in  the  capital,

'  Second  Isaiah,  in  Isa.  xlv.  1-4.
•  Second  Isaiah,  in  Isa.  slvi.  1,  2.
'  Second  Isaiah,  in  Isa.  xlvii.  1-5.

'  Tbis  seems  to  follow  from  the  part  which  he  plays  in  the  final  crisis,  as  told  in  the  Cylinder
of  Cyrus  and  in  the  Annais;  cf.  ivfra,  pp.  034,  H'ia.


634  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

within  the  security  of  its  triple  rampart.'  This  attempt  to  concentrate  the
divine  power.-;,  accentuating  as  it  did  the  supremacy  of  Bel-Marduk  over  his
compeers,  was  doubtless  flattering  to  his  pride  and  that  of  his  priests,  but  was
ill  received  by  the  rest  of  the  sacerdotal  class  and  by  the  populace.  All  these
divine  guests  had  not  only  to  be  lodged,  but  required  to  be  watched  over,
decked,  fed,  and  feted,  together  with  their  respective  temple  retinues ;  and  the
prestige  and  honour  of  the  local  Bel,  as  well  as  his  revenues,  were  likely  to  suffer
ia  consequence.  The  clamour  of  the  gods  in  the  celestial  heights  soon  re-
echoed throughout  the  land ;  the  divinities  complained  of  their  sojourn  at
Babylon  as  of  a  captivity  in  E-sagilla ;  they  lamented  over  the  suppression  of
their  daily  sacrifices,  and  Marduk  at  length  took  pity  on  them.  He  looked
upon  the  countries  of  Sumir  and  Akkad,  and  saw  their  sanctuaries  in  ruins  and
their  towns  lifeless  as  corpses ;  "  he  cast  his  eyes  over  the  surrounding  regions ;
he  searched  them  with  his  glance  and  sought  out  a  prince,  upright,  after  his
own  heart,  who  should  take  his  hands.  He  proclaimed  by  name  Cyrus,  King  of
Anshan,  and  he  called  him  by  his  name  to  universal  sovereignty."  ^  Alike
for  the  people  of  Babylon  and  for  the  exiled  Jew,  and  also  doubtless  for  other
stranger-colonies,  Cyrus  appeared  as  a  deliverer  chosen  by  the  gods  ;  his  speedy
approach  was  everywhere  expected,  if  not  with  the  same  impatience,  at  least
with  an  almost  joyful  resignation.  His  plans  were  carried  into  action  in  the
early  months  of  538,  and  his  habitual  good  fortune  did  not  forsake  him  at  this
decisive  moment  of  his  career.  The  immense  citadel  raised  by  Nebuchadrezzar
in  the  midst  of  his  empire,  in  anticipation  of  an  attack  by  the  Medes,  was  as
yet  intact,  and  the  walls  rising  one  behind  another,  the  moats,  and  the  canals
and  marshes  which  protected  it,^  had  been  so  well  kept  u})  or  restored  since
his  time,  that  their  security  was  absolutely  complete ;  a  besieging  army  could
do  little  harm — it  needed  a  whole  nation  in  revolt  to  comi^ass  its  downfall.  A
whole  nation  also  was  required  for  its  defence,  but  the  Babylonians  were  not
inclined  to  second  the  efforts  of  their  sovereign.  Nabonidus  concentrated  his
troops  at  the  point  most  threatened,  in  the  angle  comprised  near  Opis  between
the  Medic  wall  and  the  bend  of  the  Tigris,  and  waited  in  inaction  the  commence-
ment of  the  attack.     It  is  supposed  that  Cyrus  put  two  bodies  of  troops  in

'  Annals  of  Nahonidus,  col.  iii.  11.  8-11 :  cf.  8chrader,  Die  Nahonid-Ci/rus-Chronik,  iu  the
Keilinschri/tliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  iii.,  2ad  .part,  pp.  132,  133,  and  Hagen,  Keilschrifturkunden  zur
Geschichte  des  Konigs  Cyrus,  iii  the  Beitrage  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  220-223.  Tlie  chronicler
adds  that  the  gods  of  Sippar,  Kutha,  and  Borsippa  were  not  taken  to  Babylon  ;  and,  indeed,  these
cities  being  included  withia  the  lines  of  defence  of  the  great  city,  their  gods  were  as  well  defended
from  the  enemy  as  if  they  had  been  in  Babylon  itself.

'  Cylinder  of  Cyrue,  II.  1-12;  cf  Schrader,  Imclirifl  auf  dem  Thoncylindir  des  Cyrus,  ESnigs  von
Bahylon-Persien,  in  the  Keiliuschriftliche  Bibliothek,  vol.  iii.,  2nd  part,  pp.  120-123,  and  Hagek,
Keilschrifturktmden  zur  Geschichte  des  Konigs  Cyrus,  in  the  BeitrOgs  zur  Aisyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  208-211.

"  Cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  561-5G3.


TAKING  OF  BAB7L0X  AND  TEE  FALL  OF  lEE  CHALDEAN  EMPIRE.     635

motion  :  one  leaving  Susa  under  his  own  command,  took  the  usual  route  of  all
Elamite  invasions  in  the  direction  of  the  confluence  of  the  Tigris  and  the
Diyala ;  the  other  commanded  by  Gobryas,  the  satrap  of  Gutium,  followed
the  course  of  the  Adhem  or  the  Diyala,  and  brought  the  northern  contingents
to  the  rallying-place.  From  what  we  know  of  the  facts  as  a  whole,  it  would
appear  that  the  besieging  force  chose  the  neighbourhood  of  the  present  Bagdad
to  make  a  breach  in  the  fortifications.  Taking  advantage  of  the  months  when
the  rivers  were  at  their  lowest,  they  drew  oif  the  water  from  the  Diyala  and
the  Tigris  till  they  so  reduced  the  level  that  they  were  able  to  cross  on  foot ;
they  then  cut  their  way  through  the  ramparts  on  the  left  bank,  and  rapidly
transported  the  bulk  of  their  forces  into  the  very  centre  of  the  enemy's  position.
The  principal  body  of  the  Chaldsean  troops  were  still  at  Opis,  cut  off  from  the
capital ;  Cyrus  fell  upon  them,  overcame  them  on  the  banks  of  the  Zalzallat
in  the  early  days  of  Tammuz,  urging  forward  Gobryas  meanwhile  upon  Babylon
itself.^  On  the  14th  of  Tammuz,  Nabonidus  evacuated  Sippar,  which  at  once
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Persian  outposts ;  on  the  16th  Gobryas  entered
Babylon  without  striking  a  blow,  and  Nabonidus  surrendered  himself  a
prisoner.^  The  victorious  army  had  received  orders  to  avoid  all  excesses  which
would  offend  the  people ;  they  respected  the  property  of  the  citizens  and  of
the  temples,  placed  a  strong  detachment  around  E-sagilla  to  protect  it  from
plunder,  and  no  armed  soldier  was  allowed  within  the  enclosure  until  the
king  had  determined  on  the  fate  of  the  vanquished.  Cyrus  arrived  after  a
fortnight  had  elapsed,  on  the  3rd  of  Marchesvau,  and  his  first  act  was  one  of
clemency.  He  prohibited  all  pillage,  granted  mercy  to  tlie  inhabitants,  and
entrusted  the  government  of  the  city  to  Gobryas.  Bel-sharuzur,  the  son  of
Nabonidus,  remained  to  be  dealt  with,  and  his  energetic  nature  might  have
been  the  cause  of  serious  difiBculties  had  he  been  allowed  an  opportunity  of
rallying  the  last  partisans  of  the  dynasty  around  him.  Gobryas  set  out  to
attack  him,  and  on  the  11th  of  Marchesvan  succeeded  in  surprising  and  slaying
him.^     With  him  perished  the  last  hope  of  the  Chaldseans,  and  the  nobles  and

'  For  the  strategic  interpretation  of  the  events  of  this  campaign  I  have  generally  adopted
the  explanations  of  Billereeck,  Geographisclie  Untersuchungen,  pp.  13-25.  HeroJotus'  account
(I.  clxxxix.)  with  regard  to  the  river  Gyndes  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of  alterations  made  in  the
river-courses  at  the  time  of  the  attack  in  the  direction  of  Bagdad.

'  The  CyUwUr  of  Cyrus,  1.  17,  expressly  says  so :  "  Without  combat  or  battle  did  Marduk  make
him  enter  Babylon."  The  Annals  of  Nahonidiis,  col.  iii.  11.  15,  16,  confirm  this  testimony  of  the
official  account.

'  An7ials  of  Nabmidus,  col.  iii.  11.  12-22;  cf.  Schrader,  Die  Nahonid-Cyrus-Chroni!:,  in  the
KeilinschriflUche  Bibliothek.  vol.  iii.,  1st  part,  pp.  131,  135,  and  Haoen,  Keihchrifturkunden  zur
GeschiMe  des  Konigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrdge  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  222,  223.  The  passage  deal-
ing with  the  death  of  one  of  the  king's  sons  is  mutilated,  and  has  been  diflferently  interpreted — by
some  as  referring  to  the  death  of  Nabonidus  himself,  by  others  as  referring  to  that  of  Bel-sharuzur
(TiELE,  Babyloiiisch-assyrisclie  Geschichte,  pp.  475, 170 ;  HoMMEL,  Geschichte  Bahyloniens  und  Assyriens,
p.  786).


G36  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

towns,  still  hesitating  on  what  course  to  pursue,  now  yied  with  each  other  in
their  haste  to  tender  submission.  The  means  of  securing  their  good  will,  at  all
events  for  the  moment,  was  clearly  at  hand,  and  it  was  used  without  any  delay  :
their  gods  were  at  once  restored  to  them.  This  exodus  extended  over  nearly
two  months,  during  Marchesvan  and  Adar,  and  on  its  termination  a  proclamation
of  six  days  of  mourning,  up  to  the  3rd  of  Nisan,  was  made  for  the  death  of  Bel-
sharuzur,  and  as  an  atonement  for  the  faults  of  Nabonidus,  after  which,  on  the  4th
of  Nisan,  the  notables  of  the  city  were  called  together  in  the  temple  of  Nebo  to
join  in  the  last  expiatory  ceremonies.  Cyrus  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  act
as  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and  most  of  the  Sargonids  had  done ;  he  "  took  the  hands
of  Bel,"  and  proclaimed  himself  king  of  the  country,  but  in  order  to  secure  the
succession,  he  associated  his  son  Cambyses  with  himself  as  King  of  Babylon.^
Mesopotamia  having  been  restored  to  order,  the  provinces  in  their  turn  trans-
ferred their  allegiance  to  Persia ;  "  the  kings  enthroned  in  their  palaces,  from
the  Upper  Sea  to  the  Lower,  those  of  Syria  and  those  who  dwell  in  tents,  brought
their  weighty  tribute  to  Babylon  and  kissed  the  feet  of  the  suzerain."  ^  Events
had  followed  one  another  so  quickly,  and  iiad  entailed  so  little  bloodshed,  that
popular  imagination  was  quite  disconcerted:  it  could  not  conceive  that  an
empire  of  such  an  extent  and  of  so  formidable  an  appearance  should  have
succumbed  almost  without  a  battle,  and  three  generations  had  not  elapsed
before  an  entire  cycle  of  legends  had  gathered  round  the  catastrophe.  They
related  how  Cyrus,  having  set  out  to  make  war,  with  provisions  of  all  kinds
for  his  household,  and  especially  with  his  usual  stores  of  water  from  the  river
Choaspes,  the  only  kind  of  which  he  deigned  to  drink,  had  reached  the  banks
of  the  Gyndes.  While  seeking  for  a  ford,  one  of  the  white  horses  consecrated
to  the  sun  sprang  into  the  river,  and  being  overturned  by  the  current,  was
drowned  before  it  could  be  rescued.  Cyrus  regarded  this  accident  as  a  personal
aifront,  and  interrupted  his  expedition  to  avenge  it.  He  employed  his  army
during  one  entire  summer  in  digging  three  hundred  and  sixty  canals,  and  thus
caused  the  principal  arm  of  the  stream  to  run  dry,  and  he  did  not  resume  his
march  upon  Babylon  till  the  following  spring,  when  the  level  of  the  water
was  low  enough  to  permit  of  a  woman  crossing  from  one  bank  to  the  other

'  Strassmaier  has  collected  a  certain  number  of  contracts  dated  from  the  first  year  of  this  double
reign.  For  the  points  of  chronology  which  they  settle,  cf.  Pei.ser,  Studien  zur  AUorientalischen
Alterthumskunde,  pp.  2-8,  where  the  dates  are  given  one  year  earlier  than  throughout  the  present
work.  Krall  (in  the  Wiener  Studien,  vol.  ii.  p.  4S)  has  shown  that  the  reign  of  eighteen  years
accorded  to  Cambysea  by  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §  12,  in  MiJLLEB-DiDOT,  Clesi^  Cnidii  Fragmenta,p.  -tS)
has  been  reckoned  from  the  termination  of  the  joint  reign.

'  Cylinder  of  Cyrus,  11.  25-36 ;  cf.  Schrader,  hischrift  auj  dem  Thoncylinder  des  Cyrus,  Kdnigs  von
Persien,  in  the  KeilinschriftUche  Bihliothelt,  vol.  iii.,  2ud  part,  pp.  124-127,  and  Hagen,  Keilschriftur-
Itunden  zur  GeschiclUe  des  Ennigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitriige  zur  Assyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  212,  213.  The
dates  and  the  sequence  of  events  after  the  entry  of  Cyrus  into  Babylon  are  furnished  by  the  Annals
of  Nahonidus,  col.  iii,  11.  18-28.


THE  ESD    OF   THE  JEWISH   CAPTIVITY.  637

without  wetting  her  knees.  The  Babylonians  at  first  attempted  to  prevent  the
blockade  of  the  place,  but  being  repulsed  in  their  sorties,  they  retired  within
the  walls,  much  to  Cyrus's  annoyance,  for  they  were  provisioned  for  several
years.  He  therefore  undertook  to  turn  the  course  of  the  Euphrates  into  the
Bahr-i-Nejif,  and  having  accomplished  it,  he  crept  into  the  centre  of  the  city
by  the  dry  bed  of  the  river.  If  the  Babylonians  had  kept  proper  guard,  the
Persians  would  probably  have  been  surrounded  and  caught  like  fish  in  a  net ;
but  on  that  particular  day  they  were  keeping  one  of  their  festivals,  and
continued  their  dancing  and  singing  till  they  suddenly  found  the  streets  alive
with  the  enemy.'

Babylon  suffered  in  no  way  by  her  servitude,  and  far  from  its  being  a  source
of  unhappiness  to  her,  she  actually  rejoiced  in  it ;  she  was  rid  of  Nabonidus,  whose
sacrilegious  innovations  had  scandalised  her  piety,  and  she  possessed  in  Cyrus  a
legitimate  sovereign  since  he  had  "  taken  the  hands  of  Bel."  It  pleased  her  to
believe  that  she  had  conquered  her  victor  rather  than  been  conquered  by  him,
and  she  accommodated  herself  to  her  Persian  dynasty  after  the  same  fashion
that  she  had  in  turn  accustomed  herself  to  Cosssean  or  Elamite,  Ninevite  or
Chaldsean  dynasties  in  days  gone  by.^     Nothing  in  or  around  the  city  was

'  HERODOTrs,  I.  clxxsviii.-oxci.  On  the  little  that  can  be  accepted  as  true  in  this  story,  cf.
iupra,  p.  635,  note  1.

■  The  table  of  the  last  kings  of  Babylon,  according  to  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy  and  the  monuments,
is  given  below —

747-733.  Naboxazir  [Nabosassar] tiaeovaaaipou.

733-731.  Nabc-nadIkziru \   „  ^/

781.  Nabu-shumukin )

731-728.  UkInzir )   x.^fvipo./  ^al  n,i>pov.

m-121.   PULU  [TiGLATH-PlLESER  III.] ■'

727-721.  TjLrLAi  [Shalmaneser  V.] 'l\ov\a.iov.

721-709.  Marduk-ABALIDDINA MapSoKe^TraSou.

709-704.  Sargon 'ApKedi/ov.

704-702.  [Sennacherib] )

702.   MardUK-ZAKIRSHOJIU !>  'A^aaiXivra  -rptZra.

702.    MARCrK-ABALIDDINA  )

702-699.  Bei.ieni BrjA-.'/Sou.

699-693.   AsStJR-NADlN-SHUMU ' hTrapavaZiov.

693-692.    NlRGAL-rSHEZlE  ' 'Kpiye^aKov.

692-689.  MusHEZiE-MARDCK Me(T7)(rijuop5oKow.

689-681.  [Sen-SACHERIb]        ' h$aai\(VT  a.  Seinpa.

681-667.  EsARHADDOS ' AaapaSii/ov.

667-647.    SHAMASH-SHmCKIN SaoffSouxiVou.

647-625.  Kaxdalantj  [Assur-baot-pal] KirijXaSai'ou.

625-604.  NABr-BALUZCR Na^oTroAaao-apou.

604-561.  Nebuchadrezzar  II t^affoKoKaaadpov.

561-559.   AmiL-MARDCK 'IWopaouiafiov.

559-555.  NEKGAL-SHARrzuR Nr)pi7a(roA.a(j-o-dpoy.

555.  Laeashi-mardck

558-538.  Nabonidcs Na/SoraS/ou.

For  the  slightly  dilferent  figures  wliich  can  be  deduced  from  the  contracts,  cf.  the  table  of  Peiser,
Studien  zur  Altorientalischen  Alterthumskmide,  p.  7.


638  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

changed,  and  she  remained  wliat  she  liad  been  since  the  fall  of  Assyria,  the  real
capital  of  the  regions  situated  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Zagros.  It
seems  that  none  of  her  subjects — whether  Syrians,  Tyrians,  Arabs,  or  Idumseans
— attempted  to  revolt  against  their  new  master,  but  passively  accepted  him,
and  the  Persian  dominion  extended  uncontested  as  far  as  the  isthmus  of  Suez ;  ^
Cyprus  even,  and  such  of  the  Phcenicians  as  were  still  dependencies  of  Egypt,
did  homage  to  her  without  further  hesitation.  The  Jews  alone  appeared  only
half  satisfied,  for  the  clemency  shown  by  Cyrus  to  their  oppressors  disappointed
their  hopes  and  the  predictions  of  their  prophets.  They  had  sung  in  anticipation
of  children  killed  before  their  fathers'  eyes,  of  houses  pillaged,  of  women
violated,  and  Babylon,  the  glory  of  the  empire  and  the  beauty  of  Chaldsean
pride,  utterly  destroyed  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  when  overthrown  by  Jahveh.
"  It  shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither  shall  it  be  dwelt  in  from  generation  to
generation :  neither  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  tent  there ;  neither  shall  shepherds
make  their  flocks  to  lie  down  there.  But  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie
there ;  and  their  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures ;  and  ostriches  shall
dwell  there,  and  satyrs  shall  dance  there.  And  wolves  shall  cry  in  their  castles,
and  jackals  in  the  pleasant  palaces."^  Cyrus,  however,  was  seated  on  the
throne,  and  the  city  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  unlike  that  of  Sargon  and  Sennacherib,
still  continued  to  play  her  part  in  the  world's  history.  The  revenge  of
Jerusalem  had  not  been  as  complete  as  that  of  Samaria,  and  her  sons  had  to
content  themselves  with  obtaining  the  cessation  of  their  exile.  It  is  impossible
to  say  whether  they  had  contributed  to  the  downfall  of  Nabonidus  otherwise
than  by  the  fervency  of  their  prayers,  or  if  they  had  rendered  Cyrus  some
service  either  in  the  course  of  his  preparations  or  during  his  short  campaign.
They  may  have  contemplated  taking  up  arms  in  his  cause,  and  have  been
unable  to  carry  the  project  into  execution  owing  to  the  rapidity  with  which
events  took  place.  However  this  may  be,  he  desired  to  reward  them  for  their
good  intentions,  and  in  the  same  year  as  his  victory,  he  promulgated  a  solemn
edict,  in  which  he  granted  them  permission  to  return  to  Judali  and  to  rebuild
not  only  their  city,  but  the  temple  of  their  God.  The  inhabitants  of  the  places
where  they  were  living  were  charged  to  furnish  them  with  silver,  gold,  materials,
and  cattle,  which  would  be  needed  by  those  among  them  who  should  claim  the
benefits  of  the  edict ;  they  even  had  restored  to  them,  by  order  of  the  king,
what  remained  in  the  Babylonian  treasury  of  the  vessels  of  gold  and  silver-
which  had  belonged  to  the  sanctuary  of  Jahveh.     The  heads  of  the  community

'  If  the  conjecture  of  Valois,  who  restorfs  tt]v  XlepcrHv  in  a  passage  of  Polybius  (xvi.  40),  is
justified,  Gaza  held  out  for  some  time :  we  must  in  tbat  case  suppose  that  it  verj-  probably  had  the
support  of  Egypt,  and  perhaps  an  Egyptian  garrison.

^  An  anonymous  prophet  in  Isa.  xiiL  19-22.


THE  FIRST  BETURN   OF   THE  JEWS    TO   JERUSALEM.  639

received  the  favour  granted  to  them  from  such  high  quarters,  without  any
enthusiasm.  Now  that  they  were  free  to  go,  they  discovered  that  they  were
well  off  at  Babylon.  They  would  have  to  give  up  their  houses,  their  fields,
their  business,  their  habits  of  indifference  to  politics,  and  brave  the  dangers  of
a  caravan  journey  of  three  or  four  months'  duration,  finally  encamping  in  the
midst  of  ruins  in  an  impoverished  country,  surrounded  by  hostile  and  jealous
neighbours ;  such  a  prospect  was  not  likely  to  find  favour  with  many,  and
indeed  it  was  only  the  priests,  the  Levites,  and  the  more  ardent  of  the  lower
classes  who  welcomed  the  idea  of  the  return  with  a  touching  fervour.  The  first
detachment  organised  their  departure  in  536,  under  the  auspices  of  one  of  the
princes  of  the  royal  house,  named  Shauash-baluzur  (Sheshbazzar),  a  son  of
Jehoiachin.i  It  comprised  only  a  small  number  of  families,  and  contained
doubtless  a  few  of  the  captives  of  Nebuchadrezzar  who  in  their  childhood  had
seen  the  temple  standing  and  had  been  present  at  its  destruction.  The  returning
exiles  at  first  settled  in  the  small  towns  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  it  was  not
until  seven  months  after  their  arrival  that  they  summoned  courage  to  clear  the
sacred  area  in  order  to  erect  in  its  midst  an  altar  of  sacrifice.^  They  formed
there,  in  the  land  of  their  fathers,  a  little  colony,  almost  lost  among  the  heathen
nations  of  former  times — Philistines,  Idumaeans,  Moabites,  Ammonites,  and  the
settlers  implanted  at  various  times  in  what  had  been  the  kingdom  of  Israel  by
the  sovereigns  of  Assyria  and  Chaldaja.  Grouped  around  the  Persian  governor,
who  alone  was  able  to  protect  them  from  the  hatred  of  their  rivals,  they  had  no
hope  of  prospering,  or  even  of  maintaining  their  position,  except  by  exhibiting
an  unshaken  fidelity  to  their  deliverers.  It  was  on  this  very  feeling  that  Cyrus
mainly  relied  when  he  granted  them  permission  to  return  to  their  native  hills,
and  he  was  actuated  as  much  by  a  far-seeing  policy  as  from  the  promptings  of
instinctive  generosity.  It  was  with  satisfaction  that  he  saw  in  that  distant
province,  lying  on  the  frontier  of  the  only  enemy  yet  left  to  him  in  the  old
world,  a  small  band,  devoted  perforce  to  his  interests,  and  whose  very  existence

'  The  name  which  is  written  Sheshbazzar  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Book  of  Ezra  (i.  9,  11;
V.  14, 16)  is  rendered  Sao-a/SaAaero-apo's  in  Lueiau's  recension  of  the  LXX.,  and  this  latter  form  confirms
the  liypothesis  of  Hoonacker  {Zorobahel  et  le  second  Temple,  pp.  41-43),  which  is  now  universally
accepted,  that  it  corresponds  to  the  Babylonian  Shamash-abaluzur.  It  is  known  that  Shamash
becomes  Shauash  in  Babylonian;  thus  Saosdukhliios  comes  from  Shamash-shumukiu  (cf.  supra,
p.  377,  note  5) :  similarly  Shamash-abaluzur  has  become  Shauash-abaluzur.  Imbert  has  recognised
Sheshbazzar,  ShauasU-abaluzur  in  the  Shenazzar  mentioned  in  1  Uliron.  iii.  18,  as  being  one  of  the
sons  of  Jeconiah  (Le  Temple  reconstruit  par  Zoruhahel,  p.  00,  note  1),  and  this  identification  has  been
accepted  by  several  recent  historians  of  Israel  (Kenan,  Histoire  du  peuple  d'Israel,  vol.  iii.  p.  519,
note  2;  Ed.  Meter,  Entstehung  des  Judenthums,  p.  70,  et  seq.).  It  should  be  remembered  that
Shauash-abaluzur  and  Zerubbabel  have  long  been  confounded  one  with  the  other.

''  The  history  of  this  first  return  from  captivity  is  summarily  set  forth  in  Ezra  i. ;  cf.  v.  13-17 ;
vi.  3-5,  14.  Its  authenticity  has  been  denied  :  with  regard  to  tliis  point  and  the  questions  relating  to
Jewish  history  after  the  exile,  the  modifications  which  have  been  imposed  on  the  original  plan  of
this  work  have  obliged  me  to  suppress  much  detail  in  the  text  and  the  whole  of  the  bibliography  in
the  notes.


640  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

depended  entirely  on  that  of  his  empire.'  He  no  doubt  extended  the  same
favour  to  the  other  exiles  in  Chaldtea  who  demanded  it  of  him,  but  we
do  not  know  how  many  of  them  took  advantage  of  the  occasion  to  return  to
their  native  countries,  and  this  exodus  of  the  Jews  still  remains,  so  far  as
we  know,  a  unique  fact.  The  administration  continued  the  same  as  it  had
been  under  the  Chalda-ans;  Arama'an  was  still  the  official  language  in  the
provincial  dependencies,  and  the  only  change  effected  was  the  placino-  of
Persians  at  the  head  of  public  offices,  as  in  Asia  Minor,  and  allowing  them  a
body  of  troops  to  support  their  authority."  One  great  state  alone  remained  of
all  those  who  had  played  a  prominent  part  in  tiie  history  of  the  East.  This  was
Egypt ;  and  the  policy  which  her  rulers  had  pursued  since  the  development  of
the  Iranian  power  apparently  rendered  a  struggle  with  it  inevitable.  Amasis
had  taken  part  in  all  the  coalitions  which  had  as  their  object  the  perpetuation  of
the  balance  of  the  powers  in  Western  Asia ;  he  had  made  a  treaty  with  Croesus,
and  it  is  possible  that  his  contingents  had  fought  in  the  battles  before  Sardes ;  ^
Lydia  having  fallen,  he  did  all  in  his  power  to  encourage  Nabonidus  in  his
resistance.  As  soon  as  he  found  himself  face  to  face  with  Cyrus,  he  understood
that  a  collision  was  imminent,  and  did  his  best  in  preparing  to  meet  it.  Even
if  Cyrus  had  forgotten  the  support  which  had  been  freely  given  to  his  rival?,
the  wealth  of  Egypt  was  in  itself  sufficient  to  attract  the  Persian  hordes  to  her
frontiers.

A  century  later,  the  Egyptians,  looking  back  on  the  past  with  a  melancholy
retrospection,  confessed  that  "  never  had  the  valley  been  more  flourishing  or
happier  than  under  Amasis;  never  had  the  river  shown  itself  more  beneficent
to  the  soil,  nor  the  soil  more  fertile  for  mankind,  and  the  inhabited  towns  might
be  reckoned  at  20,000  in  number."  ^  The  widespread  activity  exhibited  under
Psammetichus  II.,  and  Apries,  was  redoubled  under  the  usurper,  and  the
quarries  of  Turah,®  Silsileh,^  Assuau,'  and  even  those  of  Hammamat,  were

'  Stade,  Geschichte  des  Voll;es  Israel,  vol.  ii.  pp.  93,  91.

=  The  presence  of  Persian  troops  in  Asia  Minor  is  proved  by  the  passage  in  Herodotus  (III.
cxxviii.)  where  he  says  that  Orcetes  had  with  him  1000  Persians  as  his  body-guard.

^  Cf.  supra,  p.  GI4.

'  HERODOTrs,  II.  elxxvii. ;  cf.  AViedejiajjn,  Herodols  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  604,  605,  where  will  be
found  the  passages  in  ancient  authors  referring  to  the  number  of  Egyptian  towns.

^  Herodotcs,  II.  clxxv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodufs  Zweites  Buck,  p.  602.  A  stele  of  his  forty-
fuurth  year  still  exists  in  the  quarries  of  the  Mokattam  (Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  ii.  p.  152,
note  1).

^  Inscriptions  of  Bigeh,  in  Champolliox,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  i.  p.  163;
Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  p.  284  p ;  Inscriptions  of  Sehel,  in  J.  de  Moegan,  De  la  Frontiere  de  Nuhie  a
Kom-Omhos,  p.  84,  No.  10 ;  Inscriptions  of  Elephantine,  in  Pethie,  A  Season  in  Egypt,  pi.  xi.  Xo.  302,
and  in  J.  de  Moegan,  De  la  Frontiere  de  Nuhie  h  Kom-Omhos,  p.  115,  No.  2.  According  to  Herodotus
(II.  clxxv.),  it  was  from  the  quarries  of  Elephantine  that  Amasis  caused  to  be  brought  tlie  largest
blocks  which  he  used  in  the  building  of  Sais.

■  Inscriptions  of  the  architects  and  engineers  sent  to  the  valley  of  Hammamat  in  the  forty-fourth
year  of  Amasis,  to  bring  the  stone  for  the  king's  monuments,  in  Lepsius,  Denltm.,  iii.  275  a-d ;  cf.


j!:i:.^i::t:


AN    OSIRIS   STKETCHED    FOLL   LENGTH    ON    THE   GROUND.'


THE  BUILDINGS   OF  AMASIS.  641

worked  as  in  the  palmy  days  of  the  Theban  dynasties.  The  island  of  Philse,
whose  position  just  below  the  cataract  attracted  to  it  the  attention  of  the
military  engineers,  was  carefully  fortified  and  a  temple  built  upon  it,  the
materials  of  which  were  used  later  on  in  the  masonry  of  the  sanctuary  of
Ptolemaic  times.^  Thebes  exhibited  a  certain  outburst  of  vitality  under  the
impulse  given  by  Ankhnasnofiribri  and  by  Shashonqu,  the  governor  of  her
palace ;  ^  two  small  chapels,  built  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  still  witness  to  the
queen's  devotion  to  Amon,  of  whom  she  was  the  priestess.^  Wealthy  private
individuals  did  their  best  to  emulate  their  sovereign's  example,  and
made  for  themselves  at  Shekh  Abd-el-Gurnah  and  at  Assassif  those
rock-hewn  tombs  which  rival  those  of  the  best  periods  in  their
extent  and  the  beauty  of  their  bas-reliefs.^  Most  of  the  cities  of  the
Said  were  in  such  a  state
of  decadence  that  it  was  no
longer  possible  to  restore
to  them  their  former  pros-
perity, but  Abydos  occu-
pied too  important  a  place
in  the  beliefs  connected  with  the  future  world,  and  attracted  too  many  pilgrims,
to  permit  of  its  being  neglected.  The  whole  of  its  ancient  necropolis  had  been
rifled  by  thieves  during  the  preceding  centuries,  and  the  monuments  were  nearly
as  much  buried  by  sand  as  in  our  own  times.  The  dismantled  fortress  now  known
as  the  Shunet  ez-Zebib  served  as  the  cemetery  for  the  ibises  of  Thoth,  and  for
the  stillborn  children  of  the  sacred  singing-women,''  while  the  two  Memnonia  of

Brugsch,  Histoire  d'Sgypte,  pp.  258-261,  and  GescMchte  Mgyptens,  pp.  752-755 ;  Devekia,  Mginoires
et  Fragments,  vol.  i.  pp.  296-301.

'  This  fact,  as  far  as  I  know  previously  unobserved,  was  noticed  for  the  first  time  during  an
inspection  made  at  Philaa  in  1882.

'  Concerning  this  queen,  cf  supra,  p.  558.  Her  tomb  still  exists  at  Deir  el-Medineh,  and  the
sarcophagus,  taken  from  the  tomb  in  1833,  is  now  in  the  British  Museum  (S.  Sharpe,  Egyptian
Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum,  pp.  101-185).

•  Two  of  these  temples  are  shown  on  Mariette's  plan  by  the  letters  H  and  J,  and  some  of  their
sculptures  have  been  published  partly  by  Chajipollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.
colxxxii.  Nos.  1-3;  partly  by  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Slorici,  pi.  xiii.  Nos.  51-53  ;  partly  by  Lepsius,
Denkm.,  iii.  274  a-o ;  and  partly  by  Mariette,  Karnak,  pi.  56,  and  pp.  75-77 ;  cf.  Bikch,  Lettre
a  M.  Letronne  sur  la  famille  des  Psamm^lichus  de  la  XXVI'  Dynastie,  in  Revue  Arch.,  1847,  vol.  iv.
p.  622.

*  The  most  important  of  these  tombs  is  that  of  Petenit,  the  father  of  Shashonqu,  who  was  associated
with  Ankhnasnofiribri  in  the  government  of  Thebes  ;  cf.  Champollion,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de  la
Nuhie,  vol.  i.  pp.  552,  553.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  after  Maeiette,  Monuments  Divers,  pi.  25 ;  cf.  Maspeko,  Guide  du
Visiteur,  pp.  242,  243,  No.  443.  The  monument  is  a  statuette  measuring  only  15  centimetres  in
length  ;  it  has  been  reproduced  to  give  an  idea  of  the  probable  form  of  the  statue  seen  by  Herodotus.
Wiedemann  {Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  603,  604)  does  not  admit  the  probability  of  this  resemblance.

°  JJakiette,  Catalogue  general  des  Monuments  d' Abydos,  pp.  440,  441,  from  which  we  see  that,  after
the  XX""  dynasty,  tombs  of  siuging-women  and  of  newborn  children  were  constructed  within  the  circuit
of  the  walls.     In  the  sloping  mass  of  sand  which  has  accumulated  on  the  inside  against  the  north

2    T


642


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


Seti  and  Kamses,  now  abandoned  by  tbeir  priests,  bad  become  mere  objects
of  respectful  curiosity,  on  wbicb  devout  Egyptians  or  passing  travellers —
Phoenicians,  Aramaeans,  Cypriots,  Carians,  and  Greeks  from  Ionia  and  the  isles
— came  to  carve  their  names.^  Amasis  confided  the  work  of  general  resto-
ration to  one  of  the  principal  personages  of  his  court,  Pefzaaunit,  Prince  of
Sais,  who  devoted  his  attention  chiefly  to  two  buildings — the  great  sanctuary
of  Osiris,  which  was  put  into  good  condition  throughout,  and  the  very  ancient


fk'(zs:^MM2^a'^mvr,r]\\


AilASIS    IN"  ADOfiAIIUX    EEFOKE    THE    BULL    Al'IS."


necropolis  of  Omm-el-Gaab,  where  lay  hidden  the  dlquhah,  one  of  the  sepulchres
of  the  god ;  he  restored  the  naos,  the  table  of  offerings,  the  barques,  and  the
temple  furniture,  and  provided  for  the  sacred  patrimony  by  an  endowment  of
fields,  vineyards,  palm  groves,  and  revenues,  so  as  to  ensure  to  the  sanctuary
offerings  in  perpetuity.     It  was  a  complete  architectural  resurrection.^    The

wall  was  buried,  during  the  XXVI"*  dynasty,  a  considerable  Dumber  of  terra-eotta  vases  containing
mummied  ibises  (Mariette,  Catalogue  ggn€ral  des  Monuments  d'Abydos,  p.  579 ;  cf.  Eochemonteix,
CEui-res  diverges,  p.  80).

'  The  position  occupied  by  the  grafiSti  on  certain  portions  of  the  walls  show  that  in  these  places
in  the  temple  of  Seti  there  was  already  a  layer  of  sand  varying  from  one  to  three  metres  in  depth.
The  Semitic  and  Plicenician  or  Aramaean  graffiti  have  been  published  in  the  Corpus  Inscriptiunum
Semiticarum.  The  Carian  and  part  of  the  Greek  graffiti  have  been  collected  by  Sayce,  The  Kariaii
Language  ajid  Imcripiions,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1887,  voL  ix.  pp.  126, 127,  H7-
153,  and  pis.  i.-iii. ;  Some  Greek  Graffiti  from  AbyJos,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  same  Society,  1S8S-
1889,  vol.  xi.  pp.  318,  319.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  Louvre  ;  this  is  the  stele  of  the  bull
that  died  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  Amasis.

'  Statue  A  93  of  Pefzaaunit  in  the  Louvre,  published  in  Pierret,  Recueil  d'inscriptions  ingdites  du
Mut€e  du  Louvre,  vol.  ii.  pp.  39-41,  and  in  Brugsch,  Thesaurus  Inscriptionum  JUgyptiaca^-um,  pp.
1252-1254,  translated  by  Piehl,  Saitica,  in  the  Zeitschrifl,  vol.  xxsii.  pp.  llS-122;  ef  Clarac,  Mus-ee
de  Sculpture,  vol.  ii.  pp.   243,  244.     It  seems  that  one  of  the  buildings,  the  dlquhah,  restoreil  by


MONUMENTS    OF  AMASIS  IN  THE  DELTA.


643


nomes  of  Middle  Egypt,  which  had  suffered  considerably  during  the  Ethiopian
and  Assyrian  wars,  had  some  chance  of  prosperity  now  that  their  lords  were
relieved  from  the  necessity  of  constantly  fighting  for  some  fresh  pretender.
Horn,  son  of  Psammetichus,  Prince  of  the  Oleander  nome,  rebuilt  the  ancient
sanctuary  of  Har-
shafaitu  at  Hera-
cleopolis,  and  en-
dowed it  with  a
munificence  which
rivalled  that  of
Pefzaaunit  at  Aby-
dos.^  The  king
himself  devoted  his
resources  chiefly  to
works  at  Memphis
and  in  the  Delta.
He  founded  a
temple  of  Isis  at
Memphis.which  He-
rodotus described
as  extending  over
an  immense  area
and  being  well
worth  seeing  ;  un-
fortunately nothing
now  remains  of  it,
nor  of  the  recum-
bent colossus,  sixty
feetin  length, which

the  king  placed  before  the  court  of  Phtah,  nor  of  the  two  gigantic  statues
which  he  raised  in  front  of  the  temple,  one  on  each  side  of  the  door.^  Besides  these
architectural  works,  Amasis  invested  the  funerary  ceremonies  of  the  Apis-bulls
with  a  magnificence  rarely  seen  before  his  time,  and  the  official  stelae  which  he
carved  to  the  memory  of  the  animals  who  died  in  his  reigii  exhibit  a  perfection
of  style  quite  unusual.    His  labours  at  Memphis,  however,  were  eclipsed  by  the

Pefza8,unit  was  the  tomb  of  Osiris,  discovered  by  Ame'lineau  in  1897  [Les  Nonvelles  Fouillea  d'Abydos,
p.  38,  et  seq.).

'  Statue  A  68  of  the  Louvre,  publisbed  in  Piereet,  Recueil  d' Inscriptions  in^dites  du  Musge  du
Louvre,  vol.  i.  pp.  14-21.

■  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  sketch  of  Burton,  Exeerpta  SieroglypMca,  pi.  xli.

^  HERODOTU.S,  II.  clxxvi. :  cf.  Wiedemann,  Eerodots  Zu-eites  Bucli,  pp.  603,  G04  ;  Mallet,  Les
Premiers  litahlissements  des  Grecsen  Egypie,  p.  133.


<L^-


.-.vs-


THE    NAGS    OF    AMASIS    AT   THMWS.-


644  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

admirable  work  which  he  accomplished  at  Sais.  The  propyisea  whicli  he  added  to
the  temple  of  Nit "  surpassed  most  other  buildings  of  the  same  kind,  as  much  by
their  height  and  extent,  as  by  the  size  and  quality  of  the  materials  ; "  he  had,
moreover,  embellished  them  by  a  fine  colonnade,  and  made  an  approach  to  them
by  an  avenue  of  sphinxes.  In  other  parts  of  the  same  building  were  to  be
seen  two  superb  obelisks,  a  recumbent  figure  similar  to  that  at  Memphis,  and  a
monolithic  naos  of  rose  granite  brought  from  the  quarries  of  Elephantine.
Amasis  had  a  special  predilection  for  this  kind  of  monument.  That  which  he
erected  at  Thmuis  is  nearly  twenty-three  feet  in  height,^  and  the  Louvre
contains  another  example,  which  though  smaller  still  excites  the  admiration  of
the  modern  visitor.^  The  naos  of  Sais,  which  amazed  Herodotus,  was  much
larger  than  either  of  the  two  already  mentioned,  or,  indeed,  than  any  known
example.  Tradition  states  that  it  took  t^vo  thousand  boatmen  three  years  to
convey  it  down  from  the  first  cataract.  It  measured  nearly  thirty  feet  high  in
the  interior,  twenty-four  feet  in  depth,  and  twelve  feet  in  breadth  ;  ^  even  when
hollowed  out  to  contain  the  emblem  of  the  god,  it  still  weighed  nearly  500,000
kilograms.  It  never  reached  its  appointed  place  in  the  sanctuary.  The  story
goes  that  "  the  architect,  at  the  moment  when  the  monument  had  been  moved
as  far  as  a  certain  spot  in  the  temple,  heaved  a  sigh,  oppressed  with  the  thought
of  the  time  expended  on  its  transport  and  weary  of  the  arduous  work.  Amasis
overheard  the  sigh,  and  taking  it  as  an  omen,  he  commanded  that  the  block
should  be  dragged  no  further.  Others  relate  that  one  of  the  overseers  in  charge
of  the  work  was  crushed  to  death  by  the  monument,  and  for  this  reason  it  was
left  standing  on  the  spot,"  where  for  centuries  succeeding  generations  came  to
contemplate  it.*

Amasis,  in  devoting  his  revenues  to  such  magnificent  works,  fully  shared
the  spirit  of  the  older  Pharaohs,  and  his  labours  were  flattering  to  the  national
vanity,  even  though  many  lives  were  sacrificed  in  their  accomplishment ;  but
the  glory  which  they  reflected  on  Egypt  did  not  have  the  efiect  of  removing
the  unpopularity  in  which  he  was  personally  held.      The   revolution  which

'  Description  de  I'^gypte,  Antiquites,  vol.  v.  pi.  29,  anl  Texte,  vol.  ix.  pp.  370-373,  and  Bukton,
Mxcerpta  Eieroglyphica,  pi.  sli.  The  exact  measurements  as  given  in  the  Description  are  23J  ft.  in
height,  12  ft.  9  ins.  in  width,  and  10  ft.  0  ins.  in  depth.  The  naos  of  Saft  el-Hinneh  must  have  been
smaller,  but  it  is  impossible  to  determine  its  exact  dimensions.

-  It  measures  9  ft.  7  ins.  in  height,  3  ft.  1  in.  in  width,  and  3  ft.  8  ins.  in  depth  (E.  de  Kouqe,
Notice  des  Monuments,  1849,  pp.  88-90);  the  inscriptions  have  been  published  by  Piereet,  h'ecueil
d'Inacr.  ingdites,  vol.  i.  pp.  74-80.  It  had  been  erected  in  the  nome  of  Atliribis,  and  afterwards  taken  to
Alexandria  about  the  Ptolemaic  era;  it  was  discovered  under  water  in  one  of  the  ports  of  the  town  at  the
beginning  of  this  century,  and  Drovetti,  who  recovered  it,  gave  it  to  the  Museum  of  the  Louvre  in  1825.

'  According  to  Jomard's  calculations,  exactly  9  metres  70  by  3  m.  70  (Description  de  I'jSgypte,
vol.  ix.  p.  371,  note  3).

*  Herodotus,  II.  clxxv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Berodots  Ziceites  Bucli,  pp.  602,  603.  The  measurements
given  by  Herodotus  are  so  different  from  those  of  any  naos  as  yet  discovered,  that  I  follow  Kenriok
(The  Egypt  of  Herodotus,  p.  219,  and  Ancient  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  370)  in  thinking  that  Herodotus  saw
the  monument  of  Amasis  lying  on  its  side,  and  that  he  took  for  the  height  what  was  really  the  width.


FAVOUR   SHOWN  TO    TEE   QBEEK8  BY  AMASIS.  645

overthrew  Apries  had  been  provoked  by  the  hatred  of  the  native  party  towards
the  foreigners ;  he  himself  had  been  the  instrument  by  which  it  had  been  ac-
complished, and  it  would  have  been  only  natural  that, having  achieved  a  triumph
in  spite  of  the  Greeks  and  the  mercenaries,  he  should  have  wished  to  be  revenged
on  them,  and  have  expelled  them  from  his  dominions.^  But,  as  a  fact,  nothing
of  the  kind  took  place,  and  Amasis,  once  crowned,  forgot  the  wrongs  he  had
suffered  as  an  aspirant  to  the  royal  dignity  ;  no  sooner  was  he  firmly  seated  on
the  throne,  than  he  recalled  the  strangers,  and  showed  that  he  had  only  friendly
intentions  with  regard  to  them.  His  predecessors  had  received  them  into
favour,  he,  in  fact,  showed  a  perfect  infatuation  for  them,  and  became  as  com-
plete a  Greek  as  it  was  possible  for  an  Egyptian  to  be.''  His  first  care  had
been  to  make  a  treaty  with  the  Dorians  of  Gyrene,*  and  he  displayed  so  much
tact  in  dealing  with  them,  that  they  forgave  him  for  the  skirmish  of  Irasa,
and  invited  him  to  act  as  arbitrator  in  their  dissensions.  A  certain  Arkesilas
II.  had  recently  succeeded  the  Battos  who  had  defeated  the  Egyptian  troops,
but  his  susjjicious  temper  had  obliged  his  brothers  to  separate  themselves
from  him,  and  they  had  founded  further  westwards  the  independent  city
of  Barea.  On  his  threatening  to  evict  them,  they  sent  a  body  of  Libyans
against  him.  Fighting  ensued,  and  he  was  beaten  close  to  the  town  of
Leukon.  He  lost  7000  hoplites  in  the  engagement,  and  the  disaster  aroused
so  much  ill-feeling  against  him  that  Laarchos,  another  of  his  brothers,  strangled
him.  Laarchos  succeeded  him  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  soldiery ;  but  not
long  after,  Eryxo  and  Polyarchos,  the  wife  and  brother-in-law  of  his  victim,
surprised  and  assassinated  him  in  his  turn.  The  partisans  of  Laarchos  then
had  recourse  to  the  Pharaoh,  who  showed  himself  disposed  to  send  them  help ;
but  his  preparations  were  suspended  owing  to  the  death  of  his  mother.  Poly-
archos repaired  to  Egypt  before  the  royal  mourning  was  ended,  and  pleaded
his  cause  with  such  urgency  that  he  won  over  the  king  to  his  side ;  he  obtained
the  royal  investiture  for  his  sister's  child,  who  was  still  a  minor,  Battos  III.,
the  lame,  and  tluis  placed  Gyrene  in  a  sort  of  vassalage  to  the  Egyptian
crown.'     The  ties  which  connected  the  two  courts  were  subsequently  drawn

'  See,  on  this  revolution,  above,  pp.  555-558.

'  Hekodotus,  II.  clxxvii.,  distinctly  says  that  he  became  a  phil-Hellene,  ipiKiAKiiy  Si  yevj/iem^  »
Afiouris.

'  For  the  events  which  occurred  at  Cyrene,  see  above,  pp.  551-555.

*  Herodotus  narrates  these  events  without  mentioning  Amasis  (IV.  olx.,  olxi.),  and  Nicolas  of
Damascus  adopted  Herodotus'  account  with  certain  modifications  taken  from  other  sources  {Fragm.
52,  in  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  387).  The  intervention  of  Amasis  is  mentioned
only  by  Plutarch  (De  Mulier.  virt.,  in  the  Opera  moralia,  Didot's  ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  260)  and  by  Polysenus
{Straiagemata,  viii.  41);  but  the  record  of  it  had  been  handed  down  to  them  by  some  more  ancient
author — perhaps  by  Akeeandros  (cf.  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grssc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  285,  286)  ;
or  perhaps,  in  the  first  instance,  by  Hellanicos  of  Lesbos,  who  gave  a  somewhat  detailed  account  of
certain  points  in  Egyptian  history.  The  passage  of  Herodotus  is  also  found  incorporated  in  accounts
of  Cyrenian  origin  :  his  informants  were  interested  in  recalling  deeds  which  reflected  glory  on  their


646  THE  IBANIAN  CONQUEST.

closer  by  marriage;    partly  from   policy  and   partly  from  a  whim,  Amasis

espoused  a  Cyrenian  woman  named  Ladike,  the  daughter,  according  to  some,

of  Arkesilas  or  of  Battos,  according  to  others,  of  a  wealthy  private  individual

named  Xritobulos.^     The  Greeks  of  Europe  and  Asia  Minor  fared  no  less  to

their  own  satisfaction  at  his  hand  than  their  compatriots  in  Africa ;  following

the  example  of  his  ally  Croesus,  he  entered  into  relations  with  their  oracles  on

several  occasions,  and  sent  them  magnificent  presents.     The  temple  of  Delphi

having  been  burnt  down  in  54.8,  the  Athenian  family  of  the  Alcmasonides

undertook  to  rebuild  it  from  the  ground  for  the  sum  of  three  hundred  talents,

of  which   one-fourth  was  to  be   furnished  liy  the  Delphians.     When   these,

being  too  poor  to  pay  the  sum  out  of  their  own  resources,  made  an  appeal  to

the  generosity  of  other  friendly  powers,  Amasis  graciously  offered  them  a

thousand  talents  of  Egyptian  alum,  then  esteemed  the  most  precious  of  all

others.     Alum  was  employed  in  dyeing,  and  was  an  expensive  commodity  in

the  markets  of  Europe ;  the  citizens  of  Delphi  were  all  the  more  sensible  of

Pharaoh's  generosity,  since  the  united  Greeks  of  the  Nile  valley  contributed

only  twenty  minm  of  the  same  mineral  as  their  quota.-     Amasis  erected  at

Oyrene  a  statue  of  his  wife  Ladike,  and  another  of  the  goddess  Neit,  gilded  from

head  to  foot,  and  to  these  he  added  his  own  portrait,  probably  j)ainted  on  a

wooden  panel.*     He  gave  to  Athene  of  Lindos  two  stone  statues  and  a  corselet

of  linen  of  marvellous  fineness ;  *    and  Hera  of  Samos  received  two  wooden

statues,  which  a  century  later  Herodotus  found  still  intact.^      The  Greeks

flocked  to  Egypt  from  all  quarters  of  the  world  in  such  considerable  numbers

that  the  laws    relating  to  them    had  to    be    remodelled   in   order  to   avoid

conflicts  with  the  natives.

The  townships  founded  a  century  earlier  along  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile

bad  increased  still  further  since  the  time  of  Necho,  and  to  their  activity  was

country,  like  the  defeat  of  A  pries  at  Irasa  (IV.  clix.),  but  not  in  the  memory  of  events  so  humiliating
for  them  as  the  sovereign  intervention  of  Pharaoh  only  a  few  years  after  this  victory.  And  besides,
the  merely  pacific  success  which  Amasis  achieved  was  not  of  a  nature  to  leave  a  profound  mark  on
the  Egyptian  miad.  It  is  thus  easy  to  explain  how  it  was  that  Herodotus  makes  no  allusion  to  the
part  played  by  Egypt  in  this  affair.

'  Hekodotus,  II.  clxxxi.  The  very  fact  of  the  marriage  is  considered  by  Wiedemann  (GescMehte
JSgyptent,  p.  184;  Mgyptische  Geschiehte,  p.  648;  Herodots  Zioeites  Buck,  pp.  611,  G12)  as  a  pure
legend,  but  there  is  nothing  against  its  autlienticity ;  the  curious  story  of  the  relations  of  the
woman  with  Amasis  told  by  the  Cyrenian  commentators  is  the  only  part  which  need  be  rejected.

-  Herodotus,  II.  clxxx. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  609-611.

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxxxi.,  clxxxii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  611-613.  The  text
of  Herodotus,  koI  eiKcira  eavTov  ypa<pi]  dKa<Tiiii'r]v,  can  ouly  mean  a  painted  panel  similar  to  those  which
have  been  found  on  the  mummies  of  the  Grseco-Eoman  era  iu  the  Fayum.

*  Herodotos,  II.  clxxxii. ;  cf  Wiedemann,  ileTOdo^sZioeiVes  iJuc/t,  pp.  613-615.  It  seems  that  one
of  these  statues  is  that  which,  after  being  taken  to  Constantinople,  was  destroyed  in  a  fire  in  476  a.d.
Fragments  of  the  corselet  still  existed  in  the  first  ceutury  of  our  era  (Pliny,  H.  Nat.,  xix.  1),  but
inquisitive  persons  used  to  tear  off  pieces  to  see  for  themselves  whether,  as  Herodotus  assures  us
(III.  xlvii.),  each  thread  was  composed  of  three  hundred  and  sixty -five  strands,  everyone  visible  with
the  naked  eye.

^  Hebodotds,  II.  clxxxii. ;  cf  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  p.  615.


NAUCBATIS  AND   ITS   CONSTITUTION.


647


attributable  the  remarkable  prosperity  of  the  surrounding  region.  But  the
position  which  they  occupied  on  the  most  exposed  side  of  Egypt  was  regarded
as  permanently  endangering  the  security  of  the  country  ;  her  liberty  would  be
imperilled  should  they  revolt  during  a  war  with  the  neighbouring  empire,  and
hand  over  the  line  of  defence  which  was  garrisoned  by  them  to  the  invader.^
Amasis  therefore  dispossessed  their  inhabitants,  and  transferred  them  to
Memphis  and  its  environs.  The  change  benefited  him  in  two  ways,  for,  while
securing  himself  from  possible  treason,  he  gained  a  faithful  guard  for  himself
in  the  event  of  risings  taking  place  in  his  turbulent  capital.^  While  he  thus
distributed  these  colonists  of  ancient
standing  to  his  best  interests,  he  placed
those  of  quite  recent  date  in  the  part  of
the  Delta  furthest  removed  from  Asia,
where  surveillance  was  most  easy,  in  the
triangle,  namel}',  lying  to  the  west  of  Sais,
between  the  Canopic  branch  of  the  Nile,
the  mountains,  and  the  sea-coast.  The
Milesians  had  established  here  some  time
previously,  on  a  canal  connected  with  the
main  arm  of  the  river,  the  factory  of
Naucratis,  which  long  remained  in  ob-
scurity, but  suddenly  developed  at  the
beginning  of  the  XXVI"'  dynasty,  when
Sais  became  the  favourite  residence  of  the
Pharaohs.^  This  town  Amasis  made  over
to  the  Greeks  so  that  they  might  make  it
the  commercial  and  religious  centre  of  their  communities  in  Egypt.  Temples
already  existed  there,  those  of  Apollo  and  Aphrodite,''  together  with  all  the
political  and  religious  institutions  indispensable  to  the  constitution  of  an
Hellenic  city ;  but  the  influx  of  immigrants  was  so  large  and  rapid,  that,  after
the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  the  entire  internal  organism  and  external  aspect  of  the
city  were  metamorphosed.  New  buildings  rose  from  the  ground  with  incredible
speed — the  little  temple  of  the  Dioskuri,  the  protectors  of  the  sailor,''  the  temple

'  For  these  colonies,  see  above,  pp.  49G-49S.

'  Herodotus,  II.  cliv. :  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodois  Zweites  Bucli,  p.  5C3 ;  Mallet,  Les  Premiers
EidbUitemenU  des  Grecs  en  Egi/ple,  pp.  128-131.

^  For  the  origin  of  Naucratis,  cf.  sttpra,  p.  497,  note  2.

*  Eeduced  by  Faucher-Guilin  from  the  plan  published  by  Petkie,  Naulcralis,  vol.  i.  pi.  xl.,  and
vol.  li.  pi.  iv.  Tlie  site  of  the  Ilellenion  is  marked  A,  the  modern  Arab  village  B,  tlie  temenos  of
Hera  and  Apollo  E,  that  of  the  Dioskuri  F,  and  that  of  Aphrodite  G.

'  For  the  temples  in  this  earlier  Naucratis,  cf.  Petkie,  Naulcratis,  vol.  i.  p.  11,  et  seq.,  and
Mallet,  Les  Premiers  £lahlissements  des  Grecs  en  i^gypte,  pp.  185-190.

^  Petkie  and  Gaedneb,  Naulcratis,  vol.  i.  pp.  16,  17;  vol.  ii.  pp.  11,  30-".2.    Mallet  (Les  Premiers


the  pbesent  site  of  nauckatis.'


648  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

of  the  Samiau  Hera,  that  of  Zeus  of  ^gina,'  and  tliat  of  Athene ;  ^  ere  long
the  great  temeuos,  the  Hellenion,  was  erected  at  the  public  expense  by  nine
^olian,  Ionian,  and  Dorian  towns  of  Asia  Minor,  to  serve  as  a  place  of  assembly
for  their  countrymen,  as  a  storehouse,  as  a  sanctuary,  and,  if  need  be,  even  as
a  refuge  and  fortress,  so  great  was  its  area  and  so  thick  its  walls.''  It  was  not
possible  for  the  constitution  of  Naucratis  to  be  very  homogeneous,  when  a  score
of  different  elements  assisted  in  its  composition.  It  appears  to  have  been  a
compromise  between  the  institutions  of  the  Dorians  and  those  of  the  lonians.
Its  supreme  magistrates  were  called  timuchi,  but  their  length  of  ofiSce  and
functions  are  alike  unknown  to  us.*  The  inspectors  of  the  emporia  and
markets  could  be  elected  only  by  the  citizens  of  the  nine  towns,°  and  it  is  certain
that  the  chief  authority  was  not  entirely  in  the  hands  either  of  the  timuchi  or
the  inspectors ;  perhaps  each  quarter  of  the  town  had  its  council  taken  from
among  the  oldest  residents.*'  A  prytanaeum  was  open  to  all  comers  where
assemblies  and  banquets  were  held  on  feast-days ;  here  were  celebrated  at  the
public  expense  the  festivals  of  Dionysos  and  Apollo  KomEeos.'  Amasis  made
the  city  a  free  port,  accessible  at  all  times  to  whoever  should  present  them-
selves with  peaceable  intent,  and  the  privileges  which  he  granted  naturally
brought  about  the  closing  of  all  the  other  seaports  of  Egypt.  When  a  Greek
ship,  pursued  by  pirates,  buffeted  by  storms,  or  disabled  by  an  accident  at
sea,  ran  ashore  at  some  prohibited  spot  on  the  coast,  the  captain  had  to  appear
before  the  nearest  magistrate,  in  order  to  swear  that  he  had  not  violated  the
law  wilfully,  but  from  the  force  of  circumstances.     If  his  excuse  appeared

itablissements  des  Grecs  en  £gypie,  pp.  190, 191)  thinks  that  the  temple  of  which  Petrie  has  discovered
the  remains  was  built  about  the  time  of  Amasis,  on  the  ruins  of  a  previous  temple,  which  also  had
been  dedicated  to  the  Diosknri.

'  Petkle  and  Gardner,  Naukratis,  vol.  i.  p.  16;  vol.  ii.  pp.  49,  50;  cf.  ili-hLET,  Les  Preiuiers
Etahlissements  des  Grecs  en  £gi/pte,  pp.  191-193.

^  The  temple  of  Athene,  the  Nit  of  tlie  Saite  nome,  is  as  yet  known  only  by  an  inscription  in
Petkie,  Naukratis,  vol.  i.  pi.  xxx.,  and  p.  17,  and  Ten  Years'  Digging  in  Egypt,  p.  38 ;  cf.  Mallet,
Les  Premiers  Etablissemejils  des  Grecs  en  £gypte,  p.  193.

"  Herodotus,  II.  clxxviii. ;  cf.  ■Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zuieites  Buck,  pp.  607,  608.  The  site  has
been  rediscovered  by  Petrie  at  the  southern  extremity  of  and  almost  outside  the  town  (Naukratis,
vol.  i.  pp.  23,  24) ;  the  walls  were  about  48  feet  thick  and  39  feet  high,  aud  the  rectangular  area
enclosed  by  them  could  easily  contain  iifty  thousand  men.  Cf.  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etahlissements
des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  pp.  195-198.

■■  Hekmias  of  Methymsos,  Fragm.  2,  in  Moller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  80,  81,
where  the  timuchi  are  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  festivals  celebrated  iu  the  enclosure  of  the
Hellenion.  Hesychius'  definition  of  a  timuchos  is:  apx'^v  laxvpiiraTos,  fieyicrTos.  An  inscription
mentions  a  timuclios  at  Teos  (_Corpus  Inscriptionum  Grsecarum,  3044),  and  this  title  may  liave  been
imported  into  Egypt  by  Tean  colonists.  The  timuchi  of  Marseilles  were  not  magistrates,  but  the  six
hundred  life-members  of  the  senate  (Strabo,  IV.  i.  §  5,  p.  179).

^  Herodotos,  II.  clxxviii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  p.  608.

'  This,  at  least,  is  the  opinion  of  Curtius,  Greek  History  (translated  by  Bouohe  and  Leclekq,
vol.  i.  p.  530),  where  the  duties  of  the  timuchi  seem  to  be  thus  explained.

■  For  the  civil  aud  political  organisation  of  the  city  of  Naucratis,  see  the  detailed  account  by
Mallet,  Lcs  Premiers  Etahlissements  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  pp.  357-360.


HOSTILITY  SHOWN  BY   TEE  EGYPTIANS   TO    THE  GREEKS.      649

reasonable,  he  was  permitted  to  make  his  way  to  the  mouth  of  the  Canopic
branch  of  the  Nile ;  but  when  the  state  of  the  wind  or  tide  did  not  allow  of  his
departure,  his  cargo  was  transferred  to  boats  of  the  locality,  and  sent  to  the
Hellenic  settlement  by  the  canals  of  the  Delta.'  This  provision  of  the  law
brought  prosperity  to  Naucratis ;  the  whole  of  the  commerce  of  Egypt  with
the  Greek  world  passed  through  her  docks,  and  in  a  few  years  she  became
one  of  the  wealthiest  emporia  of  the  Mediterranean.  The  inhabitants  soon
overflowed  the  surrounding  country,  and  covered  it  with  villas  and  townships."^
Such  merchants  as  refused  to  submit  to  the  rule  of  their  own  countrymen
found  a  home  in  some  other  part  of  the  valley  which  suited  them,  and  even
Upper  Egypt  and  the  Libyan  desert  were  subject  to  their  pacific  inroads.  The
Milesians  established  depots  in  the  ancient  city  of  Abydos ;  ^  the  Cypriots  and
Lesbians,  and  the  people  of  Ephesus,  Chios,  and  Samos,  were  scattered  over  the
islands  formed  by  the  network  of  canals  and  arms  of  the  Nile,  and  delighted  in
giving  them  the  names  of  their  respective  countries ;  *  Greeks  of  diverse  origin
settled  themselves  at  Neapolis,  not  far  from  Panopolis;^  and  the  Samiaus
belonging  to  the  ^schrionian  tribe  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Great  Oasis ;  •"  in
I'act,  there  was  scarcely  a  village  where  Hellenic  traders  were  not  found,  like
the  hahals  of  to-day,  selling  wine,  perfumes,  oil,  and  salted  provisions  to  the
natives,  practising  usury  in  all  its  forms,  and  averse  from  no  means  of
enriching  themselves  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Those  who  returned  to  their
mother-country  carried  thither  strange  tales,  which  aroused  the  curiosity  and
cupidity  of  their  fellow-citizens;  and  philosophers,  merchants,  and  soldiers
alike  set  out  for  the  land  of  wonders  in  pursuit  of  knowledge,  wealth,  or
adventures.''     Amasis,  ever  alert  upon  his  Asiatic  frontier,  and  always  anxious

'  Herodotus,  II.  clxxix. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  60S,  609.

-  On  the  prosperity  and  trade  of  Naucratia,  cf.  the  work  of  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  £tabUssements
des  Greet  en  Egypte,  pp.  199-364,  where  he  has  collected  all  the  scanty  information  given  by  ancient
authorities,  and  that  which  has  resulted  from  the  excavations  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund  as  set
forth  in  Peteie  and  Gardner,  Naukratis,  i.,  ii.

'  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  s.v.  "A^vSos,  where  the  name  of  the  town  is  said  to  be  derived  from
that  of  the  Milesian  Abydos  who-founded  it,  probably  oa  the  testimony  of  Aristagoras  (Gutschmid,
Kleiiie  Schriften,  vol.  i.  p.  217).  Letronne  has  seen  that  the  historian  meant  a  factory  established
by  the  Milesians  probably  in  the  reign  of  Amasis,  at  the  terminus  of  the  route  leading  to  the  Great
Oasis  {(Euvres  Choisies,  ed.  Fagnan,  1st  series,  vol.  i.  p.  166).

'  HE0AT.a;u8  of  Miletus,  Fragm.  286,  in  MUller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  i.  p.  20,
after  Stephen  of  Btzantium,  s.v.'Eipitros.  The  compiler  confines  himself  to  stating  that  there  were
in  the  Nile  islands  called  Ephesus,  Chios,  Samos,  Lesbos,  Cyprus,  and  so  on ;  the  explanation  I  have
given  in  the  text  accounts  for  this  curious  fact  quite  simply.

'  Herodotus,  II.  xci. ;  cf.  "Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  p.  368,  where  Wiedemann,  adopt-
iug  Gutschmid's  (^Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  i.  p.  217)  idea,  shows  that  Neapolis  is  not,  as  has  often
been  stated,  the  same  as  Kainepolia,  the  Qeneh  of  the  present  day,  but  a  large  village  near  to
Panopolis,  or  perhaps  a  Greek  quarter  within  this  last  town.

"  Herodotus,  III.  xxvi. ;  cf.  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d' Archiologie  Egyptiennes,  vol.  iii.
pp.  422-426.

'  In  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etablissements  des  Grecs   en  Egypte,  pp.  365-384,  will  be  found  a


650  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

to  strengthen  himself  in  that  quarter  against  a  Chaldrean  or  Persian  invasion,
welcomecl  them  with  open  arms :  those  who  remained  in  the  country  obtained
employment  about  his  person,  while  such  as  left  it  not  to  return,  carried  away
with  them  the  memory  of  his  kindly  treatment,  and  secured  for  him  in  Hellas
alliances  of  wliich  he  might  one  day  stand  in  need.  The  conduct  of  Amasis
was  politic,  but  it  aroused  the  ill-feeling  of  his  subjects  against  him.  Like
the  Jews  under  Hezekiah,  the  Babylonians  under  Nabouidus,  and  all  other
decadent  races  threatened  by  ruin,  they  attributed  their  decline,  not  to  their
own  vices,  but  to  the  machinations  of  an  angry  god,  and  they  looked  on
favours  granted  to  strangers  as  a  sacrilege.  Had  not  the  Greeks  brought
their  divinities  with  them  ?  Did  they  not  pervert  the  simple  country-folk,  so
that  they  nssociated  the  Greek  religion  with  that  of  their  own  country?
Money  was  scarce ;  Amasis  had  been  obliged  to  debit  the  rations  and  pay  of
his  mercenaries  to  the  accounts  of  the  most  venerated  Egyptian  temples — those
of  Sais,  Heliopolis,  Bubastis,  and  Memphis  ;  and  each  of  these  institutions  had
to  rebate  so  much  per  cent,  on  their  annual  revenues  in  favour  of  the  bar-
barians, and  hand  over  to  them  considerable  quantities  of  corn,  cattle,  poultry,
stuffs,  woods,  perfumes,  and  objects  of  all  kinds.  The  jiriests  were  loud  in
their  indignation,  the  echo  of  which  still  rang  in  the  ears  of  the  faithful  some
centuries  later,^  and  tlie  lower  classes  making  common  cause  with  their  priests,
a  spirit  of  hatred  was  roused  among  the  populace  as  bitter  as  that  which
had  previously  caused  the  downfall  of  Apries.  As  the  fear  of  the  army  prevented
this  feeling  from  manifesting  itself  in  a  revolt,  it  found  expression  in  the  secret
calumnies  which  were  circulated  against  the  king,  and  misrepresented  the
motives  of  all  his  actions.  Scores  of  malicious  stories  were  repeated  vilifying
his  character.  It  was  stated  that  before  his  accession  he  was  much  addicted
to  eating  and  drinking,  but  that,  suffering  from  want  of  money,  he  had  not
hesitated  in  procuring  what  he  wished  for  by  all  sorts  of  means,  the  most
honest  of  which  had  been  secret  theft.'-  When  made  king,  he  had  several
times  given  way  to  intoxication  to  such  an  extent  as  to  be  incapable  of
attending  to  public  business ;  his  ministers  were  then  obliged  to  relate  moral
tales  to  him  to  bring  him  to  a  state  of  reason.^     Many  persons  having  taunted

list  of  illustrious  Greelis  wlio  according  to  tradition  visited  Egypt,  or  who  really  came  thither  in  the
Saite  epoch — the  poet  Alcseus  of  Mitylene,  the  two  Samian  sculptors  Theodorus  and  Telecles,  Solon
the  Athenian,  Thales  of  Miletus,  and  Pythagoras.

'  Their  expression  of  indignation  haa  been  preserved  to  us  in  one  of  the  demotio  papyri  of  the
Bibliotheque  Nationale  translated  by  Revillout,  Le  Roi  Amasis  et  les  Mercenaires,  in  the  Revue
Egyptologiqiie,  vol.  i.  pp.  11-13.

-  HEKODOTrs,  II.  clxxiv. ;  cf.  Wiedemasx,  Herodots  Zweiles  Buck,  pp.  597,  598.

^  This  is  the  import  of  the  story  first  published  by  Kevillodt,  Le  Roi  Amasis  et  les  Mercenairee,
in  the  Revue  £gyptologique,  vol.  i.  pp.  17-19 ;  cf.  Maspero,  Les  Contes populaires  de  V6gypie  Ancienne,
2nd  edit.,  pp.  297-308.  The  fondness  of  Amasis  for  wine  and  mirth  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  II.
clxxiii.


THE   STORY   OF   THE  DEATH  OF  CYRUS.  651

him  with  his  low  extraction,  he  had  caused  a  statue  of  a  divinity  to  be  made
out  of  a  gold  basin  in  which  he  was  accustomed  to  wash  his  feet,  and  he  had
exposed  it  to  the  adoration  of  the  faithful.  When  it  had  been  worshipped  by
them  for  some  time,  he  revealed  the  origin  of  the  idol,  and  added  "that  it  had
been  with  himself  as  with  the  foot-pan.  ...  If  he  were  a  private  person  formerly,
yet  now  he  had  come  to  be  their  king,  and  so  he  bade  them  honour  and
reverence  him."  ^  Towards  the  middle  and  end  of  his  reign  be  was  as  much
detested  as  he  had  been  beloved  at  the  outset.

He  had,  notwithstanding,  so  effectively  armed  Egypt  that  the  Persians  had
not  ventured  to  risk  a  collision  with  her  immediately  after  their  conquest  of
Babylon.  Cyrus  had  spent  ten  years  in  compassing  the  downfall  of  Nabonidus,
and,  calculating  that  that  of  Amasis  would  require  no  less  a  period  of  time,  he
set  methodically  to  work  on  the  organisation  of  his  recently  acquired  territory ;
the  cities  of  Phoenicia  acknowledged  him  as  their  suzerain,  and  furnished
him  with  what  had  hitherto  been  a  coveted  acquisition,  a  fleet.  These
preliminaries  had  apparently  been  already  accomplished,  when  the  movements
of  the  barbarians  suddenly  made  his  presence  in  the  far  East  imperative.  He
hurried  thither,  and  was  mysteriously  lost  to  sight  (529).  Tradition  accounts
for  his  death  in  several  ways.  If  Xenophon  is  to  be  credited,  he  died  peace-
ably on  his  bed,  surrounded  by  his  children,  and  edifying  those  present  by  bis
wisdom  and  his  almost  superhuman  resignation.^  Berosus  tells  us  that  he  was
killed  in  a  campaign  against  the  Dahse ;  ^  Ctesias  states  that,  having  been
wounded  in  a  skirmish  with  the  Derbikes,  one  of  the  savage  tribes  of  Bactriana,
he  succumbed  to  his  injuries  three  days  after  the  engagement.''  According  to
the  worthy  Herodotus,  he  asked  the  hand  of  Tomyris,  Queen  of  the  Massagetse,
in  marriage,  and  was  refused  with  disdain.  He  declared  war  against  her  to
avenge  his  wounded  vanity,  set  out  to  fight  with  her  beyond  the  Araxes,
in  the  steppes  of  Turkestan,  defeated  the  advance-guard  of  cavalry,  and
took  prisoner  the  heir  to  the  crown,  Spargapises,  who  thereupon  ran  himself
through  with  his  sword..  "Then  Tomyris  collected  all  the  forces  of  her
kingdom,  and  gave  him  (Cyrus)  battle.  Of  all  the  combats  in  which
barbarians  have  engaged  among  themselves,  I  reckon  this  to  have  been  the
fiercest.     The  following,  as  I  understand,  was  the  manner  of  it : — First,  the

'  Herodotus,  II.  clsxii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Heroduts  Zweileg  Buck,  pp.  594,  595.

"  Xenophon,  Cyropasdia,  VIII.  vii.  §§  3-3S.  A  similar. legend,  but  later  in  date,  told  how  Cyrus,
when  a  hundred  years  old,  asked  one  day  to  see  his  friends.  He  was  told  that  his  son  had  had  them
all  put  to  death  :  his  grief  at  the  cruelty  of  Cambyses  caused  his  death  in  a  few  days  (Onesiobitus,
Fragm.  32,  in  Mijllek-Didot,  Scr'iptores  rerum  Alexandri  Magni,  p.  57).

^  If  Eusebius  (Chronicon,  p.  29)  can  be  trusted  ;  as  Nijldeke  has  pointed  out,  Berosus  might  really
have  found  the  fact  recorded  in  a  Babylonian  document  similar  to  those  from  which  we  have  learned
the  events  that  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  Cyrus'  reign  (Aufsdtze  zur  Persischen  Geschichte,  p.  2t).

*  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §§  6,  7,  in  MiiLLER-DiDOT,  Ctesiss  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  47.


652


THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.


two  armies  stood  apart  and  shot  their  arrows  at  each  other ;  then,  when  their
quivers  were  empty,  they  closed  and  fought  hand  to  hand  with  lances  and
daggers ;  and  thus  they  continued  fighting  for  a  length  of  time,  neither
choosing  to  giye  ground.  At  length  the  Massagetae  prevailed.  The  greater
part  of  the  army  of  the  Persians  was  destroyed.  Search  was  made  among  the
slain  by  order  of  the  queen  for  the  body  of  Cyrus ;  and  when  it  was  found,  she
took  a  skin,  and,  filling  it  full  of  human  blood,  she  dipped  the  head  of  Cyrus
in  the  gore,  saying,  as  she  thus  insulted  the  corse,  '  I  live  and  have  conquered

thee  in  fight,  and  yet  by  thee  am  I
ruined,  for  thou  tookest  my  son  with
guile ;  but  thus  I  make  good  my
threat,  and  give  thee  thy  fill  of
blood.'  "  ^  The  engagement  was  not
as  serious  as  the  legend  would  have
us  believe,  and  the  growth  of  the
Persian  power  was  in  no  way  aifected
by  it.  It  cost  Cyrus  his  life,  but  his
army  experienced  no  serious  disaster,
and  his  men  took  the  king's  body  and
brought  it  to  Pasargadae.  He  had  a
palace  there,  the  remains  of  which  can
still  be  seen  on  the  plain  of  Murgab.^
The  edifice  was  unpretentious,  built
upon  a  rectangular  plan,  with  two
porches  of  four  columns  on  the  longer
sides,  a  lateral  chamber  at  each  of  the
four  angles,  and  a  hypostyle  hall  in
the  centre,  divided  lengthways  by  two
rows  of  columns  which  supported  the  roof.  The  walls  were  decorated  with  bas-
reliefs,  and  wherever  the  inscriptions  have  not  been  destroyed,  we  can  read  in
cuneiform  characters  in  the  three  languages  which  thenceforward  formed  the
official  means  of  communication  of  the  empire — Persian,  Medic,  and  Chaldaean
— the  name,  title,  and  family  of  the  royal  occupant.  Cyrus  himself  is  repre-
.sented  in  a  standing  posture  on  the  pilasters,  wearing  a  costume  in  which
Egyptian  and  Assyrian  features  are  curiously  combined.  He  is  clothed  from
neck  to  ankle  in  the  close-fitting  fringed  tunic  of  the  Babylonian  and  Ninevite

'  Hekodotds,  I.  ceiv.-ccsiv.  (Rawlinaon'a  trans.) :  cf.  Justin,  i.  8 ;  Valerius  Masimus,  i.  10.
'  For  this  palace  of  Cyrus,  cf.  Pereot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I'Art  dam  I'Antiqiiite,  vol.  v.
pp.  665-670,  and  Dieulatot,  L'Art  Antique  de  la  Perse,  vol.  i.  p.  29,  et  seq.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograph  by  DiEnLAFOY,  LAcropole  de  Suse,  p.  49,  No.  33.


CTKUS  THE  AOHiEMENIAN.-'


THE   TOMB    OF   CYEUS.


653


sovereigns;  his  feet  are  covered  with  laced  boots,  while  four  great  wings,
emblems  of  the  supreme  power,'  overshadow  his  shoulders  and  loins,  two  of  them
raised  in  the  air,  the  others  pointing  to  the  earth ;  he  wears  on  his  head  the
Egyptian  skull-cap,  from  which  rises  one  of  the  most  complicated  head-dresses
of  the  royal  wardrobe  of  the  Pharaohs.^     The  monarch  raises  his  right  hand


THE    TOMB  OF   CYEUS.'


with  the  gesture  of  a  man  speaking  to  an  assembled  people,*  and  as  if  repeating
the  legend  traced  above  his  image :  "  I  am  Cyrus,  the  king,  the  Achaemenian."
He  was  buried  not  far  off,  in  the  monumental  tomb  which  he  had  probably  built
for  himself  in  a  square  enclosure,  having  a  portico  on  three  of  its  sides ;  a  small
chamber,  with  a  ridge  roof,_  rises  from  a  base  composed  of  six  receding  steps,
so  arranged  as  to  appear  of  unequal  height.    The  doorway  is  narrow,  and  so  low

'  Heeodottjs,  I.  ccis. ;  cf.  Dieulapot,  L'Arl  Antique  de  la  Perse,  vol.  i.  p.  35.

-  This  is  the  diadem  of  the  triple  hotesu.  No.  xli.  in  the  list  of  Kochejionteix,  (Euvres  diverses
pi.  ii.

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  the  heliogravure  of  DiETjLArOT,  L'Art  Antique  de  la  Perge.
vol.  i.  pi.  six.

*  Dieulafoy  places  in  his  closed  hand  "  a  statuette  of  which  the  double  cap,  very  different  from
the  pshent,  is  surmounted  by  the  sacred  urseus  "  (L'Art  Antique  de  la  Perse,  vol.  i.  p.  35,  and  pi,  xvii.) :
no  other  traveller  has  mentioned  this  emblem,  and  on  closely  examining  the  photographs  of  the
monument,  even  tliat  by  Dieulafoy  (L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  49,  No.  33),  I  can  make  out  only  a  crack  in
the  stone,  beyond  which  can  be  easily  seen  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  stretched  out  as  in  the  illustration
above  on  p.  652.


654  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

that  a  man  of  medium  stature  finds  some  difficulty  in  entering.  It  is  sur-
mounted by  a  hollow  moulding,  quite  Egyptian  in  style,  and  was  closed  by  a
two-leaved  stone  door.^  The  golden  coffin  rested  on  a  couch  of  the  same
metal,  covered  with  precious  stuffs ;  and  a  circular  table,  laden  with  drinking-
vessels  and  ornaments  enriched  with  precious  stones,  completed  the  furniture
of  the  chamber.  The  body  of  the  conqueror  remained  undisturbed  on  this
spot  for  two  centuries  uuder  the  care  of  the  priests  ;  but  while  Alexander  was
waging  war  on  the  Indian  frontier,  the  Greek  officers,  to  whom  he  had  entrusted
the  government  of  Persia  proper,  allowed  themselves  to  be  tempted  by  the
enormous  wealth  which  the  funerary  chapel  was  supposed  to  contain.  They
opened  the  coffin,  broke  the  couch  and  the  table,  and  finding  them  too  heavy
to  carry  away  easily,  they  contented  themselves  with  stealing  the  drinking-
vessels  and  jewels.-  Alexander  on  his  return  visited  the  place,  and  caused  the
entrance  to  be  closed  with  a  slight  wall  of  masonry ;  he  intended  to  restore
the  monument  to  its  former  splendour,  but  he  himself  perished  shortly  after,
and  what  remained  of  the  contents  probably  soon  disappeared.  After  the
death  of  Cyrus,  popular  imagination,  drawing  on  the  inexhaustible  materials
furnished  by  his  adventurous  career,  seemed  to  delight  in  making  him  the
ideal  of  all  a  monarch  should  be ;  they  attributed  to  him  every  virtue —
gentleness,  bravery,  moderation,  justice,  and  wisdom.  There  is  no  reason  to
doubt  that  he  possessed  the  qualities  of  a  good  general — activity,  energy,  and
courage,  together  with  the  astuteness  and  the  duplicity  so  necessary  to
success  in  Asiatic  conquest — but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  possessed  in  the
same  degree  the  gifts  of  a  great  administrator.  He  made  no  changes  in  the
system  of  government  which  from  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  onwards
had  obtained  among  all  Oriental  sovereigns ;  he  placed  satraps  over  the  towns
and  countries  of  recent  acquisition,  at  Sardes  and  Babylon,  in  Syria  and
Palestine,  but  without  clearly  defining  their  functions  or  subjecting  them  to  a
supervision  sufficiently  strict  to  ensure  the  faithful  performance  of  their  duties.
He  believed  that  he  was  destined  to  found  a  single  empire  in  which  all  the
ancient  empires  were  to  be  merged,  and  he  all  but  carried  his  task  to  a
successful  close  :  Egypt  alone  remained  to  be  conquered  when  he  passed
away.

His  wife  Kassandane,  a  daughter  of  Pharnaspes,  and  an  Achaemenian  like

'  DiEULAFOY,  VAH  Antique  de  la  Ferse,  vol.  i.  p.  48.

'  Arkian,  Aiuihasis,  "VI.  x.  §§  4-9,  after  Aristobulus  (Fragm.  37,  in  Muller-Didot,  Scriplores
rerum  Alexandri  Magni,  pp.  107,  108).  Cf.  Pseudo-Callisthknes,  II.  xviii.,  where  the  author  places
the  tomb  of  Cyrus  and  that  of  "  Nabonaaar,  whom  the  Greeks  call  Nabukhodonosor,"  side  by  side.
According  to  Oppert,  the  little  building  of  Murghab  is  not  tlie  tomb  of  Cyrus,  but  of  his  wife
Kassandane  (Juurnal  Asiaiique,  1872,  vol.  xix.  pp.  518,  and  Le  Pewpleet  la  Langue  des  Medes,  pp.  110,
111).  The  description  preserved  by  Arrian  shows  that  it  belongs  to  the  conqueror,  and  not  to  one  of
his  queens.


CAMBYSES  AND    SMERDIS.  655

himself,  had  borne  him  five  children ;  two  sons,  Cambyses'  and  Smerdis,^  and
three  daughters,  Atossa,  Eoxana,  and  Artystone.^  Cambyses  was  probably
born  about  558,  soon  after  his  father's  accession/  and  he  was  his  legitimate
successor,  according  to  the  Persian  custom  which  assigned  the  crown  to  the
eldest  of  the  sons  born  in  the  purple.^  He  had  been  associated,  as  we  have  seen,
in  the  Babylonian  regal  power  immediately  after  the  victory  over  Nabonidus,^
and  on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  the  fatal  campaign  against  the  Massagetae
his  father,  again  in  accordance  with  the  Persian  law,  had  appointed  him  regent.''
A  later  tradition,  preserved  by  Ctesias,  relates  that  on  this  occasion  tbe
territory  liad  been  divided  between  the  two  sons :  Smerdis,  here  called
Tanyoxarkes,  having  received  as  his  share  Bactriana,  the  Khoramnians,  the
Parthians,  and  the  Carmanians,  under  the  suzerainty  of  his  brother.*^    Cambyses,

'  The  Persian  form  of  the  name  rendered  Kambyses  by  the  Greeks  (Herodotcs,  II.  i.)  was
Kabuziya  or  Kambuziya  (JusTi,  Iranisches  Namenhuch,pp.  153, 151).  Herodotus  calls  him  the  son  of
Kassandane  (II.  i..  III.  ii.),  and  the  tradition  which  he  has  preserved  is  certainly  authentic.  Ctesias
has  erroneously  stated  that  his  mother  was  Amytis,  the  daughter  of  Astyages  {Fmgm.  37,  in  MijLlee-
DiDOT,  Cteaiie  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  63),  and  Dinon,  also  erroneously,  the  Egyptian  woman  Nitetis
(Fragm.  11,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  ii.  p.  91)  ;  Diodorus  Siculus  (i.  33)  and  Strabo
make  him  the  son  of  Meroe.  For  a  good  summary  of  information  concerning  Cambyses  and  the
children  of  Cyrus,  see  Pkashek,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Alterthuma,  vol.  i.  pp.  30-34.

-  The  original  form  was  Bardiya  or  Barziya,  "  the  laudable  "  (JusTi,  Iranisches  Namenhuch,  p.  63),
and  the  first  Greek  transcript  known,  in  JSschylus  (Persse,  774),  is  Mardos,  or,  in  the  scholiasts  on
the  passage,  Merdias,  which  has  been  corrupted  into  Marphios  by  Hellanikos  {Fragm.  164  in
MuLLEE-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  i.  p.  GS)  and  into  Merges  by  Pompeius  Trogus  (Justin,  i.  9).
The  form  Smerdis  in  Herodotus  (III.  xxx.),  and  in  the  historians  who  follow  him  (Diodobus  Siculus
six.  40),  is  the  result  of  a  mistaken  assimilation  of  the  Persian  name  with  the  purely  Greek  one  of
Smerdis  or  Smerdies  (Akistotle,  Politics,  Berlin  ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  1311);  compare  also  the  name  of  a
son  of  Otanes  rendered  Smerdomenes  for  the  same  reason  (Herodotus,  VII.  Ixxsii.,  csxi.).

'  Herodotus  says  that  Atossa  was  the  daughter  of  Kassandane  (II.  i.,  III.  iii.),  and  the  position
which  she  held  during  three  reigns  shows  that  she  must  have  been  so ;  Justi,  however,  calls  her
the  daughter  of  Amytis  (Iranisches  Namenhuch,  p.  398).  A  second  daugliter  is  mentioned  by
Herodotus  (III.  xxsi.),  the  one  whom  Cambyses  killed  in  Egypt  by  a  kick;  he  gives  her  no  name
but  she  is  probably  the  same  as  (Marquakt,  Die  Assyriaka  des  Etesias,  in  the  Pkilohgus,  Suppl.
vol.  V.  pp.  607,  608  ;  Prashek,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  31, 32)  the  Koxana
who  according  to  Ctesias  bore  a  headless  child  {Fragm.  29,  §  12,  in  Mullek-Dieot,  Clesix  Cnidii
Fragmenta,  p.  48).  The  youngest,  Artystoue,  was  the  favourite  wife  of  Darius  (Hekodoius,  III.
Ixxxviii.,  VII.  Isix.,  Ixxii.).  Josephus  {Ant.  Jud..  II.  xi.  §  2)  speaks  of  a  fourth  daughter  of  Cyrus
called  Meroe,  but  without  saying  who  was  the  mother  of  this  princess.

'  According  to  the  very  probable  calculation  of  Prashek,  Forschingcn  zur  Geschichte  des
Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  34,  85.

'  On  this  point,  cf.  Herodotus,  VII.  ii.,  iii.,  where  tradition  ascribes  the  establishment  of  this  law
to  the  Spartan  Demaratos  in  the  case  of  Xerxes  I.

'  On  this  first  association,  cf.  supra,  p.  636.

'  Herodotus,  I.  ceviii.,  states  the  fact,  Knfiffunri,  rrJirep  ttV  &a<Ti\-nirii/  iSiSov;  and  elsewhere
(VII.  ii.)  he  formally  says  that  the  Persian  law  required  the  nomination  of  a  successor  in  such  a  case.

*  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  8,  in  Mlxler-Didot,  Ctesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  47 ;  Xenophon,  who
preserves  the  same  legend,  gives  the  name  as  Tanaoxares,  and  says  that  the  Medes,  the  Arme-
nians, and  the  Cadusians  were  his  subjects  {Cyropxdia,  VIII.  vii.  §  11).  Duucker  {Geschichte
des  Alterthums,  4th  edit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  427)  accepts  the  division  of  the  empire  between  the  two
brothers,  and  the  latest  historian  of  Smerdis,  Hutecker  {Der  Falsche  Smerdis,  p.  35),  adopts  the
same  view.  Tanaoxares  or  Tanyoxarkes  would  then  be  only  an  epithet  applied  to  Smerdis,  Thanva-
rakhshathra,  the  king  of  the  how  (Dunx'Ker,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  4tb  tdit.,  voJ.  iv.  p.  437),
Tanuvazraka,  the  great  of  hodij  (Oppekt,  Mimoire  sur  les  Inscriptions  Akh^menides,  in  the  J.  As.,
4th  ser.,  1851,  vol.  xvii.  p.  262),  Tanwakhshathaka,  estahlished  in  a  lesser  kingdom  (Kern,  Specimen


656  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

it  is  clear,  iuherited  the  whole  empire,  but  intrigues  gathered  rouuu  Smerdis,
and  revolts  broke  out  in  the  provinces,  incited,  so  it  was  said,  whether  rightly
or  wrongly,  by  his  partisans.'  The  new  king  was  possessed  of  a  violent,
merciless  temper,  and  the  Persians  subsequently  emphasised  the  fact  by
saying  that  Cyrus  had  been  a  father  to  them,  Cambyses  a  master."  The
rebellions  were  repressed  with  a  vigorous  hand,  and  finally  Smerdis  disappeared
by  royal  order,  and  the  secret  of  his  fate  was  so  well  kept,  that  it  was  believed,
even  by  his  mother  and  sisters,  that  he  was  merely  imprisoned  in  some  obscure
Median  fortress.^  The  ground  being  cleared  of  his  rival,  and  affairs  on  the
Scythian  frontier  reduced  to  order,  Cambyses  took  up  the  projects  against
Egypt  at  the  exact  point  at  which  his  predecessor  had  left  them.  Amasis,
who  for  ten  years  had  been  expecting  an  attack,  had  taken  every  precaution  in
his  power  against  it,  and  had  once  more  patiently  begun  to  make  overtures  of
alliance  with  the  Hellenic  cities ;  those  on  the  European  continent  did  not  feel
themselves  so  seriously  menaced  as  to  consider  it  to  their  interest  to  furnish
him  witli  any  assistance,  but  the  Greeks  of  the  independent  islands,  with  their
chief,  Polycrates,  tyrant  of  Samos,  received  his  advances  with  alacrity.  Poly-
crates  had  at  his  disposal  a  considerable  fleet,  the  finest  hitherto  seen  in  the
waters  of  the  .3]gean,  and  this,  combined  with  the  Egyptian  navy,  was  not  any
too  large  a  force  to  protect  the  coasts  of  the  Delta,  now  that  the  Persians  had
at  their  disposition  not  only  the  vessels  of  the  ^Eolian  and  Ionian  cities,  but  those

Huloricum  exhibens  Scripfores  Graicos  de  rebus  Fersicis  Achxmenidarum  Mormmentis  collatos,  pp.  23, 24 ;
Bkeal,  De  Fersicis  nominibus,  p.  27).  Ctesias'  story  can  be  considered  only  as  a  purely  imaginary  one
(NoLBEKE,  AufsUtze  zur  Fers.  Gesch.,  p.  26  ;  Prashek,  Forsch.  zur  Gesch.  des  Alterth.,  vol.  i.  pp.  38,  39),
probably  modelled  on  what  occurred,  at  the  death  of  Dariu3  II.,  between  his  two  sons  Ai-taxerxes  II.
and  Cyru3  the  younger  (Makquaet,  Die  Assyr.  des  Ktetias,  in  the  Philologus,  Suppl..  vol.  v.  pp.  619, 620).

'  Herodotus,  III.  Ixxsviii.,  speaks  of  peoples  subdued  by  Cambyses  in  Asia,  and  this  allusion  can
only  refer  to  a  revolt  occurring  after  the  death  of  Cyrus,  before  the  Egyptian  expedition ;  these
troubles  are  explicitly  recorded  in  Xexophon,  Cyropiedia,  YIII.  viii.  §  2.

-  Herodotus,  III.  Ixxxix.,  where  the  term  5e<r?ro'Ti)s  is  explained  as  x«AtT"'s  re  ^u  Kal  6\lyu>pos.

'  The  inscription  of  Behistun  (col.  i.  11. 26-32)  says  distinctly  that  Cambyses  had  his  brother  Bardlya
put  to  death  before  the  Egyptian  expedition  (Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpersisciien  Keilinschriften,
pp.  12-15);  on  the  other  hand,  Herodotus  makes  the  murder  occur  during  the  Egyptian  expedition
(III.  XXX.)  and  Ctesias  after  this  expedition  {Fragm.  29,  §§  10,  11,  in  MtJLLER-DiDOT,  Ctesias  Ciiidii
Fragmenta,  pp.  47,  48).  Ctesias'  version  of  the  uii'air  adds  that  Cambyses,  the  better  to  dissimulate
his  crime,  ordered  the  murderer  Sphendadates  to  pass  himself  off  as  Tanyoxarkes,  as  there  was  a
great  resemblance  between  the  two :  8phendadates — the  historian  goes  on  to  say — was  exiled  to
Bactriana,  and  it  was  not  untU  five  years  afterwards  that  the  mother  of  the  two  princes  heard  of  the
murder  and  of  the  substitution.  These  additions  to  the  story  are  subsequent  developments  suggested
by  the  traditional  account  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis.  In  recent  times  several  authorities,  Beloch
(Griechische  Oeschiclite,  vol.  i.  p.  345,  note  1),  Eost  {Untersuchungen  zur  Altorientalischen  Geschichte.
pp.  107-109),  and  TVinckler  (in  the  Orientalische  Liieratur-Zeitung,  1898,  pp.  39-45,  and  Altorien-
talische  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  pp.  138-140),  have  expressed  the  opinion  that  all  that  is  told  us  of  the
murder  of  Smerdis  and  about  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  is  merely  a  legend,  invented  by  Darius  or  those
about  him  in  order  to  justify  his  usurpation  in  the  eyes  of  the  people:  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  would
be  Smerdis  himself,  who  revolted  against  Cambyses,  and  was  then,  after  he  had  reigned  a  few
months,  assassinated  by  Darius.  Winckler  acknowledges  "  that  certainty  is  impossible  in  such  a
case ; "  and,  in  reality,  all  ancient  tradition  is  against  his  hypothesis,  and  it  is  best  to  accept  Hero-
dotus' account,  with  all  its  contradictions,  until  contemporaneous  documents  enable  us  to  decide
what  to  accept  and  what  to  reject  in  it.


THE   TRADITIONAL    CAUSES    OF   TEE    WAE    WITH  EGYPT.         (357

of  Phcenicia  and  Cypius.  A  treaty  was  concluded,  bringing  about  an
exchange  of  presents  and  amenities  between  the  two  princes  which  lasted  as
long  as  peace  prevailed,  but  was  ruptured  at  the  critical  moment  by  the  action
of  Polycrates,  though  not  actually  through  his  own  fault.  The  aristocratic
party,  whose  chiefs  were  always  secretly  plotting  his  overthrow,  had  given  their
adherence  to  the  Persians,  and  their  conduct  became  so  threatening  about  the
time  of  the  death  of  Cyrus,  that  Polycrates  had  to  break  his  engagements  with
Egypt  in  order  to  avert  a  catastrophe.^  He  made  a  treaty  with  the  Persian
king,  and  sent  a  squadron  of  forty  galleys  to  join  the  fleet  then  being  equipped
in  the  Phoenician  ports.'^  Amasis,  therefore,  when  war  at  last  broke  out,  found
himself  left  to  face  the  enemy  alone.  The  struggle  was  inevitable,  and  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  eastern  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  had  long  foreseen  its
coming.  Without  taking  into  consideration  the  danger  to  which  the  Persian
empire  and  its  Syrian  provinces  were  exposed  by  the  proximity  of  a  strong
and  able  power  such  as  Egypt,  the  hardy  and  warlike  character  of  Cambyses
would  naturally  have  prompted  him  to  make  an  attempt  to  achieve  what
his  predecessors,  the  warrior- kings  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  had  always  failed
to  accomplish  successfully.  Policy  ruled  his  line  of  action,  and  was  sufScient
to  explain  it,  but  popular  imagination  sought  other  than  the  very  natural
causes  which  had  brought  the  most  ancient  and  most  recent  of  the  great
empires  of  the  world  into  opposition ;  romantic  reasons  were  therefore  invented
to  account  for  the  great  drama  which  was  being  enacted,  and  the  details
supplied  varied  considerably,  according  as  the  tradition  was  current  in  Asia
or  Africa.  It  was  said  that  a  physician  lent  to  Cyrus  by  Amasis,  to
treat  him  for  an  affection  of  the  eyes,  was  the  cause  of  all  the  evil.  The
unfortunate  man,  detained  at  Susa  and  chafing  at  his  exile,  was  said  to  have
advised  Cambyses  to  ask  for  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  in  marriage,  hojjing
either  that  Amasis  would  grant  the  request,  and  be  dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of
his  subjects  for  having  degraded  the  solar  race  by  a  union  with  a  barbarian,  or
that  he  would  boldly  refuse,  and  thus  arouse  the  hatred  of  the  Persians  against
himself.  Amasis,  after  a  Slight  hesitation,  substituted  Nitetis,  a  daughter  of
Apries,  for  his  own  child.  It  happened  that  one  day  in  sport  Cambyses
addressed  the  princess  by  the  name  of  her  supposed  father,  whereupon  she
said,  "  I  perceive,  O  king,  that  you  liave  no  suspicion  of  the  way  in  which

'  Herodotus,  III.  xxxis.-sliii.,  where  the  breach  of  the  treaty  is  laid  to  the  blame  of  the  King  of
Egypt,  and  attributed  to  liis  fear  of  the  constant  good  fortune  of  Polycrates.  The  latter's  accession  to
power  is  fixed  at  about  the  year  540  by  some  (J.  Beloch,  Griechuche  Gesclitchte,  vol.  i.  p.  317),  by
others  in  the  year  537  (Duncker,  Geschichte  de»  AUerthums,  5th  edit.,  vol.  v.  p.  512),  or  in  the  year
533-2  (BcsoLT,  Griechuche  GeechicMe,  vol.  i.  p.  002) ;  his  negotiations  with  Amasis  must  be  placed
somewhere  during  the  last  fifteen  years  of  the  Pharaoh.

-  Herod.,  III.  xliv.-xlvi.,  where  two  opposing  traditions  are  recorded  :  one  that  the  Samians  joined
in  the  Egyptian  campaign,  the  other  that  they  went  only  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  Karpathcs.

2  u


<558  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

you  have  been  deceived  by  Amasis ;  he  took  tne,  and  having  dressed  me  up  as
his  own  daughter,  sent  rae  to  you.  In  reality  I  am  the  daughter  of  Apries,  who
was  his  lord  and  master  until  the  day  that  he  revolted,  and,  in  concert  with  the
rest  of  the  Egyptians,  put  his  sovereign  to  death."  The  deceit  which  Cambyses
thus  discovered  had  been  put  upon  him  irritated  him  so  greatly  as  to  induce
him  to  turn  his  arms  against  Egypt.  So  ran  the  Persian  account  of  the  tale,'  but
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  matters  were  explained  otherwise.  Here  it  was  said
that  it  was  to  Cyrus  himself  that  Nitetis  had  been  married,  and  that  she  had
borne  Cambyses  to  him  ;  the  conquest  had  thus  been  merely  a  revenge  of  the
legitimate  heirs  of  Psammetichus  upon  the  usurper,  and  Cambyses  had
ascended  the  throne  less  as  a  conqueror  than  as  a  Pharaoh  of  the  line  of
Apries.^  It  was  by  this  childish  fiction  that  the  Egyptians  in  their  decadence
■consoled  themselves  before  the  stranger  for  their  loss  of  power.  Always
proud  of  their  ancient  prowess,  but  incapable  of  imitating  the  deeds  of  their
forefathers,  they  none  the  less  pretended  that  they  could  neither  be  vanquished
nor  ruled  except  by  one  of  themselves,  and  tlie  story  of  Nitetis  afforded
complete  satisfaction  to  their  vanity.  If  Cambyses  were  born  of  a  solar
princess,  Persia  could  not  be  said  to  have  imposed  a  barbarian  king  upon
Egypt,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  Egypt  had  cleverly  foisted  her  Pharaoh  upon
Persia,  and  through  Persia  upon  half  the  universe.

One  obstacle  still  separated  the  two  foes — the  desert  and  the  marshes  of
the  Delta.  The  distance  between  the  outposts  of  Pelusium  and  the  fortress
of  lenysos  ^  on  the  Syrian  frontier  was  scarcely  fifty-six  miles,  and  could  be
crossed  by  an  army  in  less  than  ten  days.*  Formerly  the  width  of  this  strip
of  desert  had  been  less,  but  the  Assyrians,  and  after  them  the  Chaldaeans,  had
vied  with  each  other  in  laying  waste  the  country,  and  the  absence  of  any
settled  population  now  rendered  the  transit  difficult.  Cambyses  had  his  head-
quarters at  Gaza,  at  the  extreme  limit  of  his  own  dominions,^  but  he  was  at  a
loss  how  to  face  this  solitary  region  without  incurring  the  risk  of  seeing  half
his  men  buried  beneath  its  sands,  and  his  uncertainty  was  delaying  his
departure  when  a  stroke  of  fortune  relieved  him  from  his  difficulty.     Phanes

'  Herodotus,  III.  i. ;  Ctesias  tells  the  same  story,  probably  foUoniug  Herodotus  (Fragm.  37,  in
MixLER-DiDOT,  Ctesiss  Cnidii  Fragmenia,  p.  63).

-  Hebodotds,  III.  i.-iii.  This  account  was  borrowed  from  Herodotus  by  Dinon  {Fragm.  11,
in  WuLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hut.  Graic,  vol.  ii.  p.  91),  and  by  Lycapas  of  Naueratis  (_Fragm.  2,  in
MuLLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  (?r,-¥c.,vol.  iv.  p.  441).

'  The  lenysos  of  Herodotus  (III.  v.)  is  now  Khin  Yuues.

*  In  1799,  Napoleon's  army  left  Kattiyeh  on  the  I8th  of  Pluviose,  and  was  at  Gaza  on  the  7th  of
Ventose,  after  remaining  from  the  21st  to  the  30th  of  Pluviose  before  El-Aiish  besieging  that  place.

'  This  seems  to  follow  from  the  tradition  preserved  by  Servics,  Ad  ^Eneklos,  i.  123,  according  to
which  Cambyses  leit  his  treasures  at  Gaza  during  the  Egyptian  campaign,  and  the  town  was  thence
called  Gaza,  "  the  treasury."  The  etymology  is  false,  but  the  fact  that  suggested  it  is  probably  correct,
considering  the  situation  of  Gaza  and  the  part  it  must  necessarily  play  in  an  invasion  of  Egypt.


THE  DEATH  OF  A  31 A  SIS  AND  ACOESSIOX  OF  PSAMMETICHVS  III.       659


of  Halicarnassiis,  one  of  the  mercenaries  in  the  service  of  Egypt,  a  man  of
shrewd  judgment  and  an  able  soldier,  fell  out  with  Amasis  for  some  unknown
reason,  and  left  him  to  offer  his  services  to  his  rival.     This  was  a  serious
loss  for  Egypt,  since  Phanes  possessed  considerable  authority  over  the  mer-
cenaries, and  was  better  versed  in  Egyptian  affairs  than  any  other  person.     He
was  pursued  and  taken  within  sight  of  the  Lycian  coast,  but  he  treated  his
captors  to  wine  and   escaped  from  them  while  they  were
intoxicated.     He    placed    Cambyses    in     communication
with  the  shekh  of  the  scattered  tribes  between  Syri
and  the  Delta.     The  Arab  undertook  to  furnish  tlie
Persian  king  with  guides,  as  one  of  his  predeces^ui^
had  done  in  years  gone  by  for  Esarhaddon,  and  to
station  relays  of  camels  laden  with  water  along
the  route  that  the  invading  army  was  to  follow. ^
Having  taken  these  precautions,  Cambyses  en-
trusted the  cares  of  government  and  the  regu-
lation of  his  household  to  Oropastes,^  one  of  the
Persian  magi,  and  gave   the  order  to  march
forward.     On  arriving  at  Pelusium,  he  learned
that  his  adversary  no  longer  existed.     Amasis
had  died  after  a  short   illness,  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  his   son  Psammetichus    III.     This
change  of  command,  at  the  most  critical  moment,
was  almost  in  itself  a  disaster.    Amasis,  with  his
consummate  experience  of  men  and  things,  his
intimate  knowledgeof  the  resources  of  Egypt,his
talents  as  a  soldier  and  a  general,  his  personal
prestige,  his  Hellenic  leanings,  commanded  the
confidence  of  his  own  men  and  the  respect  of  foreigners ;  but  what  could  be

'  Herodotus,  III.  iv.-x. ;  for  th'e  similar  preparations  of  Esarhaddon,  cf.  supra,  p.  371.  In  the
account  of  Ctebias  {Frngm.  29,  §  9,  in  Mlller-Didot,  Ctesix  Ciiidii  Fragmenta,  p.  47),  Kombapheus,
a  eunuch,  plays  the  same  part  as  does  Phanes  in  the  tradition  of  Herodotus.

-  Herodotus  (III.  Ixi.,  Ixiii.)  calls  this  individual  Patizeithes,  and  Dionysius  of  Miletus,  who
lived  a  little  before  Herodotus,  gives  Panzythes  as  a  variant  of  this  name  :  the  variant  passed  into  the
Syncellus  as  Pauzythes,  but  the  original  form  Patikhshayathiya  is  a  title  signifying  viceroy,  regent,
or  minister,  answering  to  the  modern  Persian  Padishah  :  Herodotus,  or  the  author  he  quotes,  has
taken  the  name  of  the  office  for  that  of  the  individual.  On  the  other  hand,  Pompeius  Trogus,  who
drew  his  information  from  good  sources,  mentions,  side  by  side  with  Cometes  or  Gaumata,  his  brother
Oropastes  (Justi;*,  i.  9),  whose  name  Ahura-upaslita  is  quite  correct,  and  may  mean.  Him  whom
Ahura  helps  (Breal,  De  Fersicis  Nominibus,  p.  12).  It  is  generally  admitted  that  Pompeius  Trogus,
or  rather  Justin,  has  inverted  the  parts  tbey  played,  and  that  his  Cometes  is  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,
and  not,  as  he  says,  Oropastes ;  it  was,  then,  tlie  latter  who  was  the  usurper's  brother,  and  it  is  his  name
of  Oropastes  which  should  be  substituted  for  that  of  the  Patizeithes  of  Herodotus  (JusTi,  Geschichte  des
Alien  Persiens,  p.  50 ;  Marqcart,  Die  Assijr.  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Fhiloloijus,  Suppl.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  C18,  B19).

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  Louvre;  cf.  G.  Benedite,  Vne  Tile


PSAMMET11.HIS    m.^


6G0  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

expected  of  liis  unknown  successor,^  and  who  could  say  whether  he  were  equal  to
the  heavy  task  which  fate  had  assigned  to  hiui  ?  The  whole  of  the  Nile  valley  was
a  prey  to  gloomy  presentiment.  Egypt  was  threatened  not  only,  as  in  the  previous
century,  by  the  nations  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  but  all  Asia,  from  the  Indus
to  the  Hellespont,  was  about  to  fall  on  her  to  crush  her.     She  was  destitute  of
all  human  helji  and  allies,  and  the  gods  themselves  appeared  to  have  forsaken
her.     The  fellahin,  inspired  with  vague  alarm,  recognised  evil  omens  in  all
around  them.    Rain  is  rare  in  the  Thebaid,  and  storms  occur  there  only  twice  or
three  times  in  a  century  :  but  a  few  days  after  the  accession  of  Psammetichus,  a
shower  of  fine  rain  fell  at  Thebes,  an  event,  so  it  was  stated  with  the  exaggera-
tion characteristic  of  the  bearers  of  ill  news,  which  had  never  before  occurred.^
Pharaoh  hastened  to  meet  the  invader  with  all  the  men,  chariots,  and  native
bowmen  at  his  disposal,  together  with  his  Libyan  and  Cyrenrean  auxiliaries,^
and  the  lonians,  Carians,  and  Greeks  of  the  isles  and  mainland.    The  battle
took  place  before  Pelusium,  and  was  fought  on  both  sides  with  brave  despera-
tion, since  defeat  meant  servitude  for  the  Egyptians,  and  for  the  Persians,  cut  oif
by  the  desert  from  possible  retreat,  captivity  or  annihilation.     Phanes  had  been
obliged  to  leave  his  children  behind  him,  and  Pharaoh  included  them  in  his
suite,  to  serve,  if  needful,  as  hostages.    The  Carians  and  lonians,  who  felt  them-
selves disgraced  by  the  defection  of  their  captain,  called  loudly  for  them  just
before  the  commencement  of  the  action.     They  were  killed  immediately  in
front  of  the  lines,  their  father  being  a  powerless  onlooker;  their  blood  was
thrown  into  a  cask   half  full  of  wine,  and  the  horrible  mixture  was  drunk
by    the  soldiers,  who   then  furiously  charged  the   enemy's  battalions.     The
i^sue  of  the  struggle  was  for  a  long  time  doubtful,  but  tlie  Egyptians  were
inferior  in  numbers ;    towards  evening   their   lines  gave   way  and    the  flight

de  statue  royale,  in  the  Gazette  des  Beaux-Arts,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  35-42.  This  fragment,  executed  in  very
good  style,  has  been  given  by  Mme.  Andre  to  the  Egyptian  Museum  in  the  Louvre.

'  Psammetichus  III.  has  left  us  very  few  monuments  (cf.  Wiedemann,  ^gyptiache  Geschichte,
pp.  660,  661),  which  is  accounted  for  by  the  extreme  shortness  of  his  reign.  For  the  same  reason
doubtless  several  writers  of  classical  times  have  ignored  his  existence,  and  have  made  the  conquest  of
Egypt  take  place  under  Amasis  (Aristotle,  Rhetoric,  ii.  8 ;  John  of  Antioch,  Fragm.  27,  in  Miller-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,  vol.  iv.  p.  552).  Cteaias  calls  the  Pharaoh  Amyrtajus,  and  gives  the  same
name  to  those  who  rebelled  against  the  Persians  in  his  own  time,  and  he  had  an  account  of  the  history
of  the  conquest  entirely  different  from  tliat  of  Herodotus  {Fragm.  27,  §  9,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Ctesi.v
Gnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  47).

'  Herodotus,  III.  x.  The  inhabitants  of  tlie  Said  have,  up  to  our  own  time,  always  considered
rain  in  the  valley  as  an  ill-omened  event.  They  used  to  say  in  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth
century,  when  speaking  of  Napoleon's  expedition,  "We  knew  that  misfortune  threatened  us,  because
it  rained  at  Luxor  shortly  before  the  French  came."  Wilkinson  assures  us  that  rain  is  not  so  rare  at
Tliebes  as  Herodotus  thought:  he  speaks  of  five  or  six  showers  a  year,  and  of  a  great  storm  on  an
average  every  ten  years  (Bawlinson,  Berodotus,  vol.  ii.  p.  338,  note  4).  But  even  he  admits  that  it
is  confined  to  the  mountain  district,  and  does  not  reacli  the  plain :  I  never  heard  of  rain  at  Luxor
during  the  six  winters  that  I  spent  in  Upper  Egypt.

'   DlODORUS  SlCULUS,  X.  14.


THE  BATTLE   OF  PELUSIUM  AND    TEE   TAKING    OF  MEMPHIS.      661

began. ^  All  was  not,  however,  lost,  if  Psammetichus  had  but  followed  the
example  of  Taharqa,-  and  defended  the  passage  of  the  various  canals  and  arms
of  the  river,  disputing  the  ground  inch  by  inch  with  the  Persians,  and  gaining
time  meanwhile  to  collect  a  fresh  army.  The  king  lost  his  presence  of  mind,
and  without  attempting  to  rally  what  remained  of  his  regiments,  he  hastened
to  take  refuge  within  the  White  Wall.  Cambyses  halted  a  few  days  to  reduce
Pelusium,^  and  in  the  mean  time  sent  a  vessel  of  Mitylene  to  summon  Memphis
to  capitulate :  the  infuriated  populace,  as  soon  as  they  got  wind  of  the  message,
massacred  the  herald  and  the  crew,  and  dragged  their  bleeding  limbs  through
the  streets.  The  city  held  out  for  a  considerable  time ;  when  at  length  she
opened  her  gates,  the  remaining  inhabitants  of  the  Said  who  had  hesitated  up  to
then,  hastened  to  make  their  submission,  and  the  whole  of  Egypt  as  far  as  Philte
became  at  one  stroke  a  Persian  province.  The  Libyans  did  not  wait  to  be  sum-
moned to  bring  their  tribute ;  Cyrene  and  Barca  followed  their  example,  but
their  offerings  were  so  small  that  the  conqueror's  irritation  was  aroused,  and
deeming  himself  mocked,  he  gave  way  to  his  anger,  and  instead  of  accepting
them,  he  threw  them  to  his  soldiers  with  his  own  hand  (b.c.  525).*  This  sudden
collapse  of  a  power  whose  exalted  position  had  defied  all  attacks  for  centuries,
and  the  tragic  fate  of  the  king  who  had  received  his  crown  merely  to  lose  it,
filled  contemporary  beholders  with  astonishment  and  pity.  It  was  said  that,
ten  days  after  the  capitulation  of  Memphis,  the  victorious  king  desired  out  of
sport  to  test  tlie  endurance  of  his  prisoner.  Psammetichus  beheld  his  daughter
and  the  daughters  of  his  nobles  pass  before  him,  half  naked,  with  jars  on  their
shoulders,  and  go  down  to  the  Nile  to  fetch  water  from  the  river  like  common
slaves ;  his  son  and  two  thousand  young  men  of  the  same  age,  in  chains  and
with  ropes  round  their  necks,  also  defiled  before  him  on  their  way  to  die  as  a
revenge  for  the  murder  of  the  Mitylenians ;  yet  he  never  for  a  moment  lost  his
royal  imperturbability.  But  when  one  of  his  former  companions  in  pleasure
chanced  to  pass,  begging  for  alms  and  clothed  in  rags,  Psammetichus  suddenly
broke  cut  into  weeping,  and  lacerated  his  face  in  despair.  Cambyses,  surprised
at  this  excessive  grief  in  a  man  who  up  till  then  had  exhibited  such  fortitude,
demanded  the  reason  of  his  conduct.  "Son  of  Cyrus,"  he  replied,  "the
misfortunes  of  my  house  are  too   unparalleled    to   weep   over,    but   not   the

'  Hebodotcs,  III.  xi.,  xii. ;  eighty  years  later  the  battle-field  used  to  be  shown  covered  with  bones
and  it  was  said  that  the  Egyptians  could  be  distinguished  from  the  Persians  by  the  relative  hardness
of  their  skulls.

«  Cf.  supra,  pp.  372,  373.

'  Pol)sonus  {Stratagems,  viii.  9)  hands  down  a  story  that  Cambyses,  in  order  to  paralyse  the
resistance  of  the  besieged,  caused  cats,  dogs,  ibises,  and  other  sacred  animals  to  march  at  tlje  head  of
his  attacking  columns  :  the  Egyptians  would  not  venture  to  use  their  arms  for  fear  of  wounding  or
killing  some  of  their  gods.

*  Herodotus,  III.  xiii.  The  question  as  to  the  year  in  which  Egypt  was  subdued  by  Cambyses
has  long  divided  historians  :  I  still  agree  with  those  who  place  the  conquest  in  ihe  spring  of  525.


662  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

affliction  of  ro}'  friend.  When  a  man,  on  the  verge  of  old  age,  falls  from
luxury  and  abundance  into  extreme  poverty,  one  may  well  lament  his  fate."
When  the  speech  was  reported  to  Cambyses,  he  fully  recognised  the  truth  of
it.  Crcesus,  who  was  also  present,  shed  tears,  and  the  Persians  round  him  were
moved  with  pity.  Cambyses,  likewise  touched,  commanded  that  the  son  of  the
Pharaoh  should  be  saved,  but  the  remission  of  the  sentence  arrived  too  late.
He  at  all  events  treated  Pharaoh  himself  with  consideration,  and  it  is  possible
that  he  might  have  replaced  him  on  the  throne,  under  an  oath  of  vassalage,
had  he  not  surprised  him  in  a  conspiracy  against  his  own  life.  He  thereupon
obliged  him  to  poison  himself  by  drinking  bulls'  blood,^  and  he  confided  the
government  of  the  Nile  valley  to  a  Persian  named  Aryandes.-

No  part  of  the  ancient  world  now  remained  unconquered  except  the  semi-
fabulous  kingdom  of  Ethiopia  in  the  far-off  south.  Cities  and  monarchies,  all
the  great  actors  of  early  times,  had  been  laid  in  the  dust  one  after  another — Tyre,
Damascus,  Carchemish,  Urartu,  Elam,  Assyria,  Jerusalem,  Media,  the  Lydians,
Babylon,  and  finally  Egypt ;  and  the  prey  they  had  fought  over  so  fiercely  and
for  so  many  centuries,  now  belonged  in  its  entirety  to  one  master  for  the  first
time  as  far  as  memory  could  reach  back  into  the  past.  Cambyses,  following  in
the  footsteps  of  Cyrus,  had  pursued  his  victorious  way  successfully,  but  it  was
another  matter  to  consolidate  his  conquests  and  to  succeed  in  governing  within
the  limits  of  one  empire  so  many  incongruous  elements — the  people  of  the
Caucasus  and  those  of  the  Nile  valley,  the  Greeks  of  the  ^Egeau  and  the  Iranians,
the  Scythians  from  beyond  the  Oxus  and  the  Semites  of  the  banks  of  the
Euphrates  or  of  the  Mediterranean  coast ;  and  time  alone  would  show  whether
this  heritage  would  not  fall  to  pieces  as  quickly  as  it  had  been  built  up.
The  Asiatic  elements  of  the  empire  appeared,  at  all  events  for  the  moment,
content  with  their  lot,  and  Babylon  showed  herself  more  than  usually  resigned  ;
but  Egypt  had  never  accepted  the  yoke  of  the  stranger  willingly,  and  the
most  fortunate  of  her  Assyrian  conquerors  had  never  exercised  more  than  a
passing  supremacy  over  her.  Cambyses  realised  that  he  would  never  master
her  except  by  governing  her  himself  for  a  period  of  several  years,  and  by
making  himself  as  Egyptian  as  a  Persian  could  be  without  offending  his
own  subjects  at  home.  He  adopted  the  titles  of  the  Pharaohs,  their  double
cartouche,  their  royal  costume,  and  their  solar  filiation ;  ^  as  much  to  satisfy

'  Herodotus,  III.  sir.,  xv. ;  the  Pharaob,  according  to  tbe  account  preserved  by  Ctesias,  was  left
unharmed,  and  sent  by  Cambyses  with  six  thousand  of  his  people  to  Susa  {Fragm.  29,  §  9,  in  Muller-
DiDOT,  Ctesise  Cnidii  Fragmeiita,  p.  47).

'  Herodotus.  IV.  clxvi. ;  instead  of  Aryandes,  Ctesias  makes  Kombarheus,  whose  treachery  be-
trayed Egypt  to  Cambyses,  the  first  satrap  of  Egypt  (_Fra<jm.  29,  §  8,  in  Mvller-Didot,  op.  cit..  p.  47).

'  Tbe  titles  and  cartouches  of  Cambyses,  cut  in  relief  on  the  inscriptions  of  Ivosseir  (Burton,
Excerpta  Hieroghjphica,  pi.  vi.  1),  and  afterwards  on  the  Naoplioros  statuette  of  the  Vatican  (Visconti,
Museo  Pio-Clementino,  vol.  \ai.  pi.  7  A),  were  first  pointed  out  by  Champollion  and  Rosellini
{Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  ii.  pp.  153-155,  169).


CAMBYSES'  EXPEDITION   TO    TEE   OASIS.


665


his  own  personal  animosity  as  to  conciliate  the  Egyptian  priests,  he  repaired
to  Sais,  violated  the  tomb  of  Amasis,  and  burnt  the  mummy  after  oflering  it
every  insult.^  He  removed  his  troops  from  the  temj^le  of  Nit,  which  they
had  turned  into  a  barrack  to  the  horror  of  the  faithful,  and  restored  at
his  own  expense  the  damage  they  had  done  to  the  building.
He  condescended  so  far  as  to  receive  instruction  in  the  local
religion,  and  was  initiated  in  the  worship  of  the  goddess  by  the
priest  Uzaharrisniti.'  This  was,  after  all,  a  pursuance  of  the
policy  employed  by  his  father  towards  the  Babylonians/'
and  the  projects  which  he  had  in  view  necessitated  his
gaining  the  confidence  of  the  people  at  all  costs.  Asia
having  no  more  to  offer  him,  two  almost  untried  fields
lay  open  to  his  ambition — Africa  and  Europe — the
Greek  world  and  what  lay  beyond  it,  the  Carthaginian
world  and  Ethiopia.  The  necessity  of  making  a  final
reckoning  with  Egypt  had  at  the  outset  summoned  him
to  Africa,  and  it  was  therefore  in  that  continent  that  he
determined  to  carry  on  his  conquests.  Memphis  was
necessarily  the  base  of  his  operations,  the  only  point
from  which  he  could  direct  the  march  of  his  armies  in
a  westerly  or  southerly  direction,  and  at  the  same  time
keep  in  touch  with  the  rest  of  his  empire,  and  he
would  indeed  have  been  imprudent  had  he  neg-
lected anything  whicli  could  make  him  accept-
able to  its  inhabitants.  As  soon  as  he  felt  he  had
gained  their  sympathies,  he  despatched  two  expe-
ditions, one  to  Carthage  and  one  to  Ethiopia.


THE  NAOPHOROS  STATUETTE  OF
THE  VATICAN.*


Cyrene  had   spontaneously

'  Hebodotus,  III.  xvi.,  where  a  second  account  is  given,  which  declares  that  Cambyses  thus  treated
the  body,  not  of  Amasis,  but  of  some  unlsnown  person  wliom  he  took  for  Amasis.  The  truth  of  the
story  is  generally  contested,  for  the  deed  would  have  been,  as  Herodotus  himself  remarks,  contrary  to
Persian  ideas  about  the  sanctity  T>f  hre.  I  think  that  by  his  cruel  treatment  of  the  mummy,  Cambyses
wished  to  satisfy  the  hatred  of  the  natives  against  the  Greek-loving  king,  and  so  render  himself  more
acceptable  to  them.  The  destruction  of  the  mummy  entailing  that  of  the  soul,  his  act  gave
the  Saitic  population  a  satisfaction  similar  to  that  experienced  by  the  refined  cruelty  of  those  who,
a  few  centuries  ago,  killed  their  enemies  when  in  a  state  of  deadly  sin,  and  so  ensure  not  only
their  dismissal  from  this  world,  but  also  their  condemnation  in  the  next.

-  Inscripiion  of  the  Naophoros  Stele,  11.  10-22 :  cf.  E.  de  Rouge,  Mgmoire  sur  la  Statuette  Naophore,
pp.  13-20  ;  Brugsch,  Geschichte  ^gyptens,  pp.  71S-751 ;  KiiviLLOUT,  Premier  Extruit  de  la  Clironique
D^motique  de  Paris,  in  the  Eeoue  Hgyptologique,  vol.  i.  pp.  25-30 ;  Marucohi,  Iscrizione  Geroglifica
delta  Slatuelta  Naofora,  pp.  5-11.  The  priest's  name  is  Uzaharrisniti,  the  Eye  of  the  Southern  Horus,
or  rather,  the  Eye  of  the  Horus  of  the  louthern  half  of  the  temple,  a  common  name  at  the  time,  having  as
its  parallel  Uzaharmihuiti,  the  Eye  of  the  Northern  Horus,  or  the  Eye  of  the  Horus  of  the  northern  half
of  the  temple  (JIaspero,  Catalogue  da  Musie  £gyplien  de  Marseille,  p.  67,  Xo.  111).

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  635,  636.

'  Drawn  by  Faucber-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  :  the  head  and  hands  are  a  restoration  of  the  last
century,  in  the  most  inappropriate  Grseco-Koman  style.


664  THE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

offered  him  lier  homage ;  he  now  further  secured  it  by  sending  thither  with
all  honour  Ladike,  the  widow  of  Amasis/  and  he  apparently  contemplated
taking  advantage  of  the  good  will  of  the  Cyrenians  to  approach  Carthage
by  sea.     The  combined    fleets   of   Ionia   and    Phoenicia  were  without  doubt
numerically  sufficient  for  this  undertaking,  but  the  Tyrians  refused  to  serve
iigainst  their  own  colonies,  and  he  did   not  venture  to  employ  the  Greeks
alone  in  waters  which  were  unfamiliar  to  them.^     Besides  this,  the  informa-
tion which  lie  obtained  from  those  about  him  convinced  him  that  the  over-
laud  route  would  enable  him  to  reach  his  destination  more  surely  if  more
slowly ;   it   would   lead   him   from    the   banks  of   the  Nile  to   the  Oases   of
the  Theban  desert,  from  there  to  the  Ammonians,  and  thence  by  way  of  the
Libyans  bordering  on  the  Syrtes  and  the  Liby-phcenicians.     He  despatched
an  advance-guard  of  fifty  thousand  men  from  Thebes  to  occupy  the  Oasis  of
Ammon  and  to  prepare  the  various  halting-places  for  the  bulk  of  the  troops.
The  fate  of  these  men  has  never  been  clearly  ascertained.     They  crossed  the
Oasis  of  El-Kliargeh  and  proceeded  to  the  north-west  in  the  direction  of  the
oracle.     The  natives  afterwards  related  that  when  they  had  arrived  halfway,
a  sudden  storm  of  wind  fell  upon  them,  and  the  entire  force  was  buried  under
mounds  of  sand  during  a  halt.     Cambyses  was  forced  to  take  their  word ;  in
spite  of  all  his  endeavours,  no  further  news  of  his  troops  was  forthcoming,
except  that  they  never  reached  the  temple,  and  that  none  of  the  generals  or
soldiers  ever  again  saw  Egypt  (524).^     The  expedition  to  Ethiopia  was  not
more  successful.     Since  the  retreat  of  Tanuatamanu,  the  Pharaohs  of  Napata
had  severed  all  direct  relations  with  Asia;  but  on  being  interfered  with  by
Psammetichus  I.  and  II.,  they  had  repulsed  the  invaders,  and  had  maintained
their  frontier  almost  within  sight  of  Philae.*     In  Nubia  proper  they  had  merely
a  few  outposts  stationed  in  the  ruins  of  the  towns  of  the  Tiieban  period — at
Derr,  at   Pnubsu,   at   Wady-Halfa,    and   at   Semneh ;    the    population   again
becoming  dense  and  the  valley  fertile  to  the  south  of  this  spot.     Kush,  like
Egypt,  was  divided  into  two  regions — To-Qonusit,  with  its  cities  of  Danguru,^
Napata,  Astamuras,  and  Barua ;  and  Alo,^  which  extended  along  the  White  and

'  Hekod  ,  II.  clxxxi. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  iZerodois  2ic.  iJ«c/;,  pp.  611,  612,  where  tlie  fact  isJoubted.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xvii.,  six.

'  Herodotus,  HI.  xvii.,  xxv.,  xxvi. ;  cf.  Diodorus  Siculus,  x.  13 ;  JuoTin,  i.  9,  §  3,  and  compare
the  account  of  Alexander's  march  across  the  Libyan  desert  in  Akrian,  Anabasis,  IH.  iii.

*  On  the  Ethiopian  -wars  of  Psammetichus  I.  and  II.,  cf.  supra,  pp.  504,  537,  538.  The  northern
boundary  of  Ethiopia  is  given  us  approximately  by  the  lists  of  temples  in  the  inscriptions  of
Harsiatef  and  of  Nastoseneu :  Pnubsu  is  mentioned  several  times  as  receiving  gifts  from  the  kiug
(Maspero,  Etudes  de  Myth,  et  d'Arcli.  Egyp.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  23:t,  213,  244),  which  carries  the  permanent
dominion  of  the  Ethiopian  kings  as  far  as  the  second  cataract.

'  Now  Old  Dongola ;  cf.  Maspero,  o^.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  256,  257.

'  Berua  is  the  Meroe  of  Strabo,  Astaboras  the  modern  Ed-Dameir,  and  Alo  the  kingdom  of  Aloah
nf  the  mediseva)  Arab  geographers  (Maspero,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  256-258).


THE  EGYPTIAN  KINGDOM   OF  ETHIOPIA.


665


the  Blue  Nile  iu  the  plain  of  Sennaar:  the  Asmakh,  the  descendants  of  the
Mashauasha  emigrants  of  the  time  of  Psammetichus  I.,  dwelt  on  the  southern
border  of  Alo.^  A  number  of  half-savage  tribes,  Maditi  and  Kohrehsa,  were
settled  to  the  right  and
to  the  left  of  the  territory
watered  by  the  Nile,  be-
tween Darfnr,  the  moun-
tains of  Abyssinia,  and
the  Eed  Sea ;  and  the
warlike  disposition  of  the
Ethiopian  kings  found
in  these  tribes  an  in-
exhaustible field  for  ob-
taining easy  victories  and
abundant  spoil.  Many
of  these  sovereigns —
Pionkhi,  Alaru,  Harsiatef,
Nastosenen  —  whose  re-
sjiective  positions  in  the
royal  line  are  still  unde-
termined, specially  dis-
tinguished themselves  in
these  struggles,  but  the
few  monuments  they  have
left,  though  bearing  wit-
ness to  their  military
enterprise  and  ability,
betray  their  utter  deca-
dence in  everything  con-
nected with  art,  language,  and  religion.^  The  ancient  Egyptian  syllabary,
adapted  to  the  needs  of  a  barbarous  tongue,  had  ended  by  losing  its  elegance  ;
architecture  was  degenerating,  and  sculpture  slowly  growing  more  and  more

'  On  these  Asmakh,  cf.  supra,  pp.  498-500.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  photograph  taken  by  Bebghoff  in  1881.  M.  Berghoff,  wlio  told
me  of  the  monument  and  sent  me  the  photograph,  was  soon  afterwards,  in  1882,  taken  prisoner  and
beheaded  by  order  of  the  Mahdi.  Thanks  to  Gigler-Pasha,  I  was  able  to  move  the  group  to  the
Boulak  Museum,  and  it  is  now  at  Gizeh;  cf.  Maspero,  Guide  du  Visiteur,  p.  8,  No.  G007,  and
Archiologie  Egyptienne,  p.  231,  fig.  204.

■'  The  monuments  of  these  kings  hitherto  discovered  have  been  translated  and  partly  commented
on  by  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Myihologie  et  d' ArcMologie  Egyptiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  232-277 ;  the  stele  of
Nastosenen  in  the  Berlin  Museum  (Lepsius,  Denhm.,  v.  16)  has  been  translated  into  German  by
Brugsoh,  Stele  von  Dongola,  in  the  Zeitschri/t,  1877,  pp.  23-27.


ETHIOPIAN   GROUP.'


666  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

clumsy  in  appearance.  Some  of  the  work,  however,  is  not  wanting  in  a
certain  rude  nobility — as,  for  instance,  the  god  and  goddess  carved  side  by
side  in  a  block  of  grey  granite.  Ethiopian  worship  had  become  permeated
with  strange  superstitions,  and  its  creed  was  degraded,  in  spite  of  the  strictness
with  which  the  priests  supervised  its  application  and  kept  watch  against
every  attempt  to  introduce  innovations.  Towards  the  end  of  the  seventh
century.'some  of  the  families  attached  to  the  temple  of  Amon  at  Napata
had  endeavoured  to  bring  about  a  kind  of  religious  reform;  among  other
innovations  they  adopted  the  practice  of  substituting  for  the  ordinary
sacrifice,  new  rites,  the  chief  feature  of  which  was  the  offering  of  the  flesh  of
the  victim  raw,  instead  of  roasted  with  fire.  This  custom,  which  was  doubtless
borrowed  from  the  negroes  of  the  Upper  Nile,  was  looked  upon  as  a  shameful
heresy  by  the  orthodox.  The  king  repaired  in  state  to  the  temple  of  Amon,
seized  tlie  priests  who  professed  these  seditious  beliefs,  and  burnt  them  alive.
The  use  of  raw  meat,  nevertheless,  was  not  discontinued,  and  it  gained  such
ground  in  the  course  of  ages  that  even  Christianity  was  unable  to  suppress  it ;
up  to  the  present  time,  the  hrinde,  or  piece  of  beef  cut  from  the  living
animal  and  eaten  raw,  is  considered  a  delicacy  by  the  Abyssiuians.^

The  isolation  of  the  Ethiopians  had  rather  increased  than  lowered  their
reputation  among  other  nations.  Their  transitory  appearance  on  the  battle-fields
of  Asia  had  left  a  deep  impression  on  the  memories  of  their  opponents.  The
tenacity  they  had  displayed  during  their  conflict  with  Assyria  had  effaced  the
remembrance  of  their  defeat.  Popular  fancy  delighted  to  extol  the  wisdom  of
Sabaco,^  and  exalted  Taharqa  to  the  first  rank  among  the  conquerors  of  the  old
world ;  ^  now  that  Kush  once  more  came  within  the  range  of  vision,  it  was
invested  with  a  share  of  all  these  virtues,  and  the  inquiries  Cambyses  made
concerning  it  were  calculated  to  make  him  believe  that  he  was  about  to  enter
on  a  struggle  with  a  nation  of  demigods  rather  than  of  men.  He  was  informed
that  they  were  taller,  more  beautiful,  and  more  vigorous  *  than  all  other  mortals,
that  their  age  was  prolonged  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  and  more,  and
that  they  possessed  a  marvellous  fountain  whose  waters  imparted   perpetual

'  stele  of  the  Excommunication,  discovered  and  published  by  Mariette,  Monuments  Divers,  pi.  10
(cf.  Quatre  Pages  des  Archives  ojicieUes  de  VEthiopie,  in  the  Revue  Archgologique,  1865,  vol.  ii.  pp.  174,
175),  translated  with  comments  by  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'Archeologie  Egypiienncs,  vol.  iii.
pp.  71-79,  229-232.  On  the  use  of  the  hrinde  at  the  present  time,  see  the  curious  information  given
by  A.  T.  DE  KocHEBRUSE,  Toxicologic  Africaine,  vol.  i.  pp.  703-710.

-  On  this  subject,  cf.  supra,  pp.  277,  278.  The  eulogy  bestowed  on  him  by  Herodotus  (II.  cxsxvii.,
cxxxix.)  shows  the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  even  in  the  Saite  period  (cf.  Diodokus  Siculus,
i.  65) ;  later  on  he  seems  to  have  become  two  persons,  and  so  to  have  given  birth  to  the  good  Ethiopian
king  Aktisanes  (Diodokus  Siculus,  i.  60).

=  Strabo,  I.  iii.  §  21,  p.  61,  following  authors  of  the  flourishing  Alexandrine  period;  cf.  supra,
pp.  362-361:.

*  Herodotus,  III.  xx.  This  exaggerated  opinion  was  subsequently  much  modified,  and  Strabo
(e.g.)  says  that  the  Ethiopians  were  small  of  stature.


TEE  liEPULSE   OF  CAMBTSES  IN  ETHIOPIA.  667

youth  to  their  bodies.^  There  existed  near  their  capital  a  meadow,  per-
petually furnishing  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  food  and  drink ;  whoever  would
might  partake  of  this  "  Table  of  the  Sun,"  and  eat  to  his  fill.^  Gold  was  so
abundant  that  it  was  used  for  common  purposes,  even  for  the  chains  of  their
prisoners ;  but,  on  tlie  other  hand,  copper  was  rare  and  much  prized.^  Cambyses
despatched  some  spies  chosen  from  among  the  Ichthyophagi  of  the  Eed  Sea
to  explore  this  region,*  and  acting  on  the  report  they  brought  back,  he  left
Memphis  at  the  head  of  an  army  and  a  ileet.^  The  expedition  was  partly  a
success  and  partly  a  failure.  It  followed  the  Nile  valley  as  far  as  Korosko,  and
then  struck  across  the  desert  iu  the  direction  of  Napata ;  ^  but  provisions  ran
shoi't  before  a  quarter  of  the  march  had  been  achieved,  and  famine  obliged  the
invaders  to  retrace  their  steps  after  having  endured  terrible  sufferings.'  Cambyses

'  Herodotus,  III.  sxiii.

-  Herodotus,  III.  xvii.,xviii.,xxiii.;  of.  Pomponids  Mela,  De  SituOrftt,  iii.  15;  Solwtjs,  Polyhist.,
XXX.,  who  accept  it  as  a  fact,  while  Pausanias  treats  it  as  a  traveller's  tale.  Heeren  thought  that
he  saw  in  Herodotus'  account  a  reference  to  intercourse  by  signs,  so  frequent  in  Africa.  The  "  Table
of  the  Sun  "  would  thus  have  been  a  kind  of  market,  whither  the  natives  would  come  for  their
provisions,  using  exchange  to  procure  them.  I  am  inclined  rather  to  believe  the  story  to  be  a
recollection,  partly  of  the  actual  custom  of  placing  meats,  which  the  first  comer  might  take,  on  the
tombs  in  the  necropolis,  partly  of  the  mythical  "Meadow  of  Oft'erings"  mentioned  in  the  funerary
texts,  to  which  the  souls  of  tlie  dead  and  the  gods  alike  had  access.  This  divine  region  would  have
transferred  to  our  earth  by  some  folk-tale,  like  the  judgment  of  the  dead,  the  entrance  into  the  solar
bark,  and  other  similar  beliefs.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xxiii.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xix.-xxv..  where  is  set  forth  all  the  information  traditionally  said  to  have  been
acquired  by  the  Ichthyophagi  when  on  their  expedition.

^  Herodotus'  text  speaks  of  an  army  only  (III.  xxv.),  but  the  accounts  of  the  wars  between  Ethiopia
and  Egypt  (cf.,  e.g.,  the  campaign  of  Pionkhi,  supra,  pp.  172-179)  show  that  the  army  was  always
accompauied  by  the  necessary  fleet.

'  It  is  usually  thought  that  the  expedition  marched  by  the  side  of  the  Nile  as  far  as  Napata  ;  to
support  this  theory  the  name  of  a  place  mentioned  in  Pliny  QH.  Kat.,  vi.  29)  is  quoted,  Cambusis  or
Kafi$vaov  TafiiTa  (PxOLEMT,  iv.  7),  "  the  stores  of  Cambyses,"  at  the  third  cataract,  which  is  supposed
to  contain  the  name  of  the  conqueror  (Duijoker,  Geschichte  des  Allerthums,  4th  edit.,  vol.  iv.  pp.
411-415  ;  Kkall,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  Alien  ^gyptens,  IV.,  Das  Land  Punt,  pp.  58-63  ;  Prashek,
Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Allerthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  67-70).  Tliis  town,  which  is  sometimes  mentioned
by  the  classical  geographers,  is  called  Kambiusit  in  the  Ethiopic  texts  (Brugsch,  Die  Biblischen
tieben  Jahre  der  Hungersnolh,  p.  54),  and  the  form  of  the  name  makes  its  connection  with  the  history
of  Cambyses  easy.  I  think  it  follows  from  the  text  of  Herodotus,  ol  Se  aTpaTidrai  ews  fiei/  tl  elxov  €k
T^s  ytas  \aix^dif€iy,  TroiT](pay^ovr€S  SU^oioy,  eVei  5e  es  Tr]v  \pd^fiot/  diriKoyTO,  Seivbu  ipyof  avroiv  rtyes
tpydcravTo,  that  the  Persians  left  Ihe  grassy  land,  the  river-valley,  at  a  given  moment,  to  enter  the
sand,  i.e.  the  desert.  Now  this  is  done  to-day  at  two  points — near  Korosko  to  rejoin  the  Nile  at  Abu-
Hammed,  and  near  Wady-Halfah  to  avoid  the  part  of  the  Nile  called  the  "  Stony  belly,"  Batn  el-
Hagar.  The  Korosko  route,  being  the  only  one  suitable  for  the  transit  of  a  body  of  troops,  and  also  the
only  route  known  to  Herodotus  (II.  xxix.),  seems,  I  think,  likely  to  be  the  one  which  was  followed
in  the  present  instance  (Rawlinsox,  Herodotus,  vol.  ii.  p.  351,  note  4  ;  Justi,  Geschichte  des  Alten
Persiem,  p.  49)  :  at  all  events,  it  fits  in  best  with  the  fact  that  Cambyses  was  obliged  to  retrace  his
steps  hurriedly,  when  he  had  accomplished  hardly  a  fifth  of  the  journey.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xxv.  Many  modern  historians  are  inclined  to  assume  that  Cambyses' expedition
was  completely  successful,  and  that  its  result  was  the  overthrow  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Nepata
and  the  foundation  of  that  of  Jleroe  (Gutschsiid,  Xeue  BeitrSge  zur  Geschichte  des  Alten  Orient,  p.  68 ;
Uunoker,  Geschichte  des  Allerthums,  4th  edit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  413 ;  Ed.  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Allerthums,
vol.  i.  p.  611;  Justi,  Geschichte  des  Allen  Persiens,  p.  49;  Sayce,  The  Ancient  Empires  of  the  East,
p.  241,  note  1 ;  Krall,  Das  Land  Punt,  pp.  58-63 ;  Wiedemann,  JEgyptische  Geschichte,  pp.  670, 671;
Prashee,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  des  AUerthums,  pp.  68-70):  Cambyses  would  have  given  the
new  town  which  he  built  thfre  the  name  of  bis  sister  Meroe  (Diodorus  Siculus,  i.  33;  Strabo,


Il


(i68  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

bad  to  rest  content  with  the  acquisition  of  those  portions  of  Nubia  adjoining
the  first  cataract — the  same,  in  fact,  that  had  been  annexed  to  Egypt  by
Psaiumetichus  I.  and  II.  (523).'  The  failure  of  this  expedition  to  the  south,
following  so  closely  on  the  disaster  which  befell  that  of  the  west,  had  a
deplorable  effect  on  the  mind  of  Cambyses.  He  had  been  subject,  from
childhood,  to  attacks  of  epilepsy,  during  which  he  became  a  maniac  and
had  no  control  over  his  actions.  These  reverses  of  fortune  aggravated  the
disease,  and  increased  the  frequency  and  length  of  the  attacks.^  The  bull  Apis
had  died  shortly  before  the  close  of  the  Ethiopian  campaign,  and  the  Egyptians,
after  mourning  for  him  during  the  prescribed  number  of  weeks,  were  bringing
his  successor  with  rejoicings  into  the  temple  of  Phtah,  when  the  remains  of  the
army  re-entered  Memphis.  Cambyses,  finding  the  city  holiday-making,  imagined
that  it  was  rejoicing  over  his  misfortunes.  He  summoneil  the  magistrates  before
him,  and  gave  them  over  to  the  executioner  without  deigning  to  listen  to  their
explanations.  He  next  caused  the  priests  to  be  brought  to  him,  and  when  they
had  paraded  the  Apis  before  him,  he  plunged  his  dagger  into  its  flank  with
derisive  laughter:  "Ah,  evil  people!  So  you  make  for  yourselves  divinities
of  flesh  and  blood  which  fear  the  sword  !  It  is  indeed  a  fine  god  that  you
Egyptians  have  here ;  I  will  have  you  to  know,  however,  that  you  shall  not
rejoice  overmuch  at  having  deceived  me!"  The  priests  were  beaten  as  im-
postors, and  the  bull  languished  from  its  wound  and  died  in  a  few  days ;  ^  its
priests  buried  it,  and  chose  another  in  its  place  without  the  usual  ceremonies,  so
as  not  to  exasperate  the  auger  of  the  tyrant,*  but  the  horror  evoked  by  this

XVII.  i.  §  5,  p.  790 ;  Josephus,  Ant.  Jud.,  ii.  10,  §  2,  all  three  following  Artemidorus  of  Ephesus).
The  traditions  concerning  Cambusis  (of.  note  6  on  the  previous  page)  and  Meroe  belong  to
the  Alexandrine  era,  and  rest  only  on  chance  similarities  of  sound.  With  regard  to  the  Ethiopian
province  of  the  Persian  empire  and  to  the  Ethiopian  neighbours  of  Egypt  whom  Cambyses  subdued
(Heeodott:s,  III.  xcvii.),  tlie  latter  are  not  necessarily  Ethiopians  of  Napata.  Herodotus  himself  says
that  the  Ethiopians  dwelt  in  the  country  above  Elephantine,  oiKeovai  Sk  rk  aTrh  'EAKpaprlvris  om;
Ateioires  ^57),  and  that  half  of  what  he  calls  the  island  of  Takhompso  was  inhabited  by  Ethiopians
(II.  xxis.)  :  the  subjugated  Ethiopians  and  their  country  plainly  correspond  with  the  Dodekaschenos
of  the  Grseco-Eoman  era.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xcvii. ;  on  the  reunion  of  this  part  of  Nubia  with  Egypt  eftected  by  Psammeti-
chus  II.,  cf.  supra,  pp.  537,  538.

-  Herodotus,  III.  xxxiii.  Keeent  historians  (Hutecker,  Ueher  den  fahchen  SinerdU,  p.  IG,  et  seq.,
30,  et  seq. ;  Pkashek,  Forsehungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  pp.  8-10)  admit  neither  the  reality
of  the  illness  of  Cambyses.  nor  the  madness  resulting  from  it,  but  consider  them  Egyptian  fables,
invented  out  of  spite  towards  the  king  who  had  conquered  and  persecuted  them.

^  Herodotus,  III.  xxvii.-xxix. ;  later  historians  improved  upou  the  account  of  Herodotus,  and  it
is  said  in  the  De  Iside,  §  44,  that  Cambyses  killed  the  Apis  and  threw  him  to  the  dogs.  Here
tliere  is  probably  a  confusion  between  the  conduct  of  Cambyses  and  that  attributed  to  the  eunuch
Bagoas  nearly  two  centuries  later,  at  the  time  of  the  second  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Ochus.

*  Blariette  discovered  in  the  SerapsBum  and  sent  to  the  Louvre  fr-igments  of  the  epitaph  of  an
Apis  buried  in  Epiphi  in  the  sixth  year  of  Cambyses,  which  had  therefore  died  a  few  months
previously.  This  fact  contradicts  the  inference  from  the  epitaph  of  the  Apis  that  died  in  the  fourth
year  of  Darius  (§  2274),  which  would  have  been  born  in  the  fifth  year  of  Cambyses,  if  we  allow  that
there  could  not  have  been  two  Apises  in  Egypt  at  once  (Wiedemann,  GescMchte  .^gyptens,  pp.  227-
231).  This  was,  indeed,  the  usual  rule,  but  a  comparison  of  the  two  dates  shows  that  here  it  was  not
followed,  and  it  is  therefore  simplest,  until  we  have  further  evidence,  to  conclude  that  at  all  events  in


THE  MADNESS    OF  CAMBTSES — GAUMATA'S   USURPATION.        669

double  sacrilege  raised  passions  against  Cambyses  which  the  ruin  of  the
country  had  failed  to  excite.  The  manifestation  of  this  antipathy  irritated  him
to  such  an  extent  that  he  completely  changed  his  policy,  and  set  himself  from
that  time  forward  to  act  counter  to  the  customs  and  prejudices  of  the  Egyptians.
They  consequently  regarded  his  memory  with  a  vindictive  hatred.  The  people
related  that  the  gods  had  struck  him  with  madness  to  avenge  the  murder  of
the  Apis,  and  they  attributed  to  him  numberless  traits  of  senseless  cruelty,^  in
which  we  can  scarcely  distinguish  truth  from  fiction.  It  was  said  that,  having
entered  the  temple  of  Phtah,  he  had  ridiculed  the  grotesque  figure  under  which
the  god  was  represented,  and  had  commanded  the  statues  to  be  burnt.  On
another  occasion  he  had  ordered  the  ancient  sepulchres  to  be  opened,  that  he
might  see  what  was  the  appearance  of  the  mummies.^  The  most  faithful
members  of  his  family  and  household,  it  was  said,  did  not  escape  his  fury.
He  killed  his  own  sister  Roxana,  whom  he  had  married,  by  a  kick  in  the
abdomen;^  he  slew  the  son  of  Prexaspes  with  an  arrow;*  he  buried  alive
twelve  influential  Persians ;  ^  he  condemned  Croesus  to  death,  and  then
repented,  but  punished  the  officers  who  had  failed  to  execute  the  sentence
pronounced  against  the  Lydian  king.^  He  had  no  longer  any  reason  for
remaining  in  Egypt,  since  he  had  failed  in  his  undertakings ;  yet  he  did  not
quit  the  country,  and  through  repeated  delays  his  departure  was  retarded  a
whole  year.  Meanwhile  his  long  sojourn  in  Africa,  the  report  of  his  failures,
and  perhaps  whispers  of  his  insanity,  had  sown  the  seeds  of  discontent  in  Asia ;
and  as  Darius  said  in  after-years,  when  recounting  these  events,  "  untruth  had
spread  all  over  the  country,  not  only  in  Persia  and  Media,  but  in  other  pro-
vinces." '  Cambyses  himself  felt  that  a  longer  absence  would  be  injurious  to  his
interests;  he  therefore  crossed  the  isthmus  in  the  spring  of  521,  and  was  making
his  way  through  Northern  Syria,  perhaps  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hamath,^
when  he  learned  that  a  revolution  had  broken  out,  and  that  its  rapid  progress
threatened  the  safety  of  his  throne  and  life.     Tradition  asserted  that  a  hrrald

eases  of  violence,  such  as  sacrilegious  murder,  there  could  have  beeu  two  Apises  at  once  one  dis-
charging his  functions,  and  the  other  unknown,  living  still  in  the  midst  of  the  herds

'    HEliODOTUS,  III.  SSS.

'  Heuodotus,  III.  sxxvii.     Pompeius  Tragus  added,  oq  the  evidence  of  some  unknown  historian
tl,at  he  had  the  temple  of  Apis  and  those  of  other  gods  destroyed  (Justly,  i.  9).
'  Herodotus,  III.  xxsi.,  xxxii.     On  this  woman's  name,  cf.  supra,  p.  655,  note  3

•    HeKODOTUS,     III.  xxxiv.,  XXXV.  >    HEI10O0TU.S,  III.  XXXV.

Herodotus  III.  xxxvi.    The  whole  of  this  story  of  Crossus  is  entirely  fabulous ;  on  the  real  fate
ot  that  prince,  cf.  supra,  pp.  617-620.

^  Imcription  of  Behhtun,  col.  i.  II.  32-35 ;  cf.  Weisseach  and  Bang.  Die  Altpers.  KeiUns  pp  U  15
Herodotus,  III.  Ixiv.,  calls  the  place  where  Cambyses  died  Agbatana  (Ecbatana).  Pliuv  says
tha  the  town  of  Carmel  was  thus  named  at  first  (H.  Nat,  v.  19) ;  but  the  place  here  mentioned  cannot
well  have  been  in  that  direction.  It  has  been  identified  with  Batanaia  in  the  country  between
the  Orontes  and  the  Euphrates  (Hyde,  Religio  Veterum  Permrum,  p.  42G),  but  the  most  likely  theory
IS  he  one  suggested  by  a  passage  in  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  s.v.  -A^afla,  that  the  place  in  question
IS  the  large  Synan  city  of  Hamath.     .Josephus  (Ant.  Ju,l.,  xi.  2,  §  2)  makes  him  die  at  Damascus


670  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

appeared  before  him  and  proclaimed  aloud,  in  the  hearing  of  the  whole  army,
that  Cambyses,  son  of  Cyrus,  had  ceased  to  reign,  and  summoned  whoever  had
till  that  day  obeyed  him  to  acknowledge  henceforth  Smerdis,  son  of  Cyrus,  as
their  lord.  Cambyses  at  first  believed  that  his  brother  had  been  spared  by  the
assassins,  and  now,  after  years  of  concealment,  had  at  length  declared  himself;
but  he  soon  received  proofs  that  his  orders  had  been  faithfully  accomplished,
and  it  is  said  that  he  wept  at  the  remembrance  of  the  fruitless  crime.^  The
usurper  was  Gaumata,  one  of  the  Persian  Magi,  whose  resemblance  to  Smerdis
was  so  remarkable  that  even  those  who  were  cognisant  of  it  invariably  mistook
tlie  one  for  the  other,^  and  he  was  brother  to  that  Oropastes  to  whom  Cambyses
had  entrusted  the  administration  of  his  household  before_setting  out  for  Egypt.^
Both  of  them  were  aware  of  the  fate  of  Smerdis;  they  also  knew  that  the
Persians  were  ignorant  of  it,  and  that  every  one  at  court,  including  the  mother
and  sisters  of  the  prince,  believed  that  he  was  still  alive.*  Gaumata  headed  a
revolt  in  the  little  town  of  Pasyauvada  on  the  14th  of  Viyakhna,  in  the  early
days  of  March,  521,  and  he  was  hailed  by  the  common  people  from  the  moment
of  his  appearance.  Persia,  Media,  and  the  Iranian  provinces  pronounced  in  bis
favour,  and  solemnly  enthroned  him  three  months  later,  on  the  9th  of  Garma-
pada ;  ^  Babylon  next  accepted  him,  followed  by  Elam  and  the  regions  of  the
Tigris.^  Though  astounded  at  first  by  such  a  widespread  defection,  Cambyses
soon  recovered  his  presence  of  mind,  and  was  about  to  march  forward  at  the
head  of  the  troops  who  were  still  loyal  to  him,  when  he  mysteriously  dis-
appeared.   Whether  he  was  the  victim  of  a  plot  set  on  foot  by  those  about  him,

'  HERODOTrs,  III.  Ixii.,  Ixiii.

-  Greek  tradition  is  unanimous  on  this  point, but  the  inscription  of  Behistun  does  not  mention  it;
cf.  HuTECtEK,  Ueber  den  Falsohen  Smerdis,  pp.  40-42.

'  Cf.  on  Oropastes,  supra,  p.  659,  note  2.  The  inscription  of  Behistun  informs  us  that  the
usurper's  name  was  Gaumata  (col.  i.  1. 36 ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpertiscken  Keilinschriften,
pp.  14,  15) ;  Pompeius  Trogus  alone,  probably  following  some  author  who  made  use  of  Charon  of
Lampsacus  (Gutsohmid,  Kleine  Schriflen,  vol.  v.  p.  59),  handed  down  this  name  in  the  form  Cometes
or  Gometes,  which  his  abbreviator  Justin  (i.  9)  carelessly  applied  to  the  second  brother.  Ctesias
gives  the  Mage  the  name  Sphendadates  {Fragm.  27,  §  10,  in  Mulleu-Didot,  Ctesix  Cnidii  Fragm.,
p.  47),  which  answers  to  the  Old  Persian  Spentodata,  "he  who  is  given  by  the  Holy  Oae,"  i.e.  by
Ahura-mazda  (JrsTi,  Iranisehes  Namenbuch,  pp.  308,  309).  The  supporters  of  the  Mage  gave  htm
this  name,  as  an  heroic  champion  of  the  Mazdiean  faith  who  had  destroj'ed  such  sanctuaries  as
were  illegal  (cf  infra,  p.  672),  and  identified  him  with  Spentodata,  son  of  Wistaspa  (Mauquaet,
Fimdamente  Israelitischer  und  Judischer  Geschichte,  p.  48,  note  3).

*  HEiiODOTrs,  III.  Isi.

^  Inscription  of  Behistun,  col.  i.  11.  35-43 ;  cf  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  AUpersischen  Keilinschriften,
pp.  14,  15.  On  the  identification  of  the  Persian  and  Babylonian  dates  and  those  of  the  modern
calender,  see  Oppekt,  Let  Inscriptions  du  Pseudo-Smerdis  et  de  I'usurpateur  Nadintabel  fixant  le
Calendrier  perse,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Stoehholm  Congress,  vol.  ii.  pp.  254,  255.

"  The  tablets  of  the  reign  of  Bardiya-Gaumafa,  published  by  Fr.  Strassmaier  (Inscliriften  von
Nabopolassar  und  Smerdis,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Assyriologie,  vol.  iv.  pp.  123-128),  show  that  the
usurper  was  recognised  at  Babylon  from  the  month  of  lyyar  onwards  (Oppekt,  Les  Inscriptions  du,
I'seudo-Smerdis,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Stockholm  Congress,  vol.  ii.  p.  257,  and  Pkashek,  Forschungen  zur
Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  22,  23;  Mahquaht,  Die  Assyriaka  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,
Suppl.,  vol.  V.  pp.  621,  622).


DEATE   OF   CAMBTSES  AND   EEIGN    OF   THE  PSEUDO-SMEBDIS.       671

is  not  known.i  The  official  version  of  the  story  given  by  Darius  states  that  he
died  by  his  own  hand,  and  it  seems  to  insinuate  that  it  was  a  voluntary  act,^  but
another  account  affirms  that  he  succumbed  to  an  accident ;  ^  while  mounting
his  horse,  the  point  of  his  dagger  pierced  his  thigh  in  the  same  spot  in  which
he  had  stabbed  the  Apis  of  the  Egyptians.  Feeling  himself  seriously  wounded,
he  suddenly  asked  the  name  of  the  place  where  he  was  lying,  and  was  told  it  was
"Agbatana"  (Ecbatana).  "Now,  long  before  this,  the  oracle  of  Buto  had  predicted
that  he  should  end  his  days  in  Agbatana,  and  he,  believing  it  to  be  the  Agbatana
in  Media  where  w-ere  his  treasures,  understood  that  he  should  die  there  in  his
old  age ;  whereas  the  oracle  meant  Agbatana  in  Syria.  When  he  heard  the
name,  he  perceived  his  error.  He  understood  what  the  god  intended,  and  cried,
'  It  is  here,  then,  that  Cambyses,  son  of  Cyrus,  must  perish  ! '  "  He  expired  about
three  weeks  after,  leaving  no  posterity  and  having  appointed  no  successor.*

What  took  place  in  the  ensuing  months  still  remains  an  enigma  to  us.
The  episode  of  Gauraata  has  often  been  looked  on  as  a  national  movement,
which  momentarily  restored  to  the  Medes  the  supremacy  of  which  Cyrus  had
robbed  them  ;  but  it  was  nothing  of  the  sort.  Gaumata  was  not  a  Mede  by
birth :  he  was  a  Persian,  born  in  Persia,  in  the  township  of  Pisyauvada,  at  the
foot  of  Mount  Arakadrish,  and  the  Persians  recognised  and  supported  him  as
much  as  did  the  Medes.  It  has  also  been  thought  that  he  had  attempted  to
foment  a  religious  revolution,^  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  destroyed  several

'  That  this  was  the  case  is  believed  by  one  of  the  latest  of  his  historians  (Lixcke,  Zur
Losung  der  Kamhyses  Frage,  pp.  5,  6,  l-l:-24).  He  bases  his  opinion  on  two  passages,  one  in
Orosus  (Hist,  adversus  Paganos,  ii.  8,  2-4)  and  one  in  John  of  Autiocli  (Fmgm.  27,  in  Muller-
DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  iv.  p.  .552),  which  he  traces  back  to  a  Greek  historian  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.,  mediately  through  Apollodorus  and  Suetonius.

^  Inscription  of  Behistun,  col.  i.  1.  43;  cf.  Wkissbach  and  Baxg,  Die  Altpersischen  Keilinschri/ten,
pp.  14,  15.  The  passage  is  interpreted  by  Oppert  as  signifying  a  suicide  (M^moire  sur  les  Inscriptions
Ach^menides,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1851,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  385,  386,  and  Le  Peuple  et  la  Langue  ties
Medes,  pp.  11",  165);  also  by  Bezold,  Die  Ach&menideninschri/ten,  p.  5,  and  by  Spiegll,  Die
Altpersisohen  Keilinschri/ten,  p.  5  ;  and  in  the  same  sense  by  most  historians  :  DixcKKii,  Geschichte  des
Alterthums,  4th  edit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  442 ;  JcsTi,  Geschichte  des  Alien  Persiens,  p.  50 ;  Noldeke,  AuftStze  zur
Persischen  Geschichte,  p.  29 ;  Hutecker,  Ueher  den  falschen  Smerdis,  pp.  49,  50 ;  Marquakt,  Die
Assyrialca  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,  Supplement,  vol.  v.  p.  622,  note  422.  Marquart  thinks  that
the  news  of  the  revolt  of  the  Babylonians  was  the  cause  of  his  suicide.

'  HEiiODOTU.'',;IlI.  Ixiv.     It  has  been  pointed  out,  for  the  purpose  of  harmonising  the  testimony  of
the  historian  with  that  of  tlie  inscription  of  Behistun,  that  although  the  latter  speaks  of  the  death  of
Cambyses  by  his  own  hand,  it  does  not  say  whether  that  death  was  voluntary  or  accidental  (Spiegel
Erdnische  Altertkumslnmde,  vol.  ii.  p.  302,  note  1 ;  Ed.  Meyei;,   Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.
p.  612  ;  Phashek,  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  des  Alterthums,  vol.  i.  pp.  78,  79).

*  Hekodotus,  III.  Ixiv..  whose  account  was  reproduced  in  an  abbreviated  form  by  Pompeius
Trogus(jE.STiN,  i.  9).  The  story  of  a  person  whose  death  has  been  predicted  to  take  place  in  some
well-known  place,  and  who  has  died  in  some  obscure  spot  of  the  same  name,  occurs  several  times  in
different  historians,  e.g.  in  the  account  of  the  Emperor  Julian  (A  jeshajcus  Marcellixcs,  xxxv.  3),  and
in  that  of  Henry  III.  of  England,  who  had  been  told  that  he  would  die  in  .lerusalem,  and  whose  death
took  place  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber  at  Westminster.  Ctesias  has  preserved  an  altogether  different
tradition — that  Cambyses  on  his  return  from  Babylon  wounded  himself  while  carving  a  piece  of
wood  for  his  amusement,  and  died  eleven  days  after  the  accident  (Fragm.  27,  §  11,  in  Mueler-
DiDOT,  Ctesiie  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  48).

=  Most  of  the  ancient  writers  shared  this  opinion  (Herodotus,  III.  Ixi.,  Isxix. ;  Plato,  Laws  iii.


672  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

temples  in  a  fcv/  months.^  Here,  however,  the  reform  touched  less  upon  a
question  of  belief  than  on  one  of  fact.  The  unity  of  the  empire  presupposed
the  unity  of  the  royal  fire,  and  wherever  that  fire  was  burning  another  could
not  be  lighted  without  sacrilege  in  the  eyes  of  the  faithful.  The  pyres  that
Gaumata  desired  to  extinguish  were,  no  doubt,  those  which  the  feudal  families
had  maintained  for  their  separate  use  in  defiance  of  the  law,  and  the  measure
which  abolished  them  had  a  political  as  well  as  a  religious  side.^  The  little
we  can  glean  of  the  line  of  action  adopted  by  Smerdis  does  not  warrant  the
attribution  to  him  of  the  vast  projects  which  some  modern  writers  credit  him
with.  He  naturally  sought  to  strengthen  himself  on  the  throne,  which  by  a
stroke  of  good  fortune  he  had  ascended,  and  whatever  he  did  tended  solely  to
this  end.  The  name  and  the  character  that  he  had  assumed  secured  him  the
respect  and  fidelity  of  the  Iranians :  "  there  was  not  one,  either  among  the
Medes  or  the  Persians,  nor  among  the  members  of  the  Achsemenian  race,  who
dreamed  of  disputing  his  power  "  in  the  early  days  of  his  reign.  The  important
thing  in  his  eyes  was,  therefore,  to  maintain  among  his  subjects  as  long  as
possible  the  error  as  to  his  identity.  He  put  to  death  all,  whether  small  or
great,  who  had  been  in  any  way  implicated  in  the  affairs  of  the  real  Smerdis,
or  whom  he  suspected  of  any  knowledge  of  the  murder.^  He  withdrew  from
public  life  as  far  as  practicable,  and  rarely  allowed  himself  to  be  seen.  Having
inherited  the  harem  of  his  predecessors,  together  with  their  crown,  he  even
went  so  far  as  to  condemn  his  wives  to  a  complete  seclusion.*  He  did  not
venture  to  hope,  nor  did  those  in  his  confidence,  that  the  truth  would  not  one
day  be  known,  but  he  hoped  to  gain,  without  loss  of  time,  sufficient  popularity
to  prevent  the  revelation  of  the  imjjosture  from  damaging  his  prospects.  The
seven  great  houses  which  he  had  dispossessed  would,  in  such  a  case,  refuse  to
rally  round  him,  and  it  was  doubtless  to  lessen  their  prestige  that  he  extinguished
their  pyres ;  but  the  people  did  not  trouble  themselves  as  to  the  origin  of
their  sovereign,  if  he  showed  them  his  favour  and  took  proper  precautions  to
secure  their  good  will.     He  therefore  exempted  the  provinces  from  taxes  and

ed.  DiDOT,  pp.  694,  695),  and  have  been  followed  therein  by  many  modern  writers  (Niebuhk.  Vortrage,
vol.  i.  pp.  157,  399  ;  Gkote,  Histonj  of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  pp.  301,  302 ;  Spiegel,  Erdnische  Alterthumskunde,
vol.  ii.  p.  310).  Kawlinson  was  the  first  to  show  that  Gaumata'a  movement  was  not  Median,  and
that  he  did  not  in  the  least  alter  the  position  of  the  Persians  in  the  empire  :  liut  he  allows  the  Magian
usurpation  to  have  been  tlie  prelude  to  a  sort  of  religious  reform  (0«  the  Magian  Revolution  and  the
Reiijn  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  in  the  Herodotus,  vol.  iii.  pp.  454-459).

'  Inscription  of  Behistun,  col.  i.  11.63,  64;  of.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpersischen  KeUin-
fchriften,  pp.  14,  15.

-  The  discovery  of  a  similar  event  in  the  life  of  Ardasbir,  the  founder  of  the  Saasanid  dynasty
(J.  DahmesTeteh,  Lettre  de  Tansar  au  roi  de  Taharistdn,  in  the  Journal  Asiutique,  1894,  vol.  iii.
pp.  530,  531),  has  enabled  us  to  understand  the  passage  of  tho  Inscription  of  Behistun  cited  in  the
preceding  note,  and  to  explain  it  as  I  have  done  in  the  text  (J.  Mauquakt,  Fundamente  Israelitischer
und  Jiidifcher  Geschiche,  p.  48,  note  3).

^  Inscription  of  Belmtun,  col.  i.  II.  43-53 ;   VVkisseaoh  ar.d  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  14. 15.

*  Heuodotus,  III.  Ixviii.


THE  ACCESSION   OF  DARIUS,   SON  OF  H7STASPES.


673


military  service  for  a  period  of  three  years.^  He  had  not  time  to  pursue  this
policy,  and  if  we  may  believe  tradition,  the  very  precautions  which  he  took  to
conceal  his  identity  became  the  cause  of  his  misfortunes.  In  the  royal  harem
there  were,  together  with  the  daughters  of  Cyrus,  relatives  of  all  the  Persian
nobility,  and  the  order  issued  to  stop  all  their  communications  with  the  outer
world  had  excited  suspicion :  the  avowals  which  had  escaped  Cambyses  before
the  catastrophe  were  now  called  to  mind,  and  it  was  not  long  before  those  in  high
places  became  convinced  that  they  had  been  the  dupes  of  an  audacious  imposture.-
A  conspiracy  broke  out,  under  the  leadership  of
the  chiefs  of  the  seven  clans,  among  whom  was
numbered  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  who  was
connected,  according  to  a  genealogy  more  or  less
authentic,  with  the  family  of  the  Achaemenides :  *
the  conspirators  surprised  Gaumata  in  his  palace  of
Sikayauvatish,  which  was  situated  in  the  district
of  Nisaya,  not  far  from  Ecbatana,  and  assassinated
him  on  the  10th  of  Bagayadish,  521  e.g.*  The
exact  particulars  of  this  scene  were  never  known,
but  popular  imagination  soon  supplied  the  defect,
furnishing  a  full  and  complete  account  of  all  that
took  place.  In  the  first  place,  Phaedime,  daughter
of  Otanes,  one  of  the  seven,  furnished  an  authentic
proof  of  the  fraud  which  had  been  perpetrated.  Her  father  had  opportunely
recalled  the  marvellous  resemblance  between  Smerdis  and  the  j\[agian,  and
remembered  at  the  same  time  that  the  latter  had  been  deprived  of  his  ears  in
punishment  for  some  misdeed  :  he  therefore  sent  certain  instructions  to  Phsedime,
who,  when  she  made  the  discovery,  at  the  peril  of  her  life,  that  her  husband
had  no  ears,  communicated  the  information  to  the  disaffected  nobles.  The  con-
spirators thereupon  resolved  to  act  without  delay  ;  but  when  they  arrived  at  the
palace,  they  were  greeted  with  an  extraordinary  piece  of  intelligence.  The  Magi,
disquieted  by  some  vague  rumours  which  were  being  circulated  against  them,
had  besought  Prexaspes  to  proclaim  to  the  people  that  the  reigning  monarch
was  indeed  Smerdis  himself.     But  Prexaspes,  instead  of  making  the  desired

'  Herodotus,  III.  Ixvii.,  whose  words  Pompeius  Trogus  reproduced  almost  literally  (Justin,  1.  9).

'  Herodotus,  III.  Ixviii.,  et  seq.,  where  Otanes  plays  the  chief  part.

^  The  passage  in  the  Bohistun  inscription  (col.  i.  11.  1-11 ;  of.  Weissbaoh  and  Bans,  Die  Altper-
aischen  Keilinschrijten,  pp.  12,  13),  in  which  Darius  sets  forth  his  own  genealogy,  has  received
various  interpretations.  That  of  Oppert  seems  still  the  most  probable,  that  the  text  indicates  two
parallel  branches  of  Achsemeiiides,  which  flourished  side  by  side  until  Cambyses  died  and  Darius
ascended  the  throne.  Such  a  genealogy,  however,  appears  to  be  fictitious,  invented  solely  for  the
purpose  of  connecting  Darius  with  tlie  ancient  royal  line,  with  which  in  reality  he  could  claim  no
kinship,  or  only  a  very  distant  connection  (Winokler,  Untersueliungen  zur  Altorient.  Gesch.,  pp.  126-128.

'  Behuhin  Inscription,  col.  i.  11.  53-Gl ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  op.  cit.,  pp.  14,  15.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  M.  Dieulafoy,  L'Acropole  de  Suse,  p.  306,  fig.  185.

2  X


DARIUS,  SON  OF   HYSTASPES.'


674  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

declaration,  informed  the  multitude  that  the  son  of  Cyrus  was  indeed  dead,
for  he  himself  had  murdered  him  at  the  bidding  of  Cambyses,  and,  having
made  this  confession,  he  put  himself  to  death,  in  order  to  escape  the  vengeance
of  the  Magi.     This  act  of  Prexaspes  was  an  additional  inducement  to  the  con-
spirators to  execute  their  purpose.     The  guard  stationed  at  the  gates  of  the
palace  dared  not  refuse  admission  to  so  noble  a  company,  and  when  the  throne-
room  was  reached  and  the  eunuchs  forbade  further  advance,  the  seven  boldly
drew  their  swords  and  forced  their  way  to  the  apartment  occupied  by  the  two
Magi.     The  usurpers  defended  themselves  with  bravery,  but  succumbed  at
length  to  the  superior  number  of  their  opponents,  after  having  wounded  two
of  the  conspirators.     Gobryas  pinioned  Gaumata  with  his  arms,  and  in  such  a
way  that  Darius  hesitated  to  make  the  fatal  thrust  for  fear  of  wounding  his
comrade ;  but  the  latter  bade  him  strike  at  all  hazards,  and  by  good  fortune
the  sword  did  not  even  graze  him.     The  crime  accomplished,  the  seven  con-
spirators agreed  to  choose  as  king  that  member  of  their  company  whose  horse
should  first  neigh  after  sunrise  :  a  stratagem  of  his  groom  caused  the  election
to  fall  on  Darius.     As  soon  as  he  was  duly  enthroned,  he  instituted  a  festival
called  the  " magophonia,"  or  "massacre  of  the  Magi,"  in  commemoration  of
the  murder  which  had  given  him  the  crown. ^

His  first  care  was  to  recompense  the  nobles  to  whom  he  owed  his  position
by  restoring  to  them  the  privileges  of  which  they  had  been  dej^rived  by  the
pseudo-Smerdis,  namely,  the  right  of  free  access  to  the  king,-  as  well  as  the
right  of  each  individual  to  a  funeral  pyre ;  ^  but  the  usurper  had  won  the  affec-
tion of  the  people,  and  even  the  inhabitants  of  those  countries  which  had  been
longest  subject  to  the  Persian  sway  did  not  receive  the  new  sovereign  favour-
ably. Darius  found  himself,  therefore,  under  the  necessity  of  conquering  his
dominions  one  after  the  other.*     The  Persian  empire,  like  those  of  the  Chal-

'  HERODOTrs,  III.  Ixviii.-lxxxvii.,  whose  account  has  been  reproduced  with  some  slight  modifica-
tions by  Pompeius  Trogua  (Jostin,  i.  9, 10 ;  of.  Gctschmid,  Kleine  Schri/ten,  vol.  v.  pp.  59-63).  Ctesias
gives  a  version  (Fragm.  29,  §  14,  in  Mullek-Didot.  Ctesiss  CnicUi  Fragmenta,  pp.  48,  49)  in  which
some  of  the  names  of  the  conspirators  differ  from  those  given  by  Herodotus.  In  at  least  three
instances  Ctesias  gives  the  name  of  the  son  where  Herodotus  mentions  the  father  (Donokek,  Ge-
schichte  des  Alterthums,  4th  edit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  250,  note  1),  while  the  list  of  the  Behistun  inscription
(col.  iv.  11.  80-86)  coincides  with  that  of  Herodotus,  with  one  exception.

-  Herodotus,  III.  cxviii.

'  Behistun  Inicription, col.  i.  11.  61-71 ;  cf.WsissBACH and  Hat^g,  Die  Altpersischfin  Keilins., pp.lijlo.

*  The  history  of  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Darius  is  recorded  in  the  great  inscription  which
the  king  caused  to  be  cut  in  three  languages  on  the  rocks  of  Behistun  (cf.  what  is  stated  on  this
subject,  infra,  p.  682).  This  inscription  was  first  edited  and  translated  into  English  by  H.  Eawlinson
in  the  J.  B.  As.  Soc,  vol.  x.  (cf  the  latest  English  translation  which  he  has  published  of  this  text
under  the  title,  Inscripiion  of  Darius  on  the  Hock  at  Behistun,  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,
vol.  i.  pp.  107-130) ;  then  into  French  by  Oppekt,  M^moire  sur  Ics  Inscriptions  aeh€m€mdes  congues  dans
I'idiome  des  Anciens  Perses,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  vol.  xvii.,  1851,  pp.  256-296,  37S-430,  524-567 ;
vol.  xviii.  pp.  56-83, 322-366,  553-5S4  ;  vol.  xix.,  1852,  pp.  140-215  ;  then  into  German  by  Spiegel,  Die
Altpers.  Keilins.,  and  by  Weissbach  and  Bang,  op.  cit.,  pp.  12-33.  The  Babylonian  version  has  been
studied  and  translated  separately  by  C.  Bezold,  Die  Akhemeniden-Inschriften,  and  the  third  version  by
NoKBis,  Scijthic  Version  of  the  Behistun  Inscrip.  in  /.  It,  As.  Soc,  1853,  vol.  xv.,  by  Oppert,  I/C  Peuple


TEE  REVOLUTIONS  IN  SUSIANA,    CEALD^A,   AND   MEDIA.        675

(Iseans  and  Medes,  had  consisted  hitherto  of  nothing  but  a  fortuitous  collection
of  provinces  under  military  rule,  of  vassal  kingdoms,  and  of  semi-independent
cities  and  tribes ;  there  was  no  fixed  division  of  authority,  and  no  regular
system  of  government  for  the  outlying  provinces.  The  governors  assigned
by  Cyrus  and  Cambyses  to  rule  the  various  provinces  acquired  by  con-
quest, were  actual  viceroys,  possessing  full  control  of  an  army,  and  in  some
cases  of  a  fleet  as  well,  having  at  their  disposal  considerable  revenues  both  in
money  and  in  kind,  and  habituated,  owing  to  their  distance  from  the  capital,
to  settle  pressing  questions  on  their  own  responsibility,  subject  only  to  the
necessity  of  making  a  report  to  the  sovereign  when  the  affair  was  concluded,
or  when  the  local  resources  were  insufficient  to  bring  it  to  a  successful  issue.
For  such  free  administrators  the  temptation  must  have  been  irresistible
to  break  the  last  slender  ties  which  bound  them  to  the  empire,  and  to  set
themselves  up  as  independent  monarchs.  The  two  successive  revolutions
which  had  taken  place  in  less  than  a  year,  convinced  such  governors,  and  the
nations  over  which  they  bore  rule,  that  the  stately  edifice  erected  by  Cyrus
and  Cambyses  was  crumbling  to  pieces,  and  that  the  moment  was  i^ropitious
for  each  of  them  to  carve  out  of  its  ruins  a  kingdom  for  himself ;  the  news  of
the  murder,  rapidly  propagated,  sowed  the  seeds  of  revolt  in  its  course — in
Susiana,  at  Babylon,  in  Media,  in  Parthia,  in  Margiana,  among  the  Sattagydes,
in  Asia  Minor,  and  even  in  Egypt  itself^ — which  sliowed  itself  in  some  places
in  an  open  and  undisguised  form,  while  in  others  it  was  contemptuously  veiled
under  the  appearance  of  neutrality,  or  the  pretence  of  waiting  to  see  the  issue
of  events.  The  first  to  break  out  into  open  rebellion  were  the  neighbouring
countries  of  Elam  and  Chaldsea  :  the  death  of  Smerdis  took  place  towards  the
end  of  September,  and  a  fortnight  later  saw  two  rebel  chiefs  enthroned — a
certain  Atbrina  at  Susa,  and  a  Nadinta-bel  at  Babylon.^  Athrina,  the  son  of
Umbadaranma,  was  a  scion  of  the  dynasty  dispossessed  by  the  successors  of
Sargon  in  the  preceding  century,  but  nevertheless  he  met  with  but  luke-
warm assistance  from  his.  own  countrymen ;  ^  he  was  taken  prisoner  before  a

et  la  Langue  dee  Medes,  pp.  l]2-21-i,  and  by  Weisseaoh  and  Bang,  Die  Achamenideninschriften  zweiter
Art.  The  order  of  (he  events  recorded  in  it  is  net  alwa)'seasy  to  determine.  I  have  finally  adopted,
with  some  modifications,  tlie  arrangement  of  Marquart  {Die  Assyr.  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,  Suppl.,
vol.  V.  pp.  G33-636),  which  seems  to  me  to  give  the  clearest  "  conspectus  "  of  these  confused  wars.

'  Behistun  Inscription,  col.  ii.  11.  5-8;  of.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Alipers.  Keilins.,  pp.  16,  17,
where  it  is  stated  that  insurrections  broke  out  in  all  these  countries  while  Darius  was  at  Babylon ;  that  is
to  say,  while  he  was  occupied  in  besieging  that  city,  as  is  evident  from  the  order  of  the  events  narrated.

'  The  latest  known  document  of  the  pseudo-Smerdis  is  dated  the  1st  of  Tisri  at  Babylon,  and  the
first  of  Nebuchadrezzar  III.  are  dated  tlie  17th  and  ■20th  of  the  same  month  (Boscawen,  Babylonian  dated
Tablets  and  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vi.  pp.  31,  67,  68  ;
Oppekt,  Les  Inscriptions  du  Fscudo- Smerdis  et  de  Vusurpalcur  Nadintabel,  in  the  Actes  du  Congres  de
Stockholm,  vol.  ii.  p.  255).  The  revolt  of  Babylon,  then,  must  be  placed  between  the  1st  and  17th  of  Tisri ;
that  is,  either  at  the  end  of  September  or  the  beginning  of  October,  521  B.C.

'  Behistun  Inscription,  col.  i.  11.  72-77,  81-83;  ef.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  op.  cit.,  pp.  14-17.  The
revolt  cannot  have  lasted  much  more  than  six  weeks,  for  on  the  20th  of  Athriyadiya  following,  that  is


676  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

month  had  passed,  and  sent  to  Darius,  who  slew  him  with  his  own  hand.

Babylon  was  not  so  easily  mastered.     Her  chosen  sovereign  claimed  to  be  the

son  of  Xabonidus,  and  had,  on  ascending  the  throne,  assumed  the  illustrious

name  of  Nebuchadrezzar;    he  was  not  supported,  moreover,  by  only  a  few

busybodies,  but  carried  the  whole  population  with  him.     The  Babylonians,

who  had  at  first  welcomed  Cyrus  so  warmly,  and  had  fondly  imagined  that

they  had  made  him  one  of  themselves,  as  they  had  made  so  many  of  their

conquerors  for  centuries  past,  soon  realised  their  mistake.     The  differences  of

language,  manners,  spirit,  and  religion  between  themselves  and  the  Persians

were  too  fundamental  to  allow  of  the  naturalisation  of  the  new  sovereign,  and  of

the  acceptance  by  the  Achaemenides  of  that  fiction  of  a  double  personality  to

which  Tiglath-pileser  III.,  Shalinaneser,  and  even  Assur-bani-pal  had  submitted.'

Popular  fancy  grew  weary  of  Cyrus,  as  it  had  already  grown  weary  in  turn  of  all

the  foreigners  it  had  at  first  acclaimed — whether  Elamite,  Kalda,  or  Assyrian —

and  by  a  national  reaction  the  self-styled  son  of  Nabonidus  enjoyed  the  benefit

of  a  devotion  proportionately  as  great  as  the  hatred  which  had  been  felt  twenty

years  before  for  his  pretended  sire.     The  situation  might  become  serious  if

he  were  given  time  to  consolidate  his  power,  for  the  loyalty  of  the  ancient

provinces  of  the  Chaldaean  empire  was  wavering,  and  there  was  no  security

that  they  would  not  feel  inclined  to  follow  the  example  of  the  capital  as  soon

as  they  should  receive  news  of  the  sedition.     Darius,  therefore,  led  the  bulk  of

his  forces  to  Babylon  without  a  day's  more  delay  than  was  absolutely  necessary,

and  the  event  proved  that  he  had  good  reason  for  such  haste.    Nebuchadrezzar

III.  had  taken  advantage  of  the  few  weeks  which  had  elapsed  since  his  accession,

to  garrison  the  same  positions  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris,  as  Nabonidus

had  endeavoured  to  defend  against  Cyrus  at  the  northern  end  of  the  fortifications

erected  by  his  ancestor.     A  well-equipped  flotilla  patrolled  the  river,  and  his

lines  presented  so  formidable  a  front  that  Darius  could  not  venture  on  a  direct

attack.     He  arranged  his  troops  in  two  divisions,  which  he  mounted  partly  on

horses,  partly  on  camels,  and  eluding  the  vigilance  of  his  adversary  by  attacking

him  simultaneously  on  many  sides,  succeeded  in  gaining  the  opposite  bank  of  the

river.     The  Chaldeans,  striving  in  vain  to  drive  him  back  into  the  stream,  were

at  length  defeated  on  the  27th  of  Athriyadiya,  and  they  retired  in  good  order  on

Babylon.     Six  days  later,  on  the  2nd  of  Anamaka,  they  fought  a  second  battle

at  Zazanu,  on  the  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  and  were  again  totally  defeated.

Nebuchadrezzar  escaped  with  a  handful  of  cavalry,  and  hastened  to  shut  himself

up  in  his  city.     Darius  soon  followed  him,  but  if  he  cherished  a  hope  that

the  Babylonians  would  open  their  gates  to  him  without  further  resistance,  as

to  say,  at  the  beginning  of  December,  Darius  had  already  joined  issue  with  the  Babylonians  on  the
banks  of  the  Tigris  (col.  i.  11.  89,  90).

'  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  pp.  192,  193,  196-199,  209,  423,  424.


NEBUCHADREZZAR  III.   AND   FRAVARTISK


C77


they  had  done  to  Cyrus,  he  met  with  a  disappointment,  for  he  was  compelled
to  commence  a  regular  siege  and  suspend  all  other  operations,  and  that,  too,
at  a  moment  when  the  provinces  were  breaking  out  into  open  insurrection  on
every  hand.^  The  attempt  of  the  Persian  adventurer  Martiya  to  stir  up  the
Susians  to  revolt  in  his  rear  failed,  thanks  to  the  favourable  disposition  of  the
natives,  who  refused  to  recognise  in  him  Ummanish,  the  heir  of  their  national
princes.^      Media,   however,   yielded   unfortunately   to   the  solicitations  of  a


iia..:l;  ^;lul1Nu  a  kebel  with  hi.s  lanli,  lli'ui.l  a  uloli'  oi  ruLU  ii.i5uM.i..>.^

certain  Fravartish,  who  had  assumed  the  personality  of  Khshatrita  *  of  the

'  Behistun  Inscription,  col.  i.  11. 83-96,  col.  ii.  II.  1-5 ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,
pp.  16,  17.  The  account  given  by  Darius  seems  to  imply  that  no  interval  of  time  elapsed  between  the
second  defeat  of  Nebuchadrezzar  III.  and  the  taking  of  Babylon,  so  that  several  modem  historians
have  rejected  the  idea  of  an  obstinate  resistance  (Noldeke,  Aufsatie  zur  Persischen  Geschichte,  pp.  31,
42,  43).  Herodotus,  however,  speaks  of  the  long  siege  the  city  sustained  (III.  elii.),  and  the  discovery
of  tablets  dated  in  the  first  and  even  the  second  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar  III.  (Pinches,  TAe  Egibi  Tablets,
in  the  Recordg  of  the  Past,  1st  ser.,  vol.  xi.  p.  88)  shows  that  the  siege  was  prolonged  into  the  second
year  of  this  usurper,  at  least  until  tlie  month  of  Xisan  (JIarch- April),  520  B.C.  No  evidence  can  be
drawn  from  the  tablets  dated  in  tlie  reign  of  Darius,  for  the  oldest  yet  discovered,  which  is  dated  in
the  month  Sebat  (Jan. -Feb.),  in  the  year  of  his  accession,  and  consequently  prior  to  the  second  year  of
Nebuchadrezzar,  comes  from  Abu-habba.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statement  that  all  the  revolts  broke
out  while  Darius  was  '"  at  Babylon  "  (Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  IL  5-S)  does  not  allow  of  the  supposition
that  all  the  events  recorded  before  his  departure  for  Media  (col.  ii.  11.  64,  65)  could  have  been  com-
pressed into  the  space  of  three  or  four  months.  It  seems,  tberefore,  more  probable  that  the  siege
lasted  till  519  nc,  as  it  can  well  have  done  if  credit  be  given  to  the  mention  of  ■'  twenty-one  months
at  least "  by  Herodotus  (III.  clii.,  civ.) ;  perhaps  the  siege  was  brought  to  an  end  in  the  May  of  that
year,  as  calculated  by  Marquart  (Die  Jssyr.  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Philologus,  Suppl.,  vol.  v.  p.  633).

-  Behistun  Inscription,  col.  ii.  11.  S-13;  cf.  Weissbaoh  and  Baug,  op.  cit.,  pp.  16,  17.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  impression  of  an  intaglio  at  St.  Petersburg ;  cf.  Menakt,
Recherches  sur  la  Glyptiqne  Orientate,  vol.  ii.  pi.  ix.  No.  1,  according  to  ^hom  {ibid.,  pp.  168-171)  the
prisoner  whom  the  Achsemenian  king  is  transfixing  with  his  lance  is  none  other  than  Gaum&ta,  the
pseudo-Smerdis  himself.

*  Behistun  Inscription,  col.  ii.  11.  13-17  ;  cf.  Weisseach  and  Baxg,  op.  cit.,  pp.  16,  17.


G78  THE  IRANIAN   C0NQUES2.

race  of  Cyaxares,  and  its  revolt  marked  almost  the  beginning  of  a  total
break-up  of  the  empire.  The  memory  of  Astyages  and  Cyaxares  had  not  yet
faded  so  completely  as  to  cause  the  Median  nobles  to  relinquish  the  hope  of
reasserting  the  supremacy  of  Media;  the  opportunity  for  accomplishing  this
aim  now  seemed  all  the  more  favourable,  from  the  fact  that  Darius  had  been
obliged  to  leave  this  province  almost  immediately  after  the  assassination  of
the  usurper,  and  to  take  from  it  all  the  troops  that  he  could  muster  for  the
siege  of  Babylon.  Several  of  the  nomadic  tribes  still  remained  faithful  to  him,
but  all  the  settled  inhabitants  of  Media  ranged  themselves  under  the  banner
of  the  pretender,  and  the  spirit  of  insurrection  spread  thereupon  into  Armenia
and  Assyria.  For  one  moment  there  was  a  fear  lest  it  should  extend  to  Asia
Minor  also,  where  Oroetes,  accustomed,  in  the  absence  of  Cambyses,  to  act  as  an
autonomous  sovereign,  displayed  little  zeal  in  accommodating  himself  to  the
new  order  of  things.  There  was  so  much  uncertainty  as  to  the  leanings  of  the
Persian  guard  of  Orcetes,  that  Darius  did  not  venture  to  degrade  the  satrap
officially,  but  despatched  Bagaaus  to  Sardes  with  precise  instructions,  which
enabled  him  to  accomplish  liis  mission  by  degrees,  so  as  not  to  risk  a  Lydian
revolt.  His  first  act  was  to  show  the  guard  a  rescript  by  which  they  were
relieved  from  attendance  on  Oroetes,  and  "  thereupon  they  immediately
laid  down  their  spears."  Emboldened  by  their  ready  obedience,  Bagseus
presented  to  the  secretary  a  second  letter,  which  contained  his  instructions :
"  The  great  king  commands  those  Persians  who  are  in  Sardes  to  kill  Oroetes."
"  Whereupon,"  it  is  recorded,  "  they  drew  their  swords  and  slew  him."  ^  A
revolt  in  Asia  Minor  was  thus  averted,  at  a  time  when  civil  war  continued  to
rage  in  the  centre  of  Iran.

The  situation,  however,  continued  critical.  Darius  could  not  think  of
abandoning  the  siege  of  Babylon,  and  of  thus  both  losing  the  fruits  of  his
victories  and  seeing  Nebuchadrezzar  reappear  in  Assyria  or  Susiana.  On  the
other  hand,  his  army  was  a  small  one,^  and  he  would  incur  great  risks  in
detaching  any  of  his  military  chiefs  for  a  campaign  against  the  Mede  with  an
insufficient  force.  He  decided,  however,  to  adopt  the  latter  course,  and  while
he  himself  presided  over  the  blockade,  he  simultaneously  despatched  two
columns— one  to  IMedia,  under  the  command  of  the  Persian  Vidarna,  one  of
the  seven ;  the  other  to  Armenia,  under  the  Armenian  Dadarshish.  Vidarna
encountered  Khshatrita  near  Marush,  in  the  mountainous  region  of  tiie  old

'  Herodotus,  III.  cxxvi.-cxsviii.,  where  the  context  indicates  that  the  events  narrated  took
place  shortly  after  the  accession  of  Darius.  Further  on  (III.  cl.)  Herodotus  mentions,  as  con-
temporaneous with  the  siege  of  Babylon,  events  which  took  place  after  the  death  of  Oroetes ;  it  is
probable,  therefore,  that  the  scene  described  by  Herodotus  occurred  in  520  e.g.  at  the  latest.

■  "  The  army  of  Modes  and  Persians  which  was  with  me  was  small "  {Belmlun  Inscriptiov,  col.  ii.
11.  18,  19;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins..  pp.  lu,  17).


TEE   TAKING    OF  BABYLON.  67 ?

Namri,  on  the  27th  of  Anamaka,  and  gave  him  battle ;  but  though  he  claimed
the  victory,  the  result  was  so  indecisive  that  he  halted  in  Kambadene,  at  the
entrance  to  the  gorges  of  the  Zagros  mountains,  and  was  there  obliged  to  await
reinforcements  before  advancing  further.  Dadarshish,  on  his  side,  gained
three  victories  over  the  Armenians — one  near  Zuzza  on  the  8th  of  Thurava-
hara,  another  at  Tigra  ten  days  later,  and  the  third  on  the  2nd  of  Thaigarshish,.
at  a  place  not  far  from  Uhyama — but  he  also  was  compelled  to  suspend
operations  and  remain  inactive  pending  the  arrival  of  fresh  troops.  Half  the
year  was  spent  in  inaction  on  either  side,  for  the  rebels  had  not  suffered  less
than  their  opponents,  and,  while  endeavouring  to  reorganise  their  forces,
they  opened  negotiations  with  the  provinces  of  the  north-east  with  the  view  of
prevailing  on  them  to  join  their  cause.  Darius,  still  detained  before  Babylon,
was  unable  to  recommence  hostilities  until  the  end  of  520  B.C.  He  sent
Vaumisa  to  replace  Dadarshish  as  the  head  of  the  army  in  Armenia,  and  the
new  general  distinguished  himself  at  the  outset  by  winning  a  decisive  victory
on  the  15th  of  Anamaka,  near  Izitush  in  Assyria ;  but  the  effect  which  he
hoped  to  secure  from  this  success  was  neutralised  almost  immediately  by
grievous  defections.^  Sagartia,  in  the  first  place,  rose  in  rebellion  at  the  call
of  a  pretended  descendant  of  Cyaxares,  named  Chitrautakhma ;  -  Hyrcania,
the  province  governed  by  Hystaspes,  the  father  of  Darius,  followed  suit  and
took  up  the  cause  of  Khshatrita,^  and  soon  after  Margiana  broke  out  into
revolt  at  the  instigation  of  a  certain  Frada.^  Even  Persia  itself  deserted
Darius,  and  chose  another  king  instead  of  a  sovereign  whom  no  one  seemed
willing  to  acknowledge.  Many  of  the  mountain  tribes  could  not  yet  resign
themselves  to  the  belief  that  the  male  line  of  Cyrus  had  become  extinct  with
the  death  of  Cambyses.  The  usurpation  of  Gaumata  and  the  accession  of
Darius  had  not  quenched  their  faith  in  the  existence  of  Smerdis  :  if  the  Magian
were  an  impostor,  it  did  not  necessarily  follow  that  Smerdis  had  been  assassi-
nated, and  when  a  certain  Vahyazdata  rose  up  in  the  town  of  Tarava  in  the
district  of  Yautiya,  and  announced  himself  as  the  younger  son  of  Cyrus,  they
received  him  with  enthusiastic  acclamations.^  A  preliminary  success  gained
by  Hystaspes  at  Vispauzatish,  in  Parthia,  on  the  22ud  of  Viyakhna,  519  B.C.,
prevented  the  guerilla  bands  of  Hyrcania  from  joining  forces  with  the  Medes,
and  some  days  later  the  fall  of  Babylon  at  length  set  Darius  free  to  utilise  his
resources  to  the  utmost.^     The  long  resistance  of  Nebuchadrezzar  furnished  a

'  Bcliistun  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  18-57;  cf.  Weis.sbach  and  Baxg.  Die  Altpers.  Keiliiis.,  pp.  16-19.
'  Behhtun  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  78-81 ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20,  21.
=  Behistim  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  92,  93;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20,  21.
♦  BeUdun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  10-12  ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20.  21.
»  Behisiun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  21-28;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  22.  23.

»  Behisiun  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  94-98 ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20, 21.    For  the  confusion  in  the  dates,  and  the
actual  order  of  events,  cf.  Marquakt,  Die  Assyr.  des  Ktesias,  in  the  Bliilologus,  Suppl.,  vol.  v.  pp.  63 1,  03j.


680  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

fruitful  theme  for  legend :  a  fanciful  story  was  soon  substituted  for  the  true
account  of  the  memorable  siege  he  had  sustained.  Half  a  century  later,  when
his  very  name  was  forgotten,  the  heroism  of  his  people  continued  to  be  extolled
beyond  measure.  When  Darius  arrived  before  the  ramparts  he  found  the
country  a  desert,  the  banks  of  the  canals  cut  through,  and  the  gardens  and
pleasure-houses  destroyed.  The  crops  had  been  gathered  and  the  herds  driven
within  the  walls  of  the  city,  while  the  garrison  had  reduced  by  a  massacre  the
number  of  non-combatants,  the  women  having  all  been  strangled,  with  the
exception  of  those  who  were  needed  to  bake  the  bread.  At  the  end  of  twenty
months  the  siege  seemed  no  nearer  to  its  close  than  at  the  outset,  and  the
besiegers  were  on  the  point  of  losing  heart,  when  at  length  Zojjyrus,  one  of  the
seven,  sacrificed  himself  for  the  success  of  the  blockading  army.  Slitting  his
nose  and  ears,  and  lacerating  his  back  with  the  lash  of  a  whip,  he  made  his
way  into  the  city  as  a  deserter,  and  persuaded  the  garrison  to  assign  him  a
post  of  danger  under  pretence  of  avenging  the  ill-treatment  he  had  received
from  his  former  master.  He  directed  some  successful  sallies  on  points
previously  agreed  upon,  and  having  thus  lulled  to  rest  any  remaining  feelings
of  distrust  on  tlie  part  of  the  garrison,  he  treacherously  opened  to  the  Persians
tlie  two  gates  of  which  he  was  in  charge ;  three  thousand  Babylonians  were
impaled,  the  walls  were  razed  to  the  ground,  and  the  survivors  of  the
struggle  were  exiled  and  replaced  by  strange  colonists.^  The  only  authentic
fact  about  this  story  is  the  length  of  the  siege.  Nebuchadrezzar  was  put  to
death,  and  Darius,  at  length  free  to  act,  hastened  to  despatch  one  of  his
lieutenants,  the  Persian  Artavardiya,  against  Vahyazdata,  while  he  himself
marched  upon  the  Modes  with  the  main  body  of  the  royal  army.^  The  rebels
had  hitherto  been  confronted  by  the  local  militia,  brave  but  inexperienced
troops,  with  whom  they  had  been  able  to  contend  on  a  fairly  equal  footing :
the  entry  into  the  field  of  the  veteran  regiments  of  Cyrus  and  Cambyses
changed  the  aspect  of  affairs,  and  promptly  brought  the  campaign  to  a
successful  issue.  Darius  entered  Media  by  the  defiles  of  Kerend,  reinforced
Vidarna  in  Kambadene,  and  crushed  the  enemy  near  the  town  of  Kundurush,
on  the  20th  of  Adukanish,  519  B.C.  Khshatrita  fled  towards  the  north  with
some  few  horsemen,  doubtless  hoping  to  reach  the  recesses   of  Mount  Elburz,

'  Herodotus,  III.  cl.-clx.  Ctesias  (Fragm.  29,  §  22,  in  MCller-Didot,  Ctesia:  Cnidii  Frag.,  p.  50)
places  the  siege  of  Babj'lon  forty  years  later,  under  Xerxes  I. ;  accordiug  to  him,  it  was  Megabysus,
son  of  Zopyrus,  who  betrayed  the  city.  Polyeenus  asserts  that  the  stratagem  of  Zopyrus  was
adopted  in  imitation  of  a  Sakian  who  dwelt  beyond  the  Oxus  {Stratagems,  viii.  11,  §  8).  Latin
writers  transferred  the  story  to  Italy,  and  localised  it  at  Gabii  (Linr,  i.  5,S,  54  ;  Ovid,  Fasli,  ii.  6S3-710),
but  the  Eoman  hero,  Sextus  Tarquinius,  did  not  carry  his  devotion  to  the  point  of  mutilating  himself.

=  Behutun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  28-33 :  "  Then  I  sent  the  army  of  the  Persians  and  Medes  which  was
with  me.  One  named  Artavardiya,  a  Persian,  my  servant,  I  made  their  general ;  the  rest  of  the
Persian  army  went  to  Media  with  me."


TEE  DEFEAT  OF  KHSEATRITA.


681


and  to  continue  there  the  struggle ;  but  he  was  captured  at  Eaga  and  carried
to  Ecbatana.  His  horrible  punishment  was  proportionate  to  the  fear  he  had
inspired :  his  nose,  ears,  and  tongue  were  cut  off,  and  his  eyes  gouged  out,  and
in  this  mutilated  condition  he  was  placed  in  chains  at  the  gate  of  the  palace,  to
demonstrate  to  his  former  subjects  how  the  Achsemenian  king  could  punish
an  impostor.  When  the  people  had  laid  this  lesson  sufficiently  to  heart,
Khshatrita  was  impaled  ;  many  of  his  principal  adherents  were  ranged  around
him  and  suffered  the  same  fate,  while  the  rest  were  decapitated  as  an  example.^
Babylon  and  Media  being  thus  successfully  vanquished,  the  possession  of  the


REBELS  BROUGHT  TO  DARICS   BY   AHURA-MAZdI.^

empire  was  assured  to  Darius,  whatever  might  happen  in  other  parts  of  his
territory,  and  henceforth  the  process  of  repressing  disaffection  went  on  unchecked.
Immediately  after  the  decisive  battle  of  Kundurush,  Vaumisa  accomplished  the
pacification  of  Armenia  by  a  victory  won  near  Autiy  ara,^  and  Artavardiya  defeated
Vahyazdata  for  the  first  time  at  Kakha  in  Persia.*  Vahyazdata  had  committed
the  mistake  of  dividing  his  forces  and  sending  a  portion  of  them  to  Arachosia.
Vivana,  the  governor  of  this  province,  twice  crushed  the  invaders,^  and  almost
at  the  same  time  the  Persian  Dadardish  of  Bactiiana  was  triumphing  over
Frada  and  winning  Margiana  back  to  allegiance.'^     For  a  moment  it  seemed

'  BeMstun  Inscr.,  col.  i.  11.  64-68  ;  cf.  Weissbaoh  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  lS-21.

'  This  is  the  scene  depicted  on  the  rook  of  Behistun  ;  cf.  the  illustration,  infra,  p.  6S3.

^  Behisiiiii  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  57-63 ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  18,  19.

«  Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  30-40  ;  cf.  Id.,  ihid.,  pp.  22,  23.

>  Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  52-75  ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20-23.

»  Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  12-21 ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20-23.


682  TEE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

as  if  the  decisive  issue  of  the  struggle  might  be  prolonged  for  months,
since  it  was  announced  that  the  appearance  of  a  new  pseudo-Smerdis  on  the
scene  had  been  followed  by  the  advent  of  a  second  pseudo-Nebuchadrezzar  in
Chalda?a.  Darius  left  only  a  weak  garrison  at  Babylon  when  he  started  to
attack  Khshatrita :  a  certain  Arakha,  an  Armenian  by  birth,  presenting  himself
to  the  Babylonian  people  as  the  son  of  Nabonidus,  caused  himself  to  be  pro-
claimed king  in  December,  519  B.C. ;  but  the  city  was  still  suffering  so  severely
from  the  miseries  of  the  long  siege,  that  it  was  easy  for  the  Mede  Vindafra
to  reduce  it  promptly  to  submission  after  a  month  or  six  weeks  of  semi-
independence.^  This  was  the  last  attempt  at  revolt.  Chitraiitakhma  expiated
his  crimes  by  being  impaled,^  and  Hystaspes  routed  the  Hyrcanian  battalions
at  Patigrabana  in  Parthia :  ^  Artavardiya  having  defeated  Vahyazdata,
near  Mount  Paraga,  on  the  6th  of  Garmapada,  618  B.C.,  besieged  him  in  his
fortress  of  Uvadeshaya,  and  was  not  long  in  effecting  his  capture.^  The  civil
war  came  thus  to  an  efad.

It  had  been  severe,  but  it  had  brought  into  such  prominence  the
qualities  of  the  sovereign  that  no  one  henceforth  dared  to  dispute  his
possession  of  the  crown.  A  man  of  less  energetic  character  and  calm  judgment
would  have  lost  his  head  at  the  beginning  of  the  struggle,  when  almost  every
successive  week  brought  him  news  of  a  fresh  rebellion — in  Susiana,  Babylon,
Media,  Armenia,  Assyria,  Margiana,  Hyrcania,  and  even  Persia  itself,  not  to
speak  of  the  intrigues  in  Asia  Minor  and  Egypt:  he  would  have  scattered
his  forces  to  meet  the  dangers  on  all  sides  at  once,  and  would  assuredly
have  either  succumbed  in  the  struggle,  or  succeeded  only  by  chance  after
his  fate  had  trembled  in  the  balance  for  years.  Darius,  however,  from  the
very  beginning  knew  how  to  single  out  the  important  points  upon  which  to  deal
such  vigorous  blows  as  would  ensure  him  the  victory  with  the  least  possible
delay.  He  saw  that  Babylon,  with  its  numerous  population,  its  immense
wealth  and  prestige,  and  its  memory  of  recent  supremacy,  was  the  real  danger
to  his  empire,  and  he  never  relaxed  his  hold  on  it  until  it  was  subdued,
leaving  his  generals  to  deal  with  the  other  nations,  tlie  Medes  included,
and  satisfied  if  each  of  them  could  but  hold  his  adversary  in  check  without
gaining  any  decided  advantage  over  him.  The  event  justified  his  decision.
When  once  Babylon  had  fallen,  the  remaining  rebels  were  no  longer  a  source
of  fear ;  to  defeat  Khshatrita  was  the  work  of  a  few  weeks  only,  and  the  sub-
mission of  tlie  other  provinces  followed  as  a  natural  consequence  on  the  ruin

'  Behislun  Tnscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  75-91 ;  cf.  Wbissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Allpers.  Keihns.,  pp.  24,  25.
'  Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  ii.  11.  82-01 ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  20,  21.
'  Behidun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  1-9;  cf.  lu.,  ibid.,  pp.  20,  21.
■*  Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  iii.  11.  40-19 ;  cf.  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  22,  23.


THE  PACIFICATION   OF  ASIA.


683


of  Media.i  After  consummating  his  victories,  Darius  caused  an  inscription  in
commemoration  of  them  to  be  carved  on  the  rocks  in  the  pass  of  Bagistana
[Behistun],  one  of  the
most  frequented  routes
leading  from  the  basin  of
the  Tigris  to  the  table-
land of  Iran.  There  his
figure  is  still  to  be  seen


a^Jh-


standing,  with  his  foot
resting  on  the  prostrate
body  of  an  enemy,  and
his  hand  raised  in  the
attitude  of  one  address-
ing an  audience,  while
nine  figures  march  in
file  to  meet  him,  their
arms  tied  behind  their
backs,  and  cords  round
their  necks,  representing
all  the  pretenders  whom
he  had  fought  and  put
to  death— Athrina,  Na-
dinta  -  bel,  Khshatrita,
Vahyazdata,  Arakha,  and
Chitraritaklima ;  an  in-
scription, written  in  the
three  official  languages  of
the  court,  recounts  at  full
length  his  mighty  deeds.
The  drama  did  not,  how-
ever, come  to  a  close  with  the  punishment  of  Vahyazdata,  for  though  no  tribe  or
chieftain  remained  now  in  open  revolt,  many  of  those  who  had  taken  no  active
share  in  the  rebellion  had,  by  their  conduct  during  the  crisis,  laid  themselves  open
to  grave  suspicions,  and  it  seemed  but  prudent  to  place  them  under  strict  sur-
veillance or  to  remove  them  from  office  altogether.  Oro3tes  had  been  summarily
desimtched,  and  his  execution  did  not  disturb  the  peace  of  Asia  Minor;  but

'  Mention  of  some  new  wars  is  made  towards  the  end  of  tlie  inscription,  but  the  text  here  is  so
mutilated  that  the  sense  can  no  longer  be  easily  determined  (Behistun  Inscr.,  col.  v.  11.  1-31 ;  cf.
Weissdach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  28-31) ;  we  shall  see  in  Chap.  VII.  that  one  of  these
wars  was  possibly  directed  against  the  Scythians.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  Flandin  and  Coste,  Fene  Ancienne,  pi.  xvi. ;  cf.  J.  de  Morg.vn,  Mission
en  Perse,  vol.  iv.  pis.  xxviii.,  xxix.


^Lt  .rE3.


^?^


THE   EOOKS   OF   BEHISTON."


684  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

Aryandes,  to  whose  rule  Cambyses  had  entrusted  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  dis-
played no  less  marked  symptoms  of  disaffection,  and  deserved  the  same  fate.
Though  he  had  not  ventured  to  usurp  openly  the  title  of  king,  he  had
arrogated  to  himself  all  the  functions  and  rights  of  royalty,  and  had  manifested
as  great  an  independence  in  his  government  as  if  he  had  been  an  actual
Pharaoh.  The  inhabitants  of  Cyrene  did  not  approve  of  the  eagerness  dis-
played by  their  tyrant  Arkesilas  III.  to  place  himself  under  the  Persian  yoke :
after  first  expelling  and  then  recalling  him,  they  drove  him  away  a  second
time,  and  at  length  murdered  him  at  Barca,  whither  he  had  fled  for  refuge.
Pheretime  came  to  Egypt  to  seek  the  help  of  Ai-yandes,  just  as  Laarchos  had
formerly  implored  the  assistance  of  Amasis,i  and  represented  to  him  that  her
son  had  fallen  a  victim  to  his  devotion  to  his  suzerain.  It  was  a  good
opportunity  to  put  to  ransom  one  of  the  wealthiest  countries  of  Africa;  so
the  governor  sent  to  the  Cyrenaica  all  the  men  and  vessels  at  his  disposal.^
Barca  was  the  only  city  to  offer  any  resistance,  and  the  Persian  troops  were
detained  for  nine  months  motionless  before  its  walls,  and  the  city  then  only
succumbed  through  treachery.^  Some  detachments  forced  their  way  as  far
as  the  distant  town  of  Euesperides,^  and  it  is  possible  that  Aryandes  dreamt
for  a  moment  of  realising  the  designs  which  Cambyses  had  formed  against
Carthage.  Insufficiency  of  supplies  stayed  the  advance  of  his  generals;  but
the  riches  of  their  ally,  Cyrene,  offered  them  a  strong  temptation,  and  they
were  deliberating  how  they  might  make  this  wealth  their  own  before  returning
to  Memphis,  and  were,  perhaps,  on  the  point  of  risking  the  attempt,  when
they  received  orders  to  withdraw.  The  march  across  the  desert  proved
almost  fatal  to  them.  The  Libyans  of  Marmarica,  attracted  by  the  spoils
with  which  the  Persian  troops  were  laden,  harassed  them  incessantly,  and
inflicted  on  them  serious  losses ;  ^  they  succeeded,  however,  in  arriving  safely
with  their  prisoners,  among  whom  were  the  survivors  of  the  inhabitants  of
Barca.  At  this  time  the  tide  of  fortune  was  setting  strongly  in  favour
of  Darius :  Aryandes,  anxious  to  propitiate  that  monarch,  despatched  these
wretched  captives  to  Persia  as  a  trophy  of  his  success,  and  Darius  sent  them
into  Bactriana,  where  they  founded  a  new  Barca.^  But  this  tardy  homage
availed  him  nothing.  Darius  himself  visited  Egypt  and  disembarrassed  himself
of  his  troi;blesome  subject  by  his  summary  execution,  inflicted,  some  said,  because

'  Cf.  what  is  stated  as  to  the  relations  between  Amasis  and  Laarehus,  supra,  pp.  615,  C46.

'  Herodotus,  IV.  clxii.-clxviii.  '  Herodotds,  IV.  cc,  cci.

*  Herodotcs,  IV.  cciv. ;  this  is  tlie  town  which  later  on  under  the  Lagidse  received  the  name  of
Berenice,  and  which  is  now  called  Benghazi.  '  Herodotus,  IV.  cciii.

"  Herodotus,  IV.  cciv.  It  is  doubtless  to  these  acts  of  personal  authority  on  the  part  of  Aryandes
that  Darius  alludes  in  the  Behistun  Inscription,  when  he  says,  "  While  I  was  before  Babylon,
the  following  provinces  revolted  against  me — Persia  and  Susiana,  the  Medes  and  Assyria,  and  the
Egyptians  .  .  ."  (Oppert,  Le  Peuple  et  la  Langue  des  Medes,  p.  125;  the  Persian  text  is  mutilated  in
this  passage,  col.  ii.  ].  7;  cf.  Weissbaoh  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  16,  17).


AFFAIRS  IN  EGYPT.  685

he  had  issued  coins  of  a  superior  fineness  to  those  of  the  royal  mint/  while,
according  to  others,  it  was  because  he  had  plundered  Egypt  and  so  ill-treated
the  Egyptians  as  to  incite  them  to  rebellion.'-*  After  the  suppression  of  this
rival,  Darius  set  himself  to  win  the  affection  of  his  Egyptian  province,  or,
at  least,  to  render  its  servitude  bearable.  With  a  country  so  devout  and  so
impressed  with  its  own  superiority  over  all  other  nations,  the  best  means  of
accomplishing  his  object  was  to  show  profound  respect  for  its  national  gods
and  its  past  glory.  Darius,  therefore,  proceeded  to  shower  favours  on  the
priests,  who  had  been  subject  to  persecution  ever  since  the  disastrous
campaign  in  Ethiopia.  Cambyses  had  sent  into  exile  in  Elam  the  chief
priest  of  Sais — that  Uzaharrisniti  who  had  initiated  him  into  the  sacred  rites ;
Darius  gave  permission  to  this  important  personage  to  return  to  liis  native
land,  and  commissioned  him  to  repair  the  damage  inflicted  by  the  madness
of  the  son  of  Cyrus.  Uzaharrisniti,  escorted  back  with  honour  to  his  native
city,  re-established  there  the  colleges  of  sacred  scribes,  and  restored  to  the
temple  of  Nit  the  lauds  and  revenues  which  had  been  confiscated.^  Greek
tradition  soon  improved  upon  the  national  account  of  this  episode,  and  asserted
that  Darius  took  an  interest  in  the  mysteries  of  Egyptian  theology,  and  studied
the  sacred  books,*  and  that  on  his  arrrival  at  Memphis  in  517  B.C.,  immediately
after  the  death  of  an  Apis,  he  took  part  publicly  in  the  general  mourning,
and  promised  a  reward  of  a  hundred  talents  of  gold  to  whosoever  should
discover  the  successor  of  the  bull.^  According  to  a  popular  story  still  current
when  Herodotus  travelled  in  Egypt,  the  king  visited  the  temple  of  Pthah  before
leaving  Memphis,  and  ordered  his  statue  to  be  erected  there  beside  that  of

'  Herodotus,  rV.  clxvi.  It  is  not  certain  tbat  Aryandes  did  actually  strike  any  coinage  in  his
own  name,  and  perliaps  Herodotus  has  only  repeated  a  popular  story  current  in  Egypt  in  his  days
(Babelon,  Melanges  mimismaliques,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  96).  If  this  money  actually  existed,  its  coinage
was  but  a  pretext  employed  by  Darius ;  the  true  motive  of  the  condemnation  of  Aryandes  was  certainly
an  armed  revolt,  or  a  serious  presumption  of  revolutionary  intentions  (Fb.  Lenormakt,  Histoire  de  la
Monnaie  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  ii.  p.  6).

-  PoLY^NCS,  Stratagems,  vii.  11,  §  7,  where  Aryandes  is  called  Oryandros.

'  Inscription  on  the  Statue  of  the  Naophoros  in  the  Vatican,  11.  44-16 :  cf.  E.  de  Kouge,  M^moire  sur  la
Statuette  Naophore,  p.  23  ;  E.  Kevillout,  Premier  Extrait  de  la  Chronique  De'motique  de  Paris,  in  the
Revue  Egyplolugique,  vol.  i.  p.  29 ;  Marccohi,  Iscrizione  Geroglifica  delta  Statuetta  Naofora,  pp.  17-
20.  E.  de  Eouge'  {Inscription  de  la  Statuette  Naophore,  p.  22)  and  Wiedemann  read  Aram  instead  of
Elam  {Gesch.  ^gyplens,  p.  239),  and  take  Uzaharrisniti  into  exile  only  in  Syria ;  I  follow  Brngsch
(Gesch.  Aigyptens,  p.  750),  however,  in  believing  that  Elam  is  intended,  where  Susa  was  one  of  the
favourite  residences  of  the  great  king.

*  DioDORCS  SicuLUs,  i.  p.  96.

*  PoLT^NCs,  Strat.,  vii.  11,  §  7.  This  episode  enabled  Wiedemann  to  determine  the  date  of
Darius'  visit  to  Egypt :  the  Apis  referred  to  can  only  be  tlie  one  which  died  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
king  (S.  2274),  or  517  B.o.  {Gesch.  ^Egyptene,  pp.  236,  237).  The  legend  concerning  the  statue  of
Sesostris  (Herodotus,  II.  ex.)  at  first  led  me  to  consider,  with  Ley  {Fata  et  Conditio  ^Egypti  sub
imperio  Persarum,  pp.  11,  12)  and  linger  {Manetho,  pp.  288,289),  that  it  was  necessary  to  place  this
journey  of  Darius  alter  the  Scythian  campaign  {Histoire  Ancienne,  4th  edit.,  p.  522,  note  7),  but  I  now
think  that  one  is  not  justified  in  allowing  the  incidents  in  the  tale  of  a  dragoman  (Wiedemann,
Serodots  Zweites  Buch,  p.  427)  to  outweigh  those  of  a  narrative  based  on  a  fact  so  precise  as  that  of
the  mourning  for  an  Apis.


C86  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

Sesostris.  The  priests  refused  to  obey  this  command,  for,  said  they,  "  Darius
has  not  equalled  the  deeds  of  Sesostris :  he  has  not  conquered  the  Scythians,
whom  Sesostris  overcame."  Darius  replied  that  "  he  hoped  to  accomplish  as
much  as  Sesostris  had  done,  if  he  lived  as  long  as  Sesostris,"  and  so  conciliated
.  the  patriotic  pride  of  the  priests.^  The  Egyptians,  grateful  for  his  moderation,
numbered  him  among  the  legislators  whose  memory  they  revered,  by  the  side
of  Menes,  Asykhis,  Bocchoris,  and  Sabaco.^

The  whole  empire  was  now  obedient  to  the  will  of  one  man,  but  the  ordeal
from  which  it  had  recently  escaped  showed  how  loosely  the  elements  of  it
were  bound  together,  and  with  what  facility  they  could  be  disintegrated.  The
system  of  government  in  force  hitherto  was  that  introduced  into  Assyria  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.,  which  had  proved  so  eminently  successful  in  the  time  of
Sargon  and  his  descendants ;  ^  Babylon  and  Ecbatana  had  inherited  it  from
Nineveh,  and  Persepolis  had  in  turn  adopted  it  from  Ecbatana  and  Babylon.
It  had  always  been  open  to  objections,  of  which  by  no  means  the  least  was
the  great  amount  of  power  and  independence  accorded  by  it  to  the  provincial
governors ;  but  this  inconvenience  had  been  little  felt  when  the  empire  was
of  moderate  dimensions,  and  when  no  province  permanently  annexed  to  the
empire  lay  at  any  very  great  distance  from  the  capital  for  the  time  being.
But  this  was  no  longer  the  case,  now  that  Persian  rule  extended  over  nearly
the  whole  of  Asia,  from  the  Indus  to  the  Thracian  Bosphorus,  and  over  a
portion  of  Africa  also.  It  must  have  seemed  far  from  prudent  to  set  governors
invested  with  almost  regal  powers  over  countries  so  distant  that  a  decree
despatched  from  the  palace  might  take  several  weeks  to  reach  its  destination.
The  heterogeneity  of  the  elements  in  each  province  was  a  guarantee  of  peace
in  the  eyes  of  the  sovereign,  and  Darius  carefully  abstained  from  any  attempt
at  unification :  not  only  did  he  allow  vassal  republics,  and  tributary  kingdoms
and  nations  to  subsist  side  by  side,  but  he  took  care  that  each  should  preserve
its  own  local  dynasty,  language,  writing,  customs,  religion,  and  peculiar
legislation,  besides  the  right  to  coin  money  stamped  with  the  name  of  its
chief  or  its  civic  symbol.  The  Greek  cities  of  the  coast  maintained  their
own  peculiar  constitutions  which  they  had  enjoyed  under  the  Merm-
nadse ;  Darius  merely  required  that  the  chief  authority  among  them  should
rest  in  the  hands  of  the  aristocratic  party,  or  in  tliose  of  an  elective
or    hereditary   tyrant    whose    personal    interest   secured   his    fidelity.*     The

•  Herodotus,  II.  ex. ;  DiODOBrs  Siculus,  i.  56  ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  426, 427.
-  DiODOKUS  Siculus,  i.  95.  ^  Cf.  supra,  p.  193,  et  seq.

*  Herodotus,  V.  xxsvi.-xxxviii.,  where  it  is  related  how  Aristagoras  betrayed  the  great  king,
and  how  he  seized  the  tyrants  of  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia  in  order  to  replace  them  by  chiefs  hostile
to  the  Persians ;  cf.  Herodotus,  VI.  xliii.,  where  Mardonius,  reversing  the  situation,  put  down  the
tyrants  of  these  same  cities  to  substitute  for  them  the  leaders  of  the  democratic  party.


THE  DIVISION   OF   THE  EMPIRE  INTO   SATRAPIES.


687


Carians,^  Lycians,^  Pamphyliaiis,  and  Cilicians  ^  continued  under  the  rule  of  their
native  princes,  subject  only  to  the  usual  obligations  of  the  corvee,  taxation,  and
military  service  as  in  past  days ;  the  majority  of  the  barbarous  tribes  which  in-
habited the  Taurus  and  the  mountainous  regions  in  the  centre  of  Asia  Minor
were  even  exempted  from  all  definite  taxes,  and  were  merely  required  to
respect  the  couriers,  caravans,  and  aVmies  which  passed  through  their  territory.
Native  magistrates  and  kings  still  bore  sway  in  Phoenicia  *  and  Cyprus,^  and


the  shekhs  of  the  desert  preserved  their  authority  over  the  marauding  and
semi-nomadic  tribes  of  Idumtea,  Nabatwa,  Moab,  and  Ammon,  and  the  wander-
ing Bedawiu  on  the  Euphrates  and  the  Khabur.  Egypt,  under  Darius,
remained  what  she  had  been  under  the  Saitic  and  Ethiopian  dynasties,
a  feudal  state  governed  by  a  Pharaoh,  who,  though  a  foreigner,  was  yet
reputed  to  be  of  the  solar  race ;  the  land  continued  to  be  divided  unequally
into  diverse  principalities,  Thebes  still  preserving  its  character  as  a  theocracy
under  the  guidance  of  the  pallacide  of  Amon  and   her  priestly  counsellors,

'  Herodotus,  "VII.  xcviii.,  xoix.,.cites  among  the  commanders  of  the  Persian  fleet  three  Carian
dynasts,  Histiseus,  Pigree,  and  Damasithymus,  besides  the  famous  Artemisia  of  Halicarnassus,

-  Herodotus,  VII.  xeviii.,  where  a  dynast  named  Eybemiskos,  son  of  Sika,  is  mentioned  among
the  commanders  of  the  fleet.  The  received  text  of  Herodotus  needs  correction,  and  we  should  read
Kybernis,  son  of  Kossika  (Six,  Monnaies  Lyciennes,  pp.  13,  85),  some  of  whose  coins  are  still  in
existence  (Babelon,  Les  Perses  Achifme'nides,  p.  01,  Nos.  430.  431,  and  pi.  xi.  2,  3).  For  the  other
Lycian  dynasts  of  the  same  or  a  later  period,  cf.  Badelon,  Les  Perses  Acligm^iiides,  pp.  xci.-exiii.

■'  The  Cilician  contingent  in  the  fleet  of  Xerxes  at  Salamis  was  commanded  by  Syennesis  himself
(Herodotus,  VII.  xoviii. ;  cf.  JjIschtlus,  Persians,  324-320),  and  Cilicia  never  had  a  satrap  until  the
time  of  Cyrus  the  younger  (Xenophon,  Cyropsedia,  vii.  4,  §  2).

'  Three  kings,  viz.  the  kings  of  Sidon,  Tyre,  and  Arvad,  bore  commands  in  the  Phoiuician  fleet
of  Xerxes  (Herodotus,  VII.  xoviii.).

'  Cf  the  Cypriot  kings  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (VII.  xcviii.)  as  commanding  the  vessels
furnished  by  the  island  of  Cyprus  to  the  fleet  of  Xerxes ;  cf.  in  Book  IV.  civ.,  cix.,  cxii.,  in  the
account  of  the  revolt  against  Darius,  the  reference  to  the  chief  Cypriot  kings.  For  the  coins  of
Cyprus  and  the  names  of  the  kings  which  they  reveal  during  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  b.c,  cf.
Babelon,  Les  Perses  Achem^nides,  pp.  cxiv.-cxx.,  cxxv.-cxxix.,  cxxxiv.-cxli.,  etc.


688  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

while  the  other  districts  subsisted  under  military  chieftains.  Our  information
concerning  the  organisation  of  the  central  and  eastern  provinces  is  incomplete,
but  it  is  certain  that  here  also  the  same  system  prevailed.  In  the  years  of
peace  which  succeeded  the  troubled  opening  of  his  reign,  that  is,  from  519
to  515  B.C.,'  Darius  divided  the  whole  empire  into  satrapies,  whose  number
varied  at  different  periods  of  his  reign  from  twenty  to  twenty-three,  and
even  twenty-eight.^  Persia  proper  was  not  included  among  these,  for  she
had  been  the  cradle  of  the  reigning  house,  and  the  instrument  of  con-
quest.^ The  Iranian  table-land,  and  the  parts  of  India  or  regions  beyond  the
Oxus  which  bordered  on  it,  formed  twelve  important  vice-royalties — Media,
Hyrcania,  Parthia,  Zaranka,  Aria,  Khorasmia,  Bactriana,  Sogdiana,  Gandaria,
and  the  country  of  the  Sakse — reaching  from  the  plains  of  Tartary  almost
to  the  borders  of  China,  the  country  of  the  Thatagus  in  the  upper  basin
of  the  Elmend,  Arachosia,  and  the  land  of  Maka  on  the  shores  of  the  Indian
Ocean.  Ten  satrapies  were  reckoned  in  the  west — Uvaya,  Elam,  in  which  lay
Susa,  one  of  the  favourite  residences  of  Darius ;  Babirus  (Babylon)  and  Chaldfea ;
Athura,  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Assyria ;  Arabaya,  stretching  from  the  Khabur
to  the  Litany,  the  Jordan,  and  the  Orontes ;  Egypt,  the  peoi^les  of  the  sea,
among  whom  were  reckoned  the  Phoenicians,  Cilicians,  and  Cypriots,  and  the
islanders  of  the  ^gean ;  Yauna,  which  comprised  Lycia,  Caria,  and  the  Greek
colonies  along  the  coast ;  Sparda,  with  Phrygia  and  Mysia ;  Armenia ;  and
lastly,  Katpatuka  or  Cappadocia,  which  lay  on  both  sides  of  the  Halys  from
the  Taurus  to  the  Black  Sea.  If  each  of  these  provinces  had  been  governed,
as  formerly,  by  a  single  individual,  who  thus  became  king  in  all  but  name
and  descent,  the  empire  would  have  run  great  risk  of  a  speedy  dissolution.
Darius  therefore  avoided  concentrating  the  civil  and  military  powers  in  the
same  hands.  In  each  province  he  installed  three  ofiScials  independent  of
each  other,  but  each  in  direct  communication  with  himself — a  satrap,''  a
general,  and  a  secretary  of  state.     The  satraps  were  chosen  from  any  class

'  Herodotus  states  that  this  dividing  of  the  empire  into  provinces  took  place  immediately  after  the
accession  of  Darius  (III.  Ixsxis.),  and  this  mistake  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  he  ignores  almost
entirely  the  civil  wars  which  filled  the  earliest  years  of  the  reign.  His  enumeration  of  twenty
satrapies  (III.  xo.-xcv.)  comprises  India  and  omits  Thrace,  which  enables  us  to  refer  the  drawing  up
of  his  list  to  a  period  before  the  Scythian  campaign,  viz.  before  514  B.C.  (Kbcmbholz,  De  Asite
Minoris  Salrapis  Persicis,  pp.  12-15).  Herodotus  very  probably  copied  it  from  the  work  of  Hecatseus
ofMiletus(KLAUSEN,  ^ecntej  Fragmenta,  p.  95;  cf.  p.  12),  and  consequently  it  reproduces  adocimient
contemporary  with  Darius  himself.

-  The  number  twenty  is,  as  has  been  remarked,  that  given  by  Herodotus  (III.  xc.-xcv.),  and
probably  by  Hecatfeus  of  Miletus.  The  great  Behistun  Inscription  enumerates  twenty-three  countries
(col.  i.  11.  12-17 ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins.,  pp.  12, 13  ;  Inscription  Eof  Pereepolis,
11.  5-18 ;  cf.  Id.,  Hid.,  pp.  34,  35),  and  the  Inscription  of  Nakhsh-l-Kustem  gives  twenty-eight  (11.  22-
30 ;  cf  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  36,  37).

^  In  the  great  Behistun  Inscription  (col.  i.  1.  14)  Darius  mentions  Persia  first  of  all  the  countries
in  his  possession.  In  tlie  Inscription  E  of  Persepolis  he  omits  it  entirely,  and  in  that  of  Nakhsh-i-
Eustem  he  does  not  include  it  in  the  general  catalogue  (11.  17,  18).

*  The  Persian  word  hhshatrapd,  khskathrapan,  Mishatrapdva,  signifies  the  lord  of  the  country.


TEE   ORGANISATION  OF   THE  SATRAPIES.  689

in  the  nation,  from  among  the  poor  as  well  as  from  among  the  wealthy,  from
foreigners  as  well  as  from  Persians ; '  but  the  most  important  satrapies  were
bestowed  only  on  persons  allied  by  birth  ^  or  marriage  with  the  Achsemenids,'*
and,  by  preference,  on  the  legitimate  descendants  of  the  six  noble  houses.
They  were  not  appointed  for  any  prescribed  period,  but  continued  in  ofSce
during  the  king's  pleasure.  They  exercised  absolute  authority  in  all  civil
matters,  and  maintained  a  court,  a  body-guard,*  palaces  and  extensive  parks,
or  paradises,  where  they  indulged  in  the  pleasures  of  the  chase  ;  they  controlled
the  incidence  of  taxation,^  administered  justice,  and  possessed  the  power  of
life  and  death.  Attached  to  each  satrap  was  a  secretary  of  state,  who
ostensibly  acted  as  his  chancellor,  but  whose  real  function  was  to  exercise
a  secret  supervision  over  his  conduct  and  report  upon  it  to  the  imperial
ministers.''  The  Persian  troops,  native  militia  and  auxiliary  forces  quartered
in  the  province,  were  placed  under  the  orders,  moreover,  of  a  general,  who  was
usually  hostile  to  the  satrap  and  the  secretary.''  These  three  officials  counter-
balanced each  other,  and  held  each  other  mutually  in  check,  so  that  a  revolt
was  rendered  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  All  three  were  kept  in
constant  communication  with  tlie  court  by  relays  of  regular  couriers,  who
carried  their  despatches  on  horseback  or  on  camels,  from  one  end  of  Asia  to
the  other,  in  the  space  of  a  few  weeks.*  The  most  celebrated  of  the  post-roads
was  that  which  ran  from  Sardes  to  Susa  through  Lydia  and  Phrygia,  crossing
the  Halys,  traversing  Cappadocia  and  Cilicia,  and  passing  through  Armenia  and
across  the  Euphrates,  until  at  length,  after  passing  through  Matiene  and  the

'  Herodotus  mentions  a  satrap  chosen  from  among  the  Lydians,  Paotyas  (I.  cliii.),  and  another
satrap  of  Greek  extraction,  Xenagoraa  of  Halicarnassus  (IX.  cvii.).

-  The  most  characteristic  instance  is  that  of  Hystaspes,  who  was  satrap  of  Persia  under  Cambyees
(Herod.,  III.  Ixs.),  and  of  Parthia  and  Hyrcania  under  his  own  son  (^Behistun  Iiiscr.,  col.  ii.  11,  03,  94;
of.  Weissbacu  and  Bang,  Die  Altpers.  Keiliiis.,  pp.  20,  21).  One  of  the  brothers  of  Darius,  Arta-
phernes,  was  satrap  of  Sardes  (IIerod.,  V.  xxv.),  and  three  of  the  kin>,''.s  sons,  Achemenes,  Ariabignes,
and  Masistes,  were  satraps  of  Egypt,  Ionia,  and  Bactriana  respectively  (Id.,  VII.  vii.,  xcvii.,  IX.  cxiii.).

'  To  understand  how  well  established  was  the  custom  of  bestowing  satrapies  on  those  only  who
were  allied  by  marriage  to  the  royal  house,  it  is  sufficient  to  recall  the  fact  that,  later  on,  under
Xerxes  I.,  when  Pausanias,  King  of  Sparta,  had  thoughts  of  obtaining  the  position  of  satrap  in  Greece,
lie  asked  for  the  hand  of  an  Achsemenian  princess  (Thucydides,  I.  cxxviii.).

*  We  know,  for  example,  that  Orcetes,  satrap  of  Sardes  under  Cyrus,  Cambyses,  and  Darius  (cf.
what  is  said  of  him,  supra,  p.  67S),  had  a  body-guard  of  1000  Persians  (Hekodotcs,  III.  cxxvii.).

'  Thus,  Artaphernes,  satrap  of  Sardes,  had  a  cadastral  survey  made  of  the  territory  of  the  lonians,
and  by  the  results  of  this  survey  he  regulated  the  imposition  of  taxes,  "  which  from  that  time  up  to
the  present  day  are  exacted  according  to  his  ordinance  "  (Herodotcs,  VI.  xlii.).

"  The  role  played  by  the  secretary  is  clearly  indicated  by  the  history  of  Oroetes,  satrap  of  Sardes
(Herodotus,  III.  cxxviii.);  cf.  the  story  related,  supra,  p.  078.

■  While  Darius  appoints  his  brother  Artaphernes  satrap  of  Lydia,  he  entrusts  the  command  of
the  army  and  the  fleet  to  Otanes,  son  of  Sisamues  (V.  xxv.,  xxvi.).  Similarly  several  generals  are
met  with  at  the  side  of  Artaphernes  in  the  Ionic  revolt  (V.  cxvi.).

»  The  Greeks  translated  by  the  word ''A77apoi  or 'Ayyop7)ioi  (Herod.,  VIII.  xcviii.)  the  Persian  lerm
used  to  designate  these  couriers.  Xenophon  compares  their  speed  in  travelling  to  the  flight  of  birds
(Oyropxdia,  viii.  6,  §  17).  A  good  example  of  the  use  of  the  camel  for  the  postal  service  is  cited  by
Strabo  (XV.  ii.  §  10,  p. 724),  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  Philotas  and  the  execution  of  Purmeuion
under  Alexander.

2    Y


090  THE   IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

country  of  the  Cossieans,  it  reached  Elam.  This  main  route  was  divided  into
one  hundred  and  eleven  stages,  which  were  performed  by  couriers  on  liorseback
and  partly  in  ferry-boats,  in  eighty-four  days.^  Other  routes,  of  which  we  have
no  particular  information,  led  to  Egypt,  Media,  Bactria,  and  India,^and  by  their
means  the  imperial  officials  in  the  capital  were  kept  fully  informed  of  all  that
took  place  in  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  empire.  As  an  extra  precaution,
the  king  sent  out  annually  certain  officers,  called  his  "eyes"  or  his  "ears,"*
who  appeared  on  the  scene  when  they  were  least  expected,  and  investigated
the  financial  or  political  situation,  reformed  abuses  in  the  administration,
and  reprimanded  or  even  suspended  the  government  officials;  they  were
accompanied  by  a  body  of  troops  to  support  their  decisions,  whose  presence
invested  their  counsels  with  the  strongest  sanction.*  An  unfavourable  report,
a  slight  irregularity,  a  mere  suspicion,  even,  was  sufficient  to  disqualify  a
satrap.  Sometimes  he  was  deposed,  often  secretly  condemned  to  death  with-
out a  trial,  and  the  execution  of  the  judgment  was  committed  even  to  his
own  servants.  A  messenger  would  arrive  unexpectedly,  and  remit  to  the
guards  an  order  charging  them  to  put  their  chief  to  death — an  order  which
was  promptly  executed  at  the  mere  sight  of  the  royal  decree.^

This  reform  in  the  method  of  government  was  displeasing  to  the  Persian
nobles,  whose  liberty  of  action  it  was  designed  to  curtail,  and  they  took  their
revenge  in  sneering  at  the  obedience  they  could  not  refuse  to  render.  Cyrus,
they  said,  had  been  a  father,  Cambyses  a  master,  but  Darius  was  only  a
pedler  greedy  of  gain."  The  chief  reason  for  this  division  of  the  empire  into
provinces  was,  indeed,  fiscal  rather  than  political :  to  arrange  the  incidence  of
taxation  in  his  province,  to  collect  the  revenue  in  due  time  and  forward  the
total  amount  to  the  imperial  treasury,  formed  the  fundamental  duty  of  ^
satrap,  to  which  all  others  had  to  yield.'  Persia  proper  was  exempt  from  the
payment  of  any  fixed  sura,  its  inhabitants  being  merely  required  to  ofi'er
presents  to  the  king  whenever  he  passed  through  their  districts.     These  semi-

'  HEKODOTns,  V.  li.-liii. ;  oa  the  line  and  stages  of  this  road  in  Asia  Minor,  cf.  Eamsat,  Mistorical
Geography  of  Asia  Minor,  pp.  27-35,  and  Kadet,  La  Lydie  et  le  Monde  Grec  au  temps  des  Mermnadef>
p.  23,  et  seq.,  certain  details  of  which  have  been  corrected  by  the  two  authors  themselves  in  several
of  their  later  works.

'  Ctesias  at  the  end  of  his  work  describes  the  routes  leading  from  Ephesus  to  Bactriana  and  India
(Fragm.  29,  in  MijLler-Didot,  Ctesia:  Cnidii  Fragm.,  p.  58).  It  is  probable  that  the  route  described
by  Isidorus  of  Charax  in  his  Stathma  Parthica  (Mullee-Didot,  Geographi  Grseci  Minores,  vol.  i.
pp.  244-254)  already  existed  iu  the  times  of  the  Achfemenids,  and  was  traversed  by  their  postal  couriers.

'  Mention  of  the  Eye  of  the  hing  occurs  in  Herodotus  (I.  cxiv.),  in  ^schylus  (Persians,  980),  and  in
Plutarch  {Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  12),  of  the  Ear  in  Xenophou  (Cyropiedia,  viii.  2,  §  10)  ;  cf.  the  Persian
proverb,  according  to  which  "  The  king  has  many  eyes  and  many  ears."

'  Xenophou  {Cyropsedia,  viii.  6,  §  16)  affirms  that  these  inspections  were  still  held  in  his  day.

'  Cf.  the  story  of  Orcetes  in  Herodotus  (III.  csxviii.),  related  supra,  p.  078.

*  Herodotus,  III.  Isxxix.  ;  Aapuos  p.iv  icajrTjAos,  Ka^$v(rris  Se  Seo-TrcJT'Tjs,  Kvpos  5e  irarrjp  6  ^^i/  'on
€Ka7n']\€U€  Trai'Ta  Ta  irpayfxaTa.

'  Herodotus,  III.  Ixxxix.


THE  FINANCIAL    SYSTEM — TEE  DARIO.  691

compulsory  gifts  were  proportioned  to  the  fortunes  of  the  individual  contribu-
tors ;  they  might  consist  merely  of  an  ox  or  a  sheej),  a  little  milk  or  cheese,
some  dates,  a  handful  of  flour,  or  some  vegetables.^  The  other  provinces,  after
being  subjected  to  a  careful  survey,  were  assessed  partly  in  money,  partly  in
kind,  according  to  their  natural  capacity  or  wealth.  The  smallest  amount  of
revenue  raised  in  any  province  amounted  to  170  talents  of  silver — the  sum,
for  instance,  collected  from  Arachosia  with  its  dependencies  Gedrosia  and
Gandara;^  while  Egypt  yielded  a  revenue  of  700  talents,'  and  the  amount
furnished  by  Babylon,  the  wealthiest  province  of  all,  amounted  to  1000  talents.*
The  total  revenue  of  the  empire  reached  the  enormous  sum  of  £3,311,997,
estimated  by  weight  of  silver,  which  is  equivalent  to  over
£26,000,000  of  modern  English  money,  if  the  greater  value
of  silver  in  antiquity  is  taken  into  consideration.  In  order
to  facilitate  the  collection  of  the  revenue,  Darius  issued  the
gold  and  silver  coins  which  are  named  after  him.  On  the
obverse   side  these   darics  are   stamped    with   a   figure   of

•^  O  DARIC  OF  DARIUS,  SOX

the  sovereign,  armed  with  the  bow  or  javelin.  They  were  °^  hystaspes.>
coined  on  the  scale  of  3000  gold  darics  to  one  talent,  each  daric  weighing
normally  '2788  oz.  troy,  and  being  worth  exactly  20  silver  drachm  se  or  Medic
shekels  ;  so  that  the  relative  value  of  the  two  metals  was  approximately
1  to  131.  The  most  ancient  type  of  daric  was  thick  and  irregular  in  shape,
and  rudely  stamped,  but  of  remarkable  fineness,  the  amount  of  alloy  being
never  more  than  three  per  cent.^  The  use  of  this  coinage  was  nowhere
obligatory,  and  it  only  became  general  in  the  countries  bordering  on  the
Mediterranean,  where  it  met  the  requirements  of  international  trafiic  and  poli-
tical relations,  and  in  the  payment  of  the  army  and  the  navy.  In  the  interior,
the  medium  of  exchange  used  in  wholesale  and  retail  commercial  transactions
continued  to  be  metals  estimated  by  weight,  and  the  kings  of  Persia  them-
selves preferred  to  store  their  revenues  in  the  shape  of  bullion ;  as  the  metal
was  received  at  the  royal  treasury  it  was  melted  and  poured  into  clay
moulds,  and  was  minted  into  money  only  gradually,  according  to  the  whim  or
necessity  of  the  moment.'     Taxes  in  kind  were  levied  even  more  largely  than

'  ..Elian,  Var.  Hist.,  i.  31.

-  IlERODOTrs,  III.  sci.,  where  a  list  is  given  of  tlie  triljes  comprised  in  this  satrapy — Sattagydes
(Thatagush),  Gaudarians,  Dulikcs,  and  Aparytes.

'  HlCRODOTUS,  III.  xci.  '   HEliODOTUS.  III.  xcii.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  specimen  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  of  which  a  cast  has
kindly  been  furnished  me  by  JI.  Babelon.

"  Fr.  Lenobmaxt,  La  Monnaie  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  i.  p.  787;  for  the  whole  subject  of  darics,
cf.  Baeelon,  Les  Perses  Ach€m^iiides,  /es  Satrapes  et  les  Dynastes  tributaires  de  leur  Empire,  pp.  i.-xx.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xcvi.  Arrian  relates  that  Alexander  found  50,000  talents'  weight  of  silver  in
the  treasury  at  Susa  {Anahasis,  iii.  16);  other  hoards  quite  as  rich  were  contained  in  the  palaces  of
Persepolis  and  Pasargadoe  {Anabasis,  iii.  18).


692  THE  IRANIAN  CONQUEST.

in  money,  but  the  exact  form  they  assumed  in  the  different  regions  of
the  empire  has  not  yet  been  ascertained.  The  whole  empire  was  divided
into  districts,  which  were  charged  with  the  victualling  of  the  army  and  the
court,  and  Babylon  alone  bore  a  third  of  the  charges  under  this  head.^  We
learn  elsewhere  that  Egypt  was  bound  to  furnish  corn  for  the  120,000  men  of
the  army  of  occupation,  and  that  the  fisheries  of  the  Fayum  yielded  the  king  a
yearly  revenue  of  240  talents.^  The  Medes  furnished  similarly  100,000  sheep,
4000  mules,  and  3000  horses ;  ^  the  Armenians,  30,000  foals  ;  the  Cilicians,
365  white  horses,  one  for  each  day  in  the  year  ;  *  the  Babylonians,  500  youthful
eunuchs ;  ^  and  any  city  or  town  which  produced  or  manufactured  any  valuable
commodity  was  bound  to  furnish  a  regular  supply  to  the  sovereign.  Thus,
Chalybon  provided  wine ;  Libya  and  the  Oases,  salt ; ''  India,  dogs,  with
whose  support  four  large  villages  in  Babylonia  were  charged ; ''  the  /Eolian
Assos,  cheese ;  and  other  places,  in  like  manner,  wool,  wines,  dyes,  medicines,
and  chemicals.  These  imperial  taxes,  though  they  seem  to  us  somewhat
heavy,  were  not  excessive,  but  taken  by  themselves  they  give  us  no  idea  of
the  burdens  which  each  province  had  to  resign  itself  to  bear.  The  State
provided  no  income  for  the  satraps  ;  their  maintenance  and  that  of  their  suite
were  charged  on  the  province,  and  they  made  ample  exactions  on  the  natives.
The  province  of  Babylon  was  required  to  furnish  its  satrap  daily  with  an  ardeb
of  silver  ;  ^  Egypt,  India,  Media,  and  Syria  each  provided  a  no  less  generous
allowance  for  its  governor,  and  the  poorest  provinces  were  not  less  heavily
burdened.  The  satraps  required  almost  as  much  to  satisfy  their  requirements
as  did  the  king ;  but  for  the  most  part  they  fairly  earned  their  income,  and
saved  more  to  their  subjects  than  they  extorted  from  them.  They  repressed
brigandage,  piracy,  competition  between  the  various  cities,  and  local  wars ;
while  quarrels,  which  formerly  would  have  been  settled  by  an  appeal  to  arms,
were  now  composed  before  their  judgment-seats,  and  in  case  of  need  the  rival
factions  were  forcibly  compelled  to  submit  to  their  decisions.  They  kept  up
the  roads,  and  afforded  complete  security  to  travellers  by  night  and  day ;  they
protected  industries  and  agriculture,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  piecepts  of
their  religious  code,  they  accounted  it  an  honourable  task  to  break  up  waste
land  or  replant  deserted  sites.  Darius  himself  did  not  disdain  to  send  con-
gratulations to  a  satrap  who  had  planted  trees  in  Asia  Minor,  and  laid  out  one

'  Herodotus,  I.  oxcii.

'  Herodotus,  IH.  xci. ;  cf.,  for  the  fisheries  of  the  Fayum,  E[eeodotus,  II.  cxlix. ;   according  to
Diodorus  Siculus,  the  daily  revenue  from  these  was  assigned  to  the  queen  (i.  52).

'  i^TRABO,  XI.  xiii.  §  14,  p.  525.  *  Xenophon,  Anabasis,  iv.  5,  §  34,  et  seq.

^  Herodotus,  HI.  xoii.  °  Stkabo,  XV.  iii.  §§  21,  22,  p.  735.

'  Herodotus,  I.  cxoii.
*  Heeodotus,  I.  cxcii.   This  would  be,  by  weight,  about  £104,000  a  year.


TEE  IMPERIAL   ARMY.  693

of  those  wooded  parks  in  which  the  king  delighted  to  refresh  himself  after  the
i'atigues  of  goTernment,  by  the  exercise  of  walking  or  in  the  pleasures  of  the
chase.'  In  spite  of  its  defects,  the  system  of  government  inaugurated  by
Darius  secured  real  prosperity  to  his  subjects,  and  to  himself  a  power  far
greater  than  that  enjoyed  by  any  of  his  predecessors.  It  rendered  revolts  on
the  part  of  the  provincial  governors  extremely  difficult,  and  enabled  the  court
to  draw  up  a  regular  budget  and  provide  for  its  expenses  without  any  undue
pressure  on  its  subjects ;  in  one  point  only  was  it  defective,  but  that  point
was  a  cardinal  one,  namely,  in  the  military  organisation.  Darius  himself
maintained,  for  his  personal  protection,  a  bodyguard  recruited  from  the  Persians
and  the  Modes.  It  was  divided  into  three  corps,  consisting  respectively  of
2000  cavalry,  2000  infantry  of  noble  birth,  armed  with  lances  whose  shafts  were
ornamented  below  with  apples  of  gold  or  silver — whence  their  name  of  melophori
— and  under  them  the  10,000  "  immortals,"  in  ten  battalions,  the  first  of
which  had  its  lances  ornamented  with  golden  pomegranates.^  This  guard
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  standing  army,  which  could  be  reinforced  by  the  first
and  second  grades  of  Persian  and  Median  feudal  nobility  at  the  first  summons.
Forces  of  varying  strength  garrisoned  the  most  important  fortresses  of  the
empire,  such  as  Sardes,  Memphis,^  Elephantine,  Daphnse,*  Babylon,  and  many
others,  to  hold  the  restless  natives  in  check.  These  were,  indeed,  the  only
regular  troops  on  which  the  king  could  always  rely.  Whenever  a  war  broke
out  which  demanded  no  special  effort,  the  satraps  of  the  provinces  directly
involved  summoned  the  military  contingents  of  the  cities  and  vassal  states
under  their  control,  and  by  concerted  action  endeavoured  to  bring  the  affair  to
a  successful  issue  without  the  necessity  of  an  appeal  to  the  central  authority.
If,  on  the  contrary,  troubles  arose  which  threatened  the  welfare  of  the  whole
empire,  and  the  sovereign  felt  called  upon  to  conduct  the  campaign  iu  person,
lie  would  mobilise  his  guard,  and  summon  the  reserves  from  several  provinces
or  even  from  all  of  them.  Veritable  hordes  of  recruits  then  poured  in,  but  these
masses  of  troops,  differing  from  each  other  in  their  equipment  and  methods  of
fio-hting,  in  disposition  and  in  language,  formed  a  herd  of  men  rather  than  an
army.  They  had  no  cohesion  or  confidence  in  themselves,  and  their  leaders,
unaccustomed  to  command  such  enormous  numbers,  suffered  themselves  to  be  led
rather  than  exercise  authority  as  guides.  Any  good  qualities  the  troops  may
have  possessed  were  neutralised  by  lack  of  unity  in  their  methods  of  action,

'  Cf.  the  letter  of  Darius  to  tbe  satrap  Gadatas,  congratulating  him  on  having  planted  some
trees;  it  is  published  In  th(3  Bulletin  de  Correspondance  Hellenique,  1S89,  p.  529,  et  seq.

«  Hekacliues  of  Com^,  Fragm.  1,  iu  MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Fragin.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  96.
Xenophon  QCyropsedia,  vii.  5,  §  S8)  attributes  tho  organisation  of  this  force  to  Cyrus.

'  Herodotus,  III.  xci.,  where  it  is  stated  that  the  army  of  Memphis  included  some  Persian  and
auxiliary  troops.

*  Herodotus,  II.  xxx.;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  129,  130.


694  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

and  their  actual  faults  exaggerated  this  defect,  so  that,  in  spite  of  their  splendid
powers  of  endurance  and  their  courage  under  every  ordeal,  they  ran  the  risk  of
finding  themselves  in  a  state  of  hopeless  inferiority  when  called  upon  to  meet
armies  very  much  smaller,  but  composed  of  homogeneous  elements,  all  animated
with  the  same  spirit  and  drilled  in  the  same  school.

By  continual  conquests,  the  Persians  were  now  reduced  to  only  two  outlets
for  their  energies,  in  two  opposite  directions — in  the  east  towards  India,  in  the
west  towards  Greece.     Everywhere  else  their  advance  was  arrested  by  the  sea
or  other  obstacles  almost  as  impassable  to  their  heavily  armed  battalions  :  to
the  north  the  empire  was  bounded  by  the  Black  Sea,  the  Caucasus,  the  Caspian
Sea,  and  the  Siberian  steppes  ;  to  the  south,  by  the  Indian  Ocean,  the  sandy
table-land  of  Arabia,  and  the  African  deserts.    At  one  moment,  about  512  B.C.,
it  is  possible  that  they  pushed  forward  towards  the  east.^      From  the  Iranian
plateau  they  beheld  from  afar  the  immense  plain  of  the  Hapta  Hindu  (or  the
Punjab).     Darius  invaded  this  territory,  and  made  himself  master  of  extensive
districts  which  he  formed  into  a  new  satrapy,  that  of  India,  but  subsequently,
renouncing  all  idea  of  pushing  eastward  as  far  as  the  Ganges,  he  turned  his
steps  towards  the  south-east.    A  fleet,  constructed  at  Peukela  and  placed  under
the  command  of  a  Greek  admiral,  Scylax  of  Caryanda,  descended  the  Indus  by
order  of  the  king ; '  subjugating  the  tribes  who  dwelt  along  the  banks  as  he
advanced,  Scylax  at  length  reached  the  ocean,  on  which  he  ventured  forth,
undismayed  by  the  tides,  and  proceeded  in  a  westerly  direction,  exploring,  in
less  than  thirty  months,  the  shores  of  Gedrosia  and  Arabia.     Once  on  the
threshold    of    India,    the    Persians    saw    open   before   them   a   brilliant  and
lucrative  career :    the  circumstances  which  prevented    them  from  following
up  this  preliminary  success  are  unknown — perhaps  the  first  developments  of
nascent  Buddhism  deterred  them — but  certain  it  is  that  they  arrested  their
steps  when  they  had  touched  merely  the  outskirts  of  the  basin  of  the  Indus,  and
retreated  at  once  towards  the  west.    The  conquest  of  Lydia,  and  subsequently
of  the  Greek  cities  and  islands  along  the  coast  of  the  iEgean,  had  doubtless
enriched  the  empire  by  the  acquisition  of  active  subject  populations,  whose
extraordinary  aptitude  in  the  arts  of  peace  as  well  as  of   war  might  offer
incalculable  resources  to  a  sovereign  who  should  know  how  to  render  them
tractable  and  rule  them  wisely.     Not  only  did  they  possess  the  elements  of  a

•  India  Is  not  referred  to  in  tlie  Behistun  Inscription,  but  is  mentioned  in  one  of  the  Inscriptions
of  Persepolis  (E,  11.  17,  18  ;  cf.  Weisseaoh  and  Bang,  Die  Altpersischen  Keilins.,  pp.  31,  35),  and  in
that  of  Nakhsh-i-Rustem  (1.  25  ;  cf  Id.,  ibid.,  pp.  3U,  37).  The  campaign  in  which  it  was  subjugated
must  be  placed  about  512  B.C.

2  HERODOTrs,  IV.  xliv.  Scylax  published  an  account  of  his  voyage  which  was  still  extant  in  the
time  of  Aristotle  (^Polilics,  viii.  13,  §  1).  Hugo  Berger  questions  the  authenticity  of  the  circum-
navigation of  Arabia  {Gesch.  der  Wissenscha/tlichen  Erdkunde  der  Griechen,  vol.  i.  pp.  47-19), as  that  of
the  circumnavigation  of  Africa  under  Necho  (cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  sujjra,  p.  533,  note  1  \


uii'v    Voldicr^    or    ate    ^Dodii   iiuard    or    ^hxn'uj


[TnOil    TUE   LOUVUE)
rniMED   DY  FOUTIER   SIAROTTE,  IN   T-VriS,    —  FRANCE.


CONQUEST   OF  INDIA   AND   RELATIONS    WITH  GREECE.  695

navy  as  enterprising  and  efficacious  as  that  of  the  Phoenicians,  but  the  perfection
of  their  equipment  and  their  discipline  on  laud  rendered  them  always  superior
to  any  Asiatic  army,in  whatever  circumstances,  unless  they  were  crushed  by  over-
whelming numbers.     Inquisitive,  bold,  and  restless,  greedy  of  gain,  and  inured
to  the  fatigues  and  dangers  of  travel,  the  Greeks  were  to  be  encountered  every-
where— in  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,  Syria,  Babylon,  and  even  Persia  itself;  and  it
was  a  Greek,  we  must  remember,  whom  the  great  king  commissioned  to  navigate
the  course  of  the  Indus  and  the  waters  of  the  Indian  Ocean.^     At  the  same
time,  the  very  ardour  of  their  temperament,  and  their  consequent  pride,  their
impatience  of  all  regular  control,  their  habitual  proneness  to  civic  strife,  and
to  sanguinary  quarrels  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring  cities,  rendered
them  the  most  dangerous  subjects  imaginable  to  govern,  and  their  loyalty  very
uncertain.     Moreover,  their  admission  as  vassals  of  the  Persian  empire  had  not
altered  their  relations  with  European  Greece,  and  commercial  transactions
between  the  opposite  shores  of  the  ^gean,  inter-marriages,  the  travels  of
voyagers,  movements  of  mercenaries,  and  political  combinations,  went  on  as
freely  and  frequently  under  the  satraps  of  Sardes  as  under  the  Mermnadce.
It  was  to  Corinth,  Sparta,  and  Athens  tliat  the  families  banished  by  Cyrus
after  his  conquest  fled  for  refuge,  and  every  time  a  change  of  party  raised  a
new  tyrant  to  power  in  one  of  the  ^olian,  Ionian,  or  Doric  communities,  the
adherents  of  the  deposed  ruler  rushed  in  similar  manner  to  seek  shelter  among
their  friends  across  the  sea,  sure  to  repay  their  hospitality  should  occasion  ever
require  it.    Plots  and  counterplots  were  formed  betHeen  the  two  shores,  without
any  one  paying  much  heed  to  the  imperial  authority  of  Persia,  and  the  constant
support  which  the  subject  Greeks  found  among  their  free  brethren  was  bound
before  long  to  rouse  the  anger  of  the  court  at  Susa.     When  Polycrates,  fore-
seeing the  fall  of  Amasis,  placed  himself  under  the  suzerainty  of  Cambyses,
the  Corinthians  and  Spartans  came  to  besiege  him  in  Saraos  without  manifest-
ing any  respect  for  the  great  king.^     They  failed  in  this  particular  enterprise,*
but  later  on,  after  Orcetes  had  been  seized  and  put  to  death,  it  was  to  the
Spartans  that  the  successor  of  Polycrates,  Mseandrios,  applied  for  help  to  assert
his  claim  to  the  possession  of  the  tyranny  against  Syloson,  brother  of  Polycrates
and  a  personal  friend  of  Darius.^     This  constant  intervention  of  the  foreigner

'  Cf.  what  is  said  of  the  expedition  of  Scylax,  supra,  p.  601.

^  Herodotus,  III.  xxxis.,  xliv.,  Ivi.,  with  a  mixture  of  romantic  adventuree.

'  Herodotus,  III.  cxx.,  cxxv. ;  cf.  Stesimeuotus,  Fragm.  12,  in  Mullei!-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.
Grsec,  vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  57.  Tlie  date  of  the  death  of  Polycrates  must  be  pluced  between  that  of  the
conquest  of  Egypt  and  that  of  the  revolt  of  Gaumata,  either  in  521  or  523  B.C.

*  Heuodotus,  III.  cxxxix.-cxlix.,  and  the  simple  fact,  without  the  popular  embellishments
related  by  Herodotus  in  Thucvdides,  I.  xiii.  The  reinstatement  of  f^ylcson  may  be  placed  in
516  B.C.,  about  tlie  time  when  Darius  was  completing  the  reorganisation  of  the  empire  and  preparing
to  attacli  Greece.


696  TEE  IRANIAN   CONQUEST.

was  in  evident  contradiction  to  the  spirit  which  had  inspired  the  reorganisation
of  the  empire.  Just  when  efforts  were  being  made  to  strengthen  the  imperial
power  and  ensure  more  effective  obedience  from  tiie  provincials  by  the  institu-
tion of  satrapies,  it  was  impossible  to  put  up  with  acts  of  unwarrantable  inter-
ference, which  would  endanger  the  prestige  of  the  sovereign  and  the  authority
of  his  officers.  Conquest  presented  the  one  and  only  natural  means  of  escape
from  the  difficulties  of  the  present  situation  and  of  preventing  their  recurrence ;
when  sati'aps  should  rule  over  the  European  as  well  as  over  the  Asiatic  coasts
of  the  .^gean,  all  these  turbulent  Greeks  would  be  forced  to  live  at  peace  with
one  another  and  in  awe  of  the  sovereign,  as  far  as  their  fickle  nature  would
allow.  It  was  not  then,  as  is  still  asserted,  the  mere  caprice  of  a  despot  which
brought  upon  the  Greek  world  the  scourge  of  the  Persian  wars,  but  the  impe-
rious necessity  of  security,  which  obliges  well-organised  empires  to  subjugate
in  turn  all  the  tribes  and  cities  which  cause  constant  trouble  on  its  frontiers.
Darius,  who  was  already  ruler  of  a  good  third  of  the  Hellenic  world,  from
Trebizond  to  Bairca,  saw  no  other  means  of  keeping  what  he  already  possessed,
and  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  incessant  fomentation  of  rebellion  in  his  own
territories,  than  to  conquer  the  mother-country  as  he  had  conquered  the
colonies,  and  to  reduce  to  subjection  the  whole  of  European  Hellas.


THE     LAST     DAYS     OF     THE     OLD
EASTEEN    WOBLD.


THE    .MEIJIAX    WAKS — THE    LAST   NATIVE    DYNASTIES    OF   EUYI'T — THE    EASTERN    WORLD    (IN    THE
EVE    OF   THE    MACEDONIAN   CONQUEST.

The  Persians  hi  512  B.C. — European  Crreece  and  the  dangers  which  its  indepetulence
presented  to  the  safety  of  the  empire — The  preliminaries  of  the  Median  wars :  the  iScijtJiian
expedition,  the  conquest  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia — T)ie  Ionic  revolt,  the  intervention  of
Athens  ami  the  takimj  of  Sardes ;  the  battle  of  Lade — Mardoniws  in  Thrace  and  in
Macedonia.

T)ie  Median  icars—The  expedition  of  Datis  and  Artaphernes:  the  taking  of  Eretriu,
the  battle  of  Marathon  (490) — Tlie  recolt  of  Egypt  under  Khabbisha ;  the  death  of  Darius
and  tlie  accession  of  Xerxes  I. — The  revolt  of  Babylon  under  Shamasherib — The  invasion  of
Greece:  Artemision,  Thermopylce,  the  taking  of  Athens,  Salamis — Platcea  and  the  final
retreat  of  the  Persians :  Mycale — The  war  carried  on  by  the  Athenians  and  the  league  of
Delos:  huxros,  the  campaigns  in  Cyprus  and  Egypt,  the  peace  of  Callias — Tlie  death
of  Xerxes.

Artaxerxes  I.  (405-424) ;  the  recolt  of  Megabyzos — The  palaces  of  Pasargadce,  Persepolis,
and  Susa;  Persian  architecture  and  sctdpturc  ;  court  life,  the  king  and  his  harem — Revolutions
in  the  palace — Xerxes  II.,  Sekudianos,  Darius  II. — Intervention  in  Greek  affairs  and  the
convention  of  Miletus;  the  end  of  the  peace  of  Callias — Artaxerxes  II.  (404-359)  and  Cyrus
the  Younger  :  the  battle  of  Kunaxa  and  the  retreat  of  the  ten  thousand  (401).


(      G98      )

TrmMes  in  Asia  Minor,  Syria,  ami  Etjypf — Amijrt(eiis  and  the  XXVIII""  Suite  dynasty
— The  XXIX"'  Sebennytic  dynasty — Nephorites  I.,  Hakoris,  Psammuiis,  their  alliances  icith
Evagoras  and  tvilh  the  states  of  Continental  Greece — The  XXX"'  Mendesian  dynasty  —
Nectanebo  I.,  Tachus  and  the  invasion  of  Syria,  the  revolt  of  Nectaneho  II. — Tlie  ihatlt
of  Artaxerxes  II. — Tlie  accession  of  Orhiis  (359  B.C.),  his  unfm-tunate  wars  in  the  Delta,
the  conquest  of  Egypt  (342)  and  the  reconstitution  of  the  empire.

The  Eastern  world:  Elam,  Urarlii,  tlie  Syrian  kingdoms,  the  ancient  Semitic  states
decayed  and  decaying — Babylon  in  its  decline — The  Jewish  state  and  its  miseries — Nehemiah,
Ezra — Egypt  in  the  eyes  of  the  Cheeks :  Sais,  the  Delta,  the  inhabitants  of  the  marshes —
Memphis,  its  monuments,  its  population — Travels  in  Upper  Egypt :  the  Faynm.  Khcmmis,
Tliehes,  Elephantine — Tlie  apparent  vigour  and  actiiid  feebltness  of  Egypt.

Persia  and  its  j'oiverlessness  to  resist  attack :  the  rise  of  Macedonia,  Philippi — Arses  (337)
and  Darius  Codomannos  (336) — Alexander  the  Great — Tlie  invasion  of  Asia — The  battle  of
Crranicus  and  the  conquest  of  the  Asianic  peninsula — Issus,  the  siege  of  Tyre  and  of  Gaza,  the
conquest  of  Egypt,  the  foundation  of  Alexandria — Arbela  :  the  conquest  of  Babylon,  Susa,  and
Ecbatana — The  death  of  Darius  and  the  last  dags  of  the  old  Eastern  world.


pgiMffjiJ^p!^


A    LION-HUNT,   PERSIANS   AND   MACEDONIANS.'


CHAPTEE    VII.


THE     LAST     DAYS     OF     THE     OLD     EASTERN     WORLD.


The  Median  wars — The  last  native  dynasties  of  Egypt — The  Eastern  world  on  the  eve  of

the  Macedonian  conquest.

DAEIUS   ap23ears   to   have  formed   this   project   of  conquest
immediately   after    his    first   victories,   when    his    initial
attempts  to  institute   satrapies   had   taught   him    not    only  the
condition  and  needs  of  Asia  Minor,   but  of  the   various  other
regions  subject  to  his  laws.     Two  roads  lay  open  before  him  by
which  to  achieve  his  end.     One  by  sea,  from  the  Ionian  to
the  Attic  coast,  straight  through  the  Cyclades ;    the  other
by  land,  with   the  exception   of  the  narrow  straits   of  the
Bosphorus  or  of  the  Hellespont,  through  Thrace  and  Mace-
donia.    The  first  was  by  far  the  shorter,  but  the  more  perilous.
It  required  the  possession  of  an  immense  fleet,  for  such  a  bold
undertaking  could  not  be  carried  out  without  a  considerable  force  of  men,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  one  of  the  sarcophagi  of  Sidon,  now  in  the  Museum  of  St.  Irene ;  cf.
Ha5II)T-Bey  .ind  Th.  Keinacii,  La  Nicropole  de  Sidon,  pis.  xxxi,,  xxxiv.  The  initial  letter,  which  is
by  Faucher-Gudin,  represents  the  sitting  cynocephalus  of  Nectauebo  I.,  now  in  the  Egyptian  Museum
at  the  Vatican.


700       TEE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

and  the  largest  vessels  then  built  could  transport  only  a  small  number  of
troops  and  horses  in  addition  to  their  ordinary  crew;  it  also  incurred  the
risk  of  a  naval  engagement — an  event  always  to  be  dreaded  with  vessels
heavily  laden  with  men  and  the  material  of  war,  when  it  was  a  question  of
encountering  such  experienced  seamen  as  the  Greeks  of  that  period.  Prudence,
therefore,  prompted  its  rejection,  however  great  an  economy  of  time  and
fatigue  it  promised,  unless  it  were  possible  to  avoid  an  encounter  with  the
enemy's  fleet,  and  on  landing  to  be  sure  of  meeting  with  partisans  willing
to  throw  open  the  gates  of  their  towns,  or  at  least  facilitate  the  work  of
disembarkation.  Attica  was  the  point  aimed  at,  for  it  was  the  key  of  the
position,  and  the  possession  of  it  would  have  permitted  Darius  to  adojit  the
sea-route  without  undue  risk  ;  but  Athens  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Pisistratidse,
and  Hippias,  although  he  was  the  vassal  of  Persia  through  holding  the  fief  of
Sigaeum  in  the  Troad,  was  not  at  all  anxious  to  see  Darius  establish  himself
in  the  heart  of  Hellas.  As  long  as  Athens  was  hostile,  the  safest  route,  and,
indeed,  the  only  one  practicable  for  the  entire  Persian  army,  was  that  bordering
the  north  of  the  JEgeau,  debouching  at  the  defiles  of  Thessaly.  It  was  this
road  that  the  authorities  at  Susa  finally  selected,  although  its  choice  entailed
a  host  of  preliminary  precautions  which  demanded  time,  men,  and  money ;
there  were  fresh  Greek  colonies  to  be  subdued,  and  beyond  them  the  warlike
people  of  Thrace,  while  behind  these  lay  the  Scythian  tribes.  Even  though
a  century  had  elapsed  since  the  death  of  Madyes,  the  remembrance  of  the
Scythians  continued  to  alarm  the  whole  of  Asia ;  tales  were  still  told  among
the  Medes,  in  Lydia,  in  the  sanctuary  of  Ascalon,  on  the  frontier  of  Egypt,
and  in  the  sacred  cities  of  Pteria,^  of  their  wild  raids  over  mountain  and
valley,  their  path  marked  by  cities  given  to  the  flames  or  razed  to  the
ground,  populations  carried  away  as  slaves,  violated  temples,  and  always,
as  a  sequel  to  these  chapters  of  horrors,  the  vengeance  which  the  offended
gods  wreaked  upon  them  for  these  acts  of  sacrilege.^  More  recently
the  accounts  given  by  the  Greek  colonists  and  the  itinerant  merchants  of
the  northern  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  without  detracting  from  the  report
of  their  courage  and  ferocity,  had  added  to  it  that  of  their  wealth ;  ^  gold-
mines were  said  to  be  scattered  over  the  regions  occupied  by  them,  guarded
by  griffins,  and  worked  for  the  good  of  the  inhabitants  by  harmless  ants  as
large  as  foxes.     Besides  this,  Darius  was  constantly  coming  into  conflict  with

'  Cf.  supra,  pp.  480,  481.

'  The  records  of  the  Scythian  invasion  have  been  preserved  by  Herodotus,  I.  xv.,  ciii.-cvi.

'  Herodotus,  IV.  xiii.,  xxvii.,  III.  cxvi. ;  Ctesias,  Fragm.  57,  §  12,  70,  in  MiJLLEn-DiDOT,
Ctesise  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  82,  95-97;  Strabo,  XI.  viii.  §  4,  p.  511.  Most  of  these  somi-fabulous
traditions  originated  in  Arist^us  of  Proconnesus  and  his  Arimaspia  (Hugo  Berger,  Geschichte  der
wissenschafllichen  Erdlmnde  der  Griechen,  vol.  i.  pp.  22,  23).


THE   EXPEDITION  INTO   SC7TEIA.  701

one  or  other  of  tbeir  hordes  on  his  northern  frontiers — on  the  laxartes,  beyond
Bactriana  and  Sogdiana,  in  the  Caucasus,  and  latterly  in  Europe,  on  the  Ister
and  the  borders  of  Thrace.  It  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  wondered  at  that,  before
attacking  Greece,  he  desired  to  provide  against  all  risks  by  teaching  the
Scythians  such  a  lesson  as  would  prevent  them  from  bearing  down  upon
his  right  flank  during  his  march,  or  upon  his  rear  while  engaged  in  a
crucial  struggle  in  the  Hellenic  peninsula.  On  the  other  hand,  the  geo-
graphical information  possessed  by  the  Persians  with  regard  to  the  Danubiau
regions  was  of  so  vague  a  character,  that  Darius  must  have  believed  the
Scythians  to  have  been  nearer  to  his  line  of  operations,  and  their  country  less
desolate  than  was  really  the  case.^  A  flotilla,  commanded  by  Ariaramues,
satrap  of  Cappadocia,  ventured  across  the  Black  Sea  in  515,^  landed  a  few
thousand  men  upon  the  opposite  shore,  and  brought  back  prisoners  who  furnished
those  in  command  with  the  information  they  required.'^  Darius,  having  learned
what  he  could  from  these  poor  wretches,  crossed  the  Bosphorus  in  514,  with
a  body  of  troops  which  tradition  computed  at  800,000,  conquered  the  eastern
coast  of  Thrace,  and  won  his  way  in  a  series  of  conflicts  as  far  as  the  Ister.
The  Ionian  sailors  built  for  him  a  bridge  of  boats,  which  he  entrusted  to  their
care,  and  he  then  started  forward  into  the  steppes  in  search  of  the  enemy.
The  Scythians  refused  a  pitched  battle,  but  they  burnt  the  pastures  before
him  on  every  side,  filled  up  the  wells,  carried  off  the  cattle,  and  then  slowly
retreated  into  the  interior,  leaving  Darius  to  face  the  vast  extent  of  the
steppes  and  the  terrors  of  famine.  Later  tradition  stated  that  he  wandered
for  two  months  in  these  solitudes  between  the  Ister  and  the  Tanais;  he  had
constructed  on  the  banks  of  this  latter  river  a  series  of  earthworks,  the  remains
of  which  were  shown  in  the  time  of  Herodotus,  and  had  at  length  returned
to  his  point  of  departure  with  merely  the  loss  of  a  few  sick  men.  The
barbarians  stole  a  march  upon   him,  and  advised  the  Greeks  to  destroy  the

'  The  motives  imputed  to  Darius  by  the  aucieuts  for  making  this  expetiition  are  the  desire  of
avenging  the  disasters  of  the  Scythian  invasion  (Herodotus,  IV.  i.,  YII.  xx.),  or  of  performing  an
exploit  which  should  render  him  as  famous  as  his  predecessors  in  the  eyes  of  posterity  (Diodokus
SicuLus,  X.  5,  certainly  following  Ephorus).

-  The  reconnaissance  of  Ariaramnes  is  intimately  connected  with  the  expedition  itself  in  Ctesias
{Fragm.  29,  §  16,  in  JIlller-Didot,  Ctesiie  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  49),  and  could  have  preceded  it  by
a  few  mouths  only.  If  we  take  for  the  date  of  tlie  latter  the  year  514-513,  the  date  given  in  the
Table  of  the  Capitol  (Corpus  Inscriptionum  Grmcarum,  No.  6355  d),  that  of  the  former  cannot  be
earlier  than  515.  Ariaramnes  was  not  satrap  of  Cappadocia,  for  Cappadocia  belonged  then  to  the
satrapy  of  Daskyliou  (Krumbholz,  De  Asise  Minons  Satrapis.  p.  GO).

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  IC,  in  SIuller-Didot,  Ctesia:  Cnidii  Fragwenta,  p.  49.  The  supplementary
paragraphs  of  the  Inscription  of  Behistun  speak  of  an  expedition  of  Darius  against  the  Sakse  (col.  v.
11.  21-31 ;  cf.  Weissbach  and  Bano,  Die  Altpersischen  Keilinschn/teu,  pp.  30,  31),  which  is  supposed  to
have  had  as  its  objective  either  the  sea  of  Aral  or  the  Tigris.  Would  it  uot  be  possible  to  suppose
that  the  sea  mentioned  is  the  Pontus  Euxiuus,  and  to  take  the  mutilated  text  of  Behistun  to  be  a
description  either  of  the  campaign  beyond  the  Danube,  or  rather  of  the  preliminary  reconnaissance  of
Ariaramnes  a  year  before  the  expedition  itself?


702  TEE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

bridge,  retire  within  their  cities,  and  abandon  the  Persians  to  their  fate.
The  tyrant  of  the  Chersonnesus,  Miltiades  the  Athenian,  was  inclined  to  follow
their  advice ;  but  Histirens,  the  governor  of  Miletus,  opposed  it,  and
eventually  carried  bis  point.  Darius  reached  the  southern  bank  without
difficulty,  and  returned  to  Asia.^  The  Greek  towns  of  Thrace  thought  them-
selves rid  of  him,  and  rose  in  revolt ;  but  he  left  80,000  men  in  Europe  who,
at  first  under  Megabyzos,  and  then  under  Otanes,  reduced  them  to  subjection
one  after  another,  and  even  obliged  Amyntas  I.,  the  King  of  Macedonia,  to
become  a  tributary  of  the  empire.^  The  expedition  had  not  only  failed  to
secure  the  submission  of  the  Scythians,  but  apparently  provoked  reprisals
on  their  part,  and  several  of  their  bands  penetrated  ere  long  into  the
Chersonnesus.^  It  nevertheless  was  not  without  solid  result,  for  it  showed
that  Darius,  even  if  he  could  not  succeed  in  subjugating  the  savage  Danubian
tribes,  had  but  little  to  fear  from  them ;  it  also  secured  for  him  a  fresh
jsrovince,  that  of  Thrace,  and,  by  the  possession  of  Macedonia,  brought  his
frontier  into  contact  with  Northern  Greece.  Tiie  overland  route,  in  any  case
the  more  satisfactory  of  the  two,  was  now  in  the  hands  of  the  invader.*

Eevolutions  at  Athens  prevented  him  from  setting  out  on  his  expedition
as  soon  as  he  had  anticipated.  Hippias  had  been  overthrown  in  510,  and
having  taken  refuge  at  Sigaeuni,  was  seeking  on  all  sides  for  some  one  to
avenge  him  against  his  fellow-citizens.  The  satrap  of  Sardes,  Artaphernes,
declined  at  first  to  listen  to  him,  for  he  hoped  that  the  Athenians  themselves
would  appeal  to  him,  without  his  being  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  their
former  tyrant.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  sent  him  an  embassy,  and  begged
his  help  against  the  Spartans.  He  promised  it  on  condition  that  they  would
yield  the  traditional  homage  of  earth  and  water,  and  their  delegates  com-
plied with  his  demand,  though  on  their  return  to  Athens  they  were  disowned

'  Hekodotus,  IV.  Ixsxiii.-cxliii. :  cf.  Ctesias,  Fragm.  20,  §  18,  in  Millek-Didot,  Ctesiie  Ciiidii
Fragmenta,  p.  49,  who  limits  the  campaign  beyond  the  Danube  to  a  fifteen  days'  march  ;  and
Strabo,  VII.,  iii.  §§  14,  15,  p.  305,  who  places  the  crossing  of  the  Danube  near  the  mouth  of  that
liver,  at  the  island  of  Peuke,  and  makes  the  expedition  stop  at  the  Dniester.  Keither  the
line  of  direction  of  the  Persian  advance  nor  their  farthest  point  reached  is  known.  The  eight  forts
which  they  were  said  to  have  built,  the  ruins  of  which  were  shown  on  the  banks  of  the  Oaros  as  lute
as  tlie  time  of  Herodotus  (IV.  cxxiv.),  were  probably  tumuli  similar  to  those  now  met  with  on  the
Russian  steppes,  the  origin  of  which  is  ascribed  by  the  people  to  persons  celebrated  in  their  history  or
traditions  (Kondakoff  and  Reinach,  Antiquilfs  de  la  Russie  Me'ridionale,  pp.  157,  15S).

*  Hekodotis,  IV.  cxlii.-cxliv.,  V.  i.,  ii.,  xi.-xxvi.,  VII.  cv.-cvii.,  with  every  sort  of  romantic
detail  borrowed  from  local,  usually  Macedonian,  tradition.

'  Heeodotxjs,  VI.  xl.,  where  the  event  is  said  to  have  taken  place  in  the  third  year  of  Miltiades'
government  of  the  Chersonnesus.

'  I  had  at  first  treated  the  whole  subject  of  tlie  Median  wars  at  some  lengtli,  and  also  given  a
general  outline  of  the  relations  of  that  empire  with  the  Greeks,  but  the  necessity  of  keeping  within
the  prescribed  limits  prevents  me  from  giving  more  than  a  brief  summary  of  events,  and  compels  me
to  refer  the  reader  to  the  latest  histories  of  Greece.  I  have  confined  myself  to  the  narration  of
facts  which  specially  concern  the  ancient  Eastern  states  of  Egypt  and  Babylon,  almost  omitting  the
history — at  least  in  the  present  edition — even  of  the  Phceniciaiis  and  the  Jews.


THE  REVOLT   OF  1 0X^1  A.  706

by  the  citizens  (508). ^  Artaphernes,  disappointed  in  this  direction,  now
entered  into  communications  with  Hippias,  and  such  close  relations  soon  existed
between  the  two  that  the  Athenians  showed  signs  of  uneasiness.  Two  years
later  they  again  despatched  fresh  deputies  to  Sardes  to  beg  the  satrap  not
to  espouse  the  cause  of  their  former  ruler.  For  a  reply  the  satrap  summoned
them  to  recall  the  exiles,  and,  on  their  refusing  (506),^  their  city  became
thenceforward  the  ostensible  objective  of  the  Persian  army  and  fleet.  The
partisans  of  Hippias  within  the  town  were  both  numerous  and  active ;  it  was
expected  that  they  would  rise  and  hand  over  the  city  as  soon  as  their  chief
should  land  on  a  point  of  territory  with  a  force  sufficient  to  intimidate  the
opposing  faction.  Athens  in  the  hands  of  Hippias,  would  mean  Athens  in
the  hands  of  the  Persians,  and  Greece  accessible  to  the  Persian  hordes  at  all
times  by  the  shortest  route.  Darius  therefore  prepared  to  make  tlie  attempt,
and  in  order  to  guard  against  any  mishap,  he  caused  all  the  countries  that  he
was  about  to  attack  to  be  explored  beforehand.  Spies  attached  to  his  service
were  sent  to  scour  the  coasts  of  the  Peloponnesus  and  take  note  of  all  its
features,  the  state  of  its  ports,  the  position  of  the  islands  and  the  fortresses ;
and  they  penetrated  as  far  as  Italy,  if  we  may  believe  the  story  subsequently
told  to  Herodotus.^  While  he  thus  studied  the  territory  from  a  distance,  he
did  not  neglect  precautions  nearer  to  hand,  but  ordered  the  Milesians  to  occupy
in  his  name  the  principal  stations  of  the  ..^gean  between  Ionia  and  Attica.
Histireus,  whose  loyalty  had  stood  Darius  in  such  good  stead  at  the  bridge
over  the  Danube,  did  not,  however,  appear  to  him  equal  to  so  delicate  a  task :
the  king  summoned  him  to  Susa  on  some  slight  pretext,  loaded  him  with
honours,  and  replaced  him  by  his  nephew  Aristagoras.  Aristagoras  at  once
attempted  to  justify  the  confidence  placed  in  him  by  taking  possession  of
Naxos;  but  the  surprise  that  he  had  prepared  ended  in  failure,  discontent
crept  in  among  his  men,  and  after  a  fruitless  siege  of  four  months  he  was
obliged  to  withdraw  (499).^  His  failure  changed  the  tide  of  affairs.  He  was
afraid  that  the  Persians  would  regard  it  as  a  crime,  and  this  fear  prompted
him  to  risk  everything  to  save  his  fortune  and  his  life.  He  retired  from  his
office  as  tyrant,  exhorted  the  Milesians,  who  were  henceforth  free  to  do  so,  to
make  war  on  the  barbarians,  and  seduced  from  their  allegiance  the  crews  of
the  vessels  just  returned  from  Naxos,  and  still  lying  in  the  mouths  of  the

'  Herodotos,  v.  Ixxiii.

'  Herodotcs,  V.  xcvi. ;  the  date  is  fixed  at  the  time  wheu  the  Athenians  first  ostracised  the
principal  partisans  of  the  Pisistratids,  and  amongst  others  Hipparchus,  sou  of  Charmes,  i.e.  in  507-6.

'  Herodotus,  III.  cxxix.-cxxxviii.,  where  it  is  said  that  Darius  sent  spies  with  the  physician
Deraocedes  of  Crotona  shortly  before  the  Scythian  expedition  (HI.  cxxxiii.).

*  Hehodotus,  V.  xxx.-xxxiv.,  where  an  unlilsely  act  of  treachery  is  attributed  to  Megabates  the
Persian,  who  was  commanding  the  Iranian  contingent  attached  to  the  Ionian  troops.


704       TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE    OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.

Maeander ;  the  tyrants  who  commanded  them  were  seized,  some  exiled,  and
some  put  to  death.  The  ^olians  soon  made  common  cause  with  their
neighbours  the  lonians,  and  by  the  last  days  of  autumn  the  whole  of  the
JEgean  littoral  was  under  arms  (499).^  From  the  outset  Aristagoras  realised
that  they  would  be  promptly  overcome  if  Asiatic  Hellas  were  not  supported
by  Hellas  in  Europe.  While  the  Lydian  satrap  was  demanding  reinforcements
from  his  sovereign,  Aristagoras  therefore  repaired  to  the  Peloponnesus  as  a
suppliant  for  help.  Sparta,  embroiled  in  one  of  her  periodical  quarrels  with
Argos,  gave  him  an  insolent  refusal ;  ^  even  Athens,  where  the  revolution  had
for  the  moment  relieved  her  from  the  fear  of  the  Pisistratidae  and  the  terrors
of  a  barbarian  invasion,  granted  him  merely  twenty  triremes — enough  to  draw
down  reprisals  on  her  immediately  after  their  defeat,  without  sensibly  augmenting
the  rebels'  chances  of  success ;  to  the  Athenian  contingent  Eretria  added  five
vessels,  and  this  comprised  his  whole  force.^  The  leaders  of  the  movement  did
not  hesitate  to  assume  the  offensive  with  these  slender  resources.  As  early  as
the  spring  of  498,  before  Artaphernes  had  received  reinforcements,  they  marched
suddenly  on  Sardes.  They  burnt  the  lower  town,  but,  as  on  many  previous
occasions,  the  citadel  held  out ;  *  after  having  encamped  for  several  days  at  the
foot  of  its  rock,  they  returned  to  Ephesus  laden  with  the  spoil.^  This  indeed
was  a  check  to  their  hostilities,  and  such  an  abortive  attempt  was  calculated
to  convince  them  of  their  powerlessness  against  the  foreign  rule.  None  the
less,  however,  when  it  was  generally  known  that  they  had  burnt  the  capital  of
Asia  Minor,  and  had  with  impunity  made  the  representative  of  the  great  king
feel  in  his  palace  the  smoke  of  the  conflagration,  the  impression  was  such
as  actual  victory  could  have  produced.  The  cities  which  had  hitherto
hesitated  to  join  them,  now  espoused  their  cause — the  ports  of  the  Troad  and
the  Hellespont,  Lycia,  the  Carians,  and  Cyprus — and  their  triumph  would
possibly  have  been  secured  had  Greece  beyond  the  ^geau  followed  the
general  movement  and  joined  the  coalition.      Spaita,  however,  persisted   in

'  Herodotus,  Y.  xxxv.-xxxviii.  Tbe  Dorian  cities  took  no  part  in  tlie  revolt— at  least  Herodotus
never  mentions  them  among  the  confederates.  The  three  Ionian  cities  of  Ephesus,  Kolophon,  and
Lebedos  also  seem  to  have  remained  aloof,  and  we  know  that  the  Ephesians  were  not  present  at  the
battle  of  Lade  (Herodotus,  VI.  xvi.).

''  Herodotus,  V.  xxxviii.,  xlix.-liv.,  from  a  Laconian  tradition.  Aristagoras  had  with  him  a  map
of  the  world  engraved  on  a  bronze  plate  (Herodotus,  V.  xlix.),  which  was  probably  a  copy  of  the
chart  drawn  up  by  Hecatseus  of  Miletus.

=  Herodotus,  V.  xcvii.,  xcix.

'  On  the  revolt  of  Paktyas,  cf.  supra,  p.  623.

=  Herodotus,  V.  xcix.-ci.,  where  it  is  said  that  the  lonians  on  their  return  suffered  a  serious
reverse  near  Ephesus.  The  author  seems  to  have  adopted  some  Lydian  or  Persian  tradition  hostile
to  the  lonians,  for  Charon  of  Lampsacus',  who  lived  nearer  to  the  time  of  these  events,  mentions  only
the  retreat,  and  hints  at  no  defeat  {Fragm.  2,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  p.  32).  If
the  expedition  had  really  ended  in  this  disaster,  it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  revolt  would  have
attained  the  dimensions  it  did  immediately  afterwards.


THE   TAKING    OF  SASDES   AND    TEE  BATTLE    OF  LADE.


705


her  indifference,  and  Athens  took  the  opportunity  of  withdrawing  from  the
struggle.^  The  Asiatic  Greeks  made  as  good  a  defence  as  they  could,  but
their  resources  fell  far  short  of  those  of  the  enemy,  and  they  could  do  no  more
than  delay  the  catastrophe  and  save  their  honour  by  their  bravery.  Cyprus
was  the  first  to  yield  during  the  winter  of  498-497.  Its  vessels,  in  conjunction
with  those  of  the  lonians,  dispersed  the  fleet  of  the  Phoenicians  off  Salamis,  but
the  troops  of  their  princes,  still  imbued  with  the  old  system  of  military  tactics,
could  not  sustain  the  charge  of  the  Persian  battalions ;  they  gave  way  under
the  walls  of  Salamis,  and  their  chief,
Onesilus,  was  killed  in  a  final  charge  of
his  chariotry;-^  His  death  effected  the
ruin  of  the  Ionian  cause  in  Cyprus,
which  on  the  continent  suffered  at  the
same  time  no  less  serious  reverses.  The
towns  of  the  Hellespont  and  of  ^olia
succumbed  one  after  another;  Kyme
and  Clazomense  next  opened  their  gates ;
the  Carians  were  twice  beaten,  once  near
the  White  Columns,  and  again  near
Labranda,  and  their  victory  at  Pedasos
suspended  merely  for  an  instant  the  pro-
gress of  the  Persian  arms,  so  that  towards  the  close  of  497  the  struo-wle  was

DO

almost  entirely  concentrated  round  Miletus.*  Aristagoras,  seeing  that  his  cause
was  now  desperate,  agreed  with  his  partisans  that  they  should  expatriate  them-
selves. He  fell  fighting  against  the  Edonians  of  Thrace,  attempting  to  force
the  important  town  of  Enneahodoi,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Strymon  (496) ;  ^
but  his  defection  had  not  discouraged  any  one,  and  Histiasus,  who  had  been
sent  to  Sardes  by  the  great  king  to  negotiate  the  submission  of  the  rebels,
failed  in  his  errand.^  Even  when  blockaded  on  the  land  side,  Miletus  could
defy  an   attack    so   long  as-  communication  with   the   sea   was   not   cut  off.

1  Herodotus,  V.  eii.,  ciii. ;  the  Eretrians  did  not  give  up  the  contest.  Later  writers  attributed  to
them  an  influence  and  achievements  quite  disproportionate  to  the  smalluess  of  their  number
(Ltsanias  of  Mallos,  in  JIlllek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iv.  p.  ill).

=  Herodotus,  V.  ciii.,  civ.,  ovii.-csv.  The  movement  in  Cyprus  must  have  begun  in  the  winter
of  499-498,  for  Onesilus  was  already  in  the  field  when  Darius  heard  of  the  burning  of  Sardes
(Herodotus,  V.  cv.) ;  and  as  it  lasted  for  a  year  (V.  csvi.),  it  must  have  been  quelled  in  the  winter
of  498-497.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  terra-cotta  group  in  the  New  York  Museum.

*  Herodotus,  V.  cxv.-cxxii.

=  Herodotus,  V.  csxiv.-cxxvi.,  VI.  i.,  where  the  town  is  not  named,  but  a  passage  in  Thucydides
(iv.  102)  shows  that  it  was  Enneahodoi,  afterwards  Amphipolis,  and  that  the  death  of  Aristagoras  took
place  thirty-two  years  before  the  Athenian  defeat  at  Drabeskos,  i.e.  probably  in  496.

^  See  the  account  of  the  intrigues  of  Histiasus  and  of  the  adventurous  close  of  his  life,  in
Herodotus  (V.  cvi.,  evil.,  VI.  i.-xxv.-xxx.).

2  z


A   CTPEIOT  CHARIOT.'


TOG       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE    OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

Darius  therefore  brought  up  the  Phoenician  fleet,  reinforced  it  with  the  Cypriot
contingents,  and  despatched  the  united  squadrons  to  the  Archipelago  during
the  summer  of  494.  The  confederates,  even  after  the  disasters  of  the  pre-
ceding years,  still  possessed  353  vessels,  most  of  them  of  30  to  50  oars ;
they  were,  however,  completely  defeated  near  the  small  island  of  Lade,  in
the  latter  part  of  the  summer,  and  Miletus,  from  that  moment  cut  off  from
the  rest  of  the  world,  capitulated  a  few  weeks  later.  A  small  proportion
of  its  inhabitants  continued  to  dwell  in  the  ruined  city,  but  the  greater
number  were  carried  away  to  Ampe,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tigris,  in  the
marshes  of  the  Nar-Marratum.^  Caria  was  reconquered  during  the  winter
of  494-493,  and  by  the  early  part  of  493,  Chios,  Lesbos,  Tenedos,  the  cities
of  the  Chersonnesus  and  of  Propontis — in  short,  all  which  yet  held  out — were
reduced  to  obedience.  Artaphernes  reorganised  his  vanquished  states  entirely
in  the  interest  of  Persia.  He  did  not  interfere  with  the  constitutions  of  the
several  republics,  but  he  reinstated  the  tyrants.  He  regulated  and  augmented
the  various  tributes,  prohibited  private  wars,  and  gave  to  the  satrap  the  right  of
disposing  of  all  quarrels  at  his  own  tribunal.  The  measures  which  he  adopted
had  long  after  his  day  the  force  of  law  among  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  and  it  was  by
them  they  regulated  their  relations  with  the  representatives  of  the  great  king.^
If  Darius  had  ever  entertained  doubts  as  to  the  necessity  for  occupying
European  Greece  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  peace  in  her  Asiatic  sister-
country,  the  revolt  of  Ionia  must  have  completely  dissipated  them.  It  was  a
question  whether  the  cities  which  had  so  obstinately  defied  him  for  six  long
years,  would  ever  resign  themselves  to  servitude  as  long  as  they  saw  the  peoples
of  their  race  maintaining  their  independence  on  the  opposite  shores  of  the
-^gean,  and  while  tlie  misdeeds  of  which  the  contingents  of  Eretria  and  Athens
had  been  guilty  during  the  rebellion  remained  unpunished.  A  tradition,
which  sprang  up  soon  after  the  event,  related  that  on  hearing  of  the  burning  of
Sardes,  Darius  had  bent  his  bow  and  let  fly  an  arrow  towards  the  sky,  praying
Zeus  to  avenge  him  on  the  Athenians ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  had  com-
manded one  of  his  slaves  to  repeat  three  times  a  day  before  him,  at  every
meal,  "  Sire,  remember  the  Athenians !  "  ^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  inter-
meddling of  these  strangers  between  the  sovereign  and  his  subjects  was  at  once
a  serious  insult  to  the  Achacmenids  and  a  cause  of  anxiety  to  the  empire ;  to

'  Herodotus,  VI.  vi.-xs.  The  year  497,  i.e.  three  years  before  the  capture  of  the  town,  appears
to  be  an  unlikely  date  for  the  battle  of  Lade  (Busolt,  Griechische  Geschichte,  vol.  ii.  pp.  39-42):
Miletus  must  have  fallen  in  the  autumn  or  winter  months  following  the  defeat.  Cf.,  on  Ampe,  the
article  of  Andreas  in  Pauli-Wissowa,  Eeal-Encyclopiedie,  vol.  i.  pp.  1877-1880.

-  Herodotus,  VI.  xxv.-xxxiii.,  xli.-xlii.

'  Herodotus,  V.  cv.  ;  the  legend  is  clearly  older  than  the  time  of  Herodotus,  for  in  the  Persse  of
jEschylus  the  shade  of  Darius,  when  coming  out  of  his  tomb,  cries  to  the  old  men,  "  Kemember
Athens  and  Greece  !  "


MARBONinS  IN   THE  AC  I  A    AXD   MACEDONIA.


707


ALEXAXDEB   I.    OF

MAOEDON.'


leave  it  unpunished  would  have  been  an  avowal  of  weakness  or  timidity,  which
would  not  fail  to  be  quickly  published  in  Syria,  Egypt,  Babylon,  and  on  the
Scythian  frontiers,  and  would  ere  long  give  rise  to  similar  acts  of  revolt  and
interference.     Darius,  therefore,  resumed  his  projects,  but  with  greater  activity
than  before,  and  with  a  resolute  purpose  to  make  a  final  reckoning  with  the
Greeks,  whatever  it  might  cost  him.     The  influence  of  his  nephew  Mardo-
nius  at  first  inclined  him  to  adopt  the   overland   route,
and  he  sent  him  into  Thrace  with  a  force  of  men  and  a
fleet  of  galleys  sufficient  to  overcome  all  obstacles.     Mar-
donius  marched  against  the  Greek   colonies  and   native
tribes  which  had  thrown  off  the  yoke  during  the  Ionian
war,  and  reduced  those  who  had  still  managed  to  preserve
their  independence.    The  Bryges  opposed  him  with  such
determination,  that  summer  was  drawing  to  its  close  before  he  was  able  to
continue  his  march.     He  succeeded,  however,  in  laying  hands  on  Macedonia,
and  obliged  its  king,  Alexander,  to   submit   to   the  conditions   accepted  by
his  father   Amyntas ;    but  at  this  juncture  half  of  his  fleet  was  destroyed
by  a  tempest  in  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Athos,  and  the  disaster,  which  took
place  just  as  winter  was  approaching,  caused  him  to  suspend  his  operations
(492)."     He  was  recalled  on  account  of  his  failure,  and
the  command  was  transferred  to  Datis  tlie  Mede  and  to
the  Persian  Artaphernes.     Darius,  however,  while  tenta-
tively using  the  land  routes  through  Greece  for  his  expe-
ditions, had  left  no  stone  unturned  to  secure  for  himself
that  much-coveted  sea-way  which  would  carry  him  straight
into   the   heart   of    the    enemy's    position,   and    he   had
opened  negotiations  with  tlie  republics  of  Greece  proper.      Several  of  them
had  consented  to  tender  him  earth  and  water,  among  them  being  ^Egiua,*  and
besides  this,  the  state  of  the  various  factions  in  Athens  was  such,  that  he  had
every  reason  to  believe  thijt  he  could  count  on  the  support  of  a  large  section
of  the  population  when  the  day  came  for  him  to  disembark  his  force  on  the
shores  of  Attica.     He  therefore  decided  to  direct  his  next  expedition  against
Athens  itself,  and  he  employed  the  year  491  in  concentrating  his  troops  and
triremes  in  Cilicia,  at  a  sufficient  distance  from  the  European  coast  to  ensure

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  M&lailles,  a  cast  of  which  was
courteously  sent  me  by  JI.  Babt-lon.

-  Herodotus,  VI.  xliii.-xlv.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  of  Bybloa  in  the  Cabinet  des  ile'dailles,  a  cast  of  which
was  courteously  sent  me  by  il.  Babelon.

*  Herodotus,  VI.  xlviii.,  xlix.,  where  it  is  said  that  all  tlie  island-dwelling  Greeks,  irivTes  vnaiuTm,
submitted  to  the  great  king.  But  Herodotus  himself  says  later  on  (VI.  xcvi.)  that  the  people  of
Xaxos,  at  all  events,  proved  refractory.


A  PlICENICIAX  GALLET.-*


r08


THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE    OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.


_  Pi/rgasi)

vranaA.    \\    ^  \      ^     ,..^^_tf;^=^--.
■f-jSoros  (pijnal  place    J
of  the-Athenians


their  safety  from  any  sudden  attack.  In  the  spring  of  490  the  army  recruited
from  among  tlie  most  warlike  nations  of  the  empire — the  Persians,  Medes,  and
Sakffi — went  aboard  the  Phceuician  fleet,  while  galleys  built  on  a  special  model
were  used  as  transports  for  the  cavalry.^  The  entire  convoy  sailed  safely  out
of  the  mouth  of  the  Pyramos  to  the  port  of  Samos,  coasting  the  shores  of  Asia
Minor,  and  then  passing  through  the  Cyclades,  from  Samos  to  Naxos,  where
they  met  with  no  opposition  from  the  inhabitants,  headed  for  Delos,  where
Datis  offered  a  sacritice  to  Apollo,  whom  he  confounded  with  his  god  Mithra  ;

finally  they  reached  Eubosa,  where
Eretria  and  Carystos  vainly  en-
deavoured to  hold  their  own  against
them.  Eretria  was  reduced  to
ashes,  as  Sardes  had  been,  and  such
of  its  citizens  as  had  not  fled  into
the  mountains  at  the  enemy's  ap-
proach were  sent  into  exile  among
the  Kissians  in  the  township  of
Arderikka.  Hippias  meanwhile
had  joined  the  Persians  and  had
been  taken  into  their  confidence.  While  awaiting  the  result  of  the  intrigues  of
his  partisans  in  Athens,  he  had  advised  Datis  to  land  on  the  eastern  coast  of
Attica,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Marathon,  at  tlie  very  place  from  whence  his
father  Pisistratus  had  set  out  forty  years  before  to  return  to  his  country  after
his  first  exile.  The  position  was  well  chosen  for  the  expected  engagement.  The
bay  and  the  strand  which  bordered  it  afforded  an  excellent  station  for  the  fleet,
and  the  plain,  in  spite  of  its  marshes  and  brushwood,  was  one  of  those  rare  spots
where  cavalry  might  be  called  into  play  without  serious  drawbacks.  A  few
hours  on  foot  would  bring  the  bulk  of  the  infantry  up  to  the  Acropolis  by  a
fairly  good  road,  while  by  the  same  time  the  fleet  would  be  able  to  reach  the
roadstead  of  Phalerum.  All  had  been  arranged  beforehand  for  concerted  action
when  the  expected  rising  should  take  place  ;  but  it  never  did  take  place,  and
instead  of  the  friends  whom  the  Persians  expected,  an  armed  force  presented
itself,  commanded  by  the  polemarch  Callimachus  and  the  ten  strategi,  among
whom  figured  the  famous  Miltiades.  At  the  first  news  of  the  disembarkation
of  the  enemy,  the  reiDublic  had  despatched  the  messenger  Phidippides  to
Sparta  to  beg  for  immediate  assistance,  and  in  the  mean  time  had  sent  forward

'  The  whole  of  this  account,  often  somewhat  legendary  in  character,  is  found  in  detail  in
HEKODOTrs,  VI.  xciv.-cii.  The  French  reader  may  see  a  minute  criticism  of  it  in  the  remarkable
work  by  Amedie  Hacvette,  Eirodote  liidorien  des  Gtierres  MAliques,  pp.  ■230-274,  where  the  biblio-
jrrapliy  of  the  subject  is  given  up  to  1894.


THE  BATTLE   OF  MARATHON.


709


all  her  able-bodied  troops  to  meet  the  invaders.  They  comprised  about  10,000
hoplites,  accompanied,  as  was  customary,  by  nearly  as  many  more  light
infantry,  who  were  shortly  reinforced  by  1000  Platseans.  They  encamped  in
the  valley  of  Avlona,  around  a  small  temple  of  Heracles,  in  a  position  com-
manding the  roads  into  the  interior,  and  from  whence  they  could  watch  the
enemy  without  exposing  themselves  to  an  unexpected  attack.     The  two  armies


THE    BATTLE-FIELD    OF    MARATHON.'


watched  each  other  for  a  fortnight,  Datis  expecting  a  popular  outbreak  which
would  render  an  engagement  unnecessary,  Miltiades  waiting  patiently  till  the
Lacedaemonians  had  come  up,  or  till  some  false  move  on  the  part  of  his  opponent
gave  him  the  opportunity  of  risking  a  decisive  action.  What  took  place  at
the  end  of  this  time  is  uncertain.  Whether  Datis  grew  tired  of  inaction,  or
whether  he  suddenly  resolved  to  send  part  of  his  forces  by  sea,  so  as  to  land  on
the  neighbouring  shore  of  Athens,  and  Miltiades  fell  upon  his  rear  when  only
half  his  men  had  got  on  board  tlie  fleet,  is  not  known.'-^  At  any  rate,  Miltiades,
with  the  Plateaus  on  his  left,  set  his  battalions  in  movement  without  warning,
and  charged  the  enemy  with  a  rush.  The  Persians  and  the  Saka;  broke  the
centre  of  the  line,  but  the  two  wings,  after  having  dispersed  the  assailants  on

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  M.  AnK-tlee  Hauvette.

'  Heuodotcs,  VI.  ciii.-cxx.     For  the  various  hypotheses  to  which  the  aoeouut  of  the  battle  of
Marathon  has  given  rise,  cf.  A.  Hacvette,  H^rodote  hislnrien  des  Guerres  M^diques,  pp.  '25G-2G5.


710       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE    OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.

their  front,  wheeled  round  upon  them  and  overcame  them :  6000  barbarians
were  left  dead  upon  the  field  as  against  some  200  Athenians  and  Platoeans,
but  by  dint  of  their  valiant  efforts  the  remainder  managed  to  save  the  fleet
with  a  loss  of  only  seven  galleys.  Datis  anchored  that  evening  off  the  island  of
^gilia,  and  at  the  same  moment  the  victorious  army  perceived  a  signal  hoisted
on  the  heights  of  Pentelicus  apparently  to  attract  his  attention ;  when  he  set  sail
the  next  morning  and,  instead  of  turning  eastwards!,  proceeded  to  double  Cape
Sunion,  Miltiades  had  no  longer  any  doubt  that  treachery  was  at  work,  and
returned  to  Athens  by  forced  marches.  Datis,  on  entering  the  roads  of  Pha-
lerum,  found  the  shore  defended,  and  the  army  that  he  had  left  at  Marathon
encamped  upon  the  Cynosarge.  He  cruised  about  for  a  few  hours  in  sight  of
the  shore,  and  finding  no  movement  made  to  encourage  him  to  land,  he  turned
his  vessels  about  and  set  sail  for  Ionia.

The  material  loss  to  the  Persians  was  inconsiderable,  for  even  the  Cyclades
remained  under  their  authority ;  Miltiades,  who  endeavoured  to  retake  them,
met  with  a  reverse  before  Pares,  and  the  Athenians,  disappointed  by  his
unsuccessful  attempt,  made  no  further  efforts  to  regain  them.  The  moral
effect  of  the  victory  on  Greece  and  the  empire  was  extraordinary.  Up  till
then  the  Median  soldiers  had  been  believed  to  be  the  only  invincible  troops
in  the  world;  the  sight  of  them  alone  excited  dread  in  the  bravest  hearts,
and  their  name  was  received  everywhere  with  reverential  awe.'  But  now
a  handful  of  hoplites  from  one  of  the  towns  of  the  continent,  and  that  not
the  most  renowned  for  its  prowess,  without  cavalry  or  bowmen,  had  rushed
upon  and  overthrown  the  most  terrible  of  all  Oriental  battalions,  the  Persians
and  the  Sakre.  Darius  could  not  put  up  with  such  an  affront  without  incurring
the  risk  of  losing  his  prestige  with  the  people  of  Asia  and  Europe,  who  up
till  then  had  believed  him  all-powerful,  and  of  thus  exposing  himself  to  the
possibility  of  revolutions  in  recently  subdued  countries,  such  as  Egypt,
which  had  always  retained  the  memory  of  her  past  greatness.  In  the  interest
of  his  own  power,  as  well  as  to  soothe  his  wounded  pride,  a  renewed  attack
was  imperative,  and  this  time  it  must  be  launched  with  such  dash  and  vigour
that  all  resistance  would  be  at  once  swept  before  it.  Events  had  shown
him  that  the  influence  of  the  Pisistratidse  had  not  been  strong  enough  to
secure  for  him  the  opening  of  the  gates  of  Athens,  and  that  the  sea  route
did  not  permit  of  his  concentrating  an  adequate  force  of  cavalry  and  infantry
on  the  field  of  battle ;  he  therefore  reverted  to  the  project  of  an  expedition
by  the  overland  route,  skirting  the  coasts  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia.  During
three  years  he  collected  arms,  provisions,  horses,  men,  and  vessels,  and  was
ready  to  commence  hostilities  in  the  spring  of  487,  when  affairs  in  Egypt

'  Hebodotos,  VI.  csii.


'^fm^


^Tk


EGYPTIAN  AFFAIRS.  711

prevented  him.^  This  country  had  undeniably  prospered  under  his  suzerainty.
It  formed,  with  Gyrene  and  the  coast  of  Libya,  the  sixth  of  his  satrapies,  to
which  were  attached  the  neighbouring  Nubian  tribes  of  the  southern  frontier.^
The  Persian  satrap,  installed  at  the  White  Wall  in  the  ancient  palace  of  the
Pharaohs,  was  supported  by  an  army  of  120,000  men,  who  occupied  the  three
entrenched  camps  of  the  Saites — Daphnaj  and  Marea  on  the  confines  of  the
Delta,  and  Elephantine  in  the  south.^  Outside  these  military  stations,  where
the  authority  of  the  great  king  was  exercised  in  a  direct  manner,  the  ancient
feudal  organisation  existed  intact.  Tlie  temples  retained  their  possessions
and  their  vassals,  and  the  nobles  within  their  principalities  were  jgL

as  independent  and  as  inclined  to  insurrection  as  in  past  times.
The  annual  tribute,  the  heaviest  paid  by  any  province  with
the  exception  of  Chaldaea  and  Assyria,  amounted  only  to
700  talents  of  silver.*  To  this  sum  must  be  added  the
farming  of  the  fishing  in  Lake  Moeris,  which,  according  to
Herodotus,^  brought  in  one  talent  a  day  during  the  six  months  dakics  on  the  stele
of  the  high  Nile,  but,  according  to  Diodorus,''  during  the  whole
year,  as  well  as  the  120,000  medimni  of  wheat  required  for  the  army  of  occu-
pation,^  and  the  obligation  to  furnish  the  court  of  Susa  with  Libyan  nitre  and
Nile  water ;  ^  the  total  of  these  impositions  was  far  from  constituting  a  burden
disproportionate  to  the  wealth  of  the  Nile  valley.  Commerce  brought  in  to  it,
in  fact,  at  least  as  much  money  as  the  tribute  took  out  of  it.  Incorporated  with
an  empire  which  extended  over  three  continents,  Egypt  had  access  to  regions
whither  the  products  of  her  industry  and  her  soil  had  never  yet  been  carried.
The  produce  of  Ethiopia  and  the  Sudan  passed  through  her  emporia  on  its
way  to  attract  customers  in  the  markets  of  Tyre,  Sidon,  Babylon,  and  Susa,  and
the  isthmus  of  Suez  and  Kosseir  were  the  nearest  ports  through  which  Arabia
and  India  could  reach  the  Mediterranean.     Darius  therefore  resumed  the  work

'  Hekodotus,  VII.  i.

=  Herodotus,  III.  scvii. ;  cf.  VII.  Ixix.  The  Nubian  tribes,  wlio  are  called  Ethiopians  by  the
Oreek  historian  and  the  cuneiforril  inscriptions  (Weissbach  and  Baxg,  Die  Altpers.  Keilins..  pp.  Sti,
37),  paid  no  regular  tribute,  but  were  obliged  to  send  annually  two  chanihet  of  pure  gold,  two
hundred  pieces  of  ebony,  twenty  elephants'  tusks,  and  five  youug  slaves,  all  under  the  name  of  a
free  gift.

^  Herodotus,  II.  xsx.,  states  that  in  his  own  time  the  Persians,  like  the  Saite  Pharaohs,  still  had
garrisons  at  Daphna!  and  at  Elephantine  (cf.  supra,  p.  498).  On  the  Persian  garrison  at  Memphis,
cf.  Herodotus,  III.  xci.

*  Herodotus,  III.  xci. ;  cf.  supra,  p.  C91.

'  Herodotus,  II.  cxlix.,  who  saye  that  the  produce  sank  to  the  value  of  a  third  of  a  talent  a  day
during  the  six  other  months.

°  DiODORUs  SicuLus,  i.  52,  who  says  that  the  revenue  produced  by  the  fisheries  in  the  Lake
had  been  handed  over  by  Moeris  to  hia  wife  for  the  expenses  of  her  toilet.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudio,  from  the  Description  de  V£gypie,  Autiquit^s,  vol.  v.  pi.  2U.

*  Herodotus,  UI.  xci.

'  Ding,  Fra(jm.  15,  16,  in  MClleu-Dido  r,  Fragm.  Uiit.  Grxc ,  vol.  ii.  p.  92.


712


THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.


of  Neclio,  and  beginning  simultaneously  at  both  extremities,  he  cut  afresh  the
canal  between  the  Nile  and  the  Gulf  of  Suez.  Trilingual  stela;  in  Egyptian,
Persian,  and  Medic  were  placed  at  intervals  along  its  banks,  and  set  forth
to  all  comers  the  method  of  procedure  by  which  the  sovereign  had  brought
his  work  to  a  successful  end.^  In  a  similar  manner  he  utilised  the  Wadys
which  wind  between  Koptos  and  the  Eed  Sea,  and  by  their  means  placed  the
cities  of  the  Said  in  communication  with  the  "  Ladders  of  Incense,"  *  Punt  and
the  Sabaeans.'^     He  extended  his  favour  equally  to  the  commerce  which  they


WALLS  OF  THE   FORTRESS   OF  DDSH-EL-QALSa.^


carried  on  with  the  interior  of  Africa ;  indeed,  in  order  to  ensure  the  safety
of  the  caravans  in  the  desert  regions  nearest  to  the  Nile,  he  skilfully  fortified
the  Great  Oasis.  He  erected  at  Habit,  Kushit,  and  other  places,  several
of  those   rectangular  citadels  with    massive   walls   of   unburnt    brick,  which

'  Herodotus,  II.  clviii.,  IV.  xxxix.  ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  560, 561.  Several
trilingual  iuscriptions  discovered  at  different  times  in  the  Isthmus  of  Suez  (Description  de  VJ^Jr/ypte,
Ant.,  vol.  V.  pi.  29,  vol.  v.  pp.  150-153,  and  vol.  viii.  pp.  27-47  ;  then  Mariette,  La  Stele  bilingue  de
Cluilouf,  in  tlie  Rifue  Archgologique,  1S66;  Maspero,  Pieces  relatives  a  la  dgcouverte  du  monument  de
Chalonf,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux  relatifs  a  la  Philoloyie  et  ii  I'Archgblogie  Egijptiennes  et  Assyriennes,
vol.  vii.  pp.  1-8;  Jaillon  and  Lemasson,  Lettres  a  3L  Golenischeff  au  sujet  des  Monuments  Perset  de
fisthme,  in  tlie  Recueil,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  97-99),  and  translated  or  commented  upon  several  times  (Oppert
Mi'moire  sur  les  rapports  de  VEgypte  et  de  I'Assyrie,  pp.  123-127,  and  Le  Peuple  el  la  Langtie  des  Medes,
p.  214,  et.  seq.;  J.  Menant,  Les  AcMm€nides,  pp.  145-148,  and  La  Stele  de  Chalouf,  in  the  Recueil  de
Travaux,  vol.  is.  pp.  331-357;  Dakesst,  Revision  des  textes  de  la  Stele  de  Chalouf,  in  the  Recueil,  vol.
xi.  pp.  160-171  ;  Golenischeff,  Stele  de  Darius  aux  environs  de  Tell  el-Mashhoutah,  in  the  Recueil,
vol.  xiii.  pp.  99-109  ;  Weissbacu  and  Bang,  Die  Altpenischen  Keilinschriften,  pp.  6, 7,  38,  39),  confirm
the  classical  tradition  and  furnish  some  curious  information  with  regard  to  the  worli.

[*  For  the  explanation  of  this  term,  cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  245,  note  3. — Tr.]

-  Several  of  the  inscriptions  engraved  on  the  rocks  of  the  Wady  Hammamat  show  to  what  an
extent  the  route  was  frequented  at  certain  times  during  the  reign.  They  bear  the  dates  of  the  26th,
27th,  2StU,  30th,  aud  36th  years  of  Darius  (Burton.  Excerpta  Bieroglyphica,  pla.  iii.,  iv.,  xiv. ;
Ko.sELLiNi,  Monumenti  Siorici,  vol.  ii.  pi.  11  c,  aud  p.  174;  Lepsiu.s,  Denhm.,  iii.  283).  The  country
of  Saba  (Sheba)  is  mentioned  on  one  of  the  stel^  of  the  isthmus  (Golenischeff,  Stele  de  Darius  aux
environs  de  Tell  el-Mashhoutah,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xiii.  p.  108).

'■'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  by  Cailliaud,  Voyage  ii  la  Grande  Oasis,  pi.  xii.  Dush
is  the  Kusbit  of  the  hieroglyphs,  the  Kysis  of  Gr:eco-Eoman  times,  and  is  situated  ou  the  southern
border  of  the  Great  Oasis,  about  the  latitude  of  Assuan.


THE  REVOLT   OF  KHABBISHA.


713


resisted  every  effort  of  the  nomad  tribes  to  break  through  them  ;  and  as  the
temple  at  Habit,  raised  in  former  times  by  the  Tbeban  Pharaohs,  had
become  ruinous,  he  rebuilt  it  from  its  foundations.^  He  was  generous  in
his  gifts  to  the  gods,  and  even  towns  as  obscure  as  Edfu  was  then  received
from  him  grants  of  money  and  lands.^  The  Egyptians  at  first  were  full
of  gratitude  for  the  favours  shown  them,  but  the  news  of  the  defeat  at
Marathon,  and  the  taxes  with  which  the  Susiau  court  burdened  them  in  order
to   maiie   provision   for   the   new   war   with   Greece,   aroused   a   deep-seated


THE  GKEAT  TEMPLE  OF  DAIUIS  AT  UAstx.^

discontent,  at  all  events  amongst  those  who,  living  in  the  Delta,  had  had
their  patriotism  or  their  interests  most  affected  by  the  downfall  of  the
Saite  dynasty.  It  would  appear  that  the  priests  of  Buto,  whose  oracles
exercised  an  indisputable  influence  alike  over  Greeks  and  natives,  had
energetically  incited  the  people  to  revolt.  The  storm  broke  in  4SG,  and  a
certain  Khabbisha,  who  perhaps  belonged  to  the  family  of  Psammetichus,
proclaimed  himself  king  both  at  Sais  and  Memphis.*     Darius  did  not  believe

'  For  these  buildings  io  the  Oasis,  cf.  Cailhaud,  Voyage  a  I'Oasis  de  Thebes,  p.  40,  et  seq. ;  Hoskins,
Visit  to  the  Great  Oasis,  p.  118 ;  Brdgscu,  lieise  nach  der  grossen.  Oasen  el-Khargeh,  p.  17,  et  seq.

-  Lepsius,  Denhmiiler,  iv.  43  a,  1.  5,  :ind  Eine  Hieroglyphische  Inschrift  am  Teinpel  vou  Edfu,,  in
the  Memoirs  of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1855,  p.  75;  cf.  Dijmiohen,  Bauurkunde  der  Tempelanlagen  von
Edfu,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t,  1871,  p.  90.  The  inscription  shows  us  that  the  donation  was  made  in  the
nineteenth  year  of  Darius  I.

=  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  by  Cailliacd,  Voyage  «  I'Oasis  de  Thebes,  pi.  xviii.

'  Herodotus,  VII.  i.,  who  does  not  give  the  name  of  the  leader  of  the  rebellion,  but  says  that  it
tooli  place  iu  the  fourth  year  after  Marathon.  A  demotic  contract  in  the  Turin  Museum  bears  the
date  of  the  third  month  of  the  second  season  of  the  thirty-fifth  year  of  Darius  I.  (Revilloct,
Notice  des  Papyrus  d^motiques  archa'iqwes,  pp.  435,  436)  :  Khabbisha's  rebellion  therefore  broke  out


714       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE    OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

the  revolt  to  be  of  sufficient  gravity  to  delay  liis  plans  for  any  length  of
time.  He  hastily  assembled  a  second  army,  and  was  about  to  commence
hostilities  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  simultaneously  with  those  on  the
Hellespont,  when  he  died  in  485,  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  his  rei^n.^
He  was  one  of  the  great  sovereigns  of  the  ancient  world — the  greatest
witliout  exception  of  those  who  had  ruled  over  Persia.  Cyrus  and  Cambyses
had  been  formidable  warriors,  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  East  had  fallen
before  their  arms,  but  they  were  purely  military  sovereigns,  and  if  their
successor  had  not  possessed  other  abilities  than  theirs,  their  empire  would
have  shared  the  fate  of  that  of  the  Medes  and  the  Chaldaeans  ;  it  would
have  sunk  to  its  former  level  as  rapidly  as  it  had  risen,  and  the  sjjlendour  of
its  opening  years  would  have  soon  faded  from  remembrance.  Darius  was  no
less  a  general  by  instinct  and  training  than  they,  as  is  proved  by  the  cam-
paigns which  procured  him  his  crown ;  but,  after  having  conquered,  he  knew
how  to  organise  and  build  up  a  solid  fabric  out  of  the  materials  which
his  predecessors  had  left  in  a  state  of  chaos ;  if  Persia  maintained  her  rule
over  the  East  for  two  entire  centuries,  it  was  due  to  him  and  to  him  alone.

The  question  of  the  succession,  with  its  almost  inevitable  popular  outbreaks,
had  at  once  to  be  dealt  with.  Darius  had  had  several  wives,  and  among  them,
the  daughter  of  Gobryas,  who  had  borne  him  three  children :  Artabazanes,
the  eldest,  had  long  been  regarded  as  the  heir-presumptive,  and  had  probably
filled  the  office  of  regent  during  the  expedition  in  Scythia.-  But  Atossa,  the
daughter  of  Cyrus,  who  had  already  been  queen  under  Cambyses  and
Gaumata,  was  indignant  at  the  thought  of  her  sons  bowing  down  before  the
child  of  a  woman  who  was  not  of  Achtemenian  race,  and  at  the  moment  when
affairs  in  Egypt  augured  ill  for  the  future,  and  when  the  old  king,  according
to  custom,  had  to  appoint  his  successor,^  she  intreated  him  to  choose
Khshayarsha,  the  eldest  of  her  children,  who  had  been  born  to  the  purple,
and  in  whose  veins  flowed  the  blood  of  Cyrus.  Darius  acceded  to  her  request,
and  on  his  death,  a  few  months  after,  Khshayarsha  ascended  the  throne.*  His
brothers  offered  no  opposition,  and  the  Persian  nobles  did  homage  to  their

between  June  and  Seijtember,  4S6  (Uxger,  Mauetho,  p.  2Sfi).  Stem  makea  this  prince  to  have  beea
of  Libyan  origin  (Die  XXII.  Manethonische  Dynastie,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1SS2,  p.  25).  From  the  form
of  his  name,  ReviUout  has  supposed  that  he  was  an  Arab  {Chronique  Eyyptieiine,  p.  5,  note  2),  and
Birch  was  inclined  to  think  that  he  was  a  Persian  satrap  who  made  a  similar  attempt  to  that  of
Aryandes  {On  a  Hieroglyphic  Tablet  of  Alexander,  son  of  Alexander  the  Great,  in  the  Transactions  of
the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  i.  p.  21).  But  nothing  is  really  known  of  him  or  of  his  family  previous  to
his  insurrection  against  Darius.

'  Herodotus,  VII.  iv.  According  to  Ctesias  (Fragm.  29,  §  19,  in  MCller-Didot,  Ctesias  Cnidii
Fragmenta,  p.  49),  he  lived  seventy-two,  and  reigned  only  thirty-one  years.

=  G.  Rawlinso.v,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  4i5,  446.

'  Cf.  supra,  p.  U55.

*  Hesodotcs,  YII.  ii.,  iii. ;  Ctesias  possibly  tells  a  similar  story,  of  which  mention  is  made  in
Plutarch  and  in  Justin  (ii.  10).


TEE  DEATH   OF  DABIUS  AND   ACCESSION  OF  XESXES  I.        715

new  king.  Khshayarsha,  whom  the  Greeks  called  Xerxes,  was  at  that  time
thirty-four  years  of  age.  He  was  tall,  vigorous,  of  an  imposing  figure  and
noble  countenance,  and  he  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  handsomest  man
of  his  time,  but  neither  his  intelligence  nor  disposition  corresponded  to  his
outward  appearance ;  he  was  at  once  violent  and  feeble,  indolent,  narrow-
minded,  and  sensual,  and  was  easily  swayed  by  his  courtiers  and  mistresses.
The  idea  of  a  war  had  no  attractions  for  him,  and  he  was  inclined  to  shirk  it.
His  uncle  Artabanus  exhorted  him  to  follow  his  inclination  for  peace,  and  he
lent  a  favourable  ear  to  this  advice  until  his  cousin  Mardonius  remonstrated
with  him,  and  begged  him  not  to  leave  the  disgrace  of  Mara-
thon unpunished,  or  he  would  lower  the  respect  attached  to  the
name  of  Persia  throughout  the  world.^  He  wished,  at  all  events,
to  bring  Egyptian  affairs  to  an  issue  before  involving  himself
in  a  serious  European  war.  Khabbisha  had  done  his  best  to
prepare  a  stormy  reception  for  him.  During  a  period  of  two  years
Khabbisha  had  worked  at  the  extension  of  the  entrenchments
along  the  coast  and  at  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  in  order  to  repulse  the  attack  that
he  foresaw  would  take  place  simultaneously  with  that  on  land,  but  his  precautions
proved  fruitless  when  the  decisive  moment  arrived,  and  he  was  completely
crushed  by  the  superior  numbers  of  Xerxes.  The  nomes  of  the  Delta  which  had
taken  a  foremost  part  in  the  rising  were  ruthlessly  raided,  the  priests  heavily
fined,  and  the  oracle  of  Buto  deprived  of  its  possessions  as  a  punishment  for  the
encouragement  freely  given  to  the  rebels.  Kbabbisha  disappeared,  and  his
fate  is  unknown.  Aclioemenes,  one  of  the  king's  brothers,  was  made  satrap,^
but,  as  on  previous  occasions,  the  constitution  of  the  country  underwent  no
modification.  The  temples  retained  their  inherited  domains,  and  the  nomes
continued  in  the  hands  of  their  hereditary  princes,  without  a  suspicion  crossing
the  mind  of  Xerxes  that  his  tolerance  of  the  priestly  institutions  and  the
local  dynasties  was  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  a  body  of  chiefs  ever
in  readiness  for  future  insurrection  (483).''  Order  was  once  more  restored,  but
he  was  not  yet  entirely  at  liberty  to  pursue  his  own  plan  of  action.     Classical

'  Herodotus,  VII.  ix.-xii.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  daric  ia  the  Cihinet  dee  Mfdailles.  I  owe  a  cast  of  the  coin
to  the  courtesy  of  M.  Babeloii.

'  Herodotus,  VII.  vii.

*  Heeodotcs,  vii.  vii.  The  only  detailed  information  on  this  revolt  furnished  by  the  Egyptian
monuments  is  given  in  the  Stele  of  Ptolemy,  the  sou  of  Lagos,  and  published  by  Maiuette,  Monuments
Divers,  pi.  13,  11.  7-11  ;  cf.  Brugscu,  Ein  Dekret  I'tolemaios  des  Sohnes  Lagi,  des  Salrapes,  in  the
Zeilschrift,\87l,  pp.  i,  5,  10,  13;  Birch,  Oh  a  Hieroglyphic  Tablet  of  Alexander,  son  of  Alexander  the
Great,  recently  discovered  at  Cairo,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc.,  vol.  i.  pp.  22-25.  An
Apis,  whose  sarcophagus  still  exists,  was  buried  by  Khabbisha  iu  the  Serapteura  in  the  second  year
of  hid  reign  (Brugsoh,  Ein  Dehret  Ptolemaios,  in  the  Zeitschrifl,  1S71,  p.  13),  which  proves  tli;it  he  was  in
possession  of  Memphis  :  the  White  Wall  had  perhaps  been  deprived  of  its  garrison  in  order  to  reinforce
the  army  prepared  against  Greece,  and  It  was  possibly  thus  that  it  fell  into  the  bands  of  Khabbisha.


716       THE  LAST  DATS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.

tradition  tells  us,  that  on  the  occasion  of  his  first  visit  to  Babylon  he  had
ofiended  the  religious  prejudices  of  the  Chaldaeans  by  a  sacrilegious  curiosity.
He  had,  in  spite  of  the  entreaties  of  the  priests,  forced  an  entrance  into  the
ancient  burial-place  of  Bel-Etana,  and  had  beheld  the  body  of  the  old  hero
preserved  in  oil  in  a  glass  sarcophagus,  which,  however,  was  not  quite  full  of
the  liquid.     A  notice  posted  up  beside  it,  threatened  the  king  who  should
violate  the  secret  of  the  tomb  with  a  cruel  fate,  unless  he  filled  the  sarcophagus
to  the  brim,  and  Xerxes  had  attempted  to  accomplish  this  mysterious  in-
junction, but  all  his  efforts  had  failed.'     The  example  set  by  Egypt  and  the
change   of    sovereign    are   sufficient    to   account    for   the   behaviour   of  the
Babylonians;    they   believed   that   the   accession   of  a   comparatively  young
monarch,  and  the  difficulties  of  the  campaign  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  afforded
them  a  favourable  occasion  for  throwing  ofl'  the  yoke.^     They  elected  as  king
a    certain    Shamasherib,    whose    antecedents    are    unknown ;    but    their   in-
dependence  was   of  short   duration,^   for   Megabyzos,   son   of  Zopyrus,   who
governed   the  province   by  hereditary  right,  forced  them  to  disarm  after  a
siege  of  a  few  months.*     It  would  appear  that  Xerxes  treated  them  with  the
greatest  severity :  he  pillaged  the  treasury  and  temple  of  Bel,  appropriated
the  golden  statue  which  decorated  the  great  inner  hall  of  the  ziggurat,  and
carried  away  many  of  the  people  into  captivity  (581).'   Babylon  never  recovered
this  final  blow:  the  quarters  of  the  town  that  had  been  pillaged  remained
uninhabited  and   fell  into  ruins ;    commerce  dwindled  and  industry    flagged.
The  counsellors  of  Xerxes  had,  no  doubt,  wished  to  give  an  object-lesson  to
the  province  by  their  treatment  of  Babylon,  and  thus  prevent  the  possibility
of  a  revolution  taking  place  in  Asia  while  its  ruler  was  fully  engaged  in  a
struggle  with  the  Greeks.    Meanwhile  all  preparations  were  completed,  and  the
contingents  of  the  eastern  and  southern  provinces  concentrated  at  Kritalla,  in

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  21,  iu  Muller-Didot,  Clesiai  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  50.  M\ia.n  has
preserved  a  more  detailed  account  {Various  Stories,  si  v.  3).  A  similar  legend  was  already  current  of
the  attempt  that  Darius  made  to  open  the  tomb  of  Nitokria  (Herodotus,  I.  clxxsvii.).

-  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  21,  in  MCller-Dibot,  Ctesias  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  50,  places  this  rebellion
quite  at  the  beginning  of  Xerxes'  reigu,  before  the  Greek  expedition  (cf.  J.  Marquart,  Die
Assyriaka  des  Ktesias,  in  the  PInlologus,  Supplement,  vol.  v.  pp.  51i-52G);  others  relegate  it  to  a  date
after  the  return  from  Greece  (Arriax,  Anabasis,  VII.  xvii.  §  3).

^  This  Shamasherib  is  mentioned  only  on  a  contract  dated  from  his  accession,  which  is  preserved
in  the  British  Museum  (Sp.  ii.  19).  Fr.  Strassmaier,  who  discovered  it,  and  was  the  first  to  publish
it  {Arsaciden  Inschriften,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  140,  141, 157, 158),  pointed  out
that  this  prince  belonged  to  the  Achsemenian  period ;  Oppert  then  showed  that  he  must  have  been
the  leader  of  the  rebellion  in  the  time  of  Xerxes  I.  mentioned  by  Herodotus  and  by  Ctesias  (Vn
Champion  de  I'indi'pendance  chald^enne,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1891,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  543-545).

*  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  22,  in  MiJLi.ER-DiDOT,  Ctesiai  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  50,  where  the  author
attributes  the  act  of  devotion  to  Megabyzos  which  Herodotus  (III.  ol. ;  cf.  JnsTiN,  i.  10)  tells  of
Zopyrus  iu  the  time  of  Darius  (cf.  siqira,  p.  680).

'  Stuabo,  XVI.  i.  §  5,  p.  738,  says  that  Xerxes  destroyed  Bel's  tomb  ;  Arrian  (^Anabasis,  III.  xvi.
§  4  ;  cf.  VII.  xvii.  §  2)  more  clearly  states  that  he  overthrew  the  temple  of  Bel  and  the  other  temples
of  the  city.


SHAMASEERIB   AND    THE  REVOLT  OF  BABYLON.  717

Cappadocia,  merely  awaited  the  signal  to  set  out.  Xerxes  gave  the  order  to
advance  in  the  autumn  of  481,  crossed  the  Halys  and  took  up  his  quarters  at
Sardes,  while  his  fleet  prepared  to  winter  in  the  neighbouring  ports  of  Phocsea
and  Kyme.i  Gathered  together  in  that  little  corner  of  the  world,  were  forces
such  as  no  king  had  ever  before  united  under  his  command ;  they  comprised
1200  vessels  of  various  build,  and  probably  120,000  combatants,  besides  tlie
rabble  of  servants,  hucksters,  and  women  which  followed  all  the  armies  of
that  period.  The  Greeks  exaggerated  the  number  of  the  force  beyond  all
probability.  They  estimated  it  variously  at  800,000,  at  3,000,000,  and  at
5,283,220  men ;  1,700,000  of  whom  were  able-bodied  foot-soldiers,  and  80,000
of  them  horsemen.^     The  troops  which  they  could  bring  up  to  oppose  tliese


A    TRIREME   IN    MOTION.^

hordes  were,  indeed,  so  slender  in  number,  when  reckoned  severally,  that  all
hope  of  success  seemed  impossible.  Xerxes  once  more  summoned  the  Greeks
to  submit,*  and  most  of  the  republics  appeared  inclined  to  comjjly ;  ^  Athens
and  Sparta  alone  refused,  but  from  different  motives.  Athens  knew  that,  after
the  burning  of  Sardes  and  the  victory  of  Marathon,  they  could  hope  for  no
pity,  and  she  was  well  aware  that  Persia  had  decreed  her  complete  destruc-
tion ;  the  Athenians  were  familiar  with  the  idea  of  a  struggle  in  whicli  their
very  existence  was  at  stake,  and  they  counted  on  the  navy  with  which
Themistocles  had  just  provided  them  to  enable  them  to  emerge  from  the  affair
with  honour.  Sparta  was  not  threatened  with  the  same  fate,  but  she  was  at
that  time  the  first  military  state  in  Greece,  and  the  whole  of  the  Peloponnesus
acknowledged  her  sway ;  in  the  event  of  her  recognising  the  suzerainty  of  the

'  Herodotus,  VII.  xxvi.-xxsii. ;  Diodorus,  who  proliably  follows  Ephorus,  is  the  ouly  writer  who
Informs  ug  of  the  place  where  the  fleet  was  assembled  (xi.  2).

^  Herodotus,  VII.  clxxxiv.-clxxxvi. ;  elsewhere  he  records  the  epigram  to  the  effect  that  3,000,000
men  attacked  Thermopylae  (VII.  coxxviii.).  Ctesias  (Fra<jm.  29,  §  23,  in  Muller-Didot,  Ctesiss  Cnidii
Fragmenta,  p.  50)  and  Ephorus  adopt  the  same  figures  (Diodorus  Siculus,  xi.  3);  Isocrates  is
contented  with  700,000  combatants  and  5,000,000  men  in  all  (Archidamus,  §  99,  and  Paiiathenaic.  §  49,
ed.  DiDOT,  pp.  87,  156).

•■■  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin :  the  left  portion  is  a  free  reproduction  of  a  photograph  of  the  bas-
relief  of  the  Acropolis ;  the  right,  of  the  picture  of  Pozzo.  The  two  partly  overlap  one  another,
and  give  both  together  the  idea  of  a  trireme  going  at  full  speed.

■"  Herodotus,  VII.  xxxii.

'  For  the  feelings  which  animated  the  Greek  cities  at  this  crisis,  of.  Herodotus,  VII.  oxxxviii.


718       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF    THE    OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

barbarians,  the  latter  would  not  fail  to  require  of  her  the  renunciation  of  her
hegemony,  and  she  would  then  be  reduced  to  the  same  rank  as  her  former
rivals,  Tegea  and  Argos.  Athens  and  Sparta  therefore  united  to  repulse  the
common  enemy,  and  the  advantage  that  this  alliance  afforded  them  was  so
patent,  that  none  of  the  other  states  ventured  to  declare  openly  for  the  great
king.  Argos  and  Crete,  the  boldest  of  them,  announced  that  they  would
observe  neutrality ;  the  remainder,  Thessalians,  Boeotians,  and  people  of
Corcyra,  gave  their  support  to  the  national  cause,  but  did  so  unwillingly.^

Xerxes  crossed  the  Hellespont  in  the  spring  of  480,  by  two  bridges  of  boats
thrown  across  it  between  Abydos  and  Sestos ;  he  then  formed  his  force  into  three
columns,  and  made  his  way  slowly  along  the  coast,  protected  on  the  left  by
the  whole  of  his  fleet  from  any  possible  attack  by  the  squadrons  of  the  enemy.-
The  Greeks  had  three  lines  of  defence  which  they  could  hold  against  him,  the
natural  strength  of  which  nearly  compensated  them  for  the  inferiority  of  their
forces ;  these  were  Mount  Olympus,  Jlount  CEta,  and  the  isthmus  of  Corinth.
The  first,  however,  was  untenable,  owing  to  the  ill  will  of  the  Thessalians ;
as  a  precautionary  measure  10,000  hoplites  were  encamped  upon  it,  but
they  evacuated  the  position  as  soon  as  the  enemy's  advance-guard  came  into
sight.^  The  natural  barrier  of  CEta,  less  formidable  than  that  of  Olympus,
was  flanked  by  the  Eubcean  straits  on  the  extreme  right,  but  the  range  was
of  such  extent  that  it  did  not  require  to  be  guarded  with  equal  vigilance
along  its  whole  length.  The  Spartans  did  uot  at  first  occupy  it,  for  they
intended  to  accumulate  all  the  Greek  forces,  both  troops  and  vessels,  around
the  isthmus.  At  that  point  the  neck  of  laud  was  so  narrow,  and  the  sea  so
shut  in,  that  the  numbers  of  the  invading  force  proved  a  drawback  to  them,
and  the  advantage  almost  of  necessity  lay  with  that  of  the  two  adversaries
who  should  be  best  armed  and  best  officered.  This  plan  of  the  Spartans  was
a  wise  one,  but  Athens,  which  was  thereby  sacrificed  to  the  general  good,
refused  to  adopt  it,  and  as  she  alone  furnished  almost  half  the  total  number
of  vessels,  her  decision  had  to  be  deferred  to.  A  body  of  about  10,000  hoplites
was  therefore  posted  in  the  pass  of  Thermopylre  under  the  command  of  Leonidas,
while  a  squadron  of  271  vessels  disposed  themselves  near  the  promontory  of
Artemision,  off  the  Euripus,  and  protected  the  right  flank  of  the  pass  against  a
diversion  from  the  fleet.  Meanwhile  Xerxes  had  been  reinforced  in  the  course
of  his  march  by  the  contingents  from  IMacedonia,  and  had  received  the  homage

'  The  behaviour  of  the  Argives  is  shown  by  Herodotus  in  Books  VII.  oxlviii.-clii.,  VIII.  Ixxiii.,
that  of  the  Corcyrseans  in  Book  VII.  clxviii. ;  ou  the  refusal  of  the  Cretans,  cf.  Herodotus,  VII.  elxix.

'  For  the  critical  appreciation  of  Herodotus'  account  of  the  preliminaries  of  this  expedition,  I  must
refer  the  reader,  as  I  did  above,  to  the  work  of  A.  Haivette,  H^rodote  historien  des  Guerres  Midiques,
pp.  290-310.

=  Hekodotus,  VII.  clxxii.-clxxiv. ;  cf.  A.  Hauvktte,  ibid.,  pp.  340-350.


ARTEMISION,    TIIEEMOPYL^,    SAL  AMIS.  719

of  the  cities  of  Thessaly ;  having  reached  the  defiles  of  the  CEta  and  Eiiboea,
he  began  by  attacking  the  Greeks  directly  in  front,  both  fleets  and  armies
facing  one  another.  Leonidas  .succeeded  in  withstanding  the  assault  on  two
successive  days,  and  then  the  inevitable  took  place.  A  detachment  of  Persians,
guided  by  the  natives  of  the  country,  emerged  by  a  path  which  bad  been
left  unguarded,  and  bore  down  upon  the  Greeks  in  the  rear;  a  certain
number  managed  to  escape,  but  the  bulk  of  tlie  force,  along  with  the  300
Spartans  ami  their  king,  succumbed  after  a  desperate  resistance.  As  for  the
fleet,  it  had  borne  itself  bravely,  and  had  retained  the  ascendency  throughout,
in  spite  of  the  superiority  of  the  enemy's  numbers ;  on  hearing  the  news  of
the  glorious  death  of  Leonidas,  they  believed  their  task  ended  for  the  time
being,  and  retired  with  the  Athenians  in  their  wake,  ready  to  sustain  the  attack
should  they  come  again  to  close  quarters.^  The  victorious  side  had  suffered
considerable  losses  in  men  and  vessels,  but  they  had  forced  the  passage,  and
Central  Greece  now  lay  at  their  mercy.  Xerxes  received  the  submission  of
the  Thebans,  the  Phocteans,  the  Locrians,  the  Dorians,  and  of  all  who  appealed
to  his  clemency;  then,  having  razed  to  the  ground  Plata^a  and  Thespia?,
the  only  two  towns  which  refused  to  come  to  terms  with  him,  he  penetrated
into  Attica  by  the  gorges  of  the  Cith.Tron.-  The  population  had  taken  refuge
in  Salamis,  .^gina,  and  Trcezen.  The  few  fanatics  who  refused  to  desist  in
their  defence  of  the  Acropolis,  soon  perished  behind  their  ramparts ;  Xerxes
destroyed  the  temple  of  Pallas  by  fire  to  avenge  the  burning  of  Sardes,  and
then  entrenched  his  troops  on  the  apjiroaches  to  the  isthmus,  stationing  his
squadrons  in  the  ports  of  Munychia,  Phalerum,  and  the  Piraeus,  and  suspended
all  hostilities  while  waiting  to  see  what  policy  the  Greeks  would  pursue.^  It
is  possible  that  he  hoped  that  a  certain  number  of  them  would  intreat  for
mercy,  and  others  being  encouraged  by  their  example  to  submit,  no  further
serious  battle  would  have  to  be  fought.  When  he  found  that  no  such  request
was  proffered,  he  determined  to  take  advantage  of  the  superiority  of  his
numbers,  and,  if  possible,  destroy  at  one  blow  the  whole  of  the  Greek  naval
reserve  ;  he  therefore  gave  orders  to  his  admirals  to  assume  the  offensive.  The
Greek  fleet  lay  at  anchor  across  the  bay  of  Salamis.  The  left  squadron  of  the
Persians,  leaving  Munychia  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  made  for  the  promontory
of  Cynosura,  landing  some  troops  as  it  passed  on  the  island  of  Psyttalia,  on
which  it  was  proposed  to  fall  back  in  case  of  accident,  while  the  right  division,
sailing  close  to  the  coast  of  Attica,  closed  the  entrance  to  the  straits  in  the

'  Herodotus,  VII.  clxxv.-ccxxxix.,  YIII.  i.-xxv. ;  cf.  A.  HAnvETTE,  He'rodote  historien  des  Guerres
M^diques,  pp.  350-379.

"  Herodotus,  VIII.  xxvii.-xxxix  ,  I. ;  cf.  A.  Hauveiie,  H^rodote  historien  des  Guerres  Me'diques,
pp.  380-389.

^  Herodotus,  VIII.  l.-lv.


720


THE  LAST  DATS    OF   TEE   OLD  EASTERN    WORLD.


direction  of  Eleusis ;  this  double  movement  was  all  but  completed,  when  the
Greeks  were  informed  by  fugitives  of  what  was  taking  place,  and  the  engage-
ment was  inevitable.  They  accepted  it  fearlessly.  Xerxes,  enthroned  with
his  Immortals  on  the  slopes  of  ^gialeos,  could,  from  his  exalted  position,  see
the  Athenians  attack  his  left  squadron  :  the  rest  of  the  allies  followed  them,
and  from  afar  these  words  were  borne  upon  the  breeze  :  "  Go,  sons  of  Greece,
deliver  your  country,  deliver  your  children,  your  wives,  and  the  temples  of  the
gods  of  your  fathers  and  the  tombs  of  your  ancestors.     A  single  battle  will

decide  the  fate  of  all  you  possess."
The  Persians  fought  with  their  ac-
customed bravery,  "  but  before  long
their    numberless    vessels,    packed
closely  together  in  a  restricted  space,
begin  to  hamper  each  other's  move-
ments, and  their  rams  of  brass  col-
lide ;  whole  rows  of  oars  are  broken."
The  Greek  vessels,  lighter  and  easier
to  manoeuvre  than  those  of  the  Phoe-
nicians, surround  the  latter  and  dis-
able them  in  detail.   "  The  surface  of
the  sea  is  hidden  with  floating  wreckage  and  corpses  ;  the  shore  and  the  rocks
are  covered  with  the  dead."     At  length,  towards  evening,  the  energy  of  the
barbarians  beginning  to  flag,  they  slowly  fell  back  upon  the  Pimeus,  closely
followed  by  their  adversaries,  while  Aristides  bore  down  upon  Psyttalia  with  a
handful  of  Athenians.    "  Like  tunnies,  like  fish  just  caught  in  a  net,  with  blows
from  broken  oars,  with  fragments  of  spars,  they  fall  upon  the  Persians,  they  tear
them  to  pieces.    The  sea  resounds  from  afar  with  groans  and  cries  of  lamentation.
Night  at  length  unveils  her  sombre  face  "  and  separates  the  combatants.^    The
advantage  lay  that  day  with  the  Greeks,  but  hostilities  might  be  resumed  on
the  morrow,  and  the  resources  of  the  Persians  were  so  considerable  that  their
chances  of  victory  were  not  yet  exhausted.      Xerxes  at  first  showed  signs  of
wishing  to  continue  the  struggle  ;  he  repaired  the  injured  vessels  and  ordered
a  dyke  to  be  constructed,  which,  by  uniting  Salamis  to  the  mainland,  would
enable  him  to  oust  the  Athenians  from  their  last  retreat.     But  he  had  never
exhibited  much  zest  for  the  war ;   the  inevitable  fatigues  aud  dangers  of  a
campaign  were  irksome  to  his  indolent  nature,  and  winter  was  approaching,
which  he  would  be  obliged  to  spend  far  from  Susa,  in  the  midst  of  a  country

'  JilscHYLTjs,  Persse,  290-471,  the  only  contemporaneous  account  of  the  battle,  and  the  one
which  Herodotus  and  sill  the  historians  after  him  have  paraphrased,  wliile  they  also  added  to  it
oral  traditions.


a


.>    A


722       TEE  LAST  DATS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

wasted  and  trampled  underfoot  by  two  great  armies.     Mardonius,  guessing

what  was  passing  in  his  sovereign's  mind,  advised  him  to  take  advantage  of

the  fine  autumn  weather  to  return  to  Sardes  ;  he  proposed  to  take  over  from

Xerxes  the  command  of  the  army  in  Greece,  and  to  set  to  work  to  complete

the  conquest  of  the  Peloponnesus.    He  was  probably  glad  to  be  rid  of  a  sovereign

whose  luxurious  habits  were  a  hindrance  to  his  movements.     Xerxes  accepted

his  proposal  with  evident  satisfaction,  and  summarily  despatching  his  vessels

to  the  Hellespont  to  guard  the  bridges,  he  set  out  on  his  return  journey  by  the

overland  route.^

At  the  time  of  his  departure  the  issue  of  the  struggle  was  as  yet  unforeseen.

Mardonius  evacuated  Attica,  which  was  too  poor  and  desolate  a  country  to

support  so  large  an  army,  and  occupied  comfortable  winter  quarters  in  the  rich

plains  of  Thessaly,  where  he  recruited  his  strength  for  a  supreme  effort  in  the

spring.     He  had  with  him  about  60,000  men,  picked  troops  from  all  parts  of

Asia — Medes,  Sakse,   Bactrians,   and   Indians,   besides   the   regiment   of  the

Immortals  and  the  Egyptian  veterans  who  had  distinguished  themselves  by

their  bravery  at  Salamis ;  the  heavy  hoplites  of  Thebes  and  of  the  Bceotian

towns,  the  Thessalian  cavalry,  and  the  battalions  of  Macedonia  were  also  in

readiness  to  join  him  as  soon  as  called  on.^   The  whole  of  these  troops,  relieved

from  the  presence  of  the  useless  multitude  which  had  impeded  its  movements

under  Xerxes,  and  commanded  by  a  bold  and  active  general,  were  anxious  to

distinguish  themselves,  and  the  probabilities  of  their  final  success  were  great.

The  confederates  were  aware  of  the  fact,  and  although  resolved  to  persevere  to

the  end,  their  manceuvres  betrayed  an  unfortunate  indecision.     Their  fleet

followed  the  Persian  squadron  bound  for  the  Hellespont  for  several  days,  but  on

realising  that  the  enemy  were  not  planning  a  diversion  against  the  Peloponnesus,

they  put  about  and  returned  to  their  various  ports.^     The  winter  was  passed  in

preparations  on  both  sides.      Xerxes,  on  his  return  to  Sardes,  had  got  together

a  fleet  of  200  triremes  and  an  army  of  60,000  men,  and  had  stationed  them  at

Cape  Mycale,  opposite  Samos,  to  be  ready  in  case  of  an  Ionian  revolt,  or  perhaps

to  bear  down  upon  any  given  point  in  the  Peloponnesus  when  Mardonius  had

gained  some  initial  advantage.      The  Lacajdemonians,  on  their  part,  seem  to

have  endeavoured  to  assume  the  defensive  both  by  land  and  sea  ;  while  their

foot-soldiers  were  assembling  in  the   neigrhbourhood  of  Corinth,  their  fleet

sailed  as  far  as  Delos  and  there  anchored,  as  reluctant  to  venture  beyond  as  if

it  had  been  a  question  of  proceeding  to  the  Pillars  of  Hercules.*      Athens,

which  ran  the  risk  of  falling  into  the  enemy's  hands  for  the  second  time  through

'  Herodotus,  VIII.  Ivi.  -cxx. ;  cf.  Hacvette,  Hgrodote  hislorien  des  Ouerres  M^diques,  pp.  389-438.
-  Hebodotds,  VIII.  c,  ci.,  cvii.,  cxiii.,  cxiv.,  where  the  number  of  troops  remaining  to  Mardonius
is  estimated  at  300,000  men.

'  Hekodotus,  VIII.  cviii.-cxii.,  cxxxi.  *  HERODOTrs,  VIII.  cxsx.-cxxxii.


PLAT^A   AND   MTCALE.  723

these  hesitations,  evinced  sucli  marked  displeasure  that  Mardonius  momentarily
attempted  to  take  advantage  of  it.      He  suhmitted  to  the  citieens,  through
Alexander,  King  of  Macedon,  certain  conditions,  the  leniency  of  which  gave
uneasiness    to   the    Spartans ;    the   latter   at    once    promised  Athens  all  she
•wanted,  and  on  the  strength  of  their  oaths  she  at  once  broke  off  the  negotiations
with  the  Persians.      Mardonius  immediately  resolved  on  action  :  he  left  his
-quarters  in  Thessaly  in  the  early  days  of  May,  reached  Attica  by  a  few  quick
marches,  and  spread  his  troops  over  the  country  before  the  Peloponnesians  were
prepared  to  resist.     The  people  again  took  refuge  in  Salamis ;  the  Persians
occupied  Athens  afresh,  and  once  more  had  recourse  to  diplomacy.     This  time
the  Spartans  were  alarmed  to  good  purpose  ;  they  set  out  to  the  help  of  their
ally,  and  from  that  moment  Mardonius  showed  no  further  consideration  in  his
dealing  with  Atliens.     He  devastated  the  surrounding  country,  razed  the  city
walls  to  the  ground,  and  demolished  and  burnt  the  remaining  houses  and
temples ;  he  then  returned  to  Bceotia,  the  plains  of  which  were  more  suited
to  the  movements  of  his  squadrons,  and  took  up  a  position  in  an  entrenched
camp  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Asopos.     The  Greek  army,  under  the  command
of  Pausanias,  King  of  Sparta,  subsequently  followed  him  there,  and  at  first
stationed  themselves  on  the  lower  slopes  of  Mount  Cithseron.     Their  force  was
composed  of  about  25,000  hoplites,  and  about  as  many  more  light  troops,  and  was
scarcely  inferior  in  numbers  to  the  enemy,  but  it  had  no  cavalry  of  any  kind.
Several  days  jjassed  in  skirmishing  without  definite  results,  Mardonius  fearing
to  let  his  Asiatic  troops  attack  the  heights  held  by  the  heavy  Greek  infantry,
and  Pausanias  alarmed  lest  liis  men  should  be  crushed  by  the  Thessalian  and
Persian  horse  if  he  ventured  down  into  the  plains.     Want  of  water  at  length
obliged  the  Greeks  to  move  slightly  westwards,  their  right  wing  descending
as  far  as  the  spring  of  Gargaphia,  and  their  left  to  the  bank  of  the  Asopos.
But  this  position  facing  east,  exposed  them  so  seriously  to  the  attacks  of  the
light  Asiatic  horse,  that  after  enduring  it  for  ten  days  they  raised  their  camp
and  fell  back  in  the  night  on  Plataea.     Unaccustomed  to  manoeuvre  together,
they  were  unable  to  preserve  their  distances ;  when  day  dawned,  their  lines,
instead  of  presenting  a  continuous  front,  were  distributed  into  three  unequal
bodies  occupying  various  parts  of  the  plain.     Mardonius  unhesitatingly  seized
bis  opportunity.     He  crossed  the  Asopos,  ordered  the  Thebans  to  attack  the
Athenians,  and  with  the  bulk  of  iiis  Asiatic  troops  charged  the  Spartan  con-
tingents.    Here,  as  at  Marathon,  the  superiority  of  equipment  soon  gave  the
Greeks  the  advantage  :  Mardonius  was  killed  while  leading  the  charge  of  the
Persian  guard,  and,  as  is  almost  always  the  case  among  Orientals,  his  death
decided  the  issue  of  the  battle.     The  Immortals  were  cut  to  pieces  round  his
dead  body,  while  the  rest  took  flight  and  sought  refuge  in  their  camp.    Almost


724


TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE    OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.


simultaneously  the  Athenians  succeedeil  in  routing  the  Bcpotians.  They  took
the  entrenchments  by  assault,  gained  possession  of  an  immense  quantity  of
spoil,  and  massacred  many  of  the  defenders,  but  they  could  not  prevent  Arta-
bazus  from  retiring  in  perfect  order  with  40,000  of  his  best  troops  protected  by
his  cavalry.  He  retired  successively  from  Thessaly,  Macedonia,  and  Thrace,
reached  Asia  after  suffering  severe  losses,  and  European  Greece  was  freed  for

ever  from  the  presence  of  the  bar-


-■  .««  '-  ;,3i«i'   ;gK-«t.


barians.^  While  her  fate  was  being
decided  at  Plattea,  that  of  Asiatic
Greece  was  being  fought  out  on  the
coast  of  Ionia.  The  entreaties  of
the  Samians  had  at  length  en-
couraged Leotychidas  and  Xan-
thippus  to  take  the  initiative.  The
Persian  generals,  who  were  not  ex-
pecting this  aggressive  movement,
had  distributed  the  greater  part  of
their  vessels  throughout  the  Ionian
ports,  and  had  merely  a  small  squad-
ron left  at  their  disposal  at  Mycale.  Surprised  by  the  unexpected  appearance
of  the  enemy,  they  were  compelled  to  land,  were  routed,  and  their  vessels  burnt
(479).^  This  constituted  the  signal  for  a  general  revolt :  Samos,  Chios,  and
Lesbos  affiliated  themselves  to  the  Hellenic  confederation,  and  the  cities  of  the
littoral,  which  Sparta  would  have  been  powerless  to  protect  for  want  of  a  fleet,
concluded  an  alliance  with  Athens,  whose  naval  superiority  had  been  demon-
strated by  recent  events.  The  towns  of  the  Hellespont  threw  off  the  yoke  as  soon
as  the  triremes  of  the  confederates  appeared  within  their  waters,  and  Sestos,  the
only  one  of  them  prevented  by  its  Persian  garrison  from  yielding  to  the  Athenians,
succumbed,  after  a  long  siege,  during  the  winter  of  479-478.^  The  campaign
of  478  completed  the  deliverance  of  the  Greeks.  A  squadron  commanded  by
Pausanias  roused  the  islands  of  the  Carian  coast  and  Cyprus  itself,  without
encountering  any  opposition,  and  then  steering  northwards  drove  the  Persians
from  Byzantium.^  The  following  winter  the  conduct  of  operations  passed  out
of  the  hands  of  Sparta  into  those  of  Athens — from  the  greatest  military  tothe
greatest  naval  power  in  Greece ;  and  the  latter,  on  assuming  command,  at  once

'  Herodotus,  VIII.  csxxvi.-cxliv.,  IX.  i.-lsxsix. ;  A.  Hauvette,  Egrodole  historien  des  Guerres
J\Udiques.  pp.  447-4S3.

'  Herodotus,  IX.  xc.-cvii. ;  cf.  A.  Havvette,  Herodotehistorieu  des  Guerres M^diques,  pp.  4S3-4Sy.
'  Hekodotus,  IX.  cxv.-cxxii. ;  Thuoydides,  I.  Ixxxix.
*  Thucybides,  I.  xciv. ;   Diodoeus  Siculus,  xi.  44.


<  g


5  a

<  i


M


726       TEE  LAST   DAYS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

took  steps  to  jjrocure  the  means  which  would  enable  her  to  carry  out  her  task
thoroughly.  She  brought  about  the  formation  of  a  permanent  league  between
the  Asiatic  Greeks  and  those  of  the  islands.  Each  city  joining  it  preserved  a
complete  autonomy  as  far  as  its  internal  affairs  were  concerned,  but  pledged
itself  to  abide  by  the  advice  of  Athens  in  everything  connected  with  the  war
against  the  Persian  empire,  and  contributed  a  certain  quota  of  vessels,  men,  and
money,  calculated  according  to  its  resources,  for  the  furtherance  of  the  national
cause.  The  centre  of  the  confederation  was  fixed  at  Delos ;  the  treasure  held
in  common  was  there  deposited  under  the  guardianship  of  the  god,  and  the
delegates  from  the  confederate  states  met  there  every  year  at  the  solemn  festivals,
Athens  to  audit  the  accounts  of  her  administration,  and  the  allies  to  discuss
the  interests  of  the  league  and  to  decide  ou  the  measures  to  be  taken  against
the  common  enemy.

Oriental  empires  maintain  their  existence  only  on  condition  of  being
always  on  the  alert  and  always  victorious.  They  can  neither  restrict  them-
selves within  definite  limits  nor  remain  upon  the  defensive,  for  from  the
day  when  they  desist  from  extending  their  area  their  ruin  becomes  inevitable ;
they  must  maintain  their  career  of  conquest,  or  they  must  cease  to  exist.
This  very  activity  which  saves  them  from  downfall  depends,  like  the  control  of
affairs,  entirely  on  the  ruling  sovereign ;  when  he  chances  to  be  too  indolent
or  too  incapable  of  governing,  he  retards  progress  by  his  inertness  or  mis-
directs it  through  his  want  of  skill,  and  the  fate  of  the  people  is  made  thus
to  depend  entirely  on  the  natural  disposition  of  the  prince,  since  none
of  his  subjects  possesses  sufiScient  authority  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  his
master.  Having  conquered  Asia,  the  Persian  race,  finding  itself  hemmed  in
by  insurmountable  obstacles — the  sea,  the  African  and  Arabian  deserts,  the
mountains  of  Turkestan  and  the  Caucasus,  and  the  steppes  of  Siberia — had
only  two  outlets  for  its  energy,  Greece  and  India.  Darius  had  led  his
army  against  the  Greeks,  and,  in  spite  of  the  resistance  he  had  encountered
from  them,  he  had  gained  ground,  and  was  on  the  point  of  striking  a  crucial
blow,  when  death  cut  short  his  career.  The  impetus  that  he  had  given  to
the  militant  policy  was  so  great  that  Xerxes  was  at  first  carried  away  by  it ;
but  he  was  naturally  averse  to  war,  without  individual  energy  and  destitute
of  military  genius,  so  that  he  allowed  himself  to  be  beaten  where,  had  he
possessed  anything  of  the  instincts  of  a  commander,  he  would  have  been
able  to  crush  his  adversary  with  the  sheer  weight  of  his  ships  and  battalions.
Even  after  Salamis,  even  after  PlatEea  and  Mycale,  the  resources  of  Hellas,
split  up  as  it  was  into  fifty  different  republics,  could  hardly  bear  comparison
with  those  of  all  Asia  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  one  man :  Xerxes  must
have  triumphed  in  the  end  had  he  persevered  in  his  undertaking,  and  utilised


THE  LOVE-INTRiaUES    OF  XERXES.  727

the  inexhaustible  amount  of  fresh  material  with  which  his  empire  could  have
furnished  him.     But  to  do  that  he  would  have  had  to  take  a  serious  view
of  his  duties  as  a  sovereign,  as  Cyrus  and  Darius  had  done,  whereas  he  appears
to  have  made  use  of  his  power  merely  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  luxurious
tastes  and  his  capricious  affections.     During  the  winter  following  his  return,
and  while  he  was  reposing  at  Sardes  after  the  fatigues  of  his  campaign  in
Greece,  he  fell  in  love  with  the  wife  of  Masistes,  one  of  his  brothers,  and
as  she  refused  to  entertain  his  suit,  he  endeavoured  to  win  her  by  marrying
his   son   Darius  to  her  daugliter  Artayntas.     He  was  still  amusing  himself
with  this  ignoble  intrigue  during  the  year  which  witnessed  the  disasters  of
Platsea  and  Mycale,  when  he  was  vaguely  entertaining  the  idea  of  personally
conducting  a  fresh  army  beyond  the  ^gean ;   but  the  marriage  of  his  son
having  taken  place,  he  returned  to  Susa  in  the  autumn,  accompanied  by  the
entire  court,  and  from  thenceforward  he  remained  shut  up  in  the  heart  of
his  empire.!     After   his   departure   the  war  lost  its  general  character,  and
deteriorated   into  a  series  of  local  skirmishes   between    the   satraps   in   the
vicinity  of  the   Mediterranean   and   the  members  of  the    league   of  Delos.
The  Piioenician  fleet  played  the  principal  part  in  the  naval  operations,  but
the    central    and    eastern    Asiatics — Bactriaus,    Indians,    Parthiaus,   Arians,
Arachosians,  Armenians,  and    the  people  from   Susa  and  Babylon — scarcely
took  any  part  in  the  struggle.     The  Athenians  at  the  outset  assumed  the
offensive  under  the  intelligent  direction  of  Cimon.     They  expelled  the  Persian
garrisons  from  Eion  and  Thrace  in  476.     They  placed  successively  under  their
own  heo-emony  all  the  Greek  communities  of  the  Asianic  littoral.     Towards
466,  they  destroyed  a  fleet  anchored  within  the  Gulf  of  Pamphylia,  close  to
the  mouth  of  the  Eurymedon,  and,  as  at  Mycale,  they  landed  and  dispersed
the  force  destined  to  act  in  concert  with  the  squadron.     Sailing  from  thence
to  Cyprus,  they  destroyed  a  second  Phoenician  fleet  of  eighty  vessels,  and
returned  to  the  Pirceus  laden  with  booty.     Such  exploits  were  not  devoid  of
glory  and  profit  for  the  tiibe  being,  but  they  had  no  permanent  results.     All
these  naval  expeditions  were  indeed  successful,  and   the  islands  and  towns
of  the  ^gean,  and  even  those  of  the  Black  Sea  and  the  southern  coasts  of
Asia   Minor,   succeeded   without    difficulty   in   freeing   themselves   from   the
Persian    yoke   under   the   protection   of  the   Athenian   triremes ;    but   their
influence  did  not  penetrate  further  inland  than  a  few  miles  from  the  shore,
beyond    which   distance    they   ran    the    risk    of   being    cut    off   from   their
vessels,  and   the   barbarians   of  the   interior— Lydians,  Phrygians,  Mysians,
Pamphylians,  and  even  most  of  the  Lycians  and  Carians— remained  subject
to  the  rule  of  the  satraps.     The  territory  thus  liberated  formed  but  a  narrow

'  Hekodotis,  IX.  cviii.


728  TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   OLD  EASTERN   WOULD.

border  along  the  coast  of  the  peniusuhx ;  a  border  rent  and  interrupted
at  intervals,  constantly  in  peril  of  seizure  by  the  enemy,  and  demanding
considerable  efforts  every  year  for  its  defence.  Athens  was  in  danger  of
exhausting  her  resources  in  the  performance  of  this  ungrateful  task,  unless
she  could  succeed  in  fomenting  some  revolution  in  the  vast  possessions  of
her  adversary  which  should  endanger  the  existence  of  his  empire,  or  which,
at  any  rate,  should  occupy  the  Persian  soldiery  in  constantly  recurring
hostilities  against  the  rebellious  provinces.  If  none  of  the  countries  in  the
centre  of  Asia  Minor  would  respond  to  their  call,  and  if  the  interests  of  their
commercial  rivals,  the  Phoenicians,  were  so  far  opposed  to  their  own  as  to
compel  them  to  maintain  the  conflict  to  the  very  end,  Egypt,  at  any  rate,
always  proud  of  her  past  glory  and  impatient  of  servitude,  was  ever  seeking
to  rid  herself  of  the  foreign  yoke  and  recover  her  independent  existence  under
the  authority  of  her  Pharaohs.  It  was  not  easy  to  come  to  terms  with  her
and  give  her  efficient  help  from  Athens  itself;  but  Cyprus,  with  its  semi-
Greek  population  hostile  to  the  Achasmenids,  could,  if  they  were  to  take
possession  of  it,  form  an  admirable  base  of  operations  in  that  corner  of  the
Mediterranean.  The  Athenians  were  aware  of  this  from  the  outset,  and,  after
their  victory  at  the  mouth  of  the  Eurymedon,  a  year  never  elapsed  without  their
despatching  a  more  or  less  numerous  fleet  into  Cypriot  waters ;  by  so  doing
they  protected  the  ^gean  from  the  piracy  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  at  the  same
time,  in  the  event  of  any  movement  arising  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  they
were  close  enough  to  the  Delta  to  be  promptly  informed  of  it,  and  to  interfere
to  their  own  advantage  before  any  repressive  measures  could  be  taken.

The  field  of  hostilities  having  shifted,  and  Greece  having  now  set  herself  to
attempt  the  dismemberment  of  the  Persian  empire,  we  may  well  ask  what
had  become  of  Xerxes.  The  little  energy  and  intelligence  he  had  possessed
at  the  outset  were  absorbed  by  a  life  of  luxury  and  debauchery.  Weary
of  his  hopeless  pursuit  of  the  wife  of  Masistes,  he  transferred  his  attentions
to  the  Artayntas  whom  he  had  given  in  marriage  to  his  son  Darius,  and
succeeded  in  seducing  her.  The  vanity  of  this  unfortunate  woman  at  length
excited  the  jealousy  of  the  queen.  Amestris  believed  herself  threatened  by
the  ascendency  of  this  mistress;  she  therefore  sent  for  the  girl's  mother,
whom  she  believed  guilty  of  instigating  the  intrigue,  and,  having  cut  off
her  breasts,  ears,  nose,  lips,  and  torn  out  her  tongue,  she  sent  her  back,
thus  mutilated,  to  her  family.  jV[asistes,  wishing  to  avenge  her,  set  out  for
Bactriana,  of  which  district  he  was  satrap :  he  could  easily  have  incited
the  province  to  rebel,  for  its  losses  in  troops  during  the  wars  in  Europe
bad  been  severe,  and  a  secret  discontent  was  widespread ;  but  Xerxes,
warned  in  time,  despatched  horsemen  in  pursuit,  who  overtook  and   killed


TEE  MURDER    OF  XERXES  AND  ACCESSION  OF  ARTAXERXES  I.      729

him.^  The  incapacity  of  the  king,  and  the  slackness  with  which  he  held  the
reins  of  government,  were  soon  so  apparent  as  to  produce  intrigues  at  court  :
Artabanus,  the  chief  captain  of  the  guards,  was  emboldened  by  the  state  of
affairs  to  attempt  to  substitute  his  own  rule  for  that  of  the  Achtemeuids,
and  one  night  he  assassinated  Xerxes.  His  method  of  procedure  was  never
exactly  known,  and  several  accounts  of  it  were  soon  afterwards  current.
One  of  them  related  that  he  had  as  his  accomplice  the  eunuch
Aspamithres.  Having  committed  the  crime,  both  of  them  rushed
to  the  chamber  of  Artaxerxes,^  one  of  the  sons  of  the  sovereign,
but  still  a  child  ;  they  accused  Darius,  the  heir  to  the  throne,  of
the  murder,  and  having  obtained  an  order  to  seize  him,  they
dragged  him  before  his  brother  and  stabbed  him,  while  he  loudly
protested  his  innocence.  Other  tales  related  that  Artabanus  had
taken  advantage  of  the  free  access  to  the  palace  which  his  position  allowed
him,  to  conceal  himself  one  night  within  it,  in  company  with  his  seven  sons.
Having  murdered  Xerxes,  he  convinced  Artaxerxes  of  the  guilt  of  his
brother,  and  conducting  him  to  the  latter's  chamber,  where  he  was  found
asleep,  Artabanus  stabbed  him  on  the  spot,  on  the  pretence  that  he  was
only  feigning  slumber.''  The  murderer  at  first  became  the  virtual  sovereign,
and  he  exercised  his  authoi'ity  so  openly  that  later  chronographers  inserted
his  name  in  the  list  of  the  Achsemenids,  between  that  of  his  victim  and
his  protege ;  ^  but  at  the  end  of  six  months,  when  he  was  planning  the  murder
of  the  young  prince,  he  was  betrayed  by  Megabyzos  and  slain,  together  with
his  accomplices.  His  sons,  fearing  a  similar  fate,  escaped  into  the  country
with  some  of  the  troops.  They  perished  in  a  skirmish,  sword  in  hand ;  ^  but
their  prompt  defeat,  though  it  helped  to  establish  the  new  king  upon  his
throne,  did  not  ensure  peace,  for  the  most  turbulent  provinces  at  the  two
extremes  of  the  emj^ire,  Bactriana  on  the  north-east  and  Egypt  in  the  south-
west, at  once  rose  in  arms.     The  Bactrians  were  led  by  Hystaspes,  one  of

'  HEBODOTrs,  IX.  cviii.-cxiii. ;  -cf.  Diodobtjs  Siculus,  xi.  69.

'  Artaxerxes  is  the  form  commonly  adopted  by  the  Greek  historians  and  by  the  moderns  who
follow  them,  but  Ctesias  and  others  after  him  prefer  Artoxerxes  (Fragm.  29,  §  29,  in  MCller-Didot,
Cietise  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  51).  The  original  form  of  the  Persian  name  was  Artakhshathra
{Inscriptiuii  of  Susa,  i.  11.  2,  4);  cf.  JcsTi,  Eranisches  Namenhuch,  pp.  34-36.

^  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  daric  in  the  Cahinet  des  M€daille» ;  I  am  indebted  for  a
cast  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Babfelon.

'  Of  the  two  principal  accounts,  the  first  is  as  old  as  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §  29,  in  Mullek-Didot,
Ctetis:  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  51),  who  was  followed  in  general  outline  by  Ephorus,  of  whose  account
Diodorus  Siculus  preserves  a  summary  compilation  (xi.  69) ;  the  second  was  circulated  by  Dinon,  and
has  come  down  to  us  through  the  abbreviation  of  Pompeius  Trogus  (Justin,  iii.  1).  The  remains  of
a  third  account  are  met  with  in  Aristotle,  Politics,  v.  10.  ^lian  (Far.  Hist,  xiv.  3)  knew  a  fourth
in  which  the  murder  was  ascribed  to  the  son  of  Xerxes  himself.

'  The  passages  in  these  chronographers  referring  to  the  alleged  reign  of  Artabanus  are  collected
In  Ungek,  Manetho,  p.  286.

°  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  30,  in  Mvllek-Didot,  Clesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,-p.  51 ;  Diodobus  Sicdlcs,
xi.  69;  Justin,  iii.  1.


730       THE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

the  sons  of  Xerxes,  who,  being  older  than  Artaxerxes,  claimed  the  throne ;
his  j^retensioDS  were  not  supported  by  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  two
bloody  battles  soon  sealed  his  fate  (462).^  The  chastisement  of  Egypt  proved
a  harder  task.  Since  the  downfall  of  the  Saites,  the  eastern  nomes  of  the
Delta  had  always  constituted  a  single  fief,  which  the  Greeks  called  the
kingdom  of  Libya.  Lords  of  Marea  and  of  the  fertile  districts  extending
between  tiie  Canopic  arm  of  the  Nile,  the  mountains,  and  the  sea,  its  princes
probably  exercised  suzerainty  over  several  of  the  Libyan  tribes  of  Marmarica.
Inaros,  son  of  Psammetichus,^  who  was  then  the  ruling  sovereign,  defied  the
Persians  openly.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Delta,  oppressed  by  the  tax-gatherers
of  Achfemenes,^  welcomed  him  with  open  arms,  and  he  took  possession  of
the  country  between  the  two  branches  of  the  Nile,  probably  aided  by  the
Cyrenians;*  the  Nile  valley  itself  and  Memphis,  closely  guarded  by  the
Persian  garrisons,  did  not,  however,  range  themselves  on  his  side.  Mean-
while the  satrap,  fearing  that  the  troops  at  his  disposal  were  insufficient,  had
gone  to  beg  assistance  of  his  nephew.  Artaxerxes  had  assembled  an  army
and  a  fleet,  and,  in  the  first  moment  of  enthusiasm,  had  intended  to  assume
the  command  in  person ;  but,  by  the  advice  of  his  counsellors,  he  was  with
little  difficulty  dissuaded  from  carrying  this  whim  into  effect,  and  he  delegated
the  conduct  of  affairs  to  Achasmenes.  The  latter  at  first  repulsed  the  Libyans
(460),  and  would  probably  have  soon  driven  them  back  into  their  deserts,
had  not  the  Athenians  interfered  in  the  fray.  They  gave  orders  to  their
fleet  at  Cyprus  to  support  the  insurgents  by  every  means  in  their  power,
and  their  appearance  on  the  scene  about  the  autumn  of  469  changed  the
course  of  affairs.  Achfemenes  was  overcome  at  Papremis,  and  his  army
almost  completely  exterminated.  Inaros  struck  him  down  with  his  own  hand
in  the  struggle ;  but  the  same  evening  he  caused  the  body  to  be  recovered,
and  sent  it  to  the  court  of  Susa,  though  whether  out  of  bravado,  or  from
respect  to  the  Achsemenian  race,  it  is  impossible  to  say.'''     His  good  fortune

'  Ctesias,  Frag.  29,  §  31,  in  Mulleb-Didot,  Ctes.  Cnid.  Frag.,  p.  52 ;  DiOD.  SlcuLUS,  xi.  71.  The  date
462  is  approximate,  and  is  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  war  in  Bactriana  is  mentioned  in  Ctesiaa
between  the  war  against  the  sons  of  Artabanus  which  must  have  occupied  a  part  of  463,  and  the  Egyptian
rebellion  which  broke  out  about  462,  as  Diodorus  Siculus  (si.  71)  points  out,  doubtless  following  Ephorus.

-  Thenameof  the  fatherof  Inaros  is  given  us  by  the  contemporary  testimony  of  Thucydide3(i.  104).

^  Achiemenes  is  the  form  given  by  Herodotus  (III.  xii.,  VII.  vii.)  and  by  Diodorus  Siculus  (xi.  74),
who  make  him  the  son  of  Darius  I.,  appointed  governor  of  Egypt  aftfer  the  repression  of  the  revolt  of
Khabbisha  (ef.  supra,  p.  715).  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §  32,  in  Mi  ller-Didot,  Ctesix  Ciiidii  Fragmenta,
p.  52)  calls  him  Achiemenides,  and  says  that  he  was  the  son  of  Xerxes.

*  The  alliance  of  Cyrene  and  Inaros  seems  to  be  proved  by  the  passage  in  Pixdar,  4th  Pythic  Ode,
53-56,  and  it  goes  back  almost  to  the  beginning  of  the  rebellion,  since  Arkesilas  carried  ofi'  the  prize
in  the  third  year  of  the  LXXVIII"'  Olympiad,  i.e.  in  461.

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  32,  in  JIClleu-Didot,  Ctesix:  Cnidii  Fragm.,  p.  50,  and  Diodorus  Sioulus,
xi.  71,  who  says  in  so  many  words  that  the  Athenians  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Papremis ;  Thucydides
(i.  104)  and  Herodotus  (111.  xii.,  VII.  vii.)  do  not  speak  of  their  being  there,  and  several  modern
historians  take  this  silence  as  a  proof  that  their  siiuadron  arrived  after  the  battle  had  been  fought.


INAMOS  AND    THE  ATHENIAN  CAMPAIGN  IN  EGYPT.  731

did  not  yet  forsake  him.  Some  days  afterwards,  the  Athenian  squadron  of
Charitimides  came  up  by  chance  with  the  Phoenician  iieet,  which  was  sailing
to  the  help  of  the  Persians,  and  had  not  yet  received  the  news  of  the  disaster
which  had  befallen  them  at  Papremis.  Tiie  Greeks  sunk  thirty  of  the
enemy's  vessels  and  took  twenty  more,'  and,  after  this  success,  the  allies
believed  that  they  had  merely  to  show  themselves  to  bring  about  a  general
rising  of  the  fellahin,  and  effect  the  expulsion  of  the  Persians  from  the  whole
of  Egypt.  They  sailed  up  the  river  and  forced  Memphis  after  a  few  days'
siege ;  but  the  garrison  of  the  White  Wall  refused  to  surrender,  and  the
allies  were  obliged  to  lay  siege  to  it  in  the  ordinary  manner  (459) :  ^  in  the
issue  this  proved  their  ruin.  Artaxerxes  raised  a  fresh  force  in  Cilicia,  and
while  completing  his  prejmrations,  attempted  to  bring  about  a  diversion
in  Greece.  The  strength  of  Pharaoh  did  not  so  much  depend  on  his  Libyan
and  Egyptian  hordes,  as  on  the  little  body  of  hoplites  and  the  crews  of  the
Athenian  squadron ;  and  if  the  withdrawal  of  the  latter  could  be  effected,
the  repulse  of  the  others  would  be  a  certainty.  Persian  agents  were  therefore
employed  to  beg  the  Spartans  to  invade  Attica ;  but  the  remembrance  of
Salaniis  and  Platsea  was  as  yet  too  fresh  to  permit  of  the  Lacedromonians
allying  themselves  with  the  common  enemy,  and  their  virtue  on  this  occasion
was  proof  against  the  darics  of  the  Orientals.^  The  Egyptian  army  was
placed  in  the  field  early  in  the  year  456,  under  the  leadership  of  Megabyzos,
the  satrap  of  Syria :  it  numbered,  so  it  was  said,  some  300,000  men,  and
it  was  supported  by  300  Phoenician  vessels  commanded  by  Artabazos.^
The  allies  raised  the  blockade  of  the  White  Wall  as  soon  as  he  entered  the
Delta,  and  hastened  to  attack  him  ;  but  they  had  lost  their  opportunity.
Defeated  in  a  desperate  encounter,  in  which  Charitimides  was  killed  and
Inaros  wounded  in  the  thigh,  they  barricaded  themselves  within  the  large
island  of  Prosopitis,  about  the  first  fortnight  in  January  of  the  year  455,
and  there  sustained  a  regular  siege  for  the  space  of  eighteen  months.  At
the  end  of  that  time  MegAbyzos  succeeded  in  turning  an  arm  of  the  river,

'  Ctesias  (Fragm.  29,  §  31,  in  MLller-Didot,  Ctesiss  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  52)  is  the  only  author
who  mentions  this  victory  expressly,  anil  he  reduces  the  number  of  Athenian  vessels  to  forty,  but  this
number  -10  =  M  has  long  been  corrected  to  2110  =  2,  which  was  the  number  of  vessels  sent  to  Cyprus
annually.     It  has  also  been  proposed  to  alter  the  name  Charitiaiides  into  Carmantides.

'  The  date  of  459-8  for  the  arrival  of  the  Athenians  is  concluded  from  the  passage  of  Thucydidcs
(i.  110),  who  gives  an  account  of  the  end  of  the  war  after  the  cruise  of  Tolmides  in  455,  iu  the
sixth  year  of  its  course.

'  Thucydides,  i.  109;  cf.  Diodorus  Sioclus,  xi.  74.  Megabyzos  opened  these  negotiations,  and
his  presence  at  Sparta  during  the  winter  of  457-6  is  noticed.

'  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §  33,  in  MiiLLER-DiDOT,  Ctesiai  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  52)  here  introduces  the
Persian  admiral  Horiscos,  but  Diodorus  (xi.  74)  places  Artabazos  and  Megabyzos  side  by  side,  as  was
the  case  later  on  in  the  war  in  Cyprus,  one  at  the  head  of  the  fleet,  the  other  of  the  army  (Diodorus.
xii.3);  it  is  probable  that  the  historian  from  whom  Diodorus  copied,  viz.  Ephorus,  recognised  the  same
division  of  leadership  in  the  Egyptian  campaign.


732     tme  last  days  of  tee  old  eastern  world.

which  left  their  fleet  high  and  dry,  and,  rather  than  allow  it  to  fall  into  his
hands,  they  burned  their  vessels,  whereupon  he  gave  orders  to  make  the  final
assault.  The  bulk  of  the  Athenian  auxiliaries  perished  in  that  day's  attack,
the  remainder  withdrew  with  Inaros  into  the  fortified  town  of  Byblos,  where
Megabyzos,  unwilling  to  prolong  a  struggle  with  a  desperate  enemy,  permitted
them  to  capitulate  on  honourable  terms.  Some  of  them  escaped  and  returned
to  Cyrene,  from  whence  they  took  ship  to  their  own  country ;  but  the  main
body,  to  the  number  of  GOOO,  were  carried  away  to  Susa  by  Megabyzos  in
order  to  receive  the  confirmation  of  the  treaty  which  he  had  concluded.
As  a  crowning  stroke  of  misfortune,  a  reinforcement  of  fifty  Athenian
triremes,  which  at  this  juncture  entered  the  Mendesian  mouth  of  the  Nile,
was  surrounded  by  the  Phoenician  fleet,  and  more  than  half  of  them  destroyed.
The  fall  of  Prosopitis  brought  the  rebellion  to  an  end.^  The  nomes  of  the
Delta  were  restored  to  order,  and,  as  was  often  customary  in  Oriental  kingdoms,
the  vanquished  petty  princes  or  their  children  were  reinvested  in  their
hereditary  fiefs ;  even  Libya  was  not  taken  from  the  family  of  Inaros,  but
was  given  to  his  son  Thannyras  and  a  certain  Psammetichus.^  A  few  bands
of  fugitives,  however,  took  refuge  in  the  marshes  of  the  littoral,  in  the  place
where  the  Saites  in  former  times  had  sought  a  safe  retreat,  and  they  there
proclaimed  king  a  certain  Amyrtfeus,  who  was  possibly  connected  with  the
line  of  Amasis,  and  successfully  defied  the  repeated  attempts  of  the  Persians
to  dislodge  tbem.^

The  Greek  league  had  risked  the  best  of  its  forces  in  this  rash  undertaking,
and  had  failed  in  its  enterprise.  It  had  cost  the  allies  so  dearly  in  men  and
galleys,  that  if  the  Persians  had  at  once  assumed  the  oifensive,  most  of  the
Asiatic  cities  would  have  found  themselves  in  a  most  critical  situation ;  and
Athens,  then  launched  in  a  quarrel  with  the  states  of  the  Peloponnesus,  would
have  experienced  the  greatest  difliculty  in  succouring  them.  The  feebleness
of  Artaxerxes,  however,  and  possibly  the  intrigues  at  court  and  troubles  in
various  other  parts  of  the  empire,  prevented  the  satraps  from  pursuing  their
advantage,  and  when  at  length  they  meditated  taking  action,  the  opportunity

'  The  accounts  of  these  events  given  by  Ctesias  {Fragm.  29,  §§  33,  34,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Ctesix
Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  52)  and  Thucydides  (i.  109, 110)  are  complementary,  and,  in  spite  of  their  brevity,
together  form  a  whole  which  must  be  suiBciently  near  the  truth.  That  of  Ephorus,  preserved  in
Diodorus  (xi.  77),  is  derived  from  an  author  who  shows  partiality  to  the  Athenians,  and  who  passes  by
everything  not  to  their  honour,  while  he  seeks  to  throw  the  blame  for  the  final  disaster  on  the
cowardice  of  the  Egyptians.  Tlie  summary  of  Aristodemus  (Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec,
vol.  V.  p.  14)  comes  directly  from  that  of  Thucydides.

'  On  this  Psammetichus,  cf.  Philochorus,  Fragm.  90,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  G-raic.,
vol.  i.  pp.  398,  399 ;  and  on  Thannyras,  Herodotus,  III.  xv.

'  On  Amyrtfeus,  cf.  Thucydides,  i.  110  ;  according  to  Herodotus,  II.  cxl.,  the  island  where  he
took  up  his  abode  was  Elbo — the  same  which  had  formerly  furnished  a  retreat  for  the  blind  Anysis,
and  which  was  famous  in  the  popular  literature  of  this  age.


TEE  PEACE    OF   CALLIAS.  733

had  gone  by.      They  nevertheless  attempted  to  regain   the  ascendency  over
Cyprus  ;  Artabazos  with  a  Sidonian  fleet  cruised  about  the  island,  Megabyzos
assembled  troops  in  Cilicia,  and  the  petty  kings  of  Greek  origin  raised  a  cry  of
alarm,     Athens,  which  had  just  concluded  a  truce  with  the  Peloponnesians,  at
once  sent  two  hundred  vessels  to  their  assistance  under  the  command  of  Cimon
(449).     Cimon  acted  as  though  he  were  about  to  reopen  the  campaign  in  Egypt,
and  despatched  sixty  of  his  triremes  to  King  Amyrtseus,^  while  he  himself  took
Marion  and  blockaded  Kition  with  the  rest  of  his  forces.     The  siege  dragged
on ;  he  was  perhaps  about  to  abandon  it,  when  he  took  to  his  bed  and  died.
Those  who  succeeded  him  in  the  command  were  obliged  to  raise  the  blockade
for  want  of  provisions,  but  as  they  returned  and  were  passing  Salamis,  they  fell
in  with  the  Phcenician  vessels  which  had  just  been  landing  the  Cilician  troops,
and  defeated  them ;  they  then  disembarked,  and,  as  at  Mycale  and  Eurymedon,
they  gained  a  second  victory  in  the  open  field,  after  which  they  joined  the
squadron  which  had  been  sent  to  Egypt,  and  sailed  for  Athens  with  the  dead
body  of  their  chief.     They  had  once  more  averted  the  danger  of  an  attack  on
the  Mgenxi,  but  that  was  all.     The  Athenian  statesmen  had  for  some  time  past
realised  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  sustaiu  a  double  conflict,  and  fight
the  battles  of  Greece  against  the  common  enemy,  while  half  of  the  cities  whose
safety   was   secured   by  their   heroic   devotion   were   harassing   them  on  the
continent,  bul^  the  influence  of  Cimon  had  up  till  now  encouraged  them  to
persist ;  on  the  death  of  Cimon,  they  gave  up  the  attempt,  and  Callias,  one  of
their  leaders,  repaired  in  state  to  Susa  for  the  purpose  of  opening  negotiations.
The  peace  which  was  concluded  on  the  occasion  of  this  embassy  might  at  first
sight  appear  advantageous  to  their  side.     The  Persian  king,  without  actually
admitting  his  reverses,  accepted  their  immediate  consequences.     He  recognised
the  independence  of  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  of  those  at  least  who  belonged  to  the
league  of  Delos,  and  he  promised  that  his  armies  on  land  should  never  advance
further  than  three  days'  march  from  the  ^gean  littoral.     On  the  seas,  he
forbade  his  squadrons  to  enter  Hellenic  waters  from  the  Chelidonian  to  the
Cyansean  rocks — that  is,  from  the  eastern  point  of  Lycia  to  the  opening  of  the
Black  Sea :  this  prohibition  did  not  apply  to  the  merchant  vessels  of  the  contract-
ing parties,  and  they  received  permission  to  traffic  freely  in  each  other's  waters
— the  Phcenicians  in  Greece,  and  the  Greeks  in  Phoenicia,  Cilicia,  and  Egypt.
And  yet,  when  we  consider  the  matter,  Athens  and  Hellas  were,  of  the  two,  the
greater  losers  by  this  convention,  which  appeared  to  imply  their  superiority.
Not  only  did  they  acknowledge  indirectly  that  they  felt  themselves  unequal
to  the  task  of  overthrowing  the  empire,  but  they  laid  down  their  arras  before
they  had  accomplished  the  comparatively  restricted  task  which  they  had  set
'  Thcotdides,  i.  112  ;  PLUTAncH,  Life  of  Cimon,  §  18.


734       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

themselves  to  perform,  that  of  freeing  all  the  Greeks  from  the  Iranian  yoke :
their  Egyptian  compatriots  still  remained  Persian  tributaries,  in  company  with
the  cities  of  Cyrenaica,  Pamphylia,  and  Cilicia,  and,  above  all,  that  island  of
Cyprus  in  which  they  had  gained  some  of  their  most  signal  triumphs.  The
Persians,  relieved  from  a  war  which  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  had  consumed
their  battalions  and  squadrons,  drained  their  finances,  and  excited  their  subjects
to  revolt,  were  now  free  to  regain  their  former  wealth  and  perhaps  their  vigour,
could  they  only  find  generals  to  command  their  troops  and  guide  their  politics.
Artaxerxes  was  incapable  of  directing  this  revival,  and  his  inveterate  weakness
exposed  him  perpetually  to  the  plotting  of  his  satraps  or  to  the  intrigues  of  the
women  of  his  harem.  The  example  of  Artabanus,  followed  by  that  of  Hystaspes,
had  shown  how  easy  it  was  for  an  ambitious  man  to  get  rid  secretly  of  a
monarch  or  a  prince  and  seriously  endanger  the  crown.  The  members  of  the
families  who  had  placed  Darius  on  the  throne,  possessed  by  hereditary  right,
or  something  little  short  of  it,  the  wealthiest  and  most  populous  provinces —
Babylonia,  Syria,  Lydia,  Phrygia,  and  the  countries  of  the  Halys — and  they  were
practically  kings  in  all  but  name,  in  spite  of  the  surveilhidce  which  the  general
and  the  secretary  were  supposed  to  exercise  over  their  actions.  Besides  this,
the  indifference  and  incapacity  of  the  ruling  sovereigns  had  already  tended  to
destroy  the  order  of  the  administrative  system  so  ably  devised  by  Darius  :  the
satrap  had,  as  a  rule,  absorbed  the  functions  of  a  general  within  his  own  province,
and  the  secretary  was  too  insignificant  a  personage  to  retain  authority  and  inde-
pendence unless  he  received  the  constant  support  of  the  sovereign.  The  latter,  a
tool  in  the  bands  of  women  and  eunuchs,  usually  felt  himself  powerless  to  deal  with
his  great  vassals.  His  toleration  went  to  all  lengths  if  he  could  thereby  avoid
a  revolt ;  when  this  was  inevitable,  and  the  rebels  were  vanquislied,  he  still  con-
tinued to  conciliate  them,  and  in  most  cases  their  fiefs  and  rights  were  preserved
or  restored  to  them,  the  monarch  knowing  that  be  could  rid  himself  of  them
treacherously  by  poison  or  the  dagger  in  the  case  of  their  proving  themselves
too  troublesome.  Megabyzos  by  his  turbulence  was  a  thorn  in  the  side  of
Artaxerxes  during  the  half  of  his  reign.  He  had  ended  his  campaign  in  Egypt
by  engaging  to  preserve  the  lives  of  Inaros  and  the  6000  Greeks  who  had
capitulated  at  Byblos,  and,  in  spite  of  the  anger  of  the  king,  he  succeeded  in
keeping  his  word  for  five  years,  but  at  the  end  of  that  time  the  demands  of
Amestris  prevailed.  She  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  him  some  fifty  Greeks
whom  she  beheaded,  besides  Inaros  himself,  whom  she  impaled  to  avenge  Achte-
menes.  Megabyzos,  who  had  not  recovered  from  the  losses  he  had  sustained  in
his  last  campaign  against  Cimon,  at  first  concealed  his  anger,  but  he  asked  per-
mission to  visit  his  Syrian  province,  and  no  sooner  did  he  reach  it,  than  he  resorted
to  hostilities.   He  defeated  in  succession  Usiris  and  Menostates,  the  two  generals


TEE  BEVOLT  OF  MEGABTZOS.


735


despatched  against  him,  and  when  force  failed  to  overcome  his  obstinate  resist-
ance, the  government  condescended  to  treat  with  him,  and  swore  to  forget  the
past  if  he  would  consent  to  lay  down  arms.  To  this  he  agreed,  and  reappeared
at  court ;  but  once  there,  bis  confidence  nearly  proved  fatal  to  him.  Having
been  invited  to  take  part  in  a  bunt,  he  pierced  with  his  javelin  a  lion  which
threatened  to  attack  the  king :  Artaxerxes  called  to  mind  an  ancient  law  which


VIEW    OF    THE    Ai   II   l.Jll.MAX    l;Li:


punished  by  death  any  intervention  of  that  kind,  and  he  ordered  that  the  culprit
should  be  beheaded.  Megabyzos  with  diflSculty  escaped  this  punishment  through
tlie  entreaties  of  Amestris  and  of  his  wife  Amytis ;  but  he  was  deprived  of  his
fiefs,  and  sent  to  Kyrta,  on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  After  five  years  this
exile  became  unbearable ;  he  therefore  spread  the  report  that  he  was  attacked  by
leprosy,  and  he  returned  home  without  any  one  venturing  to  hinder  him,  from
fear  of  defiling  themselves  by  contact  with  his  person.  Amestris  and  Amytis
brought  about  his  reconciliation  with  his  sovereign  ;  and  thenceforward  he  regu-
lated his  conduct  so  successfully  that  the  past  was  completely  forgotten,  and  when
he  died,  at  the  age  of  seventy-six  years,  Artaxerxes  deeply  regretted  his  loss.^

Peace  having  been  signed  with  Athens,  and  the  revolt  of  Megabyzos  being
at  an  end,  Artaxerxes  was  free  to  enjoy  himself  without  further  care  for  the
future,  and  to  pass  his  time  between  his  various  capitals  and  palaces.     His

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  of  Flandin  and  Coste,  La  Perse  Antique,  pi.  58.

'  These  events  are  known  to  ua  only  through  Cteaias  (^Fragm.  29,  §§  31-41,  ia  MixLER-DiDOT,
Ctesiie  Ciiidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  52,  53,  G8).  Tlieir  date  is  uncertain,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  they
occurred  after  Cimoa's  campaign  in  Cyprus  and  the  conclusion  of  the  peace  of  Callias.


736


TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.


choice  lay  between  Susa  and  Persepolis,  between  Ecbatana  and  Babylon,
according  as  the  heat  of  the  summer  or  the  cold  of  the  winter  induced  him
to  pass  from  the  plains  to  the  mountains,  or  from  the  latter  to  the  plains.
During  his  visits  to  Babylon  he  occupied  one  of  the  old  Chaldasan  palaces,

but  at  Ecbatana  he  pos-
sessed merely  the  ancient
residence  of  tlie  Median
kings,  and  the  seraglio  built
or  restored  by  Xerxes  in  the
fashion  of  the  times :  at  Susa
and  in  Persia  proper,  the
royal  buildings  were  entirely
the  work  of  the  Achasme-
nids,  mostly  that  of  Darius
and  Xerxes.  The  memory
of  Cyrus  and  of  the  kings  to
whom  primitive  Persia  owed
her  organisation  in  the  ob-
scure century  preceding  her
career  of  conquest,  was
piously  preserved  in  the  rude
buildings  of  Pasargadas,^
which  was  regarded  as  a
sacred  city,  whither  the  sove-
reigns repaired  for  coronation
as  soon  as  their  predecessors
had  expired.^  But  its  lonely  position  and  simple  appointments  no  longer  suited
their  luxurious  and  effeminate  habits,  and  Darius  had  in  consequence  fixed  his
residence  a  few  miles  to  the  south  of  it,  near  to  the  village,  which  after  its
development  became  the  immense  royal  city  of  Persepolis.^  He  there  erected
buildings  more  suited  to  the  splendour  of  his  court,  and  found  the  place  so
much  to  his  taste  during  his  lifetime,  that  he  was  unwilling  to  leave  it  after
death.     He  therefore  caused  his  tomb  to  be  cut  in  the  steep  limestone  cliif

'  Ou  the  buildings  of  Cyrus  at  PasargardsB,  his  palace  and  his  tomb,  of.  supra,  pp.  652,  653.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  the  heliogravure  by  Maroel  Dieulafoy,  L'Art  antique  de  la
Perse,  vol.  ii.  pi.  x. ;  compare  the  tombs  of  the  Achsemenids,  in  Flandin  and  Costb,  La  Perse
Ancienne,  pis.  173-176.

'  Plutarch,  Artoxerxes,  §  3,  where  it  seems  very  likely  that  the  main  part  of  the  story  has  been
borrowed  from  the  historian  Dinon,  perhaps  by  an  earlier  writer  than  Plutarch,  and  then  used  by  the
latter.

*  The  history  of  Persepolis  and  the  questions  thereby  raised  have  been  briefly  set  forth  by
NoLDEKE,  Aufsatze  zur  Persichen  Gesehichte,  pp.  135-146.


THE  TOMB  OF   DARIUS.'


TEE   TOMBS   OF  TEE  ACE^MENIAN  KINGS.


737


which  borders  the  plain  about  half  a  mile  to  the  north-west  of  the  town.  It
is  an  opening  in  the  form  of  a  Greek  cross,  the  upper  part  of  which  contains
a  bas-relief  in  which  the  king,  standing  in  front  of  the  altar,  implores  the
help  of  Ahura-mazda  poised  with  extended  wings  above  him ;  the  platform
on  which  the  king  stands  is  supported  by  two  rows  of  caryatides  in  low  relief,
whose  features  and  dress  are  characteristic  of  Persian  vassals,  while  other
personages,  in  groups  of  three  on  either  side,  are  shown  in  the  attitude  of


THE    HILL   OP   THE    EOYAL    ACH^ftLENIAN    T031BS   AT    >'AKHSH-i-KUaTEM.'

prayer.  Below,  iu  tlie  transverse  arms  of  the  cross,  is  carved  a  flat  portico
with  four  columns,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  the  entrance  to  the  funeral  vault.
Within  the  latter,  in  receptacles  hollowed  out  of  the  rock,  Darius  and  eight
of  his  family  were  successively  laid.^  Xerxes  caused  a  tomb  in  every  way
similar  to  be  cut  for  himself  near  that  of  Darius,  and  in  the  course  of  years
others  were  added  close  by.^  Both  the  tombs  and  the  palace  are  built
in  that  eclectic  style  which  characterises  the  Achasmenian  period  of  Iranian  art.
The  main  features  are  borrowed  from  the  architecture  of  those  nations  which
were  vassals  or  neighbours  of  the  empire — Babylonia,  Egypt,  and  Greece;*

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  engraving  of  Flandin  and  Coste,  La  Perse  Antique,  pi.  172.

=  -The  description  and  technical  criticism  of  these  tombs  are  given  at  length  in  Peekot  and
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  I' Art  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  017-634.

^  The  tomb  of  Darius  alone  bears  an  inscription  (Weissbach  and  Baxg,  Die  Allpers.  Eeilins..
pp.  34-37).  Darius  III.  was  also  buried  there  by  command  of  Alexander;  of.  Arkian,  Anabasis,  iii.
22,  §  1,  where  the  expression  es  ndpaas  eire/ji^fie  should  be  translated  :  "  he  sent  the  body  to  Persepolis."

'  For  the  different  elements  borrowed  from  the  art  of  vassals  or  neighbours,  see  the  analysis  of
Perkot  and  Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  VAntiquite,  vol.  v.  pp.  S83-897.

3   B


738


TEE  LAST  DATS    OF  THE   OLD   EASTEBN   WORLD.


but  these  various  elements  have  been  combined  and  modified  in  such
a  manner  as  to  form  a  rich  and  harmonious  whole.  The  core  of  the  walls
was  of  burnt  bricks,  similar  to  those  employed  in  the  Euphrates  valley,  but
these  were  covered  with  a  facing  of  enamelled  tiles,  disposed  as  a  skirting  or
a  frieze,  on  which  figured  those  wonderful  processions  of  archers,  and  the
lions  which  now  adorn  the  Louvre,  while    the  pilasters   at   the   angles,  the

columns,  pillars,  window-
frames,  and  staircases  were
of  fine  white  limestone  or  of
hard  bluish  -  grey  marble.
The  doorways  are  high  and
narrow  ;  the  moulding  which
frames  them  is  formed  of
three  Ionic  fillets,  each  pro-
jecting beyond  the  other,
surmounted  by  a  coved
Egyptian  lintel  springing
from  a  row  of  alternate  eggs
and  disks.  The  framing  of
the  doors  is  bare,  but  the
embrasures  are  covered  with
Las  -  reliefs  representing
various  scenes  in  which  the
king  is  portrayed  fulfilling
his  royal  functions — engaged
in  struggles  with  evil  genii
which  have  the  form  of  lions
or  fabulous  animals,  occupied
in  hunting,  granting  audiences,  or  making  an  entrance  in  state,  shaded  by  an
umbrella  which  is  borne  by  a  eunuch  behind  him.  The  columns  employed  in
this  style  of  architecture  constitute  its  most  original  feature.  Tlie  base  of
them  usually  consists  of  two  mouldings,  resting  either  on  a  square  pedestal  or
en  a  cylindrical  drum,  widening  out  below  into  a  bell-like  curve,  and  sometimes
ornamented  with  several  rows  of  inverted  leaves.  The  shafts,  which  have
forty-eight  perpendicular  ribs  cut  on  their  outer  surface,  are  perhaps  rather
tall  in  proportion  to  their  thickness.      They  terminate  in  a  group  of  large

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  Louvre  by  Faucher-Gudin ;  this  is  one  of  the
capitals  brought  back  and  set  up  Ijy  JI.  and  Mme.  Dieulafoy.  Cf.  Dievlafoy,  L'AcropoU  de  Suse,
p.  325,  fig.  203.


ONE   OP  THE   CAPIT.\LS   FROM   SUSA.'


jrjr-r


^^


*»Jt*'(!j


m>mVi


liWf^i


Wiii


■■•'i  ■  ■^  ,  wi


g  H

03  O

S  ^

a  a

a  "

^  s

o  •<:


740


TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTEBN   WORLD.


leaves,  an  evident  imitation  of  the  Egyptian  palm-leaf  capital,  from  wbich
spring  a  sort  of  rectangular  fluted  die  or  abacus,  flanked  on  either  side  with
four  rows  of  volutes  curved  in  opposite  directions,  generally  two  at  the  base
and  two  at  the  summit.  The  heads  and  shoulders  of  two  bulls,  placed  back  to
back,  project  above  the  volutes,  and  take  the  place  of  the  usual  abacus  of  the
capital.     The  dimensions  of  these  columns,  their  gracefulness,  and  the  distance

at  which  they  were  placed
from  one  another,  prove  that
they  supported  not  a  stone
architrave,  but  enormous
beams  of  wood,  which  were
inserted  between  the  napes
of  the  bulls'  necks,  and  upon
which  the  joists  of  the  roof
were  superimposed.^  The
palace  of  Persepolis,  built  by
Darius  after  he  had  crushed
the  revolts  which  took  place
at  the  outset  of  his  reign,
was  situated  at  the  foot  of  a
chain  of  rugged  mountains
which  skirt  the  plain  on  its
eastern  side,  and  was  raised
on  an  irregularly  shaped
platform  or  terrace,  which
was  terminated  by  a  wall  of
enormous  polygonal  blocks
of  masonry.  The  terrace
was  reached  by  a  double
flight  of  steps,  the  lateral
walls  of  which  are  covered
with  bas-reliefs,  representing  processions  of  satellites,  slaves,  and  tributaries,
hunting  scenes,  fantastic  episodes  of  battle,  and  lions  fighting  with  and  devour-
ing bulls.  The  area  of  the  raised  platform  was  not  of  uniform  level,  and
was  laid  out  in  gardens,  in  the  midst  of  which  rose  the  pavilions  that  served  as
dwelling-places.     The  reception-rooms  were  placed  near  the  top  of  the  flight

'  For  the  detailed  study  of  the  elements  of  Persian  architecture  I  refer  the  reader  to  Pebkot  and
Chipiez,  Histoire  de  VArt  dans  V Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  417-588.

•  Drawn  by  Boudicr,  from  the  heliogravure  of  JIarcel  DrEULAPOT.  L'AH  antique  de  la  Perse,
vol.  ii.  pi.  xii.;  of.  Pekrot  and  CmpiEZ,  Eistoire  de  VArt  dans  VAutiquita.  vol.  v.  pi.  ii.


THE   PK0PYL.S:A    of   XERXES   I.    AT   PERSEPOLIS.'


IRANIAN  ARGHITECTUBE  AND   SCULPTURE.


741


of  steps,  and  the  more  important  of  them  had  been  built  under  the  two
preceding  kings.  Those  nearest  to  the  edge  of  the  platform  were  the
propylsea  of  Xerxes — gigantic  entrances  whose  gateways  were  guarded
on  either  side  by  winged  bulls  of  Assyrian  type;  beyond  these  was  the
apadana,  or  hall  of  honour,  where  the  sovereign  presided  in  state  at  the
ordinary   court   ceremonies.      To   the  east   of  the   apadana,   and   almost    in


BAS-KELIEF   ON    THE    STAIUCASE    LEADING   TO   THE   APADANA    OP    XEUXES    1.'

the  centre  of  the  raised  terrace,  rose  the  Hall  of  a  Hundred  Columns,  erected
by  Darius,  and  used  only  on  special  occasions.^  Artaxerxes  I.  seems  to  have
had  a  particular  affection  for  Susa.  It  had  found  favour  with  his  predecessors,
and  they  had  so  frequently  resided  there,  even  after  the  building  of  Persepolis,
that  it  had  continued  to  be  regarded  as  the  real  capital  of  the  empire  by  other
nations,  whereas  the  Persian  sovereigns  themselves  had  sought  to  make  it  rather
an  impregnable  retreat  than  a  luxurious  residence.  Artaxerxes  built  there  an
apadana  on  a  vaster  scale  than  any  hitherto  designed.  It  comprised  three
colonnades,  which,  taken  together,  formed  a  rectangle  measuring  300  feet  by  250
feet  on  the  two  sides,  the  area  being  approximately  that  of  the  courtyard  of  the

'  Drawn  by  Fauohcr-Gudiu,  from  IfAKCEL  Dieulafoy,  L'AH  anliiiue  de  la  Perse,  vol.  iii.
pi.  xviii.

-  The  ruoaumeuts  of  Persepolis  have  been  restored  and  described  iu  the  engravings  and  iti  the
text  of  the  great  work  of  Coste  and  Flandin,  Voyage  eu  Perse,  1st  part,  Perse  ancienne;  the  analysis
and  the  restoration  will  be  found  given  in  detail  in  Pebrot  and  Cuutez,  Uistoire  de  VArt  dans
I' Antiquity,  vol.  v.  pp.  075-750.


742


THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.


Louvre.  The  central  colonnade,  which  was  the  largest  of  the  three,  was  enclosed
by  walls  on  three  sides,  but  was  open  to  the  south.  Immense  festoons  of  drapery
hung  from  the  wooden  entablature,  and  curtains,  suspended  from  rods  between
the  first  row  of  columns,  afforded  protection  from  the  sun  and  from  the  curiosity
of  the  vulgar.  At  the  hour  appointed  for  the  ceremonies,  the  great  king  took
his  seat  in  solitary  grandeur  on  the  gilded  throne  of  the  Achtemenids;  at  the

r.„^_...,.^_„__ ,     extreme  end  of  the  colonnade  his  eunuchs,  nobles,
jro^  and  guards  ranged  themselves  in  silence  on  either

side,  each  in  the  place  which  etiquette  assigned
to  him.  Meanwhile  the  foreign  ambassadors  who
had  been  honoured  by  an  invitation  to  the  audience
—  Greeks  from  Thebes,  Sparta,  or  Athens;  Sakae
from  the  regions  of  the  north ;  Indians,  Arabs,
nomad  chiefs  from  mysterious  Ethiopia — ascended
in  procession  the  flights  of  steps  which  led  from
the  town  to  the  palace,  bearing  the  presents
destined  for  its  royal  master.  Having  reached
the  terrace,  the  curtains  of  the  apadana  were  sud-
denly parted,  and  in  the  distance,  through  a  vista
of  columns,  they  perceived  a  motionless  figure,
resplendent  with  gold  and  purple,  before  whom
they  fell  prostrate  with  their  faces  to  the  earth.
The  heralds  were  the  bearers  of  their  greetings,
and  brought  back  to  them  a  gracious  or  haughty
reply,  as  the  case  might  be.  When  they  rose
from  the  ground,  the  curtains  had  closed,  the
kingly  vision  was  eclipsed,  and  the  escort  which
had  accompanied  them  into  the  palace  conducted
them  back  to  the  town,  dazzled  with  the  momentary  glimpse  of  the  spectacle
vouchsafed  to  them.^

The  Achsemenian  monarchs  were  not  regarded  as  gods  or  as  sons  of
gods,  like  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs,  and  the  Persian  religion  forbade  their
ever  becoming  so,  but  the  person  of  the  king  was  hedged  round  with  such
ceremonial  respect  as  in  other  Oriental  nations  was  paid  only  to  the  gods :
this  was  but  natural,  for  was  he  not  a  despot,  who  with  a  word  or  gesture
could  abase   the    noblest    of  his  subjects,  and    determine   the  well-being   or

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Flaxdin  and  Coste,  La  Perse  Antique,  pi.  14C;  cf.  similar
scenes  in  the  same  work  in  pis.  155,  150.

-  The  palace  of  Susa, noticed  by  Loftls,  Travels  and  Researches  in  Chaldiea  and  Susiann,  pp.  3i3-355,
364-415,  has  been  excavated  by  Dieulafoy,  who  has  described  it  in  L'Acropole  de  Susa,  pp.  274-358.


THE  KISG   ox   HIS  THKOXE.


THE  ETIQUETTE   OF   THE  PEBSIAN   COURT.


743


misery  of  his  people  ?  His  dress  differed  from  that  of  his  nobles  ^  only  by  the
jjurple  dye  of  its  material  and  the  richness  of  the  gold  embroideries  with  which
it  was  adorned,"  but  he  was  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  peculiar  felt
cap,  or  hidaris,  which  he  wore,  and  the  blue-and-white  band  which  encircled  it
like  a  crown  ;  ^  the  king  is  never  represented  without  his  long  sceptre  with
pommelled  handle,  whether  he  be  sitting  or  standing,  and  wherever  he  went  he
was  attended  by  his  umbrella-  and  fan-bearers.  The  prescriptions  of  court
etiquette  were  such  as  to  convince  his  subjects  and  persuade  himself  that  he
was  sprung  from  a  nobler  race  than  that  of  any  of  his  magnates,  and  that  he


'^  J^^^^^54a»v.


A    VIEW    OF    THE    Al'ADANA    OF    SUSA,    KESTORED.''

was  outside  the  pale  of  ordinary  humanity.  The  greater  part  of  his  time  was
passed  in  privacy,  where  he  was  attended  only  by  the  eunuchs  appointed  to
receive  his  orders  ;  ^  and  these  orders,  once  issued,  were  irrevocable,  as  was  also
the  king's  word,  however  much  he  might  desire  to  recall  a  promise  once  made.^
His  meals  were,  as  a  rule,  served  to  him  alone ; '  he  might  not  walk  on  foot
beyond  the  precincts  of  the  palace,  and  he  never  showed  himself  in  public

■  It  was  the  Median  robe,  called  the  Itandys,  whose  adoption  by  the  Persians  dated,  it  was  said,
from  the  time  of  Cyrus  (Xenophon,  Cyropmdia,  viii.  1,  §  40).

-  Plutarch,  Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  24.  as»erts,  probably  following  Dinon,  that  a  royal  coitilme  of
this  description  was  estimated  to  be  worth  12,000  taleuts,  or  nearly  £2,750.000.

S'  The  name  is  transliterated  sometimes  as  Ki.daris  (Aurian,  Anabasis,  IV.  vii.  §  4),  sometimes
as  Kitciris  (Plutarch,  Life  of  Arlaxerxes,  §  2S).

*  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  the  restoration  by  Marcel  DiEOLAFoy,  L'Acrojmle  de  Suse,  pi.  sv.

»  Justin,  i.  9,  where  Pompeius  Trogus  relies  probably  on  the  testimony,  direct  or  indirect,  of
Ctesias.

»  For  the  impossibility  of  the  king's  retracting  his  word,  even  if  he  had  pledged  it  imprudently,
cf.  the  history  of  Xerxes  and  Amestrls  in  Herodotus,  IX.  cix.

'  Heraclides  of  Cumj!,  Fragm.  2,  in  Mvller-Didot,  Fmgm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  KC,  97,
gives  a  very  detailed  description  of  the  etiquette  attending  tlie  royal  meals,  as  well  as  all  the
other  incidents  in  the  life  of  the  Achiemeniau  kings  of  Persia.


744       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

except  on  horseback  or  in  his  chariot,  surroimded  by  his  servants  and  his
guards.^  The  male  members  of  the  royal  family  and  those  belonging  to  the
six  noble  houses  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  approaching  the  king  at  any  hour  of
the  day  or  night,  provided  he  was  not  in  the  company  of  one  of  his  wives.^
These  privileged  persons  formed  his  council,^  which  he  convoked  on  important
occasions,  but  all  ordinary  business  was  transacted  by  means  of  the  scribes  and
inferior  officials,  on  whom  devolved  the  charge  of  the  various  departments
of  the  government.  A  vigorous  ruler,  such  as  Darius  had  proved  himself,
certainly  trusted  no  one  but  himself  to  read  the  reports  sent  in  by  the  satraps,
the  secretaries,  and  the  generals,  or  to  dictate  the  answers  required  by  each ;
but  Xerxes  and  Artaxerxes  delegated  the  heaviest  part  of  such  business  to
their  ministers,  and  they  themselves  only  fulfilled  such  state  functions  as  it
was  impossible  to  shirk — the  public  administration  of  justice,  receptions  of
ambassadors  or  victorious  generals,  distributions  of  awards,  annual  sacrifices,
and  state  banquets :  they  were  even  obliged,  in  accordance  with  an  ancient  and
inviolable  tradition,  once  a  year  to  set  aside  their  usual  sober  habits  and  drink
to  excess  on  the  day  of  the  feast  of  Mithra.^  Occasionally  they  would  break
through  their  normal  routine  of  life  to  conduct  in  person  some  expedition  of
small  importance,  directed  against  one  of  the  semi-independent  tribes  of  Iran,
such  as  the  Cadusians,  but  their  most  glorious  and  frequent  exploits  were  con-
fined to  the  chase.  They  delighted  to  hunt  the  bull,  the  wild  boar,  the  deer,
the  wild  ass,  and  the  hare,  as  the  Pharaohs  or  Assyrian  kings  of  old  had  done ;
and  they  would  track  the  lion  to  his  lair  and  engage  him  single-handed  ;  in
fact  they  held  a  strict  monopoly  in  such  conflicts,  a  law  which  punished  with
death  any  huntsman  who  had  the  impertinence  to  interpose  between  the
monarch  and  his  prey  being  only  abolished  by  Artaxerxes.^  A  crowd  of
menials,  slaves,  great  nobles,  and  priests  filled  the  palace;  grooms,  stool-
bearers  umbrella-  and  fan-carriers,  kavasses,  "  Immortals,"  bakers,  perfumers,
soldiers,  and  artisans  formed  a  retinue  so  numerous  as  to  require  a  thousand
bullocks,  asses,  and  stags  to  be  butchered  every  day  for  its  maintenance ;«  and
when  the  king  made  a  journey  in  full  state,  this  enormous  train  looked  like  an
army  on  the  march.  The  women  of  the  royal  harem  lived  in  seclusion  in  a
separate  wing  of  the  palace,  or  in  isolated  buildings  erected  in  the  centre  of
the  o-ardens.     The  legitimate  wives  of  the  sovereign  were  selected  from  the

>  Heraclides  of  Cvus,  Fragm.  1,  in  JIcllee-Dibot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Griec.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  96.
=  Herodotus,  III.  Ixxsiv.

'  This  is  the  council  of  the  seven  meotioned  in  the  Book  of  Ezra,  vii.  14.
<  DuRis  OF  Samos,  Fragm.  13,  in  Mullek-Dedot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Crrcec,  vol.  ii.  pp.  472,  473.
'  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  735.

«  Hekaclides  of  Cciia:,  Fragm.  2, -in  JIullee-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsec.  vol.  ii.  pp.  96,  97;  cl'.
■what  is  stated,  supra,  pp.  593,  594.


TEE  ACH^MENIAN  KING   AND   HIS  HA  REM.


745


ladies  of  the  royal  house,  the  sisters  or  cousins  of  the  kiug,^  and  from  the  sis
princely  Persian  families ;  ^  but  their  number  was  never  very  large,  usually
three  or  four  at  most.^  The  concubines,  on  the  other  hand,  were  chosen  from
all  classes  of  society,  and  were  counted  by  hundreds.  They  sang  or  played  on
musical  instruments  at  the  state  banquets  of  the  court,  they  accompanied  their
master  to  the  battle-field  or  the  chase,  and  probably  performed  the  various
inferior  domestic  duties  in  the  interior  of  the  harem,  such  as  spinning,  weaving,
making  perfumes,  and  attending  to  the  confectionery  and  cooking.*  Each  of
the  king's  wives  bad  her  own  separate  suite  of  apartments  and  special  attend-
ants, and  occupied  a  much  higher  position  than  a  mere  concubine  ;  but  only  one


PROCESSIONAL  DISPLAY   OF  TRIBUTE  BBOUGHT  TO  THE   EIXG   OF   PERSIA.^

was  actually  queen  and  had  the  right  to  wear  the  crown,  and  this  position
belonged  of  right  to  a  princess  of  Achsemenian  race.  Thus  Atossa,  daughter  of
Cyrus,  was  queen  successively  to  Cambyses,  Gaumata,  and  Darius ;  Amestris
to  Xerxes;  and  Damaspia  to  Artaxerxes.  Besides  the  influence  naturally
exerted  by  the  queen  over  the  mind  of  her  husband,  she  often  acquired  bound-
less authority  in  the  empire,  in  spite  of  her  secluded  life.^  Her  power  was  still
further  increased  when  she  became  a  widow,  if  the  new  king  happened  to  be  one
of  her  own  sons.  In  such  circumstances  she  retained  the  external  attributes  of
royalty,  sitting  at  the  royal  table  whenever  the  king  deigned  to  dine  in  the
women's  apartments,  and  everywhere  taking  precedence  of  the  young  queen  ;
she  was  attended  by  her  own  body  of  eunuchs,  of  whom,  as  well  as  of  her  private

'  For  the  consanguineous  and  incestuous  marriages  which  were  in  vogue  among  the  Iranians,  anil
especially  among  the  Magi,  cf.  supra,  pp.  588,  589.

-  Herodotus,  III.  Ixxxiv.

'  Cambyses  had  had  three  wives,  including  his  two  sisters  Atossa  and  Roxana  (cf.  supra,  p.  C55,
note  3,  and  p.  609).  Darius  had  four  wives — two  daughters  of  Cyrus,  Atossa  and  Artystone,  Parmys
daughter  of  Smerdis,  and  a  daughter  of  Otanes  (Herodotus,  III.  Ixxxviii.).

*  DisoN',  Fragin.  17,  in  iliiLLEE-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  G-nec,  vol.  ii.  p.  92 ;  IIeuaclides  of  Cum,e,
Frugin.  1,  2,  in  MuLLER-DiDOT,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  93-95.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  plates  in  Flaxdix  and  Coste,  La  Ptrse  Antique,  pi.  105,  et  seq.

"  Thus  Atossa  induced  Darius  to  designate  Xerxes  as  his  huir-apparent ;  cf.  supra,  pp.  7H.  715.


746       THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

revenues,  she  had  absolute  control.  Those  whom  the  queen-mother  took  under
her  protection  escaped  punishment,  even  though  they  richly  deserved  it,  but
the  object  of  her  hatred  was  doomed  to  perish  in  the  end,  either  by  poison
treacherously  administered,  or  by  some  horrible  form  of  torture,  being  impaled,
suffocated  in  ashes,  tortured  in  the  trough,  or  flayed  alive.^  Artaxerxes  reigned
for  forty-two  years,  spending  his  time  between  the  pleasures  of  the  chase  and
the  harem  ;  no  serious  trouble  disturbed  his  repose  after  the  suppression  of  the
revolt  under  Megabyzos,  but  on  his  death  in  42-4  B.C.  there  was  a  renewal  of  the
intrigues  and  ambitious  passions  which  had  stained  with  bloodshed  the  opening
years  of  his  reign.  The  legitimate  heir,  Xerxes  II.,  was  assassinated,  after  a
reign  of  forty-five  days,  by  Secudianus  (Sogdianus),  one  of  his  illegitimate
brothers,  and  the  cortege  which  was  escorting  the  bodies  of  his  parents  con-
veyed his  also  to  the  royal  burying-place  at  Persepolis.  Meanwhile  Secudianus
became  suspicious  of  another  of  his  brothers,  named  Oehus,  whom  Artaxerxes
had  caused  to  marry  Parysatis,  one  of  the  daughters  of  Xerxes,  and  whom  he
had  set  over  the  important  province  of  Hyrcania.  Ochus  received  rejjeated
summonses  to  appear  in  his  brother's  presence  to  pay  him  homage,  and  at  last
obeyed  the  mandate,  but  arrived  at  the  head  of  an  army.  The  Persian  nobility
rose  at  his  approach,  and  one  by  one  the  chief  persons  of  the  state  declared
themselves  in  his  favour :  first  Arbarius,  commander  of  the  cavalry ;  then
Arxanes,  the  satrap  of  Egypt ;  and  lastly,  the  eunuch  Artoxares,  the  ruler  of
Armenia.  These  three  all  combined  in  urging  Ochus  to  assume  the  kidaris
publicly,  which  he,  with  feigned  reluctance,  consented  to  do,  and  proceeded,  at
the  suggestion  of  Parysatis,  to  open  negotiations  with  Secudianus,  offering  to
divide  the  regal  power  with  him.  Secudianus  accepted  the  offer,  against  the
advice  of  his  minister  Menostanes,  and  gave  himself  up  into  the  hands  of  the
rebels.  He  was  immediately  seized  and  cast  into  the  ashes,  where  he  perished
miserably,  after  a  reign  of  six  months  and  fifteen  days.^

On  ascending  the  throne,  Ochus  assumed  the  name  of  Darius.  His
confidential  advisers  were  three  eunuchs,  who  ruled  the  empire  in  his  name —
Artoxares,  who  had  taken  such  a  prominent  part  in  the  campaign  which  won
him  the  crown,  Artibarzanes,  and  Athoos;  but  the  guiding  spirit  of  his
government  was,  in  reality,  his  wife,  the  detestable  Parysatis.  She  had
already  borne  him  two  children  before  she  became  queen ;  a  daughter,  Amestris,
and  a  son,  Arsaces,^  who  afterwards  became  king  under  the  name  of  Artaxerxes.

'  Cf.  the  history  of  Parysatis  as  narrated  by  Plutarcli  in  his  Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §§  4,  5, 14, 17, 19,  etc.

-  Ctesias,  Fragm.  20,  §§  43-4S,in  JIuller-Didot,  Ctesiie  Ciiidii  Fragm.,  pp.  54,  55  ;  other  authors
mentioned  by  Oiodorus  Sicuhis  (xii.  74)  affirmed  that  the  reign  of  Xerxes  II.  lasted  a  whole  year.

'  Tliis  is  the  spelling  found  iu  the  extract  from  Photius  (Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  49,  in  MiiLLER-
DiDOT,  Ctesias  Ciiidii  Fragm.,  p.  55),  but  Plutarch  gives  the  form  Arsilias  {Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  ]),
which  must  be  the  original  spelling;  according  to  Diuon  {Fragm.  22,  iu  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.
Eist.  Greec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  03),  Artaxerxes  was  called  Oartes  before  his  accession.


XEBXES  II.,    SECUDIANUS,    DARIUS  II.  747

Soon  after  the  accession  of  her  husband,  she  bore  him  a  second  son,  whom
she  named  Cyrus,  in  memory  of  the  founder  of  the  empire,  and  a  daughter,
Artoste;  several  other  children  were  born  subsequently,  making  thirteen  in
all,  but  these  all  died  in  childhood,  except  one  named  Oxendras.^  Violent,
false,  jealous,  and  passionately  fond  of  the  exercise  of  power,  Parysatis  hesitated
at  no  crime  to  rid  herself  of  those  who  thwarted  her  schemes,  even  though
they  might  be  members  of  her  own  family;  and,  not  content  with  putting
them  out  of  the  way,  she  delighted  in  making  them  taste  her  hatred  to  the
full,  by  subjecting  them  to  the  most  skilfully  graduated  refinements  of  torture  ;
she  deservedly  left  behind  her  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  most  cruel
of  all  the  cruel  queens,  whose  memory  was  a  terror  not  only  to  the  harems  of
Persia,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  Eastern  world.  The  numerous
revolts  which  broke  out  soon  after  her  husband's  accession,
furnished  occasions  for  the  revelation  of  her  perfidious  clever-
ness. All  the  malcontents  of  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes,  those
who  had  been  implicated  in  the  murder  of  Xerxes  II.,  or  who
had  sided  with  Secudianus,  had  rallied  round  a  younger  brother
of  Darius,  named  Arsites,  and  one  of  them,  Artyphios,  son  of
Megabyzos,  took  the  field  in  Asia  Minor.  Being  supported  by  a  large  contingent
of  Greek  mercenaries,  he  won  two  successive  victories  at  the  opening  of  the
campaign,  but  was  subsequently  defeated,  though  his  forces  still  remained  for-
midable. But  Persian  gold  accomplished  what  Persian  bravery  had  failed  to
achieve,  and  prevailed  over  the  mercenaries  so  successfully  that  all  deserted  him
with  the  exception  of  three  Milesians.  Artyphios  and  Arsites,  thus  discouraged,
committed  the  imprudence  of  capitulating  on  condition  of  receiving  a  promise
that  their  lives  should  be  spared,  and  that  Ihey  should  be  well  treated ;  but
Parysatis  persuaded  her  husband  to  break  his  plighted  word,  and  they  perished
in  the  ashes.'^  Their  miserable  fate  did  not  discourage  the  satrap  of  Lydia,
Pissuthnes,  who  was  of  Achsemenian  race :  he  entered  the  lists  in  418  B.C.,
with  the  help  of  the  Athenians.*  The  relations  between  the  Persian  empire
and  Greece  had  continued  fairly  satisfactory  since  the  peace  of  449  B.C.,  and
the  few  outbreaks  which  had   taken  place  had  not  led  to   any  widespread

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  49,  in  Mullee-Didot,  Ctesiai  Ciudii  Fragmenta,  p.  55.  Since  Oclius  was
not  the  son  of  Damaspia,  the  only  legitimate  wife  of  Artaxerxes  I.,  the  Greeks  surnamed  him  n69os
(Nothus),  the  bastard.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  coins  in  the  Cabinet  des  Mgdaillei,  of  which  a  cast
was  kindly  furnislied  me  by  M.  Babelon.

'  Ctesias,  Fragm,  29,  §§  50,  51,  in  MUller-Didot,  Gtesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,,  p.  55.  For  the
punishment  of  the  ashes,  cf  the  statement  of  Valerius  JlAXijins,  is.  2,  G :  "  !?eptum  enim  altis
parietibus  locum  cinere  complevit,  superpositoque  tigno  prominente,  benigue  oibo  et  potione  esceptos
in  eo  coUocabat,  e  quo  somno  sopiti,  in  illam  insidiosam  congeriem  decidebant."

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  52,  in  MCllek-Didot,  Ctesix  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  55,  56.


748       TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

disturbance.  The  Athenians,  absorbed  in  their  quarrel  with  Sparta,  preferred
to  close  their  eyes  to  all  side  issues,  lest  the  Persians  should  declare  war
against  them,  and  the  satraps  of  Asia  Minor,  fully  alive  to  the  situation,  did
not  hesitate  to  take  advantage  of  any  pretext  for  recovering  a  part  of  the
territory  they  coveted :  it  was  thus  that  they  had  seized  Colophon  about  430  B.c.,^
and  so  secured  once  more  a  port  on  the  ^gean.  Darius  despatched  to  oppose
Pissuthnes  a  man  of  noble  birth,  named  Tissaphernes,  giving  him  j^lenary
power  throughout  the  whole  of  the  peninsula,  and  Tissaphernes  endeavoured
to  obtain  by  treachery  the  success  he  would  with  difSculty  have  won  ou  the
field  of  battle :  he  corrupted  by  his  darics  Lycon,  the  commander  of  the
Athenian  contingent,  and  Pissuthnes,  suddenly  abandoned  by  his  best
auxiliaries,  was  forced  to  surrender  at  discretion.  He  also  was  suffocated  in
the  ashes,  and  Darius  bestowed  his  office  on  Tissaphernes.  But  the  punish-
ment of  Pissuthnes  did  not  put  an  end  to  the  troubles :  his  son  Amorges
roused  Caria  to  revolt,  and  with  the  title  of  king  maintained  his  independence
for  some  years  longer.  While  these  incidents  were  taking  place,  the  news
of  the  disasters  in  Sicily  reached  the  East :  as  soon  as  it  was  known  in  Susa
that  Athens  had  lost  at  Syracuse  the  best  part  of  her  fleet  and  the  choicest  of
her  citizens,  the  moment  was  deemed  favourable  to  violate  the  treaty  and
regain  control  of  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor.  Two  noteworthy  men  were  at  that
time  set  over  the  western  satrapies,  Tissaphernes  ruling  at  Sardes,  and
Tiribazus  over  Hellespontine  Phrygia.  These  satraps  opened  negotiations
with  Sparta  at  the  beginning  of  412  B.C.,  and  concluded  a  treaty  with  her
at  Miletus  itself,  by  the  terms  of  which  the  Peloponnesians  recognised  the
suzerainty  of  Darius  over  all  the  territory  once  held  by  his  ancestors  in  Asia,
including  the  cities  since  incorporated  into  the  Athenian  league.  They  hoped
shortly  to  be  strong  enough  to  snatch  from  him  what  they  now  ceded,  and  to
set  free  once  more  the  Greeks  whom  they  thus  condemned  to  servitude  after
half  a  century  of  independence,  but  their  expectations  were  frustrated.  The
towns  along  the  coast  fell  one  after  another  into  the  power  of  Tissaphernes,
Amorges  was  taken  prisoner  in  lassos,  and  at  the  beginning  of  411  B.C.  there
remained  to  the  Athenians  in  Ionia  and  Caria  merely  the  two  ports  of  Hali-
carnassus  and  Notium,  and  the  three  islands  of  Cos,  Samos,  and  Lesbos :  from
that  time  the  power  of  the  great  king  increased  from  year  to  year,  and  weighed
heavily  on  the  destinies  of  Greece.  Meanwhile  Darius  II.  was  growing  old,
and  intrigues  with  regard  to  the  succession  were  set  on  foot.  Two  of  his
sons  put  forward  claims  to  the  throne:  Arsaces  had  seniority  in  his  favour,
but  had  been  born  when  his  father  was  still  a  mere  satrap ;  Cyrus,  on  the
contrary,   had    been    boiu    in    the    purple,   and   his   mother   Parysatis   was

'  Thucydides,  iii.  3i.


TEE   TEE  ATT   OF  MILETUS — CYRUS    THE   TO  UN  GEE.  749

passionately  devoted  to  him.^  Thanks  to  her  manceuvres,  he  was  practically
created  viceroy  of  Asia  Minor  in  407  B.C.,  with  such  abundant  resources  of
men  and  money  at  his  disposal,  that  he  was  virtually  an  independent  sovereign.
While  he  was  consolidating  his  power  in  the  west,  his  mother  endeavoured
to  secure  his  accession  to  the  throne  by  intriguing  at  the
court  of  the  aged  king ;  if  her  plans  failed,  Cyrus  was  prepared
to  risk  everything  by  an  appeal  to  arms.  He  realised  that  the
Greeks  would  prove  powerful  auxiliaries  in  such  a  con-
tingency ;  and  as  soon  as  he  had  set  up  his  court  at  Sardes,
he  planned  how  best  to  conciliate  their  favour,  or  at  least  to  ctrcs  the
win  over  those  whose  support  was  likely  to  be  most  valuable.  yodngeb.-
Athens,  as  a  maritime  power,  was  not  in  a  position  to  support  him  in  an
enterprise  which  especially  required  the  co-operation  of  a  considerable  force
of  heavily  armed  infantry.  He  therefore  deliberately  espoused  the  cause  of
the  Peloponnesians,  and  the  support  he  gave  them  was  not  without  its  influence
on  the  issue  of  the  struggle :  the  terrible  day  of  u^gos  Potamos  was  a  day  of
triumph  for  him  as  much  as  for  the  Lacedaemonians  (405  B.C.).

His  intimacy  with  Lysander,  however,  his  constant  enlistments  of
mercenary  troops,  and  his  secret  dealings  with  the  neigh-
bouring provinces,  had  already  aroused  suspicion,  and  the  A
satraps  placed  under  his  orders,  especially  Tissaphernes,  /^
accused  him  to  the  king  of  treason.  Darius  summoned  him  "
to  Susa  to  explain  his  conduct  (405  B.C.),  and  he  arrived  just  ^  *^
in  time  to  be  present  at  his  father's  death  (404),  but  too  late  artaxerxes  mnemon.'
to  obtain  his  designation  as  heir  to  the  throne  through  the  intervention  of  his
mother,  Parysatis ;  Arsaces  inherited  the  crown,  and  assumed  the  name  of  Arta-
xerxes.  Cyrus  entered  the  temple  of  Pasargadte  surreptitiously  during  the
coronation  ceremony,  with  the  intention  of  killing  his  brother  at  the  foot  of  the
altar ;  but  Tissaphernes,  warned  by  one  of  the  priests,  denounced  him,  and  he
would  have  been  put  to  de^th  on  the  spot,  had  not  his  mother  thrown  her
arms  around  him  and  prevented  the  executioner  from  fulfilling  his  office.*
Having  with  difficuMy  obtained  pardon  and  been  sent  back  to  his  province,
he  collected  thirty  thousand  Greeks  and  a  hundred  thousand  native  troops,
and,  hastily  leaving  Sardes  (401  B.C.),  he  crossed  Asia  Minor,  Northern  Syria,

'  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  49,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Ctesiie  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  p.  55,  and  following  him,
PLUTAiiOH,  Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  2.  Cyrus  was  certainly  not  more  than  seventeen  yeara  old  in
407  B.C.,  even  admitting  that  he  was  born  immediately  after  his  father's  accession  in  424-3  B.C.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  one  of  the  coins  in  the  Cabinet  des  MgdaiUes,  of  which  the
cast  was  kindly  furnished  me  by  M.  Babelon.

^  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Mi'dailles,  of  which  the  cast  was  kindly
furnished  me  by  M.  Babelon.  This  coin,  which  was  struck  at  Mallos,  in  CUicia,  bears  as  a  counter-
mark the  figure  of  a  bull  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  Issua.

*  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  57,  in  Mullei;-Didot,  Ctesias  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  56,  57,  which  was  the
source  utilised  by  Plvtarch,  Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §§  2,  3  ;  cf  JrsxiM,  v.  11.


750  'inE  LAST  DAYS   OF   THE   OLD    EASTERN   WORLD.

and  Mesopotamia,  encountered  the  royal  army  at  Cunaxa,  to  the  north  of

Babylon,  and  rashly  met  his  end  at  the  very  moment  of  victory.     He  was

a  brave,  active,  and  generous  prince,  endowed  with  all  the  virtues  requisite

to  make  a  good   Oriental    monarch,  and   he  had,  moreover,  learnt,  tlirough

contact  with  the  Greeks,  to  recognise  the  weak  points  of  his  own  nation,  and

was  fully  determined  to  remedy  them :  his  death,  perhaps,  was  an  irreparable

misfortune   for   his   country.     Had  he   survived  and   supplanted   the   feeble

Artaxerxes,  it  is  quite  possible  that  he  might  have  confirmed  and  strengthened

the   power   of  Persia,   or,   at   least,   temporarily   have   arrested    its   decline.

Having  lost  their  leader,  his  Asiatic  followers  at  once  dispersed ;    but   the

mercenaries  did  not  lose  heart,  and,  crossing  Asia  and  Armenia,  gained  at

length  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.     Up  to  that  time  the  Greeks  had  looked

upon   Persia   as  a  compact    state,  which   they  were  sufficiently  powerful   to

conquer  by  sea  and  hold  in  check  by  land,  but  which  they  could  not,  without

imprudence,  venture  to  attack  within  its  own  frontiers.     The  experience  of

the  Ten  Thousand  was  a  proof  to  them  that  a  handful  of  men,  deprived  of

their  proper  generals,  without  guides,  money,  or  provisions,  might  successfully

oppose  the  overwhelming  forces  of  the  great  king,  and  escape  from  his  clutches

witiiout   any  serious  difficulty.     National   discords   prevented  them  from  at

once  utilising  the  experience  they  thus  acquired,  but  the  lesson  was  not  lost

upon  the  court  of  Susa.     The  success  of  Lysander  had  been  ensured  by  Persian

subsidies,  and  now  Sparta  hesitated  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  of

Miletus ;  the  Lacedaemonians  demanded  liberty  once  more  for  the  former  allies

of  Athens,  fostered  the  war  in  Asia  in  order  to  enforce  their  claims,  and

their  king  Agesilaus,  penetrating  to  the  very  heart  of  Phrygia,  would  have

pressed  still  further  forward  in  the  tracks  of  the  Ten  Thousand,   had  not

an   opportune   diversion    been   created   in    his  rear   by   the   bribery   of    tlie

Persians.     Athens  once  more  flew  to  arms  :    her  fleet,  in   conjunction  with

the  Phoenicians,  took  possession  of  Cythera ;  the  Long  Walls  were  rebuilt  at

the  expense  of  the  great  king,  and   Sparta,  recalled   by  these  reverses  to  a

realisation   of    her    position,   wisely   abandoned    her   inclination   for    distant

enterprises.     Asia  Minor  was  reconquered,  and  Persia  pa.'i^ed  from  the  position

of  a  national  enemy  to  that  of  the  friend  and  arbiter  of  Greece ;  but  she  did

so  by  force  of  circumstances  only,  and  not  from  having  merited  in  any  way

the  supremacy  she  attained.     Her  military  energy,  indeed,  was  far  from  being

exhausted;    but   poor  Artaxerxes,  bewildered   by  tlie  rivalries    between   his

mother  and  his  wives,^  did  not  know  how  to  make  the  most  of  the  immense

resources  still  at  his  disposal,  and  he  met  with  repeated  checks  as  soon  as

he   came  face  to  face  with  a  nation   and   leaders  who   refused   to   stoop  to

'  Cf.,  for  the  opening  of  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes,  the  short  notices  given  by  Ctesias,  Fnigm.  29,
§§  57,  59-Gl,  in  MIxlek-Diiiot,  Clesix  Ctiidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  56-58.


AMTRT^US  AND    THE  XXVIIP"   (saITE)   DYNASTY.  751

treachery.  He  bad  no  sooner  recovered  possession  of  the  ^Egean  littoral
than  Egypt  was  snatched  from  his  grasp  by  a  new  Pharaoh  who  had  arisen
in  the  Nile  valley.  The  peace  had  not  been  seriously  disturbed  in  Egypt
during  the  forty  years  which  had  elapsed  since  the  defeat  of  Inarus.i  Satrap
had  peaceably  succeeded  satrap  in  the  fortress  of  Memphis ;  the  exhaustion
of  Libya  had  prevented  any  movement  on  the  part  of  Thannyras ;  the  aged
Amyrtseus  had  passed  from  the  scene,  and  his  son,  Pausiris,  bent  his  neck
submissively  to  the  Persian  yoke.^  More  than  once,  however,  unexpected
outbursts  had  shown  that  the  fires  of  rebellion  were  still  smouldering.  A
Psammetichus,  who  reigned  about  445  B.C.  in  a  corner  of  the  Delta,  had
dared  to  send  corn  and  presents  to  the  Athenians,  then  at  war  with
Artaxerxes  I.,  and  the  second  year  of  Darius  II.  had  been  troubled  by  a
sanguinary  sedition,  which,  however,  was  easily  suppressed  by  the  governor
then  in  power  ;3  finally,  about  410  B.C.,  a  king  of  Egypt  had,  not  without
some  show  of  evidence,  laid  himself  open  to  the  charge  of  sending  a  piratical
expedition  into  Phoenician  waters,  an  Arab  king  having  contributed  to  the
enterprise.*  It  was  easy  to  see,  moreover,  from  periodical  revolts — such  as
that  of  Megabyzos  in  Syria,  those  of  Artyphios  and  Arsites,  of  Pissuthnes
and  Amorges  in  Asia  Minor — with  what  impunity  the  wrath  of  the  o-reat
king  could  be  defied  :  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that,  about
405  B.C.,  an  enemy  should  appear  in  the  heart  of  the  Delta  in  the  person  of
a  grandson  and  namesake  of  Amyrtseus.^  He  did  not  at  first  rouse  the  whole
country  to  revolt,  for  Egyptian  troops  were  still  numbered  in  the  army  of
Artaxerxes  at  the  battle  of  Cunaxa  in  401  B.C. ;  ^  but  he  succeeded  in  estab-
lishing a  regular  native  government,  and  struggled  so  resolutely  against
the  foreign  domination  that  the  historians  of  the  sacred  colleges  inscribed
his  name  on  the  list  of  the  Pharaohs.  He  is  there  made  to  represent  a
whole  dynasty,  the  XXVIIl"',  which  lasted  six  years,  coincident  with  the
six  years  of  his  reign.  It  was  due  to  a  Mendesian  dynasty,  however,  whose
founder  was  Nephorites,  that  Egypt  obtained  its  entire  freedom,  and  was
raised  once  more  to  the  rank  of  a  nation.'     This  dynasty  from  the  very  outset

'  Wiedemann  thinks  tljat  Egypt  was  divided  at  that  time  into  two  satrapies  :  the  first,  that  of
Upper  Egypt,  being  goTerned  by  a  Persian  ;  the  second,  by  an  Egyptian  satrap  such  as  Pausiris
(Geschichte  Mgyptens,  pp.  252,  253).

-  Herodotus,  III.  xv.,  who  mentions  him  as  ruling  in  Egypt  in  his  own  day.

^  pHiLOCHOiius,  Frarj-.n.  90,  in  MI'llek-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Graee.,  vol.  i.  pp.  398,  399.

*  The  revolt  mentioned  by  Ctesias,  Fragm.  29,  §  47,  in  Mullek-Didot,  Ctesiai  Cnidii  Fragmenta.
p.  55,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  insurrection  of  the  satrap  of  Egypt  which  is  here  referred  to,  the
date  of  which  is  furnished  by  the  Syncellus  (p.  25G,  d).

°  The  name  of  this  king  has  not  been  identified  with  any  certainty  on  any  of  the  contemporarj'
hieroglyphic  monuments.  Xeither  Rudamanu  nor  Amen-iritrud  (Wiedemann,  Gesch.  Aigypteng.  p.  272 ;
^gypt.  Gesch.,  p.  U94)  seems  to  belong  to  the  middle  of  the  Persian  epoch.  In  the  Demotic  Ehap.io(ly,
the  reading  of  the  name  whicli  seems  to  correspond  to  that  of  the  Amyrta;us  of  the  Greeks  is  not
certain  (Revillout,  Une  Chrotitque  Egyplienne  contemporaine  <Z«  Manelkon,  pp.  2-5,  and  pi.  iii.  a.
Second  Extrait  de  la  Chronique  D^motique  de  Paris  in  the  Bevue  Egypt.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  53,  51).

°  DiODORUs  SicTLus,  xii.  46.  •  Xenophon,  Anabasis,  i.  8,  §  9.


752  TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

adopted  tlie  policy  which  had  proved  so  successful  in  the  case  of  the  Saites
three  centuries  previously,  and  employed  it  with  similar  success.  Egypt  had
always  been  iu  the  position  of  a  besieged  fortress,  which  needed,  for  its
complete  security,  that  its  first  lines  of  defence  should  be  well  in  advance
of  its  citadel:  she  must  either  possess  Syria  or  win  her  as  an  ally,  if  she
desired  to  be  protected  against  all  chance  of  sudden  invasion.  Nephorites
and  his  successors,  therefore,  formed  alliances  beyond  the  isthmus,  and  even
on  the  other  side  of  the  Mediterranean,  with  Cyprus,  Caria,  and  Greece,  in
one  case  to  purchase  support,  and  in  another  to  re-establish  the  ancient
supremacy  exercised  by  the  Theban  Pharaohs.^  Every  revolt  against  the
Persians,  every  quarrel  among  the  satraps,  helped  forward  their  cause,  since
they  compelled  the  great  king  to  suspend  his  attacks  against  Egypt  altogether
or  to  prosecute  them  at  wide  intervals :  the  Egyptians  therefore  fomented
such  quarrels,  or  even,  at  need,  provoked  them,  and  played  their  game  so
well  that  for  a  long  time  they  had  to  oppose  only  a  fraction  of  the  Persian
forces.  Like  the  Saite  Pharaohs  before  them,  they  were  aware  how  little
reliance  could  be  placed  on  native  troops,  and  they  recruited  their  armies
at  great  expense  from  the  European  Greeks.  This  occurred  at  the  time
when  mercenary  forces  were  taking  the  place  of  native  levies  throughout
Hellas,  and  war  was  developing  into  a  lucrative  trade  for  those  who  under,
stood  how  to  conduct  it :  adventurers,  greedy  for  booty,  flocked  to  the  standards
of  the  generals  wlio  enjoyed  the  best  reputation  for  kindness  or  ability,
and  the  generals  themselves  sold  their  services  to  the  highest  bidder.  The
Persian  kings  took  large  advantage  of  this  arrangement  to  procure  troops :  the
Pharaohs  imitated  their  example,  and  in  the  years  which  followed,  the  most
experienced  captains,  Iphicrates,  Chabrias,  and  Timotheus,  passed  from  one
camp  to  another,  as  often  against  the  will  as  with  the  consent  of  their  fatherland.
The  power  of  Sparta  was  at  her  zenith  when  Nephorites  ascended  the  throne,  and
she  was  just  preparing  for  her  expedition  to  Phrygia.  The  Pharaoh  concluded
an  alliance  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  in  396  B.C.  sent  to  Agesilaus  a  fleet
laden  with  arms,  corn,  and  supplies,  which,  however,  was  intercepted  by  Conon,
who  was  at  that  moment  cruising  in  the  direction  of  Rhodes  in  command  of
the  Persian  squadron.^  This  misadventure  and  the  abrupt  retreat  of  the
Spartans  from  Asia  Minor  cooled  the  good  will  of  the  Egyptian  king  towards  his
allies.     Thinking  that  they  had  abandoned  him,  and  that  he  was  threatened

'  This  is,  at  any  rate,  tlie  idea  given  of  him  by  Egyptian  tradition  in  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies,
as  results  from  a  passage  in  the  Demotic  Rhapsody,  where  his  reign  is  mentioned  (Uevillodt,  Second
Extrait  de  la  Chronique  D^motique  de  Paris,  in  the  Revue  Egyptologique,  vol.  ii.  p.  55.

=  DiODORUs  SiouLns,  xiv.  79,  where  the  name  is  written  Nephereus.  Pompeius  Trogus  (JnsTiN,
vi.  2 ;  cf.  Okosics,  iii.  1,  §  8)  had  access  to  the  works  of  an  author  who  called  the  king  Herkynium,
who  has  been  identified  with  Hakoris,  but  may  well  have  been  a  pretender  to  the  throne  (Judeich,
Kleinasiatisclie  Sludien,  p.  153),  or  more  likely  one  of  those  feudal  lords  of  the  Delta  whom  the
Greeks  treated  as  kings,  as  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldieans  had  in  old  days  treated  their  ancestors.


NEPIIOBITES   I.    AND   EAKOBIS   IN  EGYPT.


753


with  an  imminent  attack  on  the  shore  of  the  Delta,  he  assembled,  probably
at  Pelusium,  the  forces  he  had  apparently  intended  for  a  distant  enterprise.

Matters  took  longer  to  come  to  a  crisis  tlian  he  had  expected.  The  retreat
of  Agesilaus  had  not  pacified  the  ^gean  satrapies ;  after  the  disturbance
created  by  Cyrus  the  Younger,  the  greater  number  of  the  native  tribes —
Mysians,  Pisidians,  people  of  Pontus  and  Paphlagonia — had  shaken  off  the
Persian  yoke,  and  it  was  a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty  to  reduce  them  once
more  to  subjection.  Their  incessant  turbulence  gave  Egypt  time  to  breathe
iind  to  organise  new  combinations.  Cyprus  entered  readily  into  her  designs.
Since  the  subjugation  of  that  island  in  445  B.C.,  the  Greek  cities  had  suffered
terrible  oppression  at  the  hands  of  the  great  king.
Artaxerxes  I.,  despairing  of  reducing  them  to
obedience,  depended  exclusively  for  support  on  the
Phcenician  inhabitants  of  the  island,  who,  through
his  favour,  regained  so  much  vigour  tliat  in  the
space  of  less  than  two  generations  they  had  re-
covered most  of  the  ground  lost  during  the  pre-
ceding centuries :  Semitic  rulers  replaced  the
Achaean  tyrants  at  Salamis,  and  in  most  of  the
other  cities,  and  Citium  became  what  it  had  been
before  the  rise  of  Salamis,  the  principal  commercial

,•111-1  1  1  ,  n  HAKOItlS  '

centre  in  the  island.     Jljvagoras,  a  descendant  or

the  ancient  kings,  endeavoured  to  retrieve  the  Grecian  cause :  after  driving
out  of  Salamis  Abdemon,  its  Tyrian  ruler,  he  took  possession  of  all  the
other  towns  except  Citium  and  Amathus.  This  is  not  the  place  to  recount
the  brilliant  part  played  by  Evagoras,  in  conjunction  with  Conon,  during
the  campaigns  against  the  Spartans  in  the  Peloponnesian  war.  The  activity
he  then  displayed  and  the  ambitious  designs  he  revealed  soon  drew  upon
him  the  dislike  of  the  Persian  governors  and  their  sovereign ;  and  from
391  B.C.  he  was  at  open  war  with  Persia.  He  would  have  been  unable,
single-handed,  to  maintain  the  struggle  for  any  length  of  time,  but  Egypt
and  Greece  were  at  his  back,  ready  to  support  him  with  money  or  arms.
Hakoris  had  succeeded  Nephorites  I.  in  393  b.c.,"^  and  had  repulsed  an  attack
of  Artaxerxes  between  390  and  386.^  He  was  not  unduly  exalted  by  his
success,  and  had  immediately  taken  wise  precautions  in  view  of  a  second
invasion.      After  safe-guarding   his  western   frontier  by  concluding  a  treaty

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  Lepsics,  Denlcmaler,  iii.  301,  No.  80.

^  The  length  of  the  reign  of  Xephoritea  I.  is  fixed  at  six  years  by  the  lists  of  Manetho  (Ungee,
Chronologic  des  Manetho,  pp.  297,  298) ;  the  last-known  date  of  hia  reign  is  that  of  his  fourtli  year,  on
a  mummy-bandage  preserved  in  the  Louvre  (Deveuia,  Catalogue  des  Manuscrits  Sgypliens,  pp.  207, 208).

^  This  war  is  alluded  to  by  several  ancient  authors  (Isockates,  Panegyric,^  161 ;  Justin,  vi.  6)  in
passages  which  have  been  brought  togetlier  and  explained  by  Judeich  (Kleinatiatische  Siudien,
pp.  158,  159) ;  but  unfortunately  the  detailed  history  of  the  events  is  not  known.

3  c


754       THE  LAST  DATS   OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

with  the  Libyans  of  Barca/  he  entered  into  an  alliance  with  Evagoras  and  the
Athenians.  He  sent  lavish  gifts  of  corn  to  the  Cypriots,  as  well  as  munitions
of  war,  ships,  and  money,  while  Athens  sent  them  several  thousand  men  under
the  command  of  Chabrias  ;  not  only  did  an  expedition  despatched  against  them
under  Autophradates  fail  miserably,  but  Evagoras  seized  successively  Citium
and  Amathus,  and,  actually  venturing  across  the  sea,  took  Tyre  by  assault  and
devastated  Phcenicia  and  Gilicia.  The  princes  of  Asia  Minor  were  already
preparing  for  revolt,  and  one  of  tliem,  Hecatomnus  of  Caria,  had  openly  joined
the  allies,  when  Sparta  suddenly  opened  negotiations  witli  Persia :  Antalcidas
presented  himself  at  Susa  to  pay  homage  before  the  throne  of  the  great  king.
The  treaty  of  Miletus  had  brought  the  efforts  of  Athens  to  naught,  and  sold
the  Asiatic  Greeks  to  their  oppressors :  the  peace  obtained  by  Antalcidas
effaced  the  results  of  Salamis  and  Plataea,  and  laid  European  Greece  prostrate
at  the  feet  of  her  previously  vanquished  foes.  An  order  issuing  from  the
centre  of  Persia  commanded  the  cities  of  Greece  to  suspend  hostilities  and
respect  each  other's  liberties ;  the  issuing  of  such  an  order  was  equivalent  to
treating  them  as  vassels  whose  quarrels  it  is  the  function  of  the  suzerain  to
repress,  but  they  nevertheless  complied  with  the  command  (387  B.C.).  Arta-
xerxes,  relieved  from  anxiety  for  the  moment,  as  to  affairs  on  the  JEgeau,  was
now  free  to  send  his  best  generals  into  the  rebel  countries,  and  such  was  the
course  his  ministers  recommended.  Evagoras  was  naturally  the  first  to  be
attacked.  Cyprus  was,  in  fact,  an  outpost  of  Egypt ;  commanding  as  she  did
the  approach  by  sea,  she  was  in  a  position  to  cut  the  communications  of  any
army,  which,  issuing  from  Palestine,  should  march  upon  the  Delta.  Arta-
xerxes  assembled  three  hundred  thousand  foot-soldiers  and  three  hundred
triremes  under  the  command  of  Tiribazus,  and  directed  the  whole  force  against
the  island.  At  first  the  Cypriot  cruisers  intercepted  the  convoys  which  were
bringing  provisions  for  this  large  force,  and  by  so  doing  reduced  the  invaders
to  such  straits  that  sedition  broke  out  in  their  camp;  but  Evagoras  was
defeated  at  sea  off  the  promontory  of  Citium,  and  his  squadron  destroyed.  He
was  not  in  any  way  discouraged  by  this  misfortune,  but  leaving  his  son,
Pnytagoras,  to  hold  the  barbarian  forces  in  check,  he  liastened  to  implore  the
help  of  the  Pharaoh  (385  B.C.).  But  Hakoris  was  too  much  occupied  with
securing  his  own  immediate  safety  to  risk  anything  in  so  desperate  an  enter-
prise.^ Evagoras  was  able  to  bring  back  merely  an  insufficient  subsidy ;  he
shut  himself  up  in  Salamis,  and  there  maintained  the  conflict  for  some  years
longer.^  Meanwhile  Hakoris,  realising  that  the  submission  of  Cyprus  would
oppose  his  flank  to  attack,  tried  to  effect  a  diversion  in  Asia  Minor,  and  by  entering
into  alliance  with  the  Pisidians,  then  in  open  insurrection,  he  procured  for  it  a
'  Tbeopompos,  JVagm.  Ill,  ia  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Bist.  Griec.,  vol.  i.  p.  295.

'  DiODORUS  SlOULUS,  XV.  4-8.


TEE  MEND  ESI  AN  DYNASTY — NECTANEBO   I.  755

respite,  of  which  he  himself  took  advantage  to  prepare  for  the  decisive  struggle.^
The  peace  effected  by  Antalcidas  had  left  most  of  the  mercenary  soldiers  of
Greece  without  employment.  Hakoris  hired  twenty  thousand  of  them,  and
the  Phcenician  admirals,  still  occupied  in  blockading  the  ports  of  Cyprus,  failed
to  intercept  the  vessels  which  brought  him  these  reinforcements.'-^  It  was
fortunate  for  Egypt  that  they  did  so,  for  the  Pharaoh  died  in  381  B.C.,  and  his
successors,  Psamuthis  II.,  Mutis,  and  Nephorites  II.,  each  occupied  the  throne
for  a  very  short  time,  and  the  whole  country  was  in  confusion  for  rather  more
than  two  years  (381-379  B.C.)  during  the  settlement  of  the  succession.^  The
turbulent  disposition  of  the  great  feudatory  nobles,  which  had  so  frequently
brought  trouble  upon  previous  Pharaohs  during  the  Assyrian  wars,  was  no  less
dangerous  in  this  last  century  of  Egyptian  independence ;  it  caused  the  fall  of  the
Mendesian  dynasty  in  the  very  face  of  the  enemy,  and  the  prince  of  Sebennytos,
Nakht-har-habit,  Nectanebo  I.,  was  raised  to  the  throne  by  the  military  faction.
According  to  a  tradition  current  in  Ptolemaic  times,  this  sovereign  was  a  son
of  Nephorites  I.,  who  had  been  kept  out  of  his  heritage  by  the  jealousy  of  the
gods ;  *  whatever  his  origin,  the  people  had  no  cause  to  repent  of  having  accepted
him  as  their  king.  He  began  his  reign  by  suppressing  the  slender  subsidies
which  Evagoras  had  continued  to  receive  from  his  predecessors,  and  this
measure,  if  not  generous,  was  at  least  politic.^  For  Cyprus  was  now  virtually
in  the  power  of  the  Persians,  and  the  blockade  of  a  few  thousand  men  in
Salamis  did  not  drkught  away  a  sufiSciently  large  proportion  of  their  efifective
force  to  be  of  any  service  to  Egypt :  the  money  which  had  hitherto  been  de-
voted to  the  Cypriots  was  henceforth  reserved  for  the  direct  defence  of  the  Nile
valley.  Evagoras  obtained  unexpectedly  favourable  conditions :  Artaxerxes
conceded  to  him  his  title  of  king  and  the  possession  of  his  city  (383  B.C.),

'  Theopompus,  Fragm.  111.  iu  Muller-Dibot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  p.  296. '

■   DiODORUS  SiCt-LCS,  XV.  29.

'  Hakoris  reigned  thirteen  years  (Manetho,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  597)>
from  393  to  381  B.C.  The  reigns  of  the  three  succeeding  kings  occupied  only  two  years  and  four  months
between  them,  from  the  end  of  3S1  to  tjie  beginning  of  37S.  JIuthes  or  Mutis,  who  is  not  mentioned
in  all  the  lists  of  Manetho,  seems  to  have  his  counterpart  in  the  Demotic  Ithapsody  (Revillout,
Second  Extrait  de  la  Chronique  Demotlque,  in  the  Revue  Egyptologique,  vol.  u.  pp.  56,  57).  Wiedemann
(Geschichte^jyplens,  p.  262,  et  seq. ;  JEgypUsche  Geschichle,  pp.  696, 697)  has  inverted  the  order  usually
adopted,  and  proposed  the  following  series  :  ^fephorites  I.,  Muthes,  Psamuthis,  Hakoris,  Nephorites  II.
The  discovery  at  Karnak  of  a  small  temple  where  Psamuthis  mentions  Hakoris  as  his  predecessor
(JIaspebo,  Dg'eouverte  d'un  petit  temple  h  Karitah,  in  the  Meciieil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  p.  20)  shows  that
on  this  point  at  least  Manetho  was  well  informed.

*  Cf.,  for  this  tradition  current  in  Ptolemaic  times,  the  fairly  full  statement  of  the  Demotic
Eltapsody  which  has  been  interpreted  by  Bbvillout,  op.  cit.,  p.  55.

'  This  is  the  interpretation  which  seems  to  me  the  best  for  the  passage  in  the  fragment  of
Theopompus  {Fragm.  Ill,  in  Mi;LLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  p.  296) :  koI  as  Ne/croW^oir
Trap6tA.7)0cJTOs  Tf;s  AlyxmTOv  ^affiKetas,  Trphs  AaKtSatfMOfiovs  a.7T^<nii\iV  Euaytipaj,  Tlva  re  rpSiroi'  (S  irepl
KCTTpoi/  TToKf/xos  5i€Aufl7).  If  the  change  of  reign  in  Egypt  had  not  been  unfavourable  to  him  at  this
juncture,  Evagoras  would  not  have  made  the  advances  indicated  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  would
not  have  capitulated  shortly  after.


756       TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

and  turned  his  whole  atteution  to  Nectanebo,  the  last  of  his  enemies  who  still
held  out.

Nectanebo  had  spared  no  pains  in  preparing  effectively  to  receive  his  foe.
He  chose  as  his  coadjutor  the  Athenian  Chabrias,  whose  capacity  as  a  general
had  been  manifested  by  recent  events,  and  the  latter  accepted  this  office
although  he  had  received  no  instructions  from  his  government  to  do  so/  and
had  transformed  the  Delta  into  an  entrenched  camp.  He  had  fortified  the
most  vulnerable  points  along  the  coast,  had  built  towers  at  each  of  the  mouths
of  the  river  to  guard  the  entrance,  and  had  selected  the  sites  for  his  garrison
fortresses  so  judiciously  that  they  were  kept  up  long  after  his  time  to  protect
tiie  country.  Two  of  them  are  mentioned  by  name :  one,  situated  below
Pelusium,  called  the  Castle  of  Chabrias ;  the  other,  not  far  from  Lake  Mareotis,
wliich  was  known  as  his  township.^  The  Persian  generals  endeavoured  to  make
tlieir  means  of  attack  proportionate  to  the  defences  of  the
enemy.  Acre  was  the  only  port  in  Southern  Syria  large
enough  to  form  the  rendezvous  for  a  fleet,  where  it  might
be  secure  from  storms  and  surprises  of  the  enemy.  This
was  chosen  as  the  Persian  headquarters,  and  formed  tlie
base  of  tlieir  operations.  During  three  years  they  there
accumulated  supplies  of  food  and  military  stores,  Phoenician

PHAKNABAZUS.'  .  .

and  Greek  vessels,  and  both  foreign  and  native  troops.  The
rivalries  between  the  military  commanders,  Tithraustes,  Datames,  and  Abro-
comas,  and  tlie  intrigues  of  the  court,  had  on  several  occasions  threatened  the
ruin  of  the  enterprise,  but  Pharnabazus,  who  from  the  outset  had  held  supreme
command,  succeeded  in  ridding  himself  of  his  rivals,  and  in  the  spring  of
374  B.C.  was  at  length  ready  for  the  advance.  The  expedition  consisted  of
two  hundred  thousand  Asiatic  troops,  and  twenty  thousand  Greeks,  three
hundred  triremes,  two  hundred  galleys  of  thirty  oars,  and  numerous  trans-
ports.* Superiority  of  numbers  was  on  the  side  of  the  Persians,  and  that  just
at  the  moment  when  Nectanebo  lost  his  most  experienced  general.  Artaxerxes
had  remonstrated  with  the  Athenians  for  permitting  one  of  their  generals  to
serve  in  Egypt,  in  spite  of  their  professed  friendship  for  himself,  and,  besides
insisting  on  his  recall,  had  requested  for  himself  the  services  of  the  celebrated
Iphicrates.  The  Athenians  complied  with  his  demand,  and  while  summoning
Chabrias  to  return  to  Athens,  despatched  Iphicrates  to  Syria,  where  he  was

'  DiOBOKUS  SiouLus,  XV.  29  ;  Cornelius  Nei'OS,  Chabrias,  §  2.

=  Both  are  mentioned  by  Strabo  :  o  Xo^pIouAevofitTOs  x'^M(XVI.u.§33,p.  7G0)aud^  Xo/3,)/ou  Kti/iij
\(yop.ivri  (XVII.  i.  §  22,  p.  808);  the  exact  sites  of  these  two  places  are  not  yet  identified.  Diodorus
Siculus,  describing  the  defensive  preparations  of  Egypt  (xv.  42),  does  not  state  expressly  that  they
were  the  -work  of  Chabrias,  but  this  fact  seems  to  result  from  a  general  consideration  of  the  context.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cahinet  des  M^dailles,  of  which  a  cast  was  kindly
furnished  me  by  M.  Babelon ;  cf.  Babelon,  Les  Ferses  AcligiMindes,  pi.  iv.  No.  8.

'  DioDOKus  Siculus,  xv.  41.


XECTANEBO   I.    REPULSES    THE  PERSIAN  INVASION.  757

placed  in  command  of  the  mercenary  troops.^  Pharnabazus  ordered  a  general
advance  in  May,  374:  B.C.,-  but  when  he  arrived  before  Pelusium,  he  perceived
that  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  take  the  town  by  storm  ;  not  only  had  the
fortifications  been  doubled,  but  the  banks  of  the  canals  had  been  cut  and  the
approaches  inundated.  Iphicrates  advised  him  not  to  persevere  in  attempting
a  regular  siege :  he  contended  that  it  would  be  more  profitable  to  detach  an
expeditionary  force  towards  some  less  well-protected  point  on  the  coast,  and  there
to  make  a  breach  in  the  system  of  defence  which  protected  the  enemies'  front.
Three  thousand  men  were  despatched  with  all  secrecy  to  the  mouth  of  the  Men-
desian  branch  of  the  Nile,  and  there  disembarked  unexpectedly  before  the  forts
which  guarded  the  entrance.  The  garrison,  having  imprudently  made  a  sortie
in  face  of  the  enemy,  was  put  to  rout,  and
pursued  so  hotly  that  victors  and  van-
quished entered  pell-mell  within  the  walls.
After  this  success  victory  was  certain,  if  the
Persians  pursued  their  advantage  promptly
and  pushed  forward  straight  into  the  heart
of  the  Delta;  the  moment  was  the  more  pro-  artaxekxes  n.^

pitious  for  such  a  movement,  since  Nectanebo  had  drained  Memphis  of  troops  to
protect  his  frontier.  Iphicrates,  having  obtained  this  information  from  one  of  the
prisoners,  advised  Pharnabazus  to  proceed  up  the  Nile  with  the  fleet,  and  take
the  capital  by  storm  before  the  enemy  should  have  time  to  garrison  it  afresh  ;
the  Persian  general,  however,  considered  the  plan  too  hazardous,  and  preferred
to  wait  until  the  entire  army  should  have  joined  him.  Iphicrates  offered  to
risk  the  adventure  with  his  body  of  auxiliary  troops  only,  but  was  suspected
of  harbouring  some  ambitious  design,  and  was  refused  permission  to  advance.
Meanwhile  these  delays  had  given  the  Egyptians  time  to  recover  from  their
first  alarm  ;  they  boldly  took  the  offensive,  surrounded  the  position  held  by
Pharnabazus,  and  were  victorious  in  several  skirmishes.  Summer  advanced,
the  Nile  rose  more  rapidly  than  usual,  and  soon  the  water  encroached  upon
the  land ;  the  invaders  were  obliged  to  beat  a  retreat  before  it,  and  fall  back
towards  Syria.  Iphicrates,  disgusted  at  the  ineptitude  and  suspicion  of  his
Asiatic  colleagues,  returned  secretly  to  Greece  :  the  remains  of  the  army  were
soon  after  disbanded,   and  Egypt  once  more  breathed  freely.'     The  check

'  CoRNELics  Nepos,  CHabrtas,  §  3,  and  Iphicrates,  §  2 ;  Diodoeus  Sicdlcs,  xv.  29.

-  As  Kenrick  (^Ancient  Egypt  under  the  Pharaohs,  vol.  ii.  p.  421)  justly  observes,  "the  Persian
and  Athenian  generals  committed  the  same  mistake  which  led  to  the  defeat  of  Saiut  Louis  and  the
capture  of  his  army  iu  1249  a.d.,  and  which  Bonaparte  avoided  in  his  campaign  of  179S."  Anyhow,  it
seems  that  the  fault  must  be  laid  on  Pharnabazus  alone,  and  that  Iphicrates  was  entirely  blameless.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  silver  stater  in  the  Cabinet  des  Midailles,  of  which  I  owe  the
cast  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Babelon.

'  The  story  of  this  campaign  is  borrowed  from  DioJorus  Siculus  (xv.  41-43),  but  the  details  have
been  completed  from  information  furnished  by  other  authors,  whose  works  have  been  brought  together
and  carefully  discussed  by  Judeich,  Eleinasiatische  Sludien,  pp.  159-163


758  THE  LAST  BAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

received  by  the  Persian  arms,  however,  was  not  sufficiently  notorious  to  shake
that  species  of  supremacy  which  Artaxerxes  had  exercised  in  Greece  since  the
peace  of  387.     Sparta,  Thebes,  and  Athens  vied  with  each  other  in  obtaining
an  alliance  with  him  as  keenly  as  if  he  had  been  successful  before  Pelusium.
Autalcidas  reappeared  at  Susa  in  372  B.C.  to  procure  a  fresh  act  of  intervention  ;
Pelopidas  and  Ismenias,  in  367,  begged  for  a  rescript  similar  to  that  of  Antal-
cidas ;  and  finally  Athens  sent  a  solemn  embassy  to  entreat  for  a  subsidy.     It
seemed  as  if  the  great  king  had  become  a  kind  of  supreme  arbiter  for  Greece,
and  that  all  the  states  hitherto  leagued  against  him    now  came  in  turn  to
submit  their  mutual  differences  for  his  decision.     Bat  this  arbiter  who  thus
imposed  his  will  on  states  beyond  the  borders  of  his  empire  was  never  fully
master  within  his  own  domains.      Of  gentle  nature   and   pliant  disposition,
inclined  to  clemency  rather  than  to  severity,  and,  moreover,  so  lacking  in  judg-
ment as  a  general  that  he  had  almost  succumbed  to  an  attack  by  the  Gadusians
on  the  only  occasion  that  he  had,  in  a  whim  of  the  moment,  undertaken  the
command  of  an  army  in  person,^  Artaxerxes  busied  himself  with  greater  zeal
in  religious  reforms  than  in  military  projects.      He  introduced  the  rites  of
Mithra  and  Anahita  into  the  established  religion  of  the  state,^  but  he  had  not
the  energy  necessary  to  curb  the  ambitions  of  his  provincial  governors.     Asia
Minor,  whose  revolts  followed  closely  on  those  of  Egypt,  rose  in  rebellion
against  him  immediately  after  the  campaign  on  the  Nile,  Ariobarzanes  heading
the  rebellion  in  Phrygia,  Datames  and  Aspis  that  in  Cilicia  and  Cappadocia,
and  both  defying  his  power  for  several  years.    When  at  length  they  succumbed
through  treachery,  the  satraps  of  the  Mediterranean  district,  from  the  Helles-
pont to  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  formed  a  coalition  and  simultaneously  took  the  field  :
the  break-up  of  the  empire  would  have  been  complete  had  not  Persian  darics
been  lavishly  employed  once  more  in  the  affair.     Meanwhile  Nectanebo  had
•  died  in  361,*  and  had  been  succeeded  by  Tachos.^     The  new  Pharaoh  deemed
the  occasion  opportune  to  make  a  diversion  against  Persia  and  to  further  secure
his  own  safety  :  he  therefore  ofi'ered  his  support  to  the  satraps,  who  sent  Rheo-
mitres  as  a  delegate  to  discuss  the  terms  of  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance.

'  Plctaech,  Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  24  ;  Cobnelics  Nepos,  Datames,  §  1.

'  Cf.,  in  ■\Veissbaoh  and  Bang,  Die  AUpersischen  KeilinscUriflen,  pp.  44-47,  the  passages  from  Iiis
inscriptions  in  whicli  be  invokes  these  two  divinities.

^  The  lists  of  Manetho  assign  ten  or  eighteen  years  to  his  reign  (Manetho,  in  Muller-Didot,
Fragm.  Mist.  Grsec,  vol.  ii.  p.  597).  A  sarcophagus  in  Vienna  bears  the  date  of  his  fifteenth  year
(Brugsoh,  Recueil  de  Monuments,'.vo\.  i.  pi.  vi.  No.  1).  and  the  great  inscription  of  Edfu  speaks  of  gifts
he  made  to  the  temple  in  this  town  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign  (Lepsics,  Denhmdler.iv.  43;
BnrGSCH,  Thesaurus  Inscriptionum  .Egyptiacarum,  p.  53S,  1.  3).  The  reading  eigliteen  is  tlierefore
preferable  to  the  reading  ten  in  the  lists  of  Manetho ;  if  the  very  obscure  text  of  the  Demotic
Rhapsody  really  applies  the  number  nine  or  ten  to  the  length  of  the  reign  {Revilloct,  Second  Extrait
de  la  Chronique  Dimotique,  in  the  Revue  Egypiologique,  vol.  ii.  pp.  .')7-59),  this  reckoning  must  be
explained  by  some  mystic  calculations  of  the  priests  of  the  Ptolemaic  epoch.

*  The  name  of  this  king,  written  by  the  Greeks  TeOs  or  Taohus,  in  accordance  with  the  pronunciation
of  different  Egyptian  dialects,  has  been  discovered  in  hieroglyphic  writing  on  the  external  wall  of  the
temple  of  Khonsu  at  Karuak,  by  Bouriant.  Notes  de  Voyage,  in  Recueil  de  Travanx,  vol.  xi.  pp.  153,  154.


TACHOS  AND    TEE  INVASION  OF  STRIA.  759

Having  inherited  from  Nectanebo  a  large  fleet  and  a  full  treasury,  Tachos
entrusted  to  the  ambassador  500  talents  of  silver,  and  gave  him  fifty  ships,  with
which  he  cruised  along  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  towards  Leuke.  His  accomplices
were  awaiting  him  there,  rejoicing  at  the  success  of  his  mission,  but  he  himself
had  no  confidence  in  the  final  issue  of  the  struggle,  and  merely  sought  how  he
might  enter  once  more  into  favour  with  the  Persian  court ;  he  therefore  secured
his  safety  by  betraying  his  associates.  He  handed  over  the  subsidies  and  the
Egyptian  squadron  to  Orontes,  the  satrap  of  Daskylium,  and  then  seizing  the  in-
surgent chiefs  sent  them  in  chains  to  Susa.^  These  acts  of  treachery  changed
the  complexion  of  affairs  ;  the  league  suddenly  dissolved  after  the  imprisonment
of  its  leaders,  and  Artaxerxes  re-established  his  authority  over  Asia  Minor.

Egypt  became  once  more  the  principal  object  of  attack,  and  by  the  irony
of  fate  Pharaoh  had  himself  contributed  to  enrich  tlie  coifers  and  reinforce
the  fleet  of  his  foes.     In  spite  of  this  mischance,  however,  ^.^SST'^^v

circumstances  were  so  much  in  his  favour  that  he  ventured      J^^(^41^^<y:\.
to  consider  whether  it  would  not  be  more  advantageous  to     ii^'«»  ;3>-    ^'  ''  '.
forestall  the  foe  by  attacking   him,  rather  than  passively
to   await   an   onslaught   behind   his   own   lines.     He   had
sought  the  friendship  of  Athens,^  and  though  it  had  not
been  granted  in  explicit  terms,  the  republic  had,  neverthe-  i^atames,  m.

less,  permitted  Chabrias  to  resume  his  former  post  at  his  side.  Chabrias
exhorted  him  to  execute  his  project,  and  as  he  had  not  sufficient  money
to  defray  the  expenses  of  a  long  campaign  outside  his  own  borders,  the
Athenian  general  instructed  him  how  he  might  procure  the  necessary  funds.*
He  suggested  to  him  that,  as  the  Egyptian  priests  were  wealthy,  the  sums
of  money  annually  assigned  to  them  for  the  sacrifices  and  maintenance  of  the
temples  would  be  better  employed  in  the  service  of  the  state,  and  counselled
him  to  reduce  or  even  to  suppress  most  of  the  sacerdotal  colleges.     The  priests

■  DiODOKUS  SiouLUs,  XV.  90,  92.  The  reason  I  have  already  had  frequent  occasion  to  allude  to
forces  me  to  sacrifice  the  narration  of  the  events  which  took  place  in  Asia  Minor  and  apply  myself
to  giving  forth  the  history  of  tliS  Egyptian  wars.

-  The  memory  of  this  embassy  has  been  preserved  for  ua  by  a  decree  of  the  Athenian  assembly,
unfortunately  much  mutilated  {Curpas  Inscriplionem  Atlicarum,  ii.  No.  60),  which  has  been
assigned  to  various  dates  between  362  and  358  B.C.  M.  Paul  Foucart  has  shown  that  the  date  of  the
decree  must  be  referred  to  one  of  three  archonsliips— the  archouship  of  Callimedes,  300-59 ;  that  of
Eucharistus,  359-S ;  or  that  of  Cephisodotus,  358-7  {Nute  sur  deux  inscriptions  d'Athcnes  et  de  Friene,
in  the  Revue  de  PhiMogie,  1898,  pp.  84-86).  Without  entering  into  a  discussion  of  the  other  evidence
on  the  subject,  it  seems  to  me  probable  that  the  embassy  may  be  most  conveniently  assigned  to  the
archonship  of  Callimedes,  towards  the  end  of  360  B.C.,  at  the  moment  when  Chabrias  had  just  arrived
in  Egypt,  and  was  certain  to  endeavour  to  secure  the  help  of  Athens  for  the  king  he  served.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medailles,  a  cast  of  which  was  kindly
furnished  me  by  M.  Babelon;  cf.  Baeelon,  Lcs  Ferses  AcMini^nides,  pi.  iv.  No.  16.

'  Cornelius  Nepos,  Chahrias,^  2  ;  cf.  Poly.bnus,  Stratagemata,  iii.  11,  §§  7,  12,  where  occurs  the
narration  of  several  episodes  relative  to  the  preparations  for  this  campaign.  The  conclusion  from  the
discussion  of  the  passages  of  Polyasnus  by  Gutschmid  (Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  i.  pp.  168,  169,  173-177)
seems  to  be  that  they  were  borrowed  from  tlie  work  of  Theopompus,  in  which  the  history  of  the  wars
between  the  king  of  Egypt  and  the  great  king  was  recounted  at  length.


760       THE  LAST  DATS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WOSLD.

secured  their  own  safety  by  abandoning  their  personal  property,  and  the  king
graciously  deigned  to  accept  their  gifts',  and  then  declared  to  them  that  in
future,  as  long  as  the  struggle  against  Persia  continued,  he  should  exact  from
them  nine-tenths  of  their  sacred  revenues.  This  tax  would  have  sufficed  for
all  requirements  if  it  bad  been  possible  to  collect  it  in  full,  but  there  is  no
doubt  that  very  soon  the  priests  must  have  discovered  means  of  avoiding  part
of  the  payment,  for  it  was  necessary  to  resort  to  other  expedients.  Chabrias
advised  that  the  poll  and  house  taxes  should  be  increased  ;  that  one  obol
should  be  exacted  for  each  "  ardeb  "  of  corn  sold,  and  a  tithe  levied  on  the
produce  of  all  ship-building  yards,  manufactories,  and  manual  industries.
Money  now  poured  into  the  treasury,  but  a  difficulty  arose  which  demanded
immediate  solution.  Egypt  possessed  very  little  specie,  and  the  natives  still
employed  barter  in  the  ordinary  transactions  of  life,  while  the  foreign
mercenaries  refused  to  accept  payment  in  kind  or  uncoined  metal ;  they
demanded  good  money  as  the  price  of  their  services.  Orders  were  issued  to
the  natives  to  hand  over  to  the  royal  exchequer  all  the  gold  and  silver  in  their
possession,  whether  wrought  or  in  ingots,  the  state  guaranteeing  gradual
repayment  through  the  nomarchs  from  the  future  product  of  the  poll-tax,
and  the  bullion  so  obtained  was  converted  into  specie  for  the  payment  of  the
auxiliary  troops.^  These  measures,  though  winning  some  unpopularity  for
Tachos,  enabled  him  to  raise  eighty  thousand  native  troops  and  ten  thousand
Greeks,  to  equip  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  vessels,  and  to  engage  the  best  generals
of  the  period."  His  eagerness  to  secure  the  latter,  however,  was  injurious  to
his  cause.  Having  already  engaged  Chabrias  and  obtained  the  good  will  of
Athens,  be  desired  also  to  gain  the  help  of  Agesilaus  and  the  favourable
opinion  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  Though  now  eighty  years  old,  Agesilaus  was
still  under  the  influence  of  cupidity  and  vanity ;  the  promise  of  being  placed
in  supreme  command  enticed  him,  and  he  set  sail  with  one  thousand  hoplites.
A  disappointment  awaited  him  at  the  moment  of  his  disembarkation :  Tachos
gave  him  command  of  the  mercenary  troops  only,  reserving  for  himself  the
general  direction  of  operations,  and  placing  the  whole  fleet  under  the  orders
of  Chabrias.  The  aged  hero,  having  vented  his  indignation  by  indulging  a
more  than  ordinary  display  of  Spartan  rudeness,  allowed  himself  to  be  appeased
by  abundant  presents,  and  assumed  the  post  assigned  to  him.  But  soon  after
a  more  serious  subject  of  disagreement  arose  between  him  and  his  ally  ;  Agesi-
laus was  disposed  to  think  that  Tachos  should  remain  quietly  on  the  banks
of  the  Nile,  and  leave  to  his  generals  the  task  of  conducting  the  campaign.^

'  Pseudo-Aeistotle,  Economics,  ii.  25.

-  DiODOEUs  SicuLCs,  XV.  92 ;  for  the  devices  resorted  to  by  Chabrias  in  order  to  train  the
Egyptian  rowers  and  to  victual  his  ileet,  cf.  Polt.bnus,  Stratcgemata,  in.  11,  §§  13,  14,  and  Pseudo-
Aeistotle,  Economics,  ii.  37.

'  DiODORUs  Sicums,  XV.  90-92;  cf.  [Xenophon],  Praise  of  Agesilaus,  ii.  28-30;  Pr-UTAECH,
Agesilaus,  §  30 ;  Theopompcs,  Fragm.  1 1.  23,  in  Mullee-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  i.  pp.  279,  2S1.


REVOLT  OF  NECTANEBO   II.


'61


The  ease  with  which  mercenary  leaders  passed  from  one  camp  to  the  other,
according  to  the  fancy  of  the  moment,  was  not  calculated  to  inspire  the
Egyptian  Pharaoh  with  confidence :  he  refused  to  comply  with  the  wishes
of  Agesilaus,  and,  entrusting  the  regency  to  one  of  his  relatives,  proceeded
to  invade  Syria.  He  found  the  Persians  unprepared:  they  shut  themselves
up  in  their  strongholds,  and  the  Pharaoli  confided  to  his  cousin  Nectanebo,
son  of  the  regent,  the  task  of  dislodging  them.  The  war  dragged  on  for  some
time ;  discontent  crept  in  among  the  native  levies,  and  brought  treachery  in
its  train.  The  fiscal  measures  which  had  been  adopted  had  exasperated  the
priests  and  the  common  people ;  complaints,  at  first  only  muttered  in  fear,
found  bold  expression  as  soon  as  the  expeditionary  force  had  crossed  the
frontier.  The  regent  secretly  encouraged  the  mal-
contents, and  wrote  to  his  son  warning  him  of  what
was  going  on,  and  advised  him  to  seize  the  crown.
Nectanebo  could  easily  have  won  over  the  Egyptian
troops  to  his  cause,  but  their  support  would  have
proved  useless  as  long  as  the  Greeks  did  not  pro-
nounce in  his  favour,  and  Chabrias  refused  to  break
his  oaths.  Agesilaus,  however,  was  not  troubled  by
the  same  scruples.  His  vanity  had  been  sorely
wounded  by  the  Pharaoh  :  after  being  denied  the
position  which  was,  he  fancied,  his  by  right,  his  short
stature,  his  ill-health,  and  native  coarseness  had  exposed  him  to  tlie
unseemly  mockery  of  the  courtiers.  Tachos,  considering  his  ability  had
been  over-estimated,  applied  to  him,  it  is  said,  the  fable  of  the  mountain
bringing  forth  a  mouse  ;  to  which  he  had  replied,  "  When  opportunity  offers,
I  will  prove  to  him  that  I  am  the  lion."  ^  When  Tachos  requested  him  to
bring  the  rebels  to  order,  he  answered  ironically  that  he  was  there  to  help  tlie
Egyptians,  not  to  attack  them ;  and  before  giving  his  support  to  either  of  the
rival  claimants,  he  should  consult  the  Ephors.  The  Ephors  enjoined  him  to
act  in  accordance  with  the  welfare  of  his  country,  and  he  thereupon  took  the
side  of  Nectanebo,  despite  the  remonstrances  of  Chabrias.  Tachos,  deserted  by
his  veterans,  fled  to  Sidon,  and  thence  to  Susa,  where  Artaxerxes  received
him  hospitably  and  without  reproaching  him  (359  B.C.) ;  ^  but  the  news  of  his
fall  was  not  received  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  with  as  much  rejoicing  as  he
had  anticipated.     The  people  had  no  faith  in  any  revolution  in  which  the

'  Drawn  by  Faueher-Gudiu,  from  Lepsics,  Denlnndler,  iii.  301,  No.  S3.

-  PuiTAUOH,  Agesilaus,  §  3G;  cf.  THEOPOMPfS,  Fragm.  120,  in  Muller-Didot,  Frajm.  Hist.  Gnec,
vol.  i.  pp.  297,  298,  and  Lyceas  of  Xaitckatis,  iu  JICller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grmc,  vol.  iv.  p.  441.

'■'  DiODORiis  SiouLus,  XV.  92 ;  cf.  [Xenophon],  Praise  of  Agesilaus,  ii.  30.  A  somewhat  foolish
anecdote  was  current  concerning  the  relations  between  Tachos  and  Ochua  (Lynojecs,  or  perhaps
LTca;AS  op  Nauobatis,  in  MiiLLEK-DtDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  p.  4G6,  note  1).


nectanebo  I.'


762       THE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD    EASTERN   WORLD.

Greeks  whom  tliey  detested  took  the  chief  part,  and  the  feudal  lords  refused
to  acknowledge  a  sovereign  whom  they  had  not  themselves  chosen;  they
elected  one  of  their  number — the  prince  of  Mendes — to  oppose  Nectanebo.
The  latter  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  possessions  won  by  his  predecessor,  and
return  with  his  army  to  Egypt:  he  there  encountered  the  forces  of  his  enemy,
which,  though  as  yet  undisciplined,  were  both  numerous  and  courageous.
Agesilaus  counselled  an  immediate  attack  before  these  troops  had  time  to
become  experienced  in  tactics,  but  he  no  longer  stood  well  at  court;  the  prince
of  Mendes  had  endeavoured  to  corrupt  him,  and,  though  he  had  shown  un-
expected loyalty,  many,  nevertheless,  suspected  his  good  faith.  Nectanebo
set  up  his  headquarters  at  Tanis,  where  he  was  shortly  blockaded  by  his
adversary.  It  is  well  known  how  skilfully  the  Egyptians  handled  the  pick-
axe, and  how  rapidly  they  could  construct  walls  of  great  strength  ;  the  circle
of  entrenchments  was  already  near  completion,  and  provisions  were  beginning
to  fail,  when  Agesilaus  received  permission  to  attempt  a  sortie.  He  broke
through  tlie  besieging  lines  under  cover  of  the  night,  and  some  days  later
won  a  decisive  victory  (359  B.C.).  Nectanebo  would  now  have  gladly  kept  the
Spartan  general  at  liis  side,  for  he  was  expecting  a  Persian  attack ;  but
Agesilaus,  who  had  had  enough  of  Egypt  and  its  intrigues,  deserted  his  cause,
and  shortly  afterwards  died  of  exhaustion  on  the  coast  near  Cyrene.  The
anticipated  Persian  invasion  followed  shortly  after,  but  it  was  conducted
without  energy  or  decision.  Artaxerxes  had  entrusted  the  conduct  of  the
expedition  to  Tachos,  doubtless  promising  to  reinstate  him  in  his  former  power
as  satrap  or  vassal  king  of  Egypt,  but  Tachos  died  before  he  could  even
assume  his  post,^  and  the  discords  which  rent  the  family  of  the  Persian  king
prevented  the  generals  who  replaced  him  from  taking  any  effective  action.
The  aged  Artaxerxes  had  iiad,  it  was  reported,  one  hundred  and  fifteen  sous
by  the  different  women  in  his  harem,  but  only  three  of  those  by  his  queen
Statira  were  now  living — Darius,  Ariaspes,^  and  Oehus.  Darius,  the  eldest  of
the  three,  had  been  formally  recognised  as  heir-apparent — perhaps  at  the  time
of  the  disastrous  war  against  the  Cadusians  ^ — but  the  younger  brother,  Ochus,
who  secretly  aspired  to  the  throne,  had  managed  to  inspire  him  with  anxiety
with  regard  to  the  succession,  and  incited  him  to  put  the  aged  king  out  of  the
way.  Contemporary  historians,  ill  informed  as  to  the  intrigues  in  the  palace,
whose  effects  they  noted  without  any  attempt  to  explore  their  intricacies,
invented  several  stories  to  account  for  the  conduct  of  the  young  prince.     Some

'  .Slian  {Variif  Eisiorim,  v.  1)  narrates,  probably  following  Dinon,  that  Tachos  died  of  dysentery
due  to  over-indulgence  at  dinner.

'  This  is  the  form  given  by  Plutarch  {Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  30 ;  Pompeius  Trogus  called  this
prince  Ariarates  (Justin,  x.  2),  probably  following  Dinon.

^  Cf.,  for  this  war,  what  is  stated,  supra,  p.  758.  Pompeius  Trogus  asserts  that  such  co-regencies
were  contrary  to  Persian  law  (Justin,  x.  1) ;  we  have  seen  above  (pp.  055,  Till)  that,  on  the  contrary,
they  were  obligatory  when  the  sovereign  was  setting  out  on  a  campaign.


ACCESSION   OF   OCHUS.  763

assigned  as  the  reason  of  his  conspiracy  a  romantic  love-affair.  They  said  that
Cyrus  the  Younger  had  had  an  Ionian  mistress  named  Aspasia,  who,  after  the
fatal  battle  of  Cunaxa,  had  been  taken  into  the  harem  of  the  conqueror,  and
had  captivated  him  by  her  beauty.  Darius  conceived  a  violent  passion  for  this
damsel,  and  his  father  was  at  first  inclined  to  give  her  up  to  him,  but  after-
wards, repenting  of  his  complaisance,  consecrated  her  to  the  service  of  Mithra,
a  cult  which  imposed  on  her  the  obligation  of  perpetual  chastity.  Darius,
exasperated  by  this  treatment,  began  to  contemplate  measures  of  vengeance,
but,  being  betrayed  by  his  brother  Ochus,  was  put  to  death  with  his  whole
family.^  By  the  removal  of  this  first  obstacle  the  crafty  prince  found  himself
only  one  step  nearer  success,  for  his  brother  Ariaspes  was  acknowledged  as
heir-apparent :  Ochus  therefore  persuaded  him  that  their  father,  convinced  of
the  complicity  of  Ariaspes  in  the  plot  imputed  to  Darius,  intended  to  put  him
to  an  ignominious  death,  and  so  worked  upon  him  that  he  committed  suicide  to
escape  the  executioner.  A  bastard  named  Arsames,  who  might  possibly  have
aspired  to  the  crown,  was  assassinated  by  Ochus.  This  last  blow  was  too  much
for  Artaxerxes,  and  he  died  of  grief  after  a  reign  of  forty-six  years  (358  B.C.).'-'

Ochus,  who  immediately  assumed  the  name  of  Artaxerxes,  began  his  reign
by  the  customary  massacre  :  he  put  to  death  all  the  princes  of  the  royal  family,^
and  having  thus  rid  himself  of  all  the  rival  claimants  to  the  supreme  power,
he  hastened  on  preparations  for  the  war  with  Egypt  which  had  been  interrupted
by  his  father's  death  and  his  own  accession.  The  necessity  for  restoring
Persian  dominion  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  was  then  more  urgent  than  at  any
previous  time.  During  the  half-century  which  had  elapsed  since  the  recovery
of  her  independence,  Egypt  had  been  a  perpetual  source  of  serious  embarrass-
ment to  the  great  king.  The  contemporaries  of  Amyrtfeus,  whether  Greeks  or
barbarians,  had  at  first  thought  that  his  revolt  was  nothing  more  than  a  local
rising,  like  many  a  previous  one  which  had  lasted  but  a  short  time  and  had
been  promptly  suppressed.  But  when  it  was  perceived  that  the  native  dynasties
had  taken  a  hold  upon  the  country,  and  had  carried  on  a  successful  contest
with  Persia,  in  spite  of  the  immense  disproportion  in  their  respective  resources  ;

'  This  is  the  version  of  the  story  given  by  Dinon  and  accepted  by  Pompeius  Trogus  (Justin,  s.  2).
A  chronological  calculation  easily  demonstrates  its  unlikelihood.  It  follows  from  the  evidence  given
by  Justin  himself  (x.  2)  that  Artaxerxes  died  of  grief  soon  after  the  execution  of  his  son ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  that  the  battle  of  Cunaxa  took  place  in  400  B.C. :  Aspasia  must  then  have  been  fil'ty  or
sixty  years  old  -when  Darius  fell  in  love  with  her.

*  This  is  the  length  attributed  by  Plutarch  to  this  reign  {Life  of  Artaxerxes,  §  30),  and  which  is
generally  accepted.  It  was  narrated  in  after-days  that  the  king  kept  the  fact  of  his  father's  death
hidden  i'or  ten  months  (PoLT.i:Nus,  Stratagemaia,  vii.  17),  but  it  is  impossible  to  tell  how  much  truth
there  is  in  this  statement,  which  was  accepted  by  Dinon.

^  According  to  the  author  followed  by  Pompeius  Trogus  (Justin,  x.  3),  the  princesses  themselves
were  involved  in  this  massacre.  This  is  certainly  an  exaggeration,  for  we  shall  shortly  see  that
Darius  III.,  the  last  king  of  Persia,  was  accounted  to  be  the  grandson  of  Darius  II.;  the  massacre
can  only  have  involved  the  direct  heirs  of  Artaxerxes,


764       TEE  LAST  DATS   OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

when  not  only  the  bravest  soldiers  of  Asia,  but  the  best  generals  of  Greece,  had
miserably  failed  in  their  attacks  on  the  frontier  of  the  Delta,  Phcenicia  and
Syria  began  to  think  whether  what  was  possible  in  Africa  might  not  also  be
possible  in  Asia.  From  that  time  forward,  whenever  a  satrap  or  vassal  prince
meditated  revolt,  it  was  to  Egypt  that  he  turned  as  a  natural  ally,  and  from  Egypt
he  sought  the  means  to  carry  out  his  project ;  however  needy  the  Pharaoh  of
that  day  might  be,  he  was  always  able  to'  procure  for  such  a  suitor  sufiScient
money,  munitions  of  war,  ships,  and  men  to  enable  him  to  make  war  against  the
empire.  The  attempt  made  by  Ochus  failed,  as  all  previous  attempts  had  done :
the  two  adventurers  who  commanded  the  forces  of  Nectanebo,  the  Athenian
Diophantes  and  Lamius  of  Sparta,  inflicted  a  disastrous  defeat  on  the  imperial
troops,  and  forced  them  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat.'  This
defeat  was  all  the  more  serious  in  its  consequences  because
of  the  magnitude  of  the  efforts  which  had  been  made  :  the
king  liimself  was  in  command  of  the  troops,  and  had  been
obliged  to  turn  his  back  precipitately  on  the  foe.  The
Syrian  provinces,  which  had  been  in  an  unsettled  condition

EVAGOK.^S  II.  •  '^

OF  sALAMis.=  ever  since  the  invasion  under  Tachos,  flew  to  arms  ;  nine

petty  kings  of  Cyprus,  including  Evagoras  II.,  nephew  of  the  famous
prince  of  that  name,  refused  to  pay  tribute,  and  Artabazus  roused  Asia
Minor  to  rebellion.  The  Phoenicians  still  hesitated  ;  but  the  insolence  of  their
satrap,  the  rapacity  of  the  generals  who  had  been  repulsed  from  Egypt,  and
the  lack  of  discipline  in  the  Persian  army  forced  them  to  a  decision.  In  a
convention  summoned  at  Tripoli,  the  representatives  of  the  Phcenician  cities
conferred  on  Tennes,  King  of  Sidon,  the  perilous  honour  of  conducting  the
operations  of  the  confederate  army,  and  his  first  act  was  to  destroy  the  royal
villa  in  the  Lebanon,  and  his  next  to  burn  the  provisions  which  had  been  accu-
mulated in  various  ports  in  view  of  the  Egyptian  war  (351-350  B.C.).  Ochus
imagined  at  the  outset  that  his  generals  would  soon  suppress  these  rebellions,
and,  in  fact,  Idrieus,  tyrant  of  Caria,  supported  by  eight  thousand  mercenaries
under  the  Athenian  Phocion,  overcame  the  petty  tyrants  of  Cyprus  without
much  difficulty ;  but  in  Asia  Minor,  Artabazus,  supported  by  Athens  and
Thebes,  held  at  bay  the  generals  sent  to  oppose  him,  and  Tennes  won  a  signal
victory  in  Syria.  He  turned  for  support  to  Egypt,  and  Nectanebo,  as  might  be
expected,  put  Greek  troops  at  his  disposal  to  the  number  of  four  thousand,

'  DioDOEUS  SiouLus,  xvi.  -18,  who  unfortunately  has  given  us  no  detailed  account  of  the  course  of
events  ;  perhaps  he  found  none  in  Theopompus,  who  was  the  authority  he  followed  for  these  Egyptian
wars.  To  this  expedition  may  be  referred,  with  Wiedemann  (Gesch.  jEgyptens,  pp.  29i,  295),  the  stra-
tagem of  the  Spartan  Gastron,  which,  according  to  Polysenus  (^Strat.,  ii.  lij ;  cf.  Fkontin,  Stratagemes,
ii.  3,  §  13 ;  GuxsoimiD,  Kleine  Schriflen,  vol.  i.  pp.  175,  176),  secured  the  victory  to  the  Egyptians.

*  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  M^dailles,  of  which  the  cast  was  kiudly
furnished  me  by  M.  Babelon ;  cf.  Babelon,  Les  Perses  AcMm&iides,  pi.  svii.  No.  \i.


THE  REVOLT   OF  PHCENICIA    AND    DESTRUCTION   OF  SIDON.       765

commanded  by  one  of  his  best  generals,  Mentor  of  Ehodes  :  Belesys,  the  satrap
of  Syria,  and  Mazseus,  satrap  of  Cilicia,  suffered  a  total  defeat.  Ochus,  exasperated
at  their  want  of  success,  called  out  every  available  soldier,  three  hundred
thousand  Asiatics  and  ten  thousand  Greeks ;  the  Sidonians,  on  their  side,  dug
a  triple  trench  round  their  city,  raised  their  ramparts  and  set  fire  to  their  ships,
to  demonstrate  their  intention  of  holding  out  to  the  end.^  Unfortunately,  their
kiug,  Tennes,  was  not  a  man  of  firm  resolution.  Hitherto  he  had  lived  a  life
of  self-indulgence,  surrounded  by  the  women  of  his  harem,  whom  he  had
purchased  at  great  cost  in  Ionia  and  Greece,  and  had  made  it  the  chief  object
of  his  ambition  to  surpass  in  magnificence  the  most  ostentatious  princes  of
Cyprus,  especially  Nicocles  of  Salamis,  son  of  Evagoras.'^  The  approach  of
Ochus  confused  his  scanty  wits ;  he  endeavoured  to  wipe  out  his  treachery
towards  his  suzerain  by  the  betrayal  of  his  own  subjects.  He  secretly
despatched  his  confidential  minister,  a  certain  Thessalion,  to  the  Persian  camp,
promising  to  betray  Sidon  to  the  Persian  king,  and  to  act  as  his  guide  into
Egypt  on  condition  of  having  his  life  preserved  and  his  royal  rank  guaranteed
to  him.  Ochus  had  already  agreed  to  these  conditions,  when  an  impulse  of
vanity  on  his  part  nearly  ruined  the  whole  arrangement.  Thessalion,  not
unreasonably  doubting  the  king's  good  faith,  had  demanded  that  he  should
swear  by  his  right  hand  to  fulfil  to  the  letter  all  the  clauses  of  the  treaty  ;
whereupon  Ochus,  whose  dignity  was  offended  by  this  insistence,  gave  orders
for  the  execution  of  tlie  ambassador.  But  as  the  latter  was  being  dragged
away,  he  cried  out  that  the  kiug  could  do  as  he  liked,  but  that  if  he  disdained
the  help  of  Tennes,  he  would  fail  in  his  attacks  both  upon  Phcenicia  and  Egypt.
These  words  produced  a  sudden  reaction,  and  Thessalion  obtained  all  that  he
demanded.  When  the  Persians  had  arrived  within  a  few  days'  march  of  Sidon,
Tennes  proclaimed  that  a  general  assembly  of  the  Phcenician  deputies  was  to
be  held,  and  under  pretext  of  escorting  the  hundred  leading  men  of  his  city  to
the  appointed  place  of  meeting,  led  them  into  the  enemy's  camp,  where  they  were
promptly  despatched  by  the  javelins  of  the  soldiery.  The  Sidonians,  deserted  by
their  king,  were  determined  to  carry  on  the  struggle,  in  the  expectation  of  receiving
succour  from  Egypt ;  but  the  Persian  darics  had  already  found  their  way  into  the
hands  of  the  mercenary  troops,  and  the  general  whom  Nectanebo  had  lent  them,
declared  that  his  men  considered  the  position  desperate,  and  that  he  should
surrender  the  city  at  the  first  summons.  The  Sidonians  thereupon  found  them-
selves reduced  to  the  necessity  of  imploring  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror,  and
five  hundred  of  them  set  out  to  meet  him  as  suppliants,  carrying  olive  branches

'  DioDOKCS  SioULrs,  xvi.  44.

^  Cf.  the  account  of  this  king,  under  the  name  of  Strato,  given  by  the  historian  Theopompus,
Fnujm.  126,  in  MCllek-Didot,  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Grsecorum,  p.  299.


766       THE  LAST  DATS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

in  their  hands.  But  Ochus  was  the  most  cruel  monarch  who  had  ever  reigned
in  Persia —the  only  one,  perhaps,  who  was  really  bloodthirsty  by  nature :  he
refused  to  listen  to  the  entreaties  of  the  suppliants,  and,  like  the  preceding
hundred  delegates,  they  were  all  slain.  The  remaining  citizens,  perceiving  that
they  could  not  hope  for  pardon,  barricaded  themselves  in  their  houses,  to  which
they  set  fire  with  their  own  hands ;  forty  thousand  persons  perished  in  the
flames,  and  so  great  was  the  luxury  in  the  appointments  of  the  private  houses,
that  large  sums  were  paid  for  the  right  to  dig  for  the  gold  and  silver  ornaments
buried  in  the  ruins.  The  destruction  of  the  city  was  almost  as  complete  as  in
■  the  days  of  Esarhaddon.^  When  Sidon  had  thus  met  her  fate,  the  Persians
had  no  further  reason  for  sparing  its  king,  Tennes,  and  he  was  delivered  to
the  executioner ;  whereupon  the  other  Phoenician  kings,  terrified  by  his  fate,
opened  their  gates  without  a  struggle.^

Once  more  the  treachery  of  a  few  traitors  had  disconcerted  the  plans  of  the
Pharaoh,  and  delivered  the  outposts  of  Egypt  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy :
but  Ochus  renewed  his  preparations  with  marvellous  tenacity,  and  resolved
to  neglect  nothing  which  might  contribute  to  his  final  success.  His  victories
had  confirmed  the  cities  of  the  empire  in  their  loyalty,  and  they  vied  with  one
another  in  endeavouring  to  win  oblivion  for  their  former  hesitation  by  their
present  zeal :  "  What  city,  or  what  nation  of  Asia  did  not  send  embassies  to
the  sovereign  ?  what  wealth  did  they  not  lavish  on  him,  whether  the  natural
products  of  the  soil,  or  the  rare  and  precious  productions  of  art  ?  Did  he  not
receive  a  quantity  of  tapestry  and  woven  hangings,  some  of  purple,  some  of
diverse  colours,  others  of  pure  white  ?  many  gilded  pavilions,  completely
furnished,  and  containing  an  abundant  supply  of  linen  and  sumptuous  beds  ?
chased  silver,  wrought  gold,  cups  and  bowls,  enriched  with  precious  stones,  or
valuable  for  the  perfection  and  richness  of  their  work  ?  He  also  received
untold  supplies  of  barbarian  and  Grecian  weapons,  and  still  larger  numbers  of
draught  cattle  and  of  sacrificial  victims,  bushels  of  preserved  fruits,  bales  and
sacks  full  of  parchments  or  books,  and  all  kinds  of  useful  articles  ?  So  great
was  the  quantity  of  salted  meats  which  poured  in  from  all  sides,  that  from  a
distance  the  piles  might  readily  be  mistaken  for  rows  of  hillocks  or  high
mounds."^  The  land-force  was  divided  into  three  corps,  each  under  a
barbarian  and  a  Greek  general.  It  advanced  along  the  sea  coast,  following
the  ancient  route  pursued  by  the  armies  of  the  Pharaohs,  and  as  it  skirted  the
marshes  of  Sirbonis,  some  detachments,  having  imprudently  ventured  over  the
treacherous  soil,  perished  to  a  man.     When  the  main  force  arrived  in  safety

'  For  the  destruction  of  Sidon  by  Esarhaddon,  cf.  mpra,  p.  352.

-  The  history  of  the  Phoenician  war  is  given  at  length  by  Diodorus  Sicclits,  svi.  41-45.

'  Theopompus,  Fragm.  125,  in  MiJLLEB-DiDOT,  Fraym.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  i.  pp.  298,  299.


CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  BY  OCHUS.  767

before  Pelusium,  it  found  Nectanebo  awaiting  it  behind  his  ramparts  and
marshes.  He  had  fewer  men  than  his  adversary,  his  force  numbering  only
sixty  thousand  Egyptians,  twenty  thousand  Libyans,  and  the  same  number  of
Greeks ;  but  the  remembrance  of  the  successes  won  by  liimself  and  his  pre-
decessors with  inferior  numbers  inspired  him  with  confidence  in  the  issue  of
the  struggle.  His  fleet  could  not  have  ventured  to  meet  in  battle  the  com-
bined squadrons  of  Cyprus  and  Phcenicia,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had
a  sufScient  number  of  flat-bottomed  boats  to  prevent  any  adversary  from
entering  the  mouths  of  the  Nile.  The  weak  points  along  his  Slediterrauean
seaboard  and  eastern  frontier  were  covered  by  strongholds,  fortifications,  and
entrenched  camps :  in  short,  his  plans  were  sufficiently  well  laid  to  ensure
success  in  a  defensive  war,  if  the  rash  ardour  of  his  Greek  mercenaries  bad  not
defeated  his  plans.  Five  thousand  of  these  troops  were  in  occupation  of
Pelusium,  under  command  of  Philopliron.  Some  companies  of  Thebans,  who
were  serving  under  Lacrates  in  the  Persian  army,  crossed  a  deep  canal  which
separated  them  from  the  city,  and  provoked  the  garrison  to  risk  an  encounter
in  the  open  field.  Pliiloplnon,  instead  of  treating  their  challenge  with  in-
difference, accepted  it,  and  engaged  in  a  combat  which  lasted  till  nightfall.
On  the  following  day,  Lacrates,  having  drawn  off  the  waters  of  the  canal  and
thrown  a  dyke  across  it,  led  his  entire  force  up  to  the  glacis  of  the  fortifications,
dug  some  trenches,  and  brought  up  a  line  of  battering-rams.  He  would  soon
liave  effected  a  breach,  but  the  Egj'ptians  understood  how  to  use  the  spade  as
well  as  the  lance,  and  while  the  outer  wall  was  crumbling,  they  improvised
behind  it  a  second  wall,  crowned  with  wooden  turrets.  Nectanebo,  who  had
come  up  with  thirty  thousand  native,  five  thousand  Greek  troops,  and  half  the
Libyan  contingent,  observed  the  vicissitudes  of  the  siege  from  a  short  distance,
and  by  his  presence  alone  opposed  the  advance  of  the  bulk  of  the  Persian  army.
Weeks  passed  by,  the  time  of  the  inundation  was  approaching,  and  it  seemed
as  if  this  policy  of  delay  would  have  its  accustomed  success,  when  an  unforeseen
incident  decided  in  a  moment  the  fate  of  Egypt.  Among  the  ofScers  of  Ochus
was  a  certain  Nicostratiis  of  Argos,  who  on  account  of  his  prodigious  strength
was  often  compared  to  Heracles,  and  who  out  of  vanity  dressed  himself  up  in
the  traditional  costume  of  that  hero,  the  lion's  skin  and  the  club.  Having
imbibed,  doubtless,  the  ideas  formerly  propounded  by  Iphicrates,^  Nicostratus
forced  some  peasants,  whose  wives  and  children  he  had  seized  as  hostages,  to
act  as  his  guides,  and  made  his  way  up  one  of  the  canals  which  traverse  the
marshes  of  Menzaleh  :  there  he  disembarked  his  men  in  the  rear  of  Nectanebo,
and  took  up  a  very  strong  position  on  the  border  of  the  cultivated  land.  This
enterprise,  undertaken  with  a  very  insuflScient  force,  was  an  extremely  rash  one  ;
'  Cf.  what  is  stated  on  this  subject,  supra,  p.  757.


768  THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

if  the  Egyptian  generals  had  contented  themselves  with  harassing  Nicostratus
without  venturing  on  engaging  him  in  a  pitched  battle,  they  would  speedily
have  forced  him  to  re-embark  or  to  lay  down  his  arms.  Unfortunately,  how-
ever, five  thousand  mercenaries,  who  formed  the  garrison  of  one  of  the
neighbouring  towns,  hastened  to  attack  him  under  the  command  of  Clinias
of  Cos,  and  suffered  a  severe  defeat.  As  a  result,  the  gates  of  the  town  were
thrown  open  to  the  enemy,  and  if  the  Persians,  encouraged  by  the  success  of
this  forlorn  hope,  had  followed  it  up  boldly,  Nectanebo  would  have  run  the
risk  of  being  cut  off  from  his  troops  which  were  around  Pelusium,  and  of  being
subsequently  crushed.  He  thought  it  wiser  to  retreat  towards  the  apex  of  the
Delta,  but  this  very  act  of  prudence  exposed  him  to  one  of  those  accidental
misfortunes  which  are  wont  to  occur  in  armies  formed  of  very  diverse  elements.
Wiiile  he  was  concentrating  his  reserves  at  Memphis,  the  troops  of  the  first
line  thought  that,  by  leaving  them  exposed  to  the  assaults  of  the  great  king,  he
was  deliberately  sacrificing  them.  Pelusium  capitulated  to  Lacrates ;  Mentor
of  Ehodes  pushed  forward  and  seized  Bubastis,  and  the  other  cities  in  the  eastern
portion  of  the  Delta,  fearing  to  bring  upon  themselves  the  fate  of  Sidon,  opened
their  gates  to  the  Persians  after  a  mere  show  of  resistance.  The  forces  which
had  collected  at  Memphis  thereupon  disbanded,  and  Nectanebo,  ruined  by  these
successive  disasters,  collected  his  treasures  and  fled  to  Ethiopia.  The  successful
issue  of  the  rash  enterprise  of  Nicostratus  had  overthrown  the  empire  of  the
Pharaohs,  and  re-established  the  Persian  empire  in  its  integrity  (342  b.c.).^

'  The  complete  history  of  this  war  is  related  by  Diodorug  Sieulua  (xvi.  46-51),  who  generally
follows  the  narrative  of  Theopompus.  The  chronology  is  still  sufficiently  uncertain  to  leave  some
doubt  as  to  the  exact  date  of  each  event ;  I  have  followed  that  arrangement  which  seems  to  accord
best  with  the  general  history  of  the  period.  The  following  table  may  be  drawn  up  of  the  last
Egyptian  dynasties  as  far  as  they  can  be  restored  at  present : —

XXVII.  (Persian)  Dynasty.

I.  MASTJTEt  KaSBUTI KoM/SwrlS.

II.  .     .     .       [Gaumata] [SnepSls].

III.  SaTOUTUbI   NtAKAICASHA Aaf>i7as  a'.

IV.  Sanentonen-sotpuniphtah  Khabbisha

V Khshayarsha        Ee'pfijs  a.

VI ArtAKHSHAYABSHA 'ApTa|e'p|r)s  a.

VII Khshatabsha aep^ris  ff.

VIII SeKuSiWos  SoySiayos.

IX.  MiAMBNKI  NtABAIUASHA Aapuos  ff.

XXVIII.  (i^aite)  Dynasty.
I 'A[j.vpTa7os.

XXIX.  (Mendesian)  Dynasty.

I.  BtNKI-lMiNrTIEU  NefOBITI  I Ne<f)€p/Tr/s  a'.

II.    KHNDMMARi-SOTPUSlKHKUMU    HAKOBI "AKWplS.

III.   UsiEIPUTAHKi  PsAMI-t! ^'dp.fi.oveis.

IV Mlifl))!.

V NefuBITI  II Ne(f)epiTi)S  p'.

XXX.  (Sebennytio)  Dynasty.

I.   SNOTMIBBi-SOTPUNtANHI.-ElNAKHTHABABBtT-MiANHURI-Sn.SIT     N6K7a«'0r,S  a'.
II,  Irimaitnib!  Zadhu-Sotpunianhcei Te'ais,  Tax^s.

III.  KUOPIBKEBI  NakhtuNABUF NeKrare'^Tis  P',  NaKro,'a$o.


FROSPERITT   OF  EGYPT   UNDER   ITS  LAST  NATIVE  DYNASTY.      769


Egypt  had  prospered  under  the  strong  rule  of  its  last  native  Pharaohs.
Every  one  of  them,  from  Amyrtseus  down  to  Neetanebo,  had  done  his  best  to
effiice  all  traces  of  the  Persian  invasions  and  restore  to  the  country  the  appear-
ance which  it  had  presented  before  the  days  of  its  servitude  ;  even  kings  like
Psamutis  and  Tacbos,  whose  reign  had  been  of  the  briefest,  had,  like  those  who
ruled  for  longer  periods,  constructed  or  beautified  the  monuments  of  the  country/


SMALL    TE3JPLE  OF    NECTANKBO.    AT   THE   SOUTHERN   EXTEESIITY    OP    PHILJi.-

The  Thebaid  was  in  this  respect  a  special  field  of  their  labours.  The  island  of
Philffi,  exposed  to  the  ceaseless  attacks  of  the  Ethiopians,  had  been  reduced  to
little  more  than  a  pile  of  ruins.-'  Neetanebo  II.  erected  a  magnificent  gate
there,  afterwards  incorporated  into  the  first  pylon  of  the  temple  built  by  the
Ptolemies,  and  one  at  least  of  the  buildings  that  still  remain,  the  charming  rect-
angular kiosk,  the  pillai-s  of  which,  with  their  Hathor  capitals,  rise  above  the
southern  extremity  of  the  island  and  mark  the  spot  at  which  the  Ethiopian

'  E.g.  the  small  temples  built  by  Psamutis  .it  Karuak  (CniMPOLLiox,  Monuments  de  VEgypte  et  de
la  NuVie,  pi.  ecciii.  1,  and  cccix.  3 ;  Lepsics,  DenJnn.,  iii.  250,  a,  b ;  Maspero,  Dehouverte  d'un  petit
temple,  in  the  Becueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  vi.  p.  20;  Wiedemann,  On  Two  Temples  of  the  2dllt  Dynasty
at  Karnak,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  vol.  vii.,  1SS1-1SS5,  pp.  108-112);  also
the  works  executed  by  Tacbos  in  the  quarries  of  Turah  (Brugsch,  Histoire  d'Egypte,  p.  282),  and
in  the  temple  of  Khonsu  at  Thebes  (Bouriant,  2\otes  de  Voyage,  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xi.
pp.  153,  154).

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

'  As  to  the  buildings  of  Amasis  at  PhiU-c.  cf.  p.  041.  supra.

3    D


770


THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.


pilgrims  first  set  foot  on  the  sacred  territory  of  tlie  bountiful  Isis.^
Nectanebo  I.  restored  tiie  sanctuaries  of  Nelchabit  at  El-Kab,^  and  of  Horus  at
Edfu,  in  wliidi  laftor  place  lie  has  loft  an  admirable  uaos  which  delights  the

modern  traveller  by
its  severe  proportions
and  simplicity  of
ornament,^  while  Nec-
tanebo II.  repaired
the  ancient  temple  of
i\Iiiiu  at  Coptos  ;  *  in
.sliort,  without  giving
a  detailed  list  of  what
was  accomplished  by
each  of  these  later
Pharaohs,  it  may  be
said  that  there  are
few  important  sites  in
the  valley  of  the  Nile
where  some  striking
evidence  of  their  ac-
tivity may  not  still
be  discovered  even
after  the  lapse  of
so  many  centuries.
It  will  be  sufficient
to    mention   Thebes/


NAOS  OF  NECTANEBO  IN  THE  TEMPLE  AT  EDFC'


'  Champolliom,  il/onu-
ments  de  V^gyple  el  de  la
Nuhie,  pis.  Ixxx.,  Ixsxv.,
and  pp.  201-206 ;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici.  pi.  18  ;  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  285,  286.

-  Cf.  the  cartouobes  discovered  iu  1882  among  the  ruins  of  the  great  temple  at  El-Kab.

'  Di'iiiCHEN,  Bauurkunde  der  Tempelanlagen  von  Edfu,  in  the  Zeilschri/t,  1871,  p.  95,  et  seq.

*  JIaspeko,  \otee,  §  Isii.,  in  the  Zeitschrift,  1885,  pp.  4,  5 ;  Petrie,  Koptos,  p.  17,  and  pi.  xxvi.  2.

'  E.g.  the  buildings  of  Xephorites  I.  at  Karnak  (Champolhon,  Monuments  de  V£gypte  et  de  la
Nubie,  vol.  ii.  p.  290  ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  284  b,  c),  of  Hakoris  at  Karnak  (Chamfollion,  Monuments
de  VEgypte  et  de  la  Nuhie,  vol.  ii.  p.  264 ;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  ii.  p.  213,  and  vol.  iv.
p.  218  ;  Lepsics,  Denkm.,  iii.  284  /,  g),  and  at  Medinet-Habu  (Eosellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  ii.
pp.  211-213,  and  vol.  iv.  p.  218 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  284  h,  i),  of  Psamutis  at  Karnak  (Champollion,
Momtmenta  de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cociii.  1,  cccix.  3  ;  Eo,sellini,  Monumenti  Storici,  pi.  cliv.  4,
vol.  ii.  pp.  214,  215,  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  219,  220 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  259  a,  h ;  Maspero,  Dgcouverte  d'un
petit  temple  a  Karnak,  in  the  Recueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  ii.  p.  20),  of  Nectanebo  I.  at  Karnak  (Cham-
follion, Monuments  de  l'£gypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cccviii.  2,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  232,  238,  264,  273,  et  seq. ;
EosELLiNi,  Monumenti  Storici,  vol.  ii.  p.  222 ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  287  b-h),  of  Tachos  at  Karnak
(BocRiANT,  Notes  de  Voyage,  in  the  Mecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xi.  pp.  153,  154),  of  Nectanebo  II.  at
Karnak  (Chajifollion,  Monuments  de  Vtgypte  et  de  la  Nubie,  pi.  cccix.  2,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  240,  256,  262,
et  seq. ;  Lepsius,  Denkm.,  iii.  284  &)  and  at  Medinet-Habu  (Chamfollion,  Monuments  de  V6gyptc  et  de  la
Nubie,  pi.  cxevi. ;  Eosellini,  Monumenti  istorici, pi.  cliv.  2,  and  vol.  iv.  pp.  222,  223 ;  Lefsus,  Denkm.,
V.  1  c).  '  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.


BUILDINGS   OF  TEE   TWO   NECTANEBOS.


t  i


:\remphis,i  Sebennytos,-  Bubastis,-^  Pahabit/  Patumu,^  and  Tanis.'^  Nor  did
the  Thebaa  oases,  including  that  of  Anion  himself,  escape  their  zeal,  for
the   few   Europeans


who     have     visited

them     in      modern

times  have  observed

their         cartouches

there.    Moreover,  in

spite    of    the    brief

space  of  time  within

which  they  were  car-
ried out,  the  ma-
jority of  these  works

betray  no  signs  of
haste  or  slipshod
execution  ;  the

craftsmen  employed
on  them  seem  to
have  preserved  in
their  full  integrity
all  the  artistic  tra-
ditions of  earlier
times,  and  were
capable  of  producing
masterpieces  which
will  bear  comparison
with  those  of  the
golden  age.  The
Eastern  gate,  erected  at  Karnak  in  the  time  of  Nectauebo  II.,  is  in  no  way
inferior  either  in  purity  of  proportion  or  in  the  beauty  of  its  carvings  to  what
remains  of  the  gates  of  Amenothes  III.^     The  sarcophagus  of  Nectauebo  I.  is

'  Cf.  the  graffiti  of  the  time  of  Hakoris  and  Tachos  in  the  quarries  at  Turah  relating  to  the
buildings  carried  out  at  Memphis  (Champollios,  yionumenU  de  r£gypte  et  de  la  Niibie,  vol.  ii.  p.  489  ;
Brugsch.  Iteciieil  de  Monuments,  vol.  i.  pi.  x.  10,  14-lG,  20,  22,  and  Histoire  d'igypte,  p.  282).

-  N -WILLE.  Tlie  Mound  of  the  Jews,  pp.  2.i,  2G.  and  pi.  vi.  a  ;  cf.  Leemans,  Papyri  Graici,  vol.  i.  p.  122,
where  reference  is  made  to  the  works  carried  out  by  Nectauebo  II.  iu  the  temple  at  Sebennytos.

^  N.wiLLE,  Buhasfis,  pp.  56-58,  and  pis.  xliii.-xlviii.,  where  the  name  of  Hakoris  is  mentioned
once  (xlili.  B);  the  greater  part  of  the  buildings  dates  from  the  time  of  Nectauebo  I.

*  Naville,  The  Mound  of  the  Jetcs.  p.  26.

>  Naville,  Lettre  a  M.  Lejjsius,  iu  the  Zeilschrift,  1883,  p.  43;  The  Store-City  of  Pithom,  p.  12,
where  we  find  tlie  king  responsible  for  the  building  was  Nectanebo  I. ;  cf.  Petbie,  Tanis,  vol.  i.  p.  28,
as  to  the  statues  of  Nectanebo  I.  discovered  at  Tell  el-Maskhutah.

°  Flisdeks  Petbie,  Tarn's,  vol.  i.  p.  21.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Beato.

'  Champollios,  Monuments  de  Vligyjjte  et  de  la  Xuhic,  pi.  cccix.  2,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  2G2,  ct  Scq.  Tlie
gate  and  part  of  the  wall  adjoining  it  date  from  the  time  of  Nectanebo  II.


GREAT    GATE    OF  NTECTANESO    AT   KARNAK.'


772


THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE    OLD  EASTERN   WORLD.


carved  and  decorated  with  a,  perfection  of  skill  wliicli  has  never  been  surpassed
in  any  age,  and  elsewhere,  on  all  the  monuments  which  bear  the  name  of  this
monarch,  the  hieroglyphics  have  been  designed  and  carved  with  as  much  care
as  though  each  one  of  them  had  been  a  precious  cameo.^  The  basalt  torso  of
Nectanebo  II.,  which  attracts  so  much  admiration  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale
in  Paris  for  accuracy  of  proportion  and  delicacy  of  modelling,  deserves  to  rank
with  the  finest  statues  of  the  ancient  empire.-^  The  men's  heads  are  veritable
portraits,  in  which  such  details  as  a  peculiar  conformation  of  the  skull,  promi-
nent cheek-bones,  deep-set  eyes?
sunken  clieeks,  or  the  modelling  of
the  chin,  have  all  been  observed  and
reproduced  with  a  fidelity  and  keen-
ness of  observation  which  we  fail  to
find  in  such  works  of  the  earlier  artists
as  have  come  down  to  us.  These
later  sculptors  display  the  same  re-
gard for  truth  in  their  treatment  of
animals  and  their  dog-headed  divini-
ties:'■  their  dogs,  lions,  and  sphinxes
will  safely  bear  comparison  with  the
most  lifelike  presentments  of  these
creatures  to  be  found  among  the  re-
mains of  the  Memphite  or  Theban  eras.  Egypt  was  thus  in  the  full  tide  of
material  prosperity  when  it  again  fell  under  the  Persian  yoke,  and  might  have
become  a  source  of  inexhaustible  wealth  to  Ochus  had  he  known  how  to  secure
acceptance  of  his  rule,  as  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  had  done  in  the  days  of
Amasis.^  The  violence  of  his  temperament,  however,  impelled  him  to  a  course
of  pitiless  oppression,  and  his  favourite  minister,  the  eunuch  Bagoas,  seems  to
have  done  bis  best  to  stimulate  his  master's  natural  cruelty.  In  the  days  when
they  felt  themselves  securely  protected  from  his  anger  by  their  Libyan  and
Greek  troops,  the  fellahin  had  freely  indulged  in  lampoons  at  the  expense  of  their
Persian  suzerain  ;  they  had  compared  him  to  Typhon  on  account  of  his  barbarity,

'  The  sarcophagus  was  for  a  long  time  preserved  near  the  mosque  of  Ibn-Tulun,  and  was  credited
with  peculiar  virtues  by  the  superstitious  inhabitants  of  Cairo  ;  cf.  Jomard,  Description  des  Antiquilfs
de  la  Ville  et  de  la  Procince  dii  Kaire,  in  the  Descrtptioit  de  l'E(jijpte,  vol.  ix.  pp.  302-307,  and  Aiiti-
quiUs,  vol.  V.  pi.  si.

'  It  has  been  reproduced  in  the  Description  de  VEgypte,  AntiquiUs,  vol.  v.  pi.  Ixix.  7,  8,  and  is  now
in  the  Bibliotheque  Xatiouale  in  Paris.

'  Cf.  the  cynocephalus  of  the  Vatican,  which  is  reproduced  as  an  initial  at  the  beginning  of
Chap.  vii..  on  p.  699  of  the  present  work.

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Flinders  Petrie.

^  As  to  the  policy  followed  by  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  in  dealing  with  the  Egyptians,  cf  pp.  684—
686,  supra.


FRAGMENT  OF  A  NAOS  OP  THE  TIME  OP  Ni:CTASEBO  H.
IN   THE   BOLOGNA   MUSEUM.*


RECONSTITUTION  OF  THE  PERSIAN  EMPIRE   UNDER    OCIIUS.


OXE  or  THE  LIOXS   IN  THE   VATICAN.*


and  had  nicknamed  him  "the  Ass,"  this  animal  being  in  their  eyes  a  type  of
everything  that  is  vile.     On  his  arrival  at  Memphis,  Ochiis  gave  orders  that  an
ass  should  be  installed  in  the  temple  of  Phtah,  and  have  divine  honours  paid  to
it ;  he  next  had  the  bull  Apis  slaughtered  and  served  up  at  a  set  banquet  which
he  gave  to  his  friends  on  taking  possession  of  tlie  White  Wall.^    The  sacred  goat
of  Slendes  suffered  the  same  fate  as  the  Apis,^  and  doubtless  none  of  the  other
sacred  animals  were  spared.     Bagoas  looted  the  temples  in  the  most  systematic
way,  despatched  the  sacred  books  to  Persia,  razed  the  walls  of  the  cities  to
the  ground,  and  put  every  avowed  partisan  of  the  native  dynasty  to  the  sword.
After  these  punitive  measures  had   been   carried  out,  Ochus   disbanded   his
mercenaries  and  returned  to
Babylon,    leaving     Pheren-
dates  in  charge  of  the  recon-
quered province.^  The  down-
fall of  Egypt  struck  terror
into   tlie    rebellious   satraps
who  were  in  arms  elsewhere.
Artabazus,    who    had    kept
Asia  Minor  in  a  ferment  ever
since  the  time  of  Artaxerxes
II.,  gave  up  the  struggle  of  his  own  accord  and  took  refuge  in  Macedonia.  The
petty  kings  of  the  cities  on  the  shores  of  the  Hellespont  and  the  ^Egaean  sub-
mitted themselves  in  order  to  regain  favour,  or  if,  like  Hermias  of  Atarnsea,  the
friend  of  Aristotle,  they  still  resisted,  they  were  taken  prisoners  and  condemned
to  death.     The  success  of  Ochus  was  a  reality,  but  there  was  still  much  to
be  done  before  things  were  restored  to  the  footing  they  had  occupied  before  the
■crisis.      We  know  enough  of  the  course  of  events  in  the  western  provinces  to
realise  the  pitch  of  weakness  to  which  the  imbecility  of  Darius  II.  and  his  son
Artaxerxes  II.  had  reduced  the  empire  of  Darius  and  Xerxes,  but  it  is  quite
certain  that  the  disastrous  effects  of  their  misgovernment  were  not  confined  to
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  but  were  felt  no  less  acutely  in  the  eastern  and
central  regions  of  the  empire.      There,  as  on  the  Greek  frontiers,  the  system
built  up  at  the  cost  of  so  much  ingenuity  by  Darius  was  gradually  being  broken

■  DiNOX,  Fragm.  30,  in  Muixer-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Gra^c,  vol.  ii.  p.  95,  from  whom  the  detaUs
preserved  ia  JEliak,  Yariie  Hidorice,  vi.  S,  and  x.  28,  and  iu  SriDAS,  s.f.  a-^iZ^s,  KaKo.s  in„r<.p,va,.
KOKaefnYos  have  probablv  been  borrowed.  ,    ,,     ,,        „         ,,

=  SuiDAS,  s.v.  So-aro,  and  .Elian,  Fragm.  256,  which  latter  passage  is  probably  taken  from  the
same  source  as  the  statements  in  regai-d  to  the  Apis.  .      ,  ,      ^  ,  ,

»  DiODORC^  SiouLrs,  xvi.  51.  It  seems  that  a  part  of  the  atrocities  committed  by  Ochus  and
liagoas  soon  came  to  be  referred  to  the  time  of  the  "Impure"  (cf.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  149,
.□ote  2)  and  to  that  of  Cambyses  (cf.  p.  068,  note  3,  fiipra).

'  Drawn  bv  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photograph  by  Flinders  Petrie.


774  TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

down  with  each  year  that  passed,  and  the  central  government  could  uo  longer
make  its  power  felt  at  the  extremities  of  the  empire  save  at  irregular  intervals,
when  its  mandates  were  not  intercepted  or  nullified  in  transmission.  The
functions  of  the  "  Eyes  "  and  "  Ears  "  ^  of  the  king  had  degenerated  into  a  mere
meaningless  formality,  and  were,  more  often  than  not,  dispensed  with  altogether.
The  line  of  demarcation  between  the  military  and  civil  power  had  been
obliterated  :  not  only  had  the  originally  independent  oifices  of  satrap,  general,
and  secretary  ceased  to  exist  in  each  separate  province,  but,  in  many  instances,
the  satrap,  after  usurping  the  functions  of  his  two  colleagues,  contrived  to  ex-
tend his  jurisdiction  till  it  included  several  provinces,  thus  establishing  himself
as  a  kind  of  viceroy.  Absorbed  in  disputes  among  themselves,  or  in  conspira-
cies against  the  Achremenian  dynasty,  these  officials  had  no  time  to  look  after
the  well-being  of  the  districts  under  their  control,  and  the  various  tribes  and
cities  took  advantage  of  this  to  break  the  ties  of  vassalage.  To  take  Asia  Minor
alone,  some  of  the  petty  kings  of  Bithynia,  Paphlagonia,  and  certain  districts  of
Cappadocia  or  the  mountainous  parts  of  Phrygia  still  paid  their  tribute  inter-
mittently, and  only  when  compelled  to  do  so ;  others,  however,  such  as  the
Pisidians,  Lycaonians,  a  part  of  the  Lycians,  and  some  races  of  Mount  Taurus,
no  longer  dreamed  of  doing  so."  The  three  satrapies  on  the  shores  of  the
Caspian,''  which  a  hundred  years  before  had  wedged  themselves  in  between  that
sea  and  the  Euxine,  were  now  dissolved,  all  trace  of  them  being  lost  in  a
confused  medley  of  kingdoms  and  small  states,  some  of  which  were  ready
enough  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Persia,  while  others,  such  as  the
Gordiaians,  Taochi,  Chalybes,  Colchi,  Mosynueki,  and  Tibarenians,^  obeyed  no
rule  but  their  own.  All  along  the  Caspian,  the  Cadusians  and  Amardians,  on
either  side  of  the  chain  of  mountains  bordering  the  Iranian  plateau,  defied
all  the  efforts  made  to  subdue  them.'  India  and  the  Sakse  had  developed
from  the  condition  of  subjects  into  that  of  friendly  allies,  and  the  savage
hordes  of  Gedrosia  and  the  Paropamisus  refused  to  recognise  any  authority
at  all."     The  whole  empire  needed  to  be  reconquered  and  reorganised  bit  by  bit

'  As  to  these  functionaries,  cf.  p.  600.  supra.

-  See  the  data  supplied  by  Xesophon,  HeUenica,  I.  iv.  §  3.  III.  ii.  §  2,  and  Anabasis.  I.  i.  §  11,  ii.  §  1,
vi.  §  7,  ix.  §  14,  V.  vi.  §  8,  etc.

^  Herodotus,  III.  sciv.

*  Cf.  the  descriptions  of  some  of  tliese  countries  given  by  Xexophon',  Anabasis,  IV.  i.  §  S,  VII.
viii.  §  25.

^  They  appear  in  the  history  of  every  epoch  as  tlie  irreconcil;ible  foes  of  the  great  king,  enemies
against  whom  even  the  most  peacefully  dispo.sed  sovereigns  were  compelled  to  take  the  field  in  person
(Ctesias,  Fragm.  2,  25,  in  JICller-Didot,  Ctesise  Cnidii  Fragmenta,  pp.  14,  42 ;  Diodorcs  Sicui-rs
XV.  8,  xvii.  6 ;  Cornelius  Nepos,  Datames,  §  ]  ;  Justin,  x.  3 ;  Plutarch,  Artaxerxes.  24).

"  The  SakiE  fought  at  Arbela,  but  only  as  allies  of  the  Persians  (Arrian,  Anabasis,  III.  viii).
The  Indians  who  are  mentioned  with  them  came  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Cabul ;  most  of  the  races
who  had  formerly  figured  in  Darius'  satrapy  of  India  had  become  independent  by  the  time  Alexander
penetrated  into  the  basin  of  the  Indus.


77G       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   OLD    EASTERN   WORLD.

if  it  was  to  exercise  that  influence  in  the  world  to  wliich  its  immense  size
entitled  it,  and  the  question  arose  whether  the  elements  of  which  it  consisted
would  lend  themselves  to  any  permanent  reorganisation  or  readjustment.

The  races  of  the  ancient  Eastern  world,  or,  at  any  rate,  that  portion  of  them
which  helped  to  make  its  history,  either  existed  no  longer  or  had  sunk  into
their  dotage.     They  had  worn  each  other  out  in  the  centuries  of  their  prime,
Chald;cans  and  Assyrians  fighting  against  Cossajans  or  Elamites,  Egyptians
against  Ethiopians  and  against  Ilittites,  Urartians,  Aramrcans,  the  peoples  of
Lebanon  and  of  Damascus,  the  Plioeuicians,  Canaanites  and  Jews,  until  at  last,
with  impoverished  blood  and  flagging  energies,  they  wete  thrown  into  conflict
with  younger  and  more  vigorous  nations.     The  Medes  had  swept  away  all  that
still  remained  of  Assyria  and  Urartu  ;  the  Persians  had  overthrown  the  Medes,
the  Lydians,  and  the  Ciialdieans,  till  Egypt  alone  remained  and  was  struck
down  by  them  in  her  turn.     What  had  become  of  these  conquered  nations
during  the  period  of  nearly  two  hundred  years  that  the  Achajmenians  had
ruled  over  them  ?     First,  as  regards  Elam,  one  of  the  oldest  and  formerly  the
most  powerful  of  them  all.     She  had  been  rent  into  two  halves,  each  of  them
destined  to  have  a  different  fate.     In  the  mountains,  the  Uxians,  JIardians,
Elymjeans,  and  CosScTans — tribes  who  had  formerly  been  the  backbone  of  the
nation — had  relapsed  into  a  semi-barbarous  condition,  or  rather,  while  the  rest
of  the  world  had  progressed  in  civilisation  and  refinement,  they  had  remained
in  a  state  of  stagnation,  adhering  obstinately  to  the  customs  of  their  palmy
days:  just  as  they  had  harried  the  Chalda?ans  or  Assyrians  in  the  olden  times,
so  now  they  harried  the  Persians  ;  then,  taking  refuge  in  their  rocky  ilistnesses,
they  lived  on  the  proceeds  of  their  forays,  successfully  resisting  all  attempts  made
to  dislodge  them.^     The  people  of  the  plains,  on  the  other  hand,  kept  in  check
from  the  outset  by  the  presence  of  the  court  at  Susa,  not  only  promptly  re-
signed themselves  to  their  fate,  but  even  took  pleasure  in  it,  and  came  to  look
upon  themselves  as  in  some  sort  the  masters  of  Asia.     Was  it  not  to  their
country,  to  the  very  spot  occupied  by  the  palace  of  their  king,  that,  for  nearly
two  hundred  years,  satraps,  vassal  kings,  the  legates  of  foreign  races,  ambassadors
of  Greek  republics — in  a  word,  all  the  great  ones  of  this  world — came  svery  year
to  render  homage,  and  had  not  the  treasures  which  these  visitors  brought  with
them  been  expended,  in  part  at  any  rate,  on  their  country  ?     The  memory  of
their  former  prosperity  paled  before  the  splendours  of  their  new  destiny,  and
the  glory  of  their  ancestors  suffered  eclipse.     The  names  of  the  national  kings,
the  story  of  their  Chaldtean  and  Syrian  conquests,  the  trophies  of  their  vic-
tories over  the  great  generals  of  Nineveh,  the  horrors  of  their  latest  discords

'  Arrian,  Anahasis,  III.  xvii.


ELAM  AND    URARTU.


777


>\


COINS  OF   THE   SATKAl'S  WITH   ARAMiEAN  INSCRIPTIONS.^


and  of  the  final  catastrophe  were  all  forgotten;  even  the  documents  which
might  have  helped  to  recall  them  lay  buried  in  the  heart  of  the  mound  which
served  as  a  foundation  for  the  palace  of  the  Acbfemenides.i  Beyond  the  vague
consciousness  of  a  splendid  past,  the  memory  of  the  oommon  people  was  a
blank,  and  when  questioned  by  strangers  they  could  tell  them  nothing  save
legends  of  the  gods  or  the  exploits  of  mythical  heroes;  and  from  them  the
Greeks  borrowed  tlieir  Memnon,  that  son  of  Tithonus  and  Eos  who  rushed
to  the  aid  of  Priam  with  his  band  of  Ethiopians,  and  wliose  prowess
had  failed  to  retard  by  a  single  day  the  downfall  of  Troy.  Further  north-
wards, the  Urartiaus  and  peoples  of  ancient  Nairi,  less  favoured  by  for-
tune, lost  ground  with  each  successive  generation,  yielding  to  the  steady
jiressure  of  the  Arme-
nians. In  the  time  of  /'?>i-,  ^'.  '\^.
Herodotus  they  were
still  in  possession  of
the  upper  basins  of  the
Euphrates  and  Araxus,
and,  in  conjunction
with  the  Matieui  and  Saspires,  formed  a  satrapy — the  eighteenth — the  boun-
daries of  which  coincided  pretty  closely  with  those  of  the  kingdom  ruled  over
by  the  last  kings  of  Van  in  the  days  of  Assur-bani-pal ;  the  Armenians,  on
their  side,  constituted  the  thirteenth  satrapy,  between  Mount  Taurus  and  the
Lower  Arsanias.'  The  whole  face  of  their  country  had  undergone  a  profound
change  since  that  time  :  the  Urartians,  driven  northwards,  became  intermingled
witli  the  tribes  on  the  slopes  of  the  Caucasus,*  while  the  Armenians,  carried
along  towards  the  east,  as  though  by  some  resistless  current,  were  now  scaling  the
mountainous  bulwark  of  Ararat,  and  slowly  but  surely  encroaching  on  the  lower
plains  of  the  Araxes.  These  political  changes  had  been  almost  completed  by
the  time  of  Ochus,  and  Urartu  had  disappeared  from  the  scene,  but  an  Armenia
now  flourished  in  the  very  region  where  Urartu  had  once  ruled,  and  its  princes,
■who  were  related  to  the  family  of  the  Acha^menides,  wielded  an  authority  little
short  of  regal  under  the  modest  name  of  satraps.^     Thanks  to  their  influence,

'  As  to  the  tropliies  brought  to  Susa  by  the  Elamite  conquerors  and  discovered  by  M.  de  Morgan,
cf.  pp.  227,  22S,  supra.

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  coins  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medailles,  casts  of  which  were  very
kindly  supplied  to  me  by  JI.  Babelon.

^  Herodotus,  III.  sciii.,  xciv.;  as  to  the  kingdom  of  Urartu  in  the  time  of  Assur-bani-pal,
ef.  p.  394,  supra.

*  As  to  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  Urartians,  or,  as  they  were  afterwards  called,  the  Alarodians,  cf
H.  Bawlinson,  On  the  Alarodians  of  Berodotus,  in  G.  Rawlinson,  Herodotus,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203-206,  and
Fr.  Lenokmant,  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,  vol.  ii.  p.  299.

'-  As  to  these  forward  movements  of  the  Armenians,  cf.  Fr.  Lenormant,  Les  Origines  de  VHistoire,
•vol.  ii.  p.  370,  et  seq.


778


TEE  LAST  DATS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.


the  religions  and  customs  of  Iran  were  introduced  iuto  the  eastern  borders  of

Asia  Minor,     They  made  their  way  into  the  valleys  of  the  Iris  and  the  Halys,

into  Cappadocia  and  the  country  round

Mount  Taurus,  and  thither  they  brouglit

with    them    the    ofiScial    script    of   the

empire,  the  Persian  and  Aramrean  cunei-
form    which    was    employed    in    public

documents,  in  inscriptions,  and  on  coins.

The   centre   of  the   peninsula   remained

very  much  the  same  as   it  liad  been  in

the  period  of  the  Phrj^gian  supremacy,
but  further  west-
ward Hellenic  in-
fluences gradually
made  themselves
felt.  The  arts  of
Greece,    its    man-


ners, religious


A    LYCIAN  TOMB.'


ideals,  and    modes

of  thought,  were  slowly  displacing  civilisations  of
the  Asianic  type,  and  even  in  places  like  Lycia,  where
the  language  successfully  withstood  the  Greek  invasion,
the  life  of  the  nations,  and  especially  of  their  rulers,
became  so  deeply  impregnated  with  Hellenism  as  to
differ  but  little  from  that  in  the  cities  on  the  Ionic,
jEolian,  or  Doric  seaboard.  The  Lycians  still  adhered
to  the  ancient  forms  which  characterised  their  funerary
architecture,  but  it  was  to  Greek  sculptors,  or  pupils
from  the  Grecian  schools,  that  they  entrusted  the  decora-
;,  '  tion  of  the  sides  of  their  sarcophagi  and  of  their  tombs.-

_^______ J     Their  kings  minted  coins  many  of  which  are  reckoned

>TATii  ui  MAI- ILLS'  amoug  tlic  masterpieces  of  antique  engraving;  and  if
we  pass  from  Lycia  to  the  petty  states  of  Caria,  we  come  upon  one  of  the
greatest  triumphs  of  Greek  art — that  huge  mausoleum  in  which  the  inconsolable

'  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin,  from  a  -n-oodcut  in  Benndorff,  Beisen  in  Lijlden  und  Karien,
vol.  i.  p.  33.

=  Here  ao-ain  I  have  been  obliged  to  omit  all  that  I  had  written  in  regard  to  the  infiltration  of
Hellenic  ideas  into  Asia  Minor.  For  details  concerning  Lycian  art  in  particular,  cf.  Pekrot  and
CuiPiEZ,  L'Eistoire  de  I'Art  dans  VAntiquM,  vol.  v.  pp.  361-399.

»  Drawn  by  Fauoher-Gudin.  from  a  photograph  of  the  original  in  the  British  Museum.


THE  AKCIEXT  SYBIAX  STATES   AXD   ASSYRIA.


COIN    OP  A   LTCIAN
KING.'


Artemisia  enclosed  the  ashes  and  erected  the  statue  of  lier  husband.  The
Asia  Minor  of  Egyptian  times,  with  its  okl-world  dynasties,  its  old-world
names,  and  old-world  races,  had  come  to  be  nothing  more  than  an  historic
memory  ;  even  that  martial  world,  in  which  the  Assyrian  conquerors  fought  so
many  battles  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Black  Sea,  was  now  no  more,  and  its
neiglibours  and  enemies  of  former  days  had,  for  the  most
part,  disappeared  from  the  land  of  the  living.  The  Lotanu
were  gone,  the  Kbati  were  gone,  and  gone,  too,  were  Carche-
mish,  Arpad,  and  Qodshu,  much  of  their  domain  having
been  swallowed  up  again  by  the  desert  for  want  of  hands  to
water  and  till  it ;  even  Assyria  itself  seemed  but  a  shadow
half  shrouded  in  the  mists  of  oblivion.  Sangara,  Nisibis,
Kesaina,  and  Edessa  still  showed  some  signs  of  vigour,  but
on  quitting  the  slopes  of  the  Masios  and  proceeding  southwards,  piles  of  ruins
alone  marked  the  sites  of
those  wealthy  cities  through
which  the  Niuevite  nionarchs
had  passed  in  their  journey-
ings  towards  Syria.  Here
wide  tracts  of  arid  and  tree-
less country  were  now  to  be
seen  covered  with  aromatic-
herbage,  where  the  Scenite
Arabs  were  wont  to  pursue
the  lion,  wild  ass,  ostrich,
bustard,  antelope,  and  ga-
zelle ;  a  few  abandoned  forts,
such  as  Korsorte,  Anatho,
and  Is  (Hit)  marked  the  halt-
ing-places of  armies  on  the
banks  of  the  Euphrates.^  'In
the  region  of  the  Tigris,  the
descendants  of  Assyrian  cap-
tives who,  like  the  Jews,  had
been  set  free  by  Cyrus,  had  rebuilt  Assur,  and  had  there  grown  wealthy  by

'  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  silver  stater  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medailles,  for  a  cast  of  which
I  am  indebted  to  M.  Babelon.  The  king  in  question  was  named  Deneveles,  and  is  only  known  by  the
coins  bearing  his  superscription.     He  flourished  about  39.5  B.C.

=  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photogravure  published  by  Hamdt-Bey  and  Tii.  Eeinach,  in
La  NAropoIe  de  Sidon,  pi.  xiv.  1.

'  Xexophon,  Anahasif,  I.  v.  §§  1-0.


LTCIAN    SARCOPHAGUS    DECOEATKD    WITH   GKEEK    CARVINGS.-


780       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

husbandry  and  commerce/  but  in  the  district  of  the  Zab  solitude  reigned
supreme."  Calah  and  Nineveh  were  alike  deserted,  and  thougli  tlieir  ruins  still
littered  the  sites  where  they  had  stood,  their  names  were  unknown  in  the  neigh-
bouring villages.  Xenophon,  relying  on  his  guides,  calls  the  former  place  La-
•rissa,  the  second  Jlespila. '  Already  there  were  historians  who  took  the  ziggurat
at  Nineveh  to  be  the  burial-place  of  Sardanapalus.  They  declared  that  Cyrus
iad  pulled  it  down  in  order  to  strengthen  his  camp  during  the  siege  of  the  town,
and  that  formerly  it  had  borne  an  epitaph  afterwards  put  into  verse  by  the  poet
Chftrilus  of  lassus  :  "  I  reigned,  and  so  long  as  I  beheld  the  light  of  the  sun,  I
ate,  I  drank,  I  loved,  well  knowing  how  brief  is  the  life  of  man,  and  to  how  many
vicissitudes  it  is  liable."  ^  Many  writers,  remembering  the  Assyrian  monument
at  Anchiale  in  Cilicia,  were  inclined  to  place  the  king's  tomb  there.  It  was
surmounted  by  the  statue  of  a  man — according  to  one  account,  with  his  hands
crossed  upon  his  breast,  according  to  another,  in  the  act  of  snapping  his  fingers
— and  bore  the  following  inscription  in  Chaldaic  letters  :  "  I,  Sardanapalus,
son  of  Anakyndaraxes,  founded  Anchiale  and  Tarsus  in  one  day,  but  now  am
dead."''  Thus  ten  centuries  of  conquests  and  massacre  had  passed  away  like  a
vapour,  leaving  nothing  but  a  meagre  residue  of  old  men's  tales  and  moral  axioms.
In  one  respect  only  does  the  civilisation  of  the  Euphrates  seem  to  have
fairly  held  its  own.  Chaldjea,  though  it  had  lost  its  independence,  had  lost
but  little  of  its  wealth  ;  its  former  rebellions  had  done  it  no  great  injury,  and
its  ancient  cities  were  still  left  standing,  though  shorn  of  their  early  splendour.
Urn,  it  is  true,  numbered  but  few  citizens  round  its  tottering  sanctuaries,  but
Uruk  maintained  a  school  of  theologians  and  astronomers  no  less  famous
throughout  the  East  than  those  of  Borsippa.  The  swamps,  however,  which
surrounded  it  possessed  few  attractions,  and  Greek  travellers  rarely  ventured
tliither.     They  generally  stopped  at  Babylon,  or  if  they  ventured  off  the  beaten

'  This  seems  to  be  indicated  by  a  mutilated  passage  in  the  Cylinder  of  Cyrus.  II.  30-32  (cf.  Haqen,
Keihchrifturliunden  zur  Geschichte  des  Konigs  Cyrus,  in  the  Beitrage  zur  Amyriologie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  212,
213),  where  Assnr  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  towns  and  countries  whose  inbaUtants  were  sent  back
to  their  homes  by  Cjrus  after  the  capture  of  Babylon.  Xenophon  calls  it  Ka;na;,  this  bein?,  possibly,
a  translation  of  the  name  given  to  it  by  its  inhabitants.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  for
exiles  to  call  the  villages  founded  by  them  on  their  return  "  new."  The  town  seems  to  have  been  a
large  and  wealthy  one  {Anabasis,  II.  iv.  §  28).

-  Xenophon  {Anuhasis,  II.  iv.  §§  27,  28)  calls  this  country  Media,  a  desert  region  which  the  Ten
Thousand  took  six  days  to  cross.

^  Xesophox,  Anabasis,  III.  iv.  §§  7-1).  The  name  Larissa  is,  possibly,  a  corruption  of  some  name
Siimilar  to  that  of  the  city  of  Larsam  in  Chaldaia  ;  Mespila  may  be  a  generic  term  :  cf.  Mappela  =  the
ruins  (Kiepekt,  Handhuch  der  Alien  Geographie,  p.  152.  n.  2,  3).  [Mespila  is  31uspula,  "  tlje  low
ground"  at  the  foot  of  Kouyunjik;  Larissa  probably  Al  Eesen  or  Kes-eui,  between  Kouyunjik  and
Xebi  Yunus. — Ed.]

*  Amtktas,  Fragm.  2,  in  MvLLEn-DiDOT,  Seriptores  rerum  Alexandri  Magni,  p.  136.  Cf.  a  variant
of  the  same  inscription,  quoted  as  existing  at  Nineveh  by  Callistheses,  Fragm.  32,  in  Mijlleb-
DiDOT,  op  cii.,  pp.  21,  22,  on  the  authority  of  Hellenicus  of  Lesbos  or  Dionysius  of  Miletus,

'  Akrian,  Anabasis,  II.  v. ;  cf.  the  remarks  of  Ed.  Meyeb  QForschungen  zur  Alien  Geschichie,  vol.  i.
pp.  203-209)  in  regard  to  these  two  gestures  and  their  Assyrian  prototypes.


BABYLOXIA    AXD    CHALDuEA.  781

track,  it  was  only  to  visit  the  mouumeuts  of  Nebuchadrezzar  or  the  tombs  of
the  early  kings  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood.^  Babylon  was,  indeed,  one
of  the  capitals  of  the  empire — nay,  for  more  than  half  a  century,  during  the
closing  years  of  Artaserxes  I.,  in  the  reign  of  Darius  II.,  and  in  the  early  days
of  Artaxerxes  II.,  it  had  been  the  real  capital ;  even  under  Ochus,  the  court
spent  the  winter  months  there,  and  resorted  thither  in  quest  of  those  resources
of  industry  and  commerce  which  8usa  lacked.  The  material  benefits  due
to  the  presence  of  the  sovereign  seem  to  have  reconciled  the  city  to  its
subject  condition ;  there  had  been  no  seditious  movement  there  since  the  ill-
starred  rising  of  Shamasherib,  which  Xerxes  had  quelled  with  ruthless  severity.^
The  Greek  mercenaries  or  traders  who  visited  it,  though  prepared  for  its  huge
size  by  general  report,  could  not  repress  a  feeling  of  astonishment  as  they
approached  it.  First  of  all  there  was  the  triple  wall  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  with
its  moats,  its  rows  of  towers,  and  its  colossal  gateways.  Unlike  the  Greek  cities,
it  had  been  laid  out  according  to  a  regular  plan,  and  formed  a  perfect  square,
inside  which  the  streets  crossed  one  another  at  right  angles,  some  parallel  to
the  Euphrates,  others  at  right  angles  to  it ;  every  one  of  the  latter  terminated
in  a  brazen  gate  opening  through  the  masonry  of  the  quay,  and  giving  access  to
the  river.^  The  passengers  who  crowded  the  streets  included  representatives
of  all  the  Asiatic  races,  the  native  Babylonians  being  recognisable  by  their
graceful  dress,  consisting  of  a  linen  tunic  falling  to  the  feet,  a  fringed  shawl,
round  cap,  and  heavy  staff  terminating  in  a  knob.*  From  this  ever-
changing  background  stood  out  many  novel  features  calculated  to  stimulate
Greek  curiosity,  such  as  the  sick  persons  exposed  at  street-corners  in  order  that
they  might  beg  the  passers-by  to  prescribe  for  them,  the  prostitution  of  her
votaries  within  the  courts  of  the  goddess  Mylitta,  and  the  disposal  of  marriage-
able girls  by  auction :  Herodotus,  however,  regretted  that  this  latter  custom
had  fallen  into  abeyance.^  And  yet  to  the  attentive  eye  of  a  close  observer
even  Babylon  must  have  furnished  many  unmistakable  symptoms  of  decay.
The  huge  boundary  wall  enclosed  too  large  an  area  for  the  population  sheltered
behind  it ;  whole  quartefs  were  crumbling  into  heaps  of  ruins,  and  the  flower
and  vegetable  gardens  were  steadily  encroaching  on  spaces  formerly  covered
with  houses.^     Public  buildings  had  suffered  quite  as  much  as  private  dwellings

'  Cf.  the  description  of  Babylon  and  Babylonia  given  by  Herodotus  (I.  clxxviii.-clxxxvii.,  exeii.-
cc);  as  to  the  royal  tombs  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  marshes  at  some  distancu  from  the  city,-
cf.  AKr.lAN,  Anabasis,  VII.  xxii.

-  Cf.  what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  Shamasherib  on  p.  716,  supra.

'  HERODOTrs,  I.  clxxviii.-clxxx.

*  Herodotus,  I.  cxcv.     Cf.  the  description  on  pp.  718-720,  supra.

'  Hehodotcs,  I.  cxcvi.,  cxcvii. ;  as  to  the  prostitution  of  religious  votaries,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civiliza-
tion, pp.  639,  640.

"  STBAiiO,  XYI.  i.  §  5,  p.  73S,  where  he  says  that  KaTi]pe:i\\iav  t^s  iriKei^s  ri  fiiv  ol  Tlijiam,  to.  5'  o
Xpovos.


782       THE  LAST  DATS   OF  TEE   OLD  EASTERN   WOULD.

from  the  Persian  wars.  Xerxes  had  despoiled  the  temples,  and  no  restoration
had  been  attempted  since  his  time.'  The  ziggurat  of  Bel  lay  half  buried
already  beneath  piles  of  rubbish ;  the  golden  statues  which  had  once  stood
within  its  chambers  had  disappeared,  and  the  priests  no  longer  carried  on  their
astronomical  observations  on  its  platform.-  The  palaces  of  the  ancient  kino-s
were  falling  to  pieces  from  lack  of  repairs,  though  the  famous  hanging  gardens
in  the  citadel  were  still  sliown  to  strangers.  The  guides,  of  course,  gave
them  out  to  be  a  device  of  Semiramis,  but  the  well-iuformed  knew  that
they  had  been  constructed  by  Nebuchadrezzar  for  one  of  his  wives,  the
daughter  of  Cyaxares,  who  pined  for  the  verdure  of  her  native  mountains.
"  They  were  square  in  shape,  each  side  being  four  hundred  feet  long ;  one
approached  them  by  steps  leading  to  terraces  placed  one  above  the  other,  the
arrangement  of  the  whole  resembling  that  of  an  amphitheatre.  Each  terrace
rested  on  pillars  which,  gradually  increasing  in  size,  supported  the  weight  of
the  soil  and  its  produce.  The  loftiest  pillar  attained  a  height  of  fifty  feet ;  it
reached  to  the  upper  part  of  the  garden,  its  capital  being  on  a  level  with  the
balustrades  of  the  boundary  wall.  The  terraces  were  covered  with  a  layer  of
soil  of  sufficient  depth  for  the  roots  of  the  largest  trees ;  plants  of  all  kinds
that  delight  the  eye  by  their  shape  or  beauty  were  grown  there.  One  of  the
columns  was  hollow  from  top  to  bottom ;  it  contained  hydraulic  engines  which
pumped  up  quantities  of  water,  no  part  of  the  mechanism  being  visible  from
the  outside."  ^  Many  travellers  were  content  to  note  down  only  such  marvels
as  they  considered  likely  to  make  their  narratives  more  amusing,  but  others
took  pains  to  collect  information  of  a  more  solid  character,  and  before
they  had  carried  their  researches  very  far,  were  at  once  astounded  and
delighted  with  the  glimpses  they  obtained  of  Chaldfsan  genius.  No
doubt,  they  exaggerated  when  they  went  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  all  their
learning  came  to  them  originally  from  Babylon,  and  that  the  most  famous
scholars    of    Greece,    Pherecydes   of    Scyros,^   Democritus   of    Abdera,'^   and

'  Akbias,  Anabasig,  VII.  xvii.  §§  1.  2;  cf.  p.  716,  supra.

'  Herodotus  (I.  clxxxiii.)  merely  mentions  that  Xerxes  had  despoiled  the  temple  ;  Strabo  (XVI.
i.  §  5,  p.  13S)  tells  us  that  Alexander  wished  to  restore  it,  but  that  it  was  in  such  a  state  of
dilapidation  that  it  would  have  taken  ten  thousand  men  two  months  merely  to  remove  the  rubbish.

^  DioDORus  SicuLus,  ii.  40 ;  Steabc,  XVI.  i.  §  5,  p.  7.38,  both  of  whom  seem  to  have  borrowed
their  main  facts  from  Ctesias.

<  Philo  of  Byelos,  Frarjm.  9,  in  3Iullek-Didot,  Fraijm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  572.

^  Mi  LLER-DiDOT,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grsc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  24-26.  A  legend  of  a  later  epoch  affirms  that  he
knew  enough  AssT/rian  to  translate  a  book  by  the  celebrated  Achiacharus,  who  had  been  vizir  to
Sennacherib,  and  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Jewish  and  Arab  traditions  (E.  CosQuijf,  Le  Line  de
Tohie  et  VHistoire  du  Sage  Ahikar,  in  the  Revue  TSiblique,  vol.  viii.  pp.  50-82).  As  to  Democritus
as  alchemist,  cf.  Berthelot,  ies  Origines  de  VAlchimie,p.  145,  et  seq.,  and  in  regard  to  the  Egyptian
origin  of  the  traditions  relating  to  him,  cf.  Maspebo.  Notes  aujour  lejour,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Bibl.  Arch.  Soc,  1898,  vol.  xx.  pp.  140-144.


DECADENCE   OF  BABYLON.  783

Pythagoras/  owed  the  rudiments  of  philosophy,  mathematics,  physics,  and
astrology  to  the  school  of  the  Magi.  Yet  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  should
have  believed  this  to  be  the  case,  when  increasing  familiarity  with  the  priestly
seminaries  revealed  to  them  the  existence  of  those  libraries  of  clay  tablets  in
which,  side  by  side  with  theoretic  treatises  dating  from  two  thousand  years  back
and  more,  were  to  be  found  examples  of  applied  mechanics,  observations,  reckon-
ings, and  novel  solutions  of  problems,  which  generations  of  scribes  iiad  accumu-
lated in  the  course  of  centuries.^  The  Greek  astronomers  took  full  advantage  of
these  documents,  but  it  was  their  astrologers  and  soothsayers  who  were  specially
indebted  to  them.  The  latter  acknowledged  their  own  inferiority  the  moment
they  came  into  contact  with  their  Euphratean  colleagues,  and  endeavoured  to
make  good  their  deficiencies  by  taking  lessons  from  the  latter  or  persuading
them  to  migrate  to  Greece.  A  hundred  years  later  saw  the  Babylonian
Berosus  opening  at  Cos  a  public  school  of  divination  by  the  stars.  From
thenceforward  "Chaldaean"  came  to  be  synonymous  with  "astrologer"  or
"sorcerer,"  and  Chaldaean  magic  became  supreme  throughout  the  world  at
the  very  moment  when  Chaldasa  itself  was  in  its  death-throes.

Nor  was  its  unquestioned  supremacy  in  the  black  art  the  sole  legacy  that
Chaldfea  bequeathed  to  the  coming  generations :  its  language  survived,  and
reigned  for  centuries  afterwards  in  the  regions  subjugated  by  its  arms.  The
cultivated  tongue  employed  by  the  scribes  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  in  the
palmy  days  of  their  race,  had  long  become  a  sort  of  literary  dialect,  used  in
writings  of  a  lofty  character  and  understood  by  a  select  few,  but  unintelligible
to  the  common  people.  The  populace  in  town  or  country  talked  an  Aramaic
jargon,  clumsier  and  more  prolix  tiian  Assyrian,  but  easier  to  understand.  We
know  how  successfully  the  Aramaeans  had  managed  to  push  their  way  along
the  Euphrates  and  into  Syria  towards  the  close  of  the  Hittite  supremacy  :
their  successive  encroachments  had  been  favoured,  first  by  the  Assyrian,  later
by  the  Chaldeean  conquests,  and  now  they  had  become  sole  possessors  of  the
ancient  Naharaina,  the  plains  of  Cilicia,  the  basin  of  the  Orontes,  and  the
country  round  Damascus ;  but  the  true  home  of  the  Aramaeans  was  in  Syria
rather  than  in  the  districts  of  the  Lower  Euphrates.     Even  in  the  time  of  the

'  As  to  the  supposed  relations  of  Pythagoras  with  the  Chaldiseans  or  Assyrians,  cf.  Neanthes  of
Ctzicus,  Fragm.  20,  in  :\Uller-Didot.  Fragm.  Bid.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  pp.  9,  10,  and  Alexander  Poly-
HISTOR,  Fragm.  138,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  iii.  p.  239.  The  story  which  asserts
that  Pythagoras  served  under  Nergilos,  King  of  Assyria  (Abtdends,  Fragm.  7,  in  MCller-Didot,
Fragm.  Hist.  Gnec,  vol.  iii.  p.  282),  is  probably  based  on  some  similarity  of  names :  thus  among  the
Greek  kings  of  Cyprus,  ami  in  the  time  of  Assur-bani-pal,  we  find  one  whose  name  would  recall  that
of  Pythagoras,  if  the  accuracy  of  the  reading  were  beyond  question.

=  In  regard  to  the  library  of  Assur-bani-pal  at  Nineveh,  and  the  library  in  the  temple  of  Bel-
Jlarduk  at  Babylon  which  served  as  its  prototype,  cf  pp.  461-461,  supra.


784  THE  LAST  BAYS    OF   THE   OLD    EASTERN   WORLD.

Sargonids  their  alphabet  had  made  so  imich  headway  that  at  Nineveh  itself
and  at  Cahih  it  had  come  into  everyday  use ;  when  Chaldjean  supremacy
gave  way  to  that  of  the  Persians,  its  triumph — in  the  western  provinces,  at  any
rate — was  complete,  and  it  became  the  recognised  vehicle  of  the  royal  decrees  :
we  come  upon  it  iu  every  direction,  on  the  coins  issued  by  the  satraps  of  Asia
Minor,  on  the  seals  of  local  governors  or  dynasts,  on  inscriptions  or  stelaj  in
Egypt,  in  the  letters  of  the  scribes,  and  in  the  rescripts  of  the  great  king.
From  Nisib  to  Kaphia,  between  the  Tigris  and  the  Mediterranean,  it  gradually
supplanted  most  of  the  other  dialects — Semitic  or  otherwise — which  had
hitherto  prevailed.  Phoeniciau  held  its  ground  in  the  seaports,  but  Hebrew  gave
way  before  it,  and  ended  by  being  restricted  to  religious  purposes,  as  a  literary
and  liturgical  language.  It  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Babylon  itself  that  the
Juda.\au  exiles  had,  during  the  Captivity,  adopted  the  Aramaic  language,  and
their  return  to  Canaan  failed  to  restore  either  the  purity  of  their  own  language
or  the  dignity  and  independence  of  their  religious  life.  Their  colony  at  Jeru-
salem possessed  few  resources ;  the  wealthier  Hebrews  had,  for  the  most  part,
remained  iu  Chaldaja,  leaving  the  privilege  of  repopulating  the  holy  city  to  those
of  their  brethren  who  were  less  plenteously  endowed  with  this  world's  goods.'
These  latter  soon  learned  to  their  cost  that  Zion  was  not  the  ideal  city  whose
"  gates  shall  be  open  continually  ;  they  shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night ;  that
men  may  bring  unto  thee  the  wealth  of  the  nations ;  "  far  from  "  sucking  the
milk  of  nations  and  the  breast  of  kings," ^  their  fields  produced  barely  sufficient
to  satisfy  the  more  pressing  needs  of  daily  life.  '•  Ye  have  sown  much,  and
bring  in  little,"  as  Jahveh  declared  to  them;  "  ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough;  ye
drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink  ;  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  warm ;
and  he  that  earneth  wages  earneth  wages  to  put  it  into  a  bag  with  holes."  *
They  quickly  relinquished  the  work  of  restoration,  finding  themselves  forgotten
by  all — their  Babylonian  brethren  included — in  the  midst  of  the  great  events
which  were  then  agitating  the  world,  the  preparations  for  the  conquest  of
Egypt,  the  usurpation  of  the  pseudo-Smerdis,  the  accession  of  Darius,  the
Babylonian  and  Median  insurrections.  Possibly  they  believed  that  the
Achaemenides  had  had  their  day,  and  that  a  new  Chaldaean  empire,  with  a
second  Nebuchadrezzar  at  its  head,  was  about  to  regain  the  ascendency.     It

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  this  subject  on  pp.  G3S.  039,  supra.  I  should  have  liked  to  deal. with  tlie
history  of  the  Jewish  community  as  fully  as  it  deserves,  but  the  necessity  of  condensing  my  work  has
rendered  this  impossible.  I  give  here  merely  the  necessary  details,  without  quoting  authorities;  the
reader  will  have  no  diiiiculty  in  identifying  the  works  on  which  I  have  relied  in  dealing  with  the
controversy  which  has  arisen  in  regard  to  the  chronology  of  the  events  mentioned  in  the  books  of
Ezra  and  Nehemiah.

'  An  anonymous  prophet  in  Isa.  Is.  11-lG.

^  Hagg.  i.  6.


TEE  NEW  JEWISH  STATE  AND   ITS  DIFFICULTIES.  785

would  seem  that  the  downfall  of  Nadiutav-bel  inspired  them  with  new  faith  in
the  future  and  encouraged  them  to  complete  their  task :  in  the  second  year  of
Darius,  two  prophets,  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  arose  in  their  midst  and  lifted  up
their  voices.  Zerubbabel,  a  prince  of  the  royal  line,  governed  Judah  in  the
Persian  interest,  and  with  him  was  associated  the  high  priest  Joshua,  who
looked  after  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  community :  the  reproaches  of  the
two  prophets  aroused  the  people  from  their  inaction,  and  induced  them  to
resume  their  interrupted  building  operations.  Darius,  duly  informed  of  what
was  going  on  by  the  governor  of  Syria,  gave  orders  that  they  were  not  to  be
interfered  with,  and  four  years  later  the  building  of  the  temple  was  completed.^
For  nearly  a  century  after  tliis  the  little  Jewish  republic  remained  quiescent.
It  had  slowly  developed  until  it  had  gradually  won  back  a  portion  of  the
former  territories  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  but  its  expansion  southwards  was
checked  by  the  Idumteans,  to  whom  Nebuchadrezzar  had  years  before  handed
over  Hebron  and  Acrabattene  (Akrabbim)


as  a  reward  for  the  services  they  had  ren-      f  '    ^„^  „  ^

dered.     On  the  north  its  neighbours  were  ^  '"        '''      ■"      '  "


.^'7j\j=r'       !<         Pill      <^


the  descendants  of  those  Aramaean  exiles

whom  Sargon,  Sennacherib,  and  Esarliaddon,

kings  of  Assyria,  had,  on  various  occasions,

installed  around  Samaria  in  Mount  Ephraim.

chaldj:as  seal  with  akamaic
At  first  these  people  paid  no  reverence  to  msckiptiox.^

the   "God   of   the   land,"   so   that   Jahveli,   in   order  to   punish   them,   sent

lions,   which    spread   carnage    in    their   ranks.     Then  the   King   of  Assyria

allotted   them  an  Israelitish   priest   from   among   his  prisoners,  who  taught

them  "the   law"  of  Jahveh,  and    appointed  other   priests   chosen   from   the

people,  and  showed  them  how  to  offer  up  sacrifices  on  the  ancient  high  places.®

Thus  another  Israel  began  to  rise  up  again,  and,  at  first,  the  new  Judah  seems

to  have  been  on  tolerably  friendly  terms  with  it :  the  two  communities  traded

and  intermarried  with  one  another,  the  Samaritans  took  part  in  the  religious

ceremonies,  and  certain  of  their  leaders  occupied  a  court  in  the  temple  at

Jerusalem.     The  alliance,  however,  proved  dangerous  to  the  purity  of  the  faith,

for  the  proselytes,  while  they  adopted  Jahveh  and  gave  Him  that  supreme

•  Ezra  iv.-vi.;  the  account  given  by  Josephus,  Anl.  Jud.,  x.  1,  2,  of  the  two  expeditions  of
Zerubbabel  seems  to  have  been  borrowed  partly  from  the  canonical  book,  partly  from  the  Apocryphal
writing  known  as  the  \st  Booh  of  Esdras.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  photogravure  published  in  Menant,  La  Ghjptique  Orientale,
vol.  ii.  pi.  ix.  No.  4.  and  pp.  217,  218.

^  2  Kings  xvii.  24-40.  There  do  not  seem  to  have  been  the  continual  disputes  betweeu  the  inhabi-
tants of  Judffia  and  Samaria  before  the  return  of  Nehemiah,  which  the  compilers  of  the  Books  of
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  seem  to  have  believed.

3    E


786       TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

place  in  their  devotions  which  was  due  to  "  the  God  of  the  land,"  had  by  no
means  entirely  forsworn  their  national  superstitions,  and  Adrammelek,  Nergal,
Tartak,  Anammelek,  and  other  deities   still  found  worshippers  among  them.
Judah,  which  in  the  days  of  its  independence  had  so  often  turned  aside  after
the  gods  of  Canaan  and  Moab,  was  in  danger  of  being  led  away  by  the  idolatrous
practices  of  its  new  neighbours ;  intermarriage  with  the  daughters  of  Moab
and  Ammon,  of  Philistia  and  Samaria,  was  producing  a  gradual  degeneracy :
the  national  language  was  giving  way  before  the  Aramajan ;  unless  some  one
could  be  found  to  stem  the  tide  of  decadence  and  help  the  people  to  remount
the  slope  which  they  were  descending,  the  fate  of  Judah  was  certain.     A
prophet— the  last  of  those  whose  predictions  have  survived  to  our  time — stood
forth  amid  the  general  laxity  and  called  the  people  to  account  for  their  trans-
gressions, in  the  name  of  the  Eternal,  but  his  single  voice,  which  seemed  but  a
feeble  echo  of  the  great  prophets  of  former  ages,  did  not  meet  with  a  favourable
hearing.    Salvation  came  at  length  from  the  Jews  outside  Judah,  the  naturalised
citizens  of  Babylon,  a  well-informed  and  wealthy  body,  occupying  high  places
in  the  administration  of  the  empire,  and   sometimes  in  the  favour  of  the
sovereign  also,  yet  possessed  by  an  ardent  zeal  for  the  religion  of  their  fathers
and  a  steadfast  faith  in  the  vitality  of  their  race.     One  of  these,  a  certain
Nehemiah,  was  employed  as  cupbearer  to  Artaxerxes  II.     He  was  visited  at
Susa  by  some  men  of  Judah  whose  business  had  brought  them  to  that  city  and
inquired  of  them  how  matters  fared  in  Jerusalem.     Hanani,  one  of  his  visitors,
replied  that  "  the  remnant  that  are  left  of  the  captivity  there  in  the  province
are  in  great  affliction  and  reproach  :  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  is  broken
down,  and  the  gates  thereof  are  burned  with  fire."      Nehemiah  took  advan-
tage of  a  moment  when  the  king  seemed  in  a  jovial  mood  to  describe  the
wretched  state    of  his  native  land  in  moving  terms:  he  obtained  leave  to
quit  Susa  and  authority    to   administer   the   city  iu  which   his  fathers  had
dwelt.!

This  took  place  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,  about  385  B.C.
Nehemiah  at  once  made  his  way  to  Jerusalem  with  such  escort  as  beiitted  his
dignity,  and  the  news  of  his  mission,  and,  apparently,  the  sentiments  of  rigid
orthodoxy  professed  by  him  from  the  beginning,  provoked  the  resentment  of
the  neighbouring  potentates  against  him :  Sanballat  the  Horonite,  Tobiah  the
Ammonite,  chief  of  the  Samaritans,  and  Geshem  the  Bedawin  did  their  best  to
thwart  him  in  the  execution  of  his  plans.  He  baffled  their  intrigues  by  his
promptitude  in  rebuilding  the  walls,  and  when  once  he  had  rendered  himself
safe  from  any  sudden  attack,  he  proceeded  with  the  reforms  which  he  deemed

'  Nehemiah  i.,  ii.


I


NEHEMIAH  AT  JERUSALEM.  787

Tirgent.  His  teuure  of  ofSce  lasted  twelve  years — from  384  to  373  B.C. —
and  during  the  whole  of  that  time  he  refused  to  accept  any  of  the  dues  to
which  he  was  entitled,  and  which  his  predecessors  had  received  without  scruple.
Ever  since  their  return  from  exile,  the  common  people  had  been  impoverished
and  paralysed  by  usury.  The  poor  had  been  compelled  to  mortgage  their
fields  and  their  vineyards  in  order  to  pay  the  king's  taxes ;  then,  when  their
land  was  gone,  they  had  pledged  their  sons  and  their  daughters ;  the  moneyed
classes  of  the  new  Israel  thus  absorbed  the  property  of  their  poorer  brethren,
and  reduced  the  latter  to  slavery.  Nehemiah  called  the  usurers  before  him
and  severely  rebuking  them  for  their  covetousness,  bade  them  surrender  the
interest  and  capital  of  existing  debts,  and  restore  the  properties  which  had
fallen  into  their  hands  owing  to  their  shameful  abuse  of  wealth,  and  release  all
those  of  their  co-religionists  whom  they  had  enslaved  in  default  of  payment
of  their  debts.^  His  high  place  in  the  royal  favour  doubtless  had  its  effect
on  those  whose  cupidity  suffered  from  his  zeal,  and  prevented  external
enemies  from  too  ojienly  interfering  in  the  affairs  of  the  community  :  by  the
time  he  returned  to  the  court,  in  372  B.C.,  after  an  absence  of  twelve  years,"
Jerusalem  and  its  environs  had  to  some  extent  regained  the  material  prosperity
of  former  days.  The  part  played  by  Nehemiah  was,  however,  mainly  political,
and  the  religious  problem  remained  in  very  much  the  same  state  as  before.
The  high  priests,  who  alone  possessed  the  power  of  solving  it,  had  fallen  in
with  the  current  that  was  carrying  away  the  people,  and — latterly,  at  any  rate
— had  become  disqualified  through  intermarriage  with  aliens  :  what  was  wanted
was  a  scribe  deeply  versed  in  sacred  things  to  direct  them  in  the  right  way,
and  such  a  man  could  be  found  only  in  Babylonia,  the  one  country  in  which
the  study  of  the  ancient  traditions  still  flourished.  A  certain  Ezra,  son  of
Seraiah,  presented  himself  in  369  B.C.,  and,  as  he  was  a  man  of  some  standing,
Artaxerxes  not  only  authorised  him  to  go  himself,  but  to  take  with  him  a  whole
company  of  priests  and  Levites  and  families  formerly  attached  to  the  service
of  the  temple.  The  books  containing  the  Law  of  God  and  the  history  of  His
people  had,  since  the  beginning  of  the  captivity,  undergone  alterations  which
had  profoundly  modified  their  text  and  changed  their  spirit.  This  work  of
revision,  begun  under  the  influence  of  Ezekiel,  and  perhaps  by  his  own
followers,  had,  since  his  time,  been  carried  on  without  interruption,  and  by
mingling  the  juridical  texts  with  narratives  of  the  early  ages  collected  from
different  sources,  a  lengthy  work  had  been  produced,  very  similar  in  com-

■  Neh.  V.

^  Neh.  siii.  6 :  "in  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,  King  of  Babylon,  I  went  unto
the  king."


I


788  TEE  LAST  DATS   OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WOBLD.

position  and  wording  to  the  five  Books  of  Moses  and  the  Book  of  Joshua  as  we
now  possess  them.^  It  was  this  version  of  the  Revelation  of  Jahveh  that  Ezra
brought  with  him  from  Babylon  in  order  to  instruct  the  people  of  Judah,  and
the  first  impressions  received  by  him  at  the  end  of  his  journey  convinced  him
that  his  ta^k  would  be  no  light  one,  for  the  number  of  mixed  marriages  had
been  so  great  as  to  demoralise  not  only  the  common  people,  but  even  the
priests  and  leading  nobles  as  well.  Nevertheless,  at  a  general  assembly  -  of  the
people  he  succeeded  in  persuading  them  to  consent  to  the  repudiation  of  aliert
wives.  But  this  preliminary  success  would  have  led  to  nothing  unless  he
could  secure  formal  recognition  of  the  rigorous  code  of  which  he  had  con-
stituted himself  the  champion,  and  protracted  negotiations  were  necessary
before  he  could  claim  a  victory  on  this  point  as  well  as  on  the  other.  At
length,  about  367  B.C.,  more  than  a  year  after  his  arrival,  he  gained  his  point,
and  the  covenant  between  Jahveh  and  His  people  was  sealed  with  ceremonies
modelled  on  those  which  had  attended  the  promulgation  of  Deuteronomy  in
the  time  of  Josiah.-'  On  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month,  a  little  before  the
autumn  festival,  the  people  assembled  at  Jerusalem  in  "  the  broad  place  which
was  before  the  water  gate."  Ezra  mounted  a  wooden  pulpit,  and  the  chief
among  the  priests  sat  beside  him.  He  "  opened  the  book  in  the  sight  of  all
the  people  .  .  .  and  ...  all  the  people  stood  up :  and  Ezra  blessed  the  Lord,
the  great  God.  And  all  the  people  answered  '  Amen,  amen  ! '  with  the  lifting
up  of  their  hands ;  and  they  bowed  their  heads  and  worshipped  the  Lord  with
their  faces  to  the  ground."  Then  began  the  reading  of  the  sacred  text.  As
each  clause  was  read,  the  Levites  stationed  here  and  there  among  the  people
interpreted  and  explained  its  provisions  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  so  as  to  make
their  meaning  clear  to  all.  The  prolix  enumeration  of  sins  and  their  expiation,^
the  threats  expressed  in  certain  chapters,  produced  among  the  crowd  the  same
effect  of  nervous  terror  as  had  once  before  been  called  forth  by  the  precepts
and  maledictions  of  Deuteronomy.  The  people  burst  into  tears,  and  so
vehement  were  their  manifestations  of  despair,  that  all  the  efforts  of  Ezra  and
his  colleagues  were  needed  to  calm  them.  Ezra  took  advantage  of  this  state
of  fervour  to  demand  the  immediate  application  of  the  divine  ordinances.
And  first  of  all,  it  was  "  found  written  in  the  law,  how  that  the  Lord  had
commanded  by  Moses  that  the  children  of  Israel  should  dwell  in  booths."  For
seven  days  Jerusalem  was  decked  nith  leaves ;  tabernacles  of  olive,  myrtle,

'  This  is  the  priestly  revision  presupposed  by  recent  critics  ;  here  again,  in  order  to  keep  within
the  prescribed  limits  of  space,  I  have  been  compelled  to  omit  much  that  I  should  have  lilsed  to  adil  in
regard  to  the  nature  of  this  work  and  the  spirit  in  which  it  was  carried  out.

■  Ezra  vii.-xl.,  where  the  dates  given  do  not  form  part  of  the  work  as  written  by  Ezra,  but  have
been  introduced  later  by  the  editor  of  the  book  as  it  now  stands.

^  Cf.  the  account  of  these  events  on  pp.  507-511,  supra.


£ZEA    AND    TEE  LAW   OF  MOSES.  789

and  palm  branches  rose  up  on  all  sides,  on  the  roofs  of  houses,  in  courtyards,
in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  at  the  gates  of  the  city.  Then,  on  the  27th  day
of  the  same  month,  the  people  put  on  mourning  in  order  to  confess  their  own
sins  and  the  sins  of  their  fathers.  Finally,  to  crown  the  wliole,  Ezra  and
his  followers  required  the  assembly  to  swear  a  solemn  oath  that  they  would
respect  "the  law  of  Moses,"  and  regulate  their  conduct  by  it.^  After  the  first
enthusiasm  was  passed,  a  reaction  speedily  set  in.  Many  even  among  the
priests  thought  that  Ezra  had  gone  too  far  in  forbidding  marriage  with
strangers,  and  that  the  increase  of  the  tithes  and  sacrifices  would  lay  too
heavy  a  burden  on  the  nation.  The  Gentile  women  reappeared,  the  Sabbath
was  no  longer  observed  either  by  the  Israelites  or  aliens ;  Eliashib,  son  of  the
high  priest  Joiakim,  did  not  even  deprive  Tobiah  the  Ammonite  of  the
chamber  in  the  temple  which  he  had  formerly  prepared  for  him,  and  things
were  almost  imperceptibly  drifting  back  into  the  same  state  as  before  the
reformation,  when  Nehemiah  returned  from  Susa  towards  the  close  of  the  reign
of  Artaxerxes.  He  lost  no  time  in  re-establishing  respect  for  the  law,  and  from
henceforward  opposition,  if  it  did  not  entirely  die  out,  ceased  to  manifest  itself
in  Jerusalem.^  Elsewhere,  however,  among  the  Samaritans,  Idumaeans,  and
Philistines,  it  continued  as  keen  as  ever,  and  the  Jews  themselves  were  im-
prudent enough  to  take  part  in  the  political  revolutions  that  were  happening
around  them  in  their  corner  of  the  empire.  Their  traditions  tell  how  they
were  mixed  up  in  the  rising  of  the  Phcenician  cities  against  Ochus,  and  suffered
the  penalty ;  when  Sidon  capitulated,  they  were  punished  with  the  other  rebels,
"the  more  recalcitrant  among  them  being  deported  into  Hyrcania.'

Assyria  was  nothing  more  than  a  name,  Babylon  and  Phcenicia  were  growing
weaker  every  day ;  the  Jews,  absorbed  in  questions  of  religious  ethics,  were
deficient  in  material  power,  and  had  not  as  yet  attained  sufficient  moral  authority
■to  exercise  an  influence  over  the  eastern  world :  the  Egypt  indestructible  had
alone  escaped  the  general  shipwreck,  and  seemed  fated  to  survive  her  rivals  for
a  long  time.  Of  all  these  ancient  nations  it  was  she  who  appealed  most  strongly
to  the  imagination  of  the  Greeks :  Greek  traders,  mercenaries,  scholars,  and
even  tourists  wandered  freely  within  her  borders,  and  accounts  of  the  strange
and  marvellous  things  to  be  found  there  were  published  far  and  wide  in  the
writings  of  Hecatpeus  of  3Iiletus,  Herodotus  of  Halicarnassus,  and  Hellanicus
of  Lesbos.*     As  a  rule,  they  entered  the  country  from  the  west,  as  European

'  Nell,  viii.,  is.,  with  an  interpolation  in  ver.  9  of  cliap.  viii.,  inserted  in  onler  to  identify  Nehemiah
nvith  the  representative  of  the  Persian  government.
'  Neh.  xiii.

^  JosEPHCs,  Ant.  Jud.,  xi.  7,  1. ;  cf.  NuLdeee,  Aufsatze  zur  Persisdie/i  Gesehichte,  p.  7S.
'  As  to  the  Greek  historians  who  wrote  about  Egypt  priir  to  the  conquest  of  Alexander,  cf  the


790       TEE  LAST  DATS    OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WOBLD.

tourists  and  merchants  still  do  ;  but  Rakotis,  the  first  port  at  which  they  touched,
was  a  mere  village,^  and  its  rocky  Pharos  had  no  claim  to  distinction  beyond
tlie  fact  that  it  had  been  mentioned  by  Homer.-  From  hence  they  followed  the
channel  of  the  Canopic  arm,  and  as  they  gradually  ascended,  they  had  pointed
out  to  them  Anthylla,  Arkandrupolis,  and  Gynascopolis,  townships  dependent
on  Naucratis,^  lying  along  the  banks,  or  situated  some  distance  off  on  one  of
the  minor  canals  ;  then  Naucratis  itself,  still  a  flourishing  place,  in  spite  of  the
rebellions  in  the  Delta  and  the  suppressive  measures  of  the  Persians.  All  this
region  seemed  to  them  to  be  merely  an  extension  of  Crreece  under  the  African
sky  :  to  their  minds  the  real  Egypt  began  at  Sais,  a  few  miles  farther  eastwards.
Sais  was  full  in  memories  of  the  XXVI"'  dynasty  :  there  they  had  pointed  out  to
them  the  tombs  of  the  Pharaohs  in  the  enclosure  of  Nit,*  the  audience  hall  in
which  Psammetichus  II.  received  the  deputation  of  the  Eleians,^  the  prison  where
the  unfortunate  Apries  had  languished  after  his  defeat."  The  gateways  of  the
temple  of  Nit  seemed  colossal  to  eyes  accustomed  to  the  modest  dimensions  of
most  Greek  sanctuaries;''  these  were,  moreover,  the  first  great  monuments  that
the  strangers  had  seen  since  they  landed,  and  the  novelty  of  their  appearance  had
a  good  deal  to  do  with  the  keenness  of  the  impression  produced.  The  goddess
showed  herself  in  hospitable  guise  to  the  visitors ;  she  welcomed  them  all,  Greek
or  Persian,  at  her  festivals,  and  initiated  them  into  several  of  her  minor  rites,
without  demanding  from  them  anything  beyond  tolerance  on  certain  points  of
doctrine.^  Her  dual  attributes  as  wielder  of  the  bow  and  shuttle  had  inspired  the
Greeks  with  the  belief  that  she  was  identical  with  that  one  of  their  own  srod-
desses  who  most  nearly  combined  in  her  person  this  complex  mingling  of  war  and
industry  :  in  her  they  worshipped  the  prototype  of  their  own  Pallas.^  On  the
evening  of  the  17th  day  of  Thoth,  Herodotus  saw  the  natives,  rich  and  poor,
placing  on  the  fronts  of  their  dwellings  large  flat  lamps  filled  with  a  mixture
of  salt  and  oil  which  they  kept  alight  all  night  in  honour  of  Osiris  and  of

details  collected  by  GrxscHMiD,  Kleine  Bchriften,  vol.  1.  pp.  35-149,  168-183,  and  by  Wiedemann,
j^gyptische  GeschicJite,  pp.  103-117.

'  Brcgsch,  Dictionnaire  Giocjraphique,  pp.  66,  68,  451.

-  Odtsset,  it.  354-359;  cf.  Mallet,  Les  Premiers  Etahlissements  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  pp.
11,  12.

^  Herodotus,  II.  scvii.,  xcvlii.  ;  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zwcites  Buck,  pp.  389-391.  Noue  of
the  sites  of  these  three  places  can  now  be  fixed  with  certainty.

'  Hekodotcs,  II.  clxis. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodotg  Zweites  Bach.  pp.  580-583,

^  Cf,  what  is  said  as  to  this  embassy  on  p.  542,  supra.

■=  Herodotus,  II,  clsix. ;  cf,  AViedemann,  Seroduts  Zcceites  Buck.  pp.  580, 581.  As  to  these  events,
cf.  pp.  557,  558,  $upra.

~  Herodotus,  II,  clsx7. ;  cf,  Wiedemann.  Uerodots  Ztceites  Buch,  p.  598.

*  Herodotus,  II.  clxsi.  ;  Tr^pl  fiev  wv  rovruv  elSoTi  iJ.oi  inl  ir\€ov,  US  iKaffTa  avTuv  €X6i,  evarofia
K(l(re<i>;  cf  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ztceites  Back,  pp.  591.  592.

»  Herodotus  invariably  calls  Nit  "  Atlieuaie  ; "  cf.  II.  lix.  As  'o  this  assimilation,  cf  JIallet,
Le  Cidle  de  Neilh  a  Sais,  pp.  236-24 1.


WEAT  THE    GREEKS   SAW   OF  EGYPT.


791


'*^,U^^iii^-i.


MODERS  MOHAMMEDAN   SHEKHS'
TOMBS.'


the  dead.^     He  made  liis  way  into  the  dwelling  of  the  ineffable  god,  and  there,

Tinobserved  among  the  crowd,  lie  witnessed

scenes  from  the  divine  life  represented  by

the  priests  on  the  lake  by  the  light  of  torches,

ej^isodes  of  his  passion,  mourning,  and  resur-
rection.^    The  priests  did  not  disclose  their

subtler  mysteries  before  barbarian  eyes,  nor

did  they  teach  the  inner  meaning  of  their

dogmas,  but  the  little  they  did  allow  him  to

discern  filled  the  traveller  with  respect  and

wonder,  recalling  sometimes  by  their  resem-
blance to  them  the  mysteries  in  which  he

was  accustomed    to   take   part  in    his  own

country.^     Then,  as  now,  but  little  attention

was  paid  to  the  towns  in  the  centre  and  east

of  the  Delta  ;  travellers  endeavoured  to  visit

one  or  two  of  them  as  types,  and  collected

as   much   information  as  they  could  about

the  remainder.     Herodotus  and  his  rivals  attached  little  importance  to  those

details  of  landscape  which  possess
so  much  attraction  for  the  modern
tourist.  They  bestowed  no  more  than
a   careless    glance    on    the   chapels

H^t-  i^    W       '  j^P      scattered  up  and  down  the  country

*■  ~  like  the  Mohammedan  shrines  at  the

present  day,  and  the  waters  ex-
tending on  all  sides  beneath  the  acacias
and  palm  trees  during  the  inunda-
tion, or  the  fellahin  trotting  along  on
their  little  asses  beside  the  pools,  did
not  strike  them  as  being  of  sufficient

interest   to  deserve   passing   mention  in  an  account   of  their   travels.     They

'  HERODOxrs,  II.  Ixii.  ;  cf.  Wiedemask,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  261,  262,  where  passages  in
classical  authors  referring  to  this  festival  are  given.  In  my  opinion,  however,  it  is  not  the  festivals
of  Athyr  that  are  here  referred  to,  but  those  of  the  month  of  Thoth,  when,  as  the  inscriptions  show,  it
was  the  practice  to  light  the  new  fire,  according  to  the  ritual,  after  first  extinguishing  the  lire  of  the
previous  year,  not  only  in  the  temple  of  the  goJ,  but  in  all  the  houses  of  the  city.

-  HEEODOTrs,  II.  clxxi. ;  cf.  Wiedemann.  Herodots  Zweites  Buch.  pp.  591-593.

'  Cf.,  ia  regard  to  these  points,  P.  Foccakt,  Recherches  sur  I'Origine  et  la  Nature  des  mystires
d'Eleusis,  4to,  1895.

'  Drawn  by  Boudicr,  from  a  photograph  by  Gautier.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Gautier.


iAUi     \^^      iili.    iM.M'.^ii.
PALM   GKOVE.^


792       THE  LAST  DATS   OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

passed  by  the  most  picturesque  villages  with  iiuliflerenee,  and  it  was  only
when  they  reached  some  great  city,  or  came  upon  some  exceptionally
fine  temple  or  eccentric  deity,  that  their  curiosity  was  aroused.  Mendes
worshipped  its  patron  god  in  the  form  of  a  live  ram,i  and  bestowed  on
all  members  of  the  same  species  some  share  of  the  veneration  it  lavished  on
the  divine  animal.^  The  inhabitants  of  Atarbekhis,^  on  the  island  of  Pro-
sopitis,  gave  themselves  up  to  the  worship  of  the  bull.  When  one  of  these
animals  died  in  the  neighbourhood  they  buried  it,  leaving  one  horn  above  the
earth  in  order  to  mark  the  spot,  and  once  every  year  the  boats  of  Atarbekhis
made  a  tour  round  the  island  to  collect  the  skeletons  or  decaying  bodies,  in
order  that  they  might  be  interred  in  a  common  burying-place.*  The  people
of  Busiris  patronised  a  savage  type  of  religion.  During  the  festival  of  Isis
they  gave  themselves  up  to  fierce  conflicts,  their  fanatical  fury  even  infecting
strangers  who  chanced  to  be  present.  The  Carians  also  had  hit  upon  a  means
of  outdoing  the  extravagance  of  the  natives  themselves :  like  the  Shiite
Mohammedans  of  the  present  day  at  the  festival  of  the  Hassanen,  they
slashed  their  faces  with  knives  amidst  shrieks  and  yells.''  At  Papremis
a  pitched  battle  formed  part  of  the  religious  observances :  it  took  place,
however,  under  certain  special  conditions.  On  the  evening  of  the  festival
of  Anhuiit,  as  the  sun  went  down,  a  number  of  priests  performed  a  hasty
sacrifice  in  the  temple,  while  the  remainder  of  the  local  priesthood
stationed  themselves  at  the  gate  armed  with  heavy  cudgels.  When
the  ceremony  was  over,  the  celebrants  placed  the  statue  of  the  god  on  a
four-wheeled  car,  as  though  about  to  take  it  away  to  some  other  locality,
but  their  colleagues  at  the  gate  opposed  its  departure  and  barred  the  way.
It  was  at  this  juncture  that  the  faithful  intervened ;  they  burst  in  the
door  and  set  upon  the  priests  with  staves,  the  latter  offering  a  stout  resist-
ance. The  cudgels  were  heavy,  the  arms  that  wielded  them  lusty,  and  the
fight  lasted  a  long  time,  yet  no  one  was  ever  killed  in  the  fray — at  least,  so
the   priests    averred — and   I   am   at   a   loss  to   understand    why    Herodotus,

'  Herodotus  says  that  both  the  goat  and  the  god  were  named  Mendes  in  Egyptian  (II.  xlvi.),  but
he  is  here  confusing  ordinary  goats  with  the  special  goat  which  was  supposed  to  contain  ihe  soul  of
Osiris.  It  was  the  latter  that  the  Egyptians  named  after  the  god  himself,  Bainibdiduit,  i.e.  the  soul
of  Vie  master  of  the  city  of  Diduit.  It  was  this  form,  popularly  contracted  into  Bendidi,  that  was
rendered  by  the  Greeks  MeVSiys,  MeVSijToj.

-  Hekodotus,  U.  xlvi. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  216-227.

^  The  old  explanation  of  this  name  as  the  City  of  Hathor  has  been  rightly  rejected  as  inconsistent
with  one  of  the  elementary  rales  of  hieroglyphic  grammar  (Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,
p.  195).  The  name,  when  properly  divided  into  its  three  constituent  parts,  means  literally  the  Castle
of  Borus  the  Sparroic-hatcl:,  or  Hat-har-baki.

^  Herodotus,  II.  xli. ;  ef.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  193-196.

=  Heeodotcs,  II.  li.\.,  Ixi.;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  256-258.


TEE  DELTA  AND   DWELLER   IN   THE  EGYPTIAN  MAESEES.       793


who  was  not  a  native  of  Papremis,  should  have  been  so  unkind  as  to  doubt
their  testimony.^

It  is  nearly  always  in  connection  with  some  temple  or  religious  festival
that  he  refers  to  the  towns  of  the  Delta,  and,  indeed,  in  most  of  the  minor
cities  of  Egypt,  just  as  in  those  of  modern  Italy  there  is  little  to  interest  visitors
except  the  religious  monuments  or  ceremonies.  Herodotus  went  to  Tanis  or
Mendes  as  we  go  to  Orvieto  or  Loretto,  to  admire  the  buildings  or  pay  our
devotions  at  a  famous  shrine.  More  often  than  not  the  place  was  nothing
in  itself,  consisting  merely  of  a  fortified  enclosure,  a  few  commonplace  houses
occupied  by  the  wealthy  inhabitants  or  by  government  officials,  and  on
mounds  of  ancient  debris,  the  accumulation  of  centuries,  a  number  of
ephemeral  hovels  built  of  clay  or  dried  bricks,  divided  into  irregular  blocks  by
winding  alleys.  The  whole  local  in-
terest was  centred  in  the  sanctuary
and  its  inmates,  human  and  divine.
The  traveller  made  his  way  in  as
best  he  could,  went  into  ecstasies  over
the  objects  that  were  shown  to  him,
and  as  soon  as  he  had  duly  gone  the
rounds,  set  out  for  the  next  place  on
liis  list,  deeming  himself  lucky  if  he
happened  to  arrive  during  one  of  the
annual  fairs,  such  as  that  of  Bubastis,
for  instance.  Bands  of  pilgrims  flocked  in  from  all  parts  of  Egypt ;  the
river  craft  were  overflowing  with  men  and  women,  who  converted  the
journey  into  one  long  carnival.  Every  time  the  vessel  put  in  to  land,  the
women  rushed  on  shore,  amid  the  din  of  castanets  and  flutes,  and  ran  hither
and  thither  challenging  the  women  of  the  place  with  abuse  to  dance  against
them  with  uplifted  garments.  To  the  foreigners  there  was  little  to  distinguish
the  festival  of  Baslit  from  many  other  Egyptian  ceremonies  of  the  kind ;  it
consisted  of  a  solemn  procession,  accompanied  by  the  singing  of  hymns  and
playing  of  harps,  dancing  and  sacrifices,  but  for  weeks  before  and  after  it
the  town  was  transformed  into  one  vast  pleasure-ground.  The  people  of
Bubastis  took  a  certain  pride  in  declaring  that  more  wine  was  drunk  in  it  during

'  Herodotus,  II.  lis.,  Ixiii. ;  cf.  Wiedemaxx,  Herodois  Ziveiles  Bitch,  pp.  2G3-268.  The  god  whom
the  Greeks  identified  with  their  Are3  was  Anliurit,  as  is  proved  by  one  of  the  Leydeu  Papyri
(I.EEMASNs,  Papyri  Gneci,  vol.  i.  pp.  123,  121,  128).  h^o,  too,  in  modern  times  at  Cairo,  it  used  to  be
affirmed  that  no  :\Iobammedan  who  submitted  to  the  dosek  was  ever  seriously  iujured  by  the  hoofs  of
the  horse  which  trampled  over  the  bodies  extended  on  the  ground.

-  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  HaussouUier.


i:rHLMi:i:AL  Hdvlls  of  clay  me  dkild  bkicks.-


794       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

a  single  day  than  during  the  rest  of  the  whole  year.^  Buto  enjoyed  excep-
tional popularity  among  the  Greeks  in  Egypt.  Its  patron  goddes?,  the  Isis
who  took  refuge  amid  the  pools  in  a  moving  thicket  of  reeds  and  lotus,  in  order
that  she  might  protect  her  son  Ilorus  from  the  jealousy  of  Typhon,  reminded
them  of  the  story  of  Latona  and  the  cycle  of  the  Delian  legends ;  they  visited
her  in  crowds,  and  her  oracle  became  to  most  of  them  what  that  of  Delos  was
to  their  brethren  in  Europe.  At  Buto  they  found  a  great  temple,  similar  to
all  Egyptian  temples,  a  shrine  in  which  the  statues  of  the  goddess  continued
her  mysterious  existence,  and,  in  the  midst  of  the  sacred  lake,  the  little  island
of  Khemmis,  which  was  said  to  float  hither  and  thither  upon  the  waters.'-^
Herodotus  did  not  venture  to  deny  this  absolutely,  but  states  tJiat  he  had
never  seen  it  change  its  position  or  even  stir :  ^  perhaps  his  incredulity  may
have  been  quickened  by  tlie  fact  that  this  miracle  had  already  been  inquired
into  by  Hecatmus  of  jJIiletus,  an  author  who  was  his  pet  aversion.  The  priests
of  Buto  declared  that  their  prophets  had  foretold  everything  that  had  happened
for  a  long  time  past,  and  for  each  event  they  had  a  version  which  redounded
to  the  credit  of  their  goddess :  she  had  shown  Pheron  how  he  might  recover
his  sight,  had  foretold  how  long  the  reign  of  Mykeriaos  would  last,  had
informed  Psammetichus  that  he  would  be  saved  by  men  of  brass  rising  out
of  the  sea,  and  had  revealed  to  Cambyses  that  he  should  die  in  a  town  named
Ecbatana.*  Her  priests  had  taken  an  active  part  iu  the  revolt  of  Khabbisha
against  Darius,  and  had  lost  a  goodly  portion  of  their  treasure  and  endowments
for  their  paius.'^  They  still  retained  their  prestige,  however,  in  spite  of  the
underhand  rivalry  of  the  oracle  of  Zeus  Ammon.  The  votaries  of  the  Libyan
deity  could  bring  forward  miracles  even  more  marvellous  than  those  credited  to
the  Egyptian  Latona,  and  in  the  case  of  many  of  the  revolutions  which  had  taken
place  on  the  banks  of  the  Kile,  a  version  of  the  legend  in  his  honour  was  circu-
lated side  by  side  with  the  legends  of  Buto."  The  latter  city  lay  on  the  very
outskirts  of  one  of  those  regions  which  excited  the  greatest  curiosity  among  travel-
lers, the  almost  inaccessible  Bucolicum,  where,  it  was  said,  no  rebel  ever  failed

'  Herodotus,  II.  lis.,  Ix. ;  cf.  Wiedemann-,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  252-256.

-  Hecat^us  of  MiLETCs,  Fragm.  284,  in  Muller-Didot,  Fraijmciita  Bistarkorum  Grsecorum,
vol.  i.  p.  20.

'  HEEODOTrs,  II.  civ.,  clvi. ;  cf.  ■Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  55i-559.

■*  Herodotcs,  II.  cxi.,  cxxxiii.,  clii..  III.  Isiv.,  Ixv.

^  Cf.  what  is  said  as  to  the  part  played  by  Buto  under  Khabbisha  on  pp.  713-715.  supra.

"  This  rivalry  between  the  two  oracles  in  the  narrative  of  Herodotus  had  been  noticed  by
GcTSCBMiD,  Kleine  Schriften.  vol.  i.  pp.  137, 138. 142,  who  believed  the  oracle  iu  question  to  be  that  of
the  Theban  Amon,  and  he  might  perhaps  be  right,  were  it  possible  to  prove,  what  I  believe  to  be  the
case,  that  the  name  Temeuthes,  in  the  legend  of  Psammetichus,  is  a  corruption  of  Tandamanu.  Never-
theless, I  consider  it  more  prudent  for  the  present  to  admit,  with  Mallei-,  Les  Premiers  £iabUsse-
vtents  des  Grecs  en  Egypte,  pp.  45,  46,  that  it  is  the  oracle  of  Zeus  Ammon.


MEMPHIS.  795

to  find  a  safe  refuge  from  his  alien  pursuers. '^     Tlie  Egyptians  of  the  marshes
were  a  very  courageous  race,  but  savage,  poor,  and  ill  fed."    They  drank  nothing
but  beer,  and  obtained  their  oil  not  from  the  olive,  but  from  the  castor-oil
plant,^  and  having  no  corn,  lived  on  the  seeds  or  roots  of  the  lotus,  or  even  on
the  stalks  of  the  papyrus,  which  they  roasted  or  boiled.*    Fish  was  their  staple
article  of  food,  and  this  they  obtained  in  considerable  quantity  from  Lake
Menzaleh,  the  lagoons  along  the  coast,  and  the  canals  or  pools  left  by  the  inun-
dation.^   But  little  was  known  of  their  villages  or  monuments,  and  probably  they
were  not  worth  the  trouble  of  a  visit  after  those  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  :
endless  stories  were  told  of  feals  of  brigandage  and  of  the  mysterious  hiding-
places  which  these  localities  offered  to  every  outlaw,  one  of  the  most  celebrated
being  the  isle  of  Elbo,  where  the  blind  Anysis  defied  the  power  of  Ethiopia  for
thirty  years,  and  in  which  the  first  Amyrtteus  found  refuge."     With  the  excep-
tion of  a  few  merchants  or  adventurers  who  visited  them  with  an  eye  to  gain,
most  travellers  coming  from  or  returning  to  Asia  avoided  their  territory,  and
followed  the  military  road  along  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile  from  Pelusium
to  Daphnaj  or  Zalu,  and  from  Daphnce  or  Zalu  to  Bubastis.     A  little  below
Kerkasoron,  near  the  apex  of  the  Delta,  the  pyramids  stood  out  on  the  horizon,
looking  insignificant  at  first,  but  afterwards  so  lofty  that,  during  the  period  of
inundation,  when  the  whole  valley,  from  the  mountains  of  Arabia  to  those  of
Libya,  was  nothing  but  one  vast  river,  a  vessel  seemed  to  sail  in  their  shadow
for  a  long  time  before  it  reached  their  base.''     The  traveller  passed  Heliopolis
on  his   left  with  its  temple  of   the    Sun,  next   the  supposed  sources  of  the
Northern   Nile,  the  quarries  of    the   Bed   Mountain,  and   then   entering   at
length  the  Nile  itself,  after  a  journey  of  some  hours,  came  to  anchor  by  the

quays  of  Memphis.

To  the  Greeks  of  that  time,  Memphis  was  very  much  what  Cairo  is  to  us,
viz,   the  typical    Oriental  city,  the  quintessence  and  chief  representative  of

'  Cf.  the  description  of  the  region  about  Biicolicum  in  Tlie  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  p.  89.

=  This  is  the  very  description  given  of  them  by  Herodotus,  ol  eV  ru7<n  e\f(j-i  KaTomifihoL  (11.
xcii.),  or  Alyvwriuv  ol  Trepi  Ta  UK€a  oIk^o,7,s  (II.  xciv.),  in  the  passages  where  he  describes  their
customs.

»  Herodotus,  II.  xciv. ;  cf.  Wiedejiann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  381-383.  It  seems,  more-
over, that  this  custom  was  not  confined  to  the  Delta;  Herodotus,  iu  contrasting  the  custom  of
bucolicum  with  that  of  the  rest  of  Egypt,  was  evidently  thinliing  of  Sais,  Memphis,  and  other
great  cities  in  which  he  had  resided,  where  foreign  olive  oil  obtained  from  Greece  or  Syria  was  gene-
rally used.

*  Herodotus,  II.  xcii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  373-379.     As  to  food  of  this

kind,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  G5,  66.

^  Herodotus,  II.  sciii.;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  p.  379.

«  Herodotu.-,  II.  cxl. ;    cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  500.  .JOl,  and  what  is  said

on  p.  732,  supra.

'■  Hefodotu?,  II.  XV.,  xvii.,  xcvii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  S9,  90.


79G  THE  LAST  DATS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN  WORLD.

ancient  Egypt.  In  spite  of  the  disasters  which  had  overwhelmed  it  during  the
last  few  centuries,  it  was  still  a  very  beautiful  city,  ranking  with  Babylon  as  one
of  the  largest  in  the  world.  Its  religious  festivals,  especially  those  in  honour  of
Apis,  attracted  numberless  pilgrims  to  it  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  and
hosts  of  foreigners,  recruited  from  every  imaginable  race  of  the  old  continent,
resorted  to  it  for  purposes  of  trade.  Most  of  the  nationalities  who  frequented
it  had  a  special  quarter,  which  was  named  after  them ;  the  Phoenicians
occupied  the  Tyrian  Camp,^  the  Greeks  and  Carians  the  Hellenic  Wall  and
Carian  Wall,  and  there  were  Caromemphites  or  Hellenoraemphites  side  by  side
with  the  native  inhabitants.^  A  Persian  garrison  wa^  stationed  within  the
White  Wall,  ready  to  execute  the  satrap's  orders  in  tlie  event  of  rebellion,
and  could  have  held  out  for  a  long  time  even  after  the  rest  of  the  country  had
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  insurgents.^  Animals  which  one  would  scarcely
have  expected  to  find  in  the  streets  of  a  capital,  such  as  cows,  sheep,  and  goats,
wandered  about  unheeded  in  the  most  crowded  thoroughfares ;  for  the  common
people,  instead  of  living  apart  from  their  beasts,  as  the  Greeks  did,  stabled
tliem  in  their  own  houses.*  Nor  was  this  the  only  custom  which  must  have
seemed  strange  in  the  eyes  of  a  newly  arrived  visitor,  for  the  Egyptians  might
almost  have  been  said  to  make  a  point  of  doing  everything  differently  from
other  nations.  The  baker,  seen  at  the  kneading-trough  inside  his  shop,  worked
the  dough  with  his  foot ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  mason  used  no  trowel  in
applying  his  mortar,  and  the  poorer  classes  scraped  up  handfuls  of  mud  mixed
with  dung  when  they  had  occasion  to  repair  the  walls  of  their  hovels.^  In
•Greece,  even  the  very  poorest  retired  to  their  houses  and  ate  with  closed
doors ;  the  Egyptians  felt  no  repugnance  at  eating  and  drinking  in  the  open
air,  declaring  that  unbecoming  and  improper  acts  should  be  performed  in
secret,  but  seemly  acts  in  public.^  The  first  blind  alley  they  came  to,  a  recess
between  two  hovels,  the  doorstep  of  a  house  or  temple,  any  of  these  seemed
to  them  a  perfectly  natural  place  to  dine  in.     Their  bill  of  fare  was  not  a

'  Hi:iiODOTr~,  II.  cxii. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buck,  p  432.  We  find  a  Quarter  of  the
Ilittites  in  the  environs  of  Memphis  as  early  as  the  time  of  King  Aiof  the  XVIII""  dynasty  (Dai;e.sst,
Notes  et  Semarque:',  in  the  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  vol.  xvi.  p.  123).

-  Akistagokas  of  Miletus,  Fragm.  5,  in  JICller-Didot,  Fragin.  Rut.  Orai-.,  vol.  ii.  p.  98  :
'^KhX-qviKhy  Kal  KapLKof  r6-K0t  ev  Me/i(^i5t,  a(p*  wv  '^X\rivo^e^<p7i at  Kai  Kapofx^fx<fi7Tai^  us  'Api(rTay6pas^  and
KapiKOi',  TOTOS,  iSiofdii'  ei'  MefitptSi,  eyflo  Kap^s  oiK^aavTes,  i-jnyapLias  irphs  Me^cfuVas  Troir]<raiJ.ivoi,
Kapop.eftplTat  «K\7')0r)(7ai'.  Cf.  GvTSCHMiD,  Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  i.  pp.  135,  136,  141,  142.  Papyrus  50
in  the  British  Museum  contains  a  reference  to  one  of  these  Hellc-nomemphites  about  the  middle  of
the  Ptolemaic  epoch.

=  Hkrodotus,  III.  xci.,  where  he  refers  to  the  quantities  of  grain  served  out  to  the  garrison  of  the
White  Wall.     Cf.  the  account  of  the  revolt  of  Inaros  on  pp.  730,  731,  supra.

'  Herodotus,  II.  xsxvi. ;  cf.  Wiedemann-,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  I.i7,  1.58.

^  Herodotus,  II.  sxxvi. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Bucli,  pp.  159,  160.

'  Herodotus,  II.  xxxv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Bueh,  pp.  150,  151.


TEE  POPULATION  OF  MEMPHIS.  797

sumptuous  one.  A  sort  of  flat  pancake  somewhat  bitter  in  taste,  and  made
— not  of  corn  or  barley — but  of  spelt,^  a  little  oil,  an  onion  or  a  leek,  with  an
occasional  scrap  of  meat  or  poultry,  washed  down  by  a  jug  of  beer  or  wine ;
there  was  nothing  here  to  tempt  the  foreigner,  and,  besides,  it  would  not  have
been  thought  right  for  him  to  invite  himself.  A  Greek  who  lived  on  the
flesh  of  the  cow  was  looked  upon  as  unclean  in  the  highest  degree ;  no
Egyptian  would  have  thought  of  using  the  same  pot  or  knife  with  him,  or
of  kissing  him  on  the  mouth  by  way  of  greeting.^  Moreover,  Egyptian
etiquette  did  not  tolerate  the  same  familiarities  as  the  Greek :  two  friends  on
catching  sight  of  one  another  paused  before  they  met,  bowed,  then  clasped
one  another  round  the  knees  or  pretended  to  do  so.  Young  people  gave  way
to  an  old  man,  or,  if  seated,  rose  to  let  him  pass.  The  traveller  recalled  the
fact  that  the  Spartans  behaved  in  the  same  way,  and  approved  this  mark  of
deference; 3  but  nothing  in  his  home-life  had  prepared  him  for  the  sight  of
respectable  women  coming  and  going  as  they  pleased,  without  escort  and
unveiled,  carrying  burdens  on  their  shoulders  (whereas  the  men  carried  them
on  their  heads),  going  to  market,  keeping  stalls  or  shops,  while  their  husbands
or  fathers  stayed  comfortably  at  home,  wove  cloth,  kneaded  the  potter's  clay  or
turned  the  wheel,  and  worked  at  their  trades ;  ■*  no  wonder  that  they  were  ready
to  believe  that  the  man  was  the  slave,  and  the  wife  the  mistress  of  the  family.
Some  historians  traced  the  origin  of  these  customs  back  to  Osiris,  others  only
as  far  as  Sesostris :  Sesostris  was  the  last  resource  of  Greek  historians  when
they  got  into  difficulties."  The  city  was  crowded  with  monuments ;  there
was  the  temple  of  the  Phoenician  Astarte,  in  which  priests  of  Syrian  descent
had  celebrated  the  mysteries  of  the  great  goddess  ever  since  the  days  of  the
XVIII"'  dynasty ;  then  there  was  the  temple  of  Kii,  the  temple  of  Amon,  the
temple  of  Tumu,  the  temple  of  Bastit,  and  the  temple  of  Isis.^  The  temple  of
Phtah,  as   yet   intact,  provided   the    visitor    with   a   spectacle   scarcely    less

'  Heeodotus,  II.  xxxvi. ;  it  is  this  bread  that  he  elsewhere  calls  ki/AAtjo-tis  (II.  Ixxvii. ;  cf.
WiEDKMANN,  Herodots  Zuieites  Buck,  pp.  326,  327);  it  was  also  kaown  to  Hecat.'eus  of  Jliletus
{Fragm.  290,  iu  iIuLLi;R-DiDOT,  Frugm.  Hist.  Gr,r.c.,  vol.  i.  p.  20),  and  is  identical  with  the  Jcuriehtit
or  hulishlil  ofPharaonic  times  (Lauth,  Drd  .^yptischen  Namen  cles  Brodet,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t,  186S,
p.  91).

-  HERODOirs,  II.  xli. ;  of.  Wii:di;maxx,  Herodots  Zuieites  Buch,  pp.  187,  188.

"  Hekodotcs,  II.  Ixsx. ;  cf.  Wikdemanx,  Herodots  Zweiles  Buch,  pp.  336-338.

*  Herodotus,  II.  xxxv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Hercdots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  147-150.

'  Xymphodokus  op  SYRACifE,  Fragm.  21,  in  MOlleb-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Greec,  vol.  ii.  pp.  380,
381,  where  a  part  of  the  thirty-tiftli  chapter  of  Herodotus  is  transcribed  with  additions  of  uncertain
origin.

'^  This  list  is  taken  mainly  from  one  of  the  mutilated  letters  found  on  the  back  of  the  Saltier
Papyrus,iy.  pi.  i.  1.  1,  pi.  ii.  1.  11.  The  Phcenician  Astarte. called  a  foreign  Aphrodile  by  Herodotus,
VI.  cxii.,  was  regarded  by  the  Egyptians  as  a  counterpart  of  Bastit,  lady  of  Oukhtoui  (Brugscb,  Die
fremde  Aphrodite  in  Meviphis,  iu  the  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  i.  p.  9).


798       TUB  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE    OLD    EASTERN    WORLD.

admirable  than  that  offered  by  the  temple  of  the  Theban  Araou  at  Karnak.
The  kings  had  modified  the  original  plan  as  each  thought  best,  oue  adding
obelisks  or  colossal  statues,  another  a  pylon,  a  third  a  pillared  hall.  Com-
pleted in  this  way  by  the  labours  of  a  score  of  dynasties,  it  formed,  as  it  were,
a  microcosm  of  Egyptian  history,  in  which  each  image,  inscription  and  statue,
aroused  the  attention  of  the  curious.  They  naturally  desired  to  learn  who
were  the  strangely  dressed  races  shown  struggling  in  a  battle  scene,  the  name
of  the  king  who  had  conquered  them,  and  the  reasons  which  had  led  him  to
construct  this  or  that  part  of  a  monument,  and  there  were  plenty  of  busy-
bodies  ready  to  satisfy,  as  far  as  they  could,  the  curiosity  of  visitors.  Inter-
preters were  at  hand  who  bartered  such  information  as  they  possessed,  and
the  modern  traveller  who  has  had  occasion  to  employ  the  services  of  a
dragoman  will  have  no  difficulty  in  estimating  the  value  of  intelligence  thus
hawked  about  in  ancient  times.  Priests  of  the  lower  class,  doorkeepers  and
sacristans  were  trained  to  act  as  ciceroni,  and  knew  the  main  outlines  of  the
history  of  the  temple  in  which  they  lived. ^  Menes  planned  it,^  Moeris  added
the  northern  propyla^a,^  Rhampsinitus  those  on  the  west,*  Psammetichus  the
south,^  Asychis  those  on  the  east,  the  most  noteworthy  of  them  all.*'  A  native
of  Memphis,  born  at  the  foot  of  the  pyramids,  had  been  familiar  with  the
names  of  Menes  and  Cheops  from  childhood;  he  was  consequently  apt  to
attribute  to  them  everything  of  importance  achieved  by  the  Pharaohs  of
the  old  days.  Menes  had  built  the  temple,  Menes  had  founded  the  city,
Jlenes  had  created  the  soil  on  which  the  city  stood,  and  preserved  it  from
floods  by  his  dykes.  The  thoughtful  traveller  would  assent,  for  had  he  not
himself  observed  the  action  of  the  mud ;  a  day's  journey  from  the  coast  one
could  not  let  down  a  plummet  without  drawing  it  up  covered  with  a  blackish
slime,  a  clear  proof  that  the  Nile  continued  to  gain  upon  the  sea.''  Menes,
at  all  events,  had  really  existed ;  but  as  to  Asychis,  Moeris,  Proteus,  Pheron,
and  most  of  the  characters  glibly  enumerated  by  Herodotus,  it  would  be  labour
lost  to  search  for  their  names  among  the  inscriptions ;  they  are  mere  puppets
of  popular  romance,  some  of  their  names,  such  as  Piraui  or  Pruti,  being
nothing  more  than  epithets  employed  by  the  story-tellers  to  indicate  in  general

'  As  to  the  persons  meant  by  Herodotus  when  he  speaks  of  "  priests  "  and  "  Egyptians,"  cf.
Maspeko,  Etudes  de  Mytkologie  et  d'Arclieologie  Egyptiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  343-315,  and  Wiedemann,
Mgypthche  Geschichte,  pp.  113-115.

-  Herodotus,  II.  xcix. ;  for  the  legend  of  Menes,  cf.  Dawn  of  Conization,  pp.  232-236.

=  HEKODOTrs,  II.  ci. ;  Wiedemax.n,  Berodots  Zu-eites  Buck,  pp.  401,  402.

*  HEKODOTrs,  II.  cxxi. ;  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  445,  44G.

^  HERODOxrs,  II.  clii. ;  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zu-eites  Buck,  p.  547.

'  Heeodotes,  n.  exssvi. ;  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Ziceites  Buch,  pp.  490,  491.

■  Heeodotes,  II.  iv.,  V. ;  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  58-61,  394-396.  As  to  the
observations  made  by  the  travellers  and  writers  of  the  first  Greek  epoch  in  regard  to  these  allusions,
cf.  Hlgo  Bergee,  Geschichte  der  Wissenschaftlichen  Geographie,  vol.  i.  pp.  120-126.


MEMPEITE  LEGENDS   CONCERNING   THE  MONUMENTS.


^99


terms  the  heroes  of  their  tales.^  We  can  understand  how  strangers,  placed  at
the  mercy  of  their  dragoman,  were  misled  by  this,  and  tempted  to  transform  each
title  into  a  man,  taking  Pruti  and  Piraui  to  be  Pharaoh  Proteus  and  Pharaoh
Pheron,  each  of  them  celebrated  for  his  fabulous  exploits.  The  guides
told  Herodotus,  and  Herodotus  retails  to  us,  as  sober  historical  facts,  the
remedy  employed  by  this  uuhistorical  Pheron  in  order  to  recover  his  sight ;  *


THE    STEP    rrBAHID    SEES    FK05I  THE    GROVE    UF   I'ALM    TREES    TO    THE    XijKTH   OP   SAQQARAH.

the  adventures  of  Paris  and  Helen  at  the  court  of  Proteus,*  and  the  droll
tricks  played  by  a  thief  at  the  expense  of  the  simple  Ehampsinitus.'  The
excursions  made  by  the  Greek  traveller  in  the  environs  of  Memphis  were  very
similar  to  those  taken  by  modern  visitors  to  Cairo :  on  the  opposite  bank  of
the  Nile  there  was  Heliopolis  with  its  temple  of  Ka,'=  then  there  were  the
quarries  of  Turah,  which  had  been  worked  from  time  immemorial,  yet  never
exhausted,  and  from  which'  the  monuments  he  had  been  admiring,  and  the  very

>  As  to  these  titles,  cf.  X»aiC)(  of  Civilization,  p.  2G3.  The  equivalence  of  Pruti  and  Proteus  was
established  by  Lacth,  ^gijptische  Chronologie,  pp.  ISl,  182 ;  that  of  Pharaoh  and  Pheron  by  Maspeeo,
Etudes  de  Mytltologie  et  d' Arch^ologie,  vol.  iii.  pp.  410-412.

-  Hekodotcs,  II.  cxi. ;  Wiedemann,  Eerodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  427-430.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograpli  by  Haussoullier.

*  Hekodotcs,  II.  cxii.-cxs. ;  Wiedemann,  Eerodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  431-445.  Some  dragomans
identified  the  Helen  of  the  Homeric  legend  with  the  "  foreign  Aphrodite"  who  had  a  temple  in  the
Tyrian  quarter  at  Jlemphis,  and  who  was  really  a  Semitic  divinity  (cf.  p.  797,  note  5,  supra).

^  Heeodotus,  II.  cxxi. ;  of.  JIaspero,  Les  Contes  populaires  de  VEgypte  ancienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.
xlvli.-li.,  245-256 ;  Wiedemann,  Eerodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  445-452.

^  HERODOTrs.  II.  iii. ;  h  'HAi'ou  vuKivavTuv  tovtijiv  i'lvtKiv  iTpaTrOfi-qi/.  Cf.  WIEDEMANN,  Eerodots
Zweites  Buch,  p.  50.


800       THE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.

Pyramids  themselves  liad  been  taken  stone  by  stone.^  The  Spliinx  probably
lay  hidden  beneath  the  sand,  and  the  nearest  Pyramids,  those  at  Saqqarah,
were  held  in  small  esteem  by  visitors;'^  they  were  told  as  they  passed  by
that  the  step  Pyramid  was  the  most  ancient  of  all,  having  been  erected  by
Uenephes,  one  of  the  kings  of  tlie  first  dynasty,  and  they  asked  no  further
questions.^  Their  whole  curiosity  was  reserved  for  the  three  giants  at  Gizeh
and  their  inmates,  Cheops,  Chephren,  ^lykerinos,  and  the  foir  Nitokris  with  the
rosy  cheeks.*  Througli  all  the  country  rouad,  at  Heliopolis,  and  even  in  the
Fayum  itself,  they  heard  the  same  names  that  had  been  dinned  into  their  ears

at  Mempliis;  the  whole  of  the  monu-
ments were  made  to  fit  into  a  single


cycle  of  popular  history,  and  what
they  learned  at  one  place  completed,
or  seemed  to  complete,  what  they
had  learned  at  another.^

I  cannot  tell  whether  many  of
them  cared  to  stray  much  beyond
Lake  Maris :  the  repressive  measures
of  Ochus    had,  as   it  would   appear,


JL


LONG   OlKl.Nlio    uF    LADKX    VhSSELS."

interrupted  for  a  time  the  regular
trade  which,  ever  since  the  Suite  kings  of  the  XXVI"'  dynasty,  had  been
carried  on  by  the  Greeks  with  the  Oases,  by  way  of  AbydosJ  A  stranger
who  ventured  as  far  as  the  Thebaid  would  have  found  himself  in  the  same
plight  as  a  European  of  the  last  century  who  undertook  to  reach  the  first
cataract.  Their  point  of  departure — Memphis  or  Cairo — was  very  much  the
same  ;  their  destinations — Elephantine  and  Assuan — differed  but  little.  They
employed  the  same  means  of  transport,  for,  excepting  the  cut  of  the  sails,  the
modern  dahabeah  is  an  exact  counterpart  of  the  pleasure  and  passenger  boats
shown  on  the  monuments.  Lastly,  they  set  out  at  the  same  time  of  year,
in  November  or  December,  after  the  floods  had  subsided.  The  same  length  of
time  was  required  for  the  trip  ;  it  took  a  month  to  reach  Assuan  from  Cairo  if
the  wind  were  favourable,  and  if  only  sucli  stoppages  were  made  as  were  strictly

'  These  are  "the  quarries  in  the  Arabian  :\Iouutaiii,"  tuv  MOoToiiUav  tuv  fV  t^,  'Apa0i(j}  oipei
(HKKODOTUti,  II.  csxiv.),  mentioned  by  Herodotus  without  indication  of  the  local  name ;  as  to  these
quarries,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  383.

=  Herodotus  does  not  mention  it,  nor  does  any  other  writer  of  the  Greek  [jeriod.  As  to  the
covering  of  the  Sphinx  by  the  sand,  cf.  StruggU  of  the  Nations,  p.  294.

'  Manetho,  in  JICller-Didot,  Fragm.  Hist.  Grxc,  vol.  ii.  pp.  539,  ^0.

*  For  the  legends  concerning  the  great  pyramids  and  their  founders,  as  well  as  Khodopis,  cf.
Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  377-382,  437-440.

^  Maspeeo,  £tudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'ArcliMogie  Egyptiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  378-381,  and  Les  Contes
2>opulaires  de  VEgypie  Aneienne,  2nd  edit.,  pp.  sxxiy.-xli.

"  Drawn  by  Boudier.  from  a  photograph  by  Gautier.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  about  the  Samians  who  settled  in  the  great  Theban  Oasis  on  p.  649,  supra.


GREEK   TBAVELLERS  IN   UPPER   EGYPT.


801


THK    VAST  SHEET   OP  WATER   IN    THE   MIDDAY   HEAT.^


necessary  for  taking  in  fresh  provisions.     Pococke,  having  left  Cairo  on  the
Gth  of  December,  1737,  about  midday,  was  at  Akhmim  by  the  17th.     He  set
sail  again  on  the  IStli,  stayed  at  Thebes  from  the  13th  of  January,  1738,  till
the   17th,  and   finally  moored   at  Assuan  on  the   evening  of  January  20th,
making    in   all    forty-five    days,  fourteen   of    which   were    spent   at    various
stoi^ping-places.     If  the  diary  of  a  Greek  excursionist  or  tourist  had  come  down
to   us,    we   should   probably
find  in  it  entries   of  a  very
similar  kind.^  The  departure
from   Memphis    would    take
place   in   November   or  De-
cember; ten  or  twelve  days
later  the  traveller  would  find
himself  at  Panopolis;^  from
Panopolis     to     Elephantine,
stopping      at     Coptos     and
Thebes,  would  take  about  a
month,  allowing   time   for  a
stay  at  Thebes,  and  returning
to  Mempliis  in  February  or  March.    The  greater  part  of  the  time  was  employed
in  getting  from  one  point  to  another,  and  the  necessity  of  taking  advantage  of
a  favourable  wind  in  going  up  the  river,  often  obliged  the  travellers  to  neglect
more  than  one  interesting  locality.     The  Greek  was  not  so  keenly  alive  to  the
picturesqueness  of  the  scenes  through  which  he  passed  as  the  modera  visitor,
and  in  the  account  of  his  travels  he  took  no  note  of  the  long  lines  of  laden
boats  going  up  or  down  stream,  nor  of  the  vast  sheet  of  water  glowing  in  the
midday  sun,  nor  of  the  mountains  honeycombed  with  tombs  and  quarries,  at
the  foot  of  which  he  would  be  sailing  day  after  day.     What  interested  iiim
above  all  things  was  information  with  regard  to  the  sources  of  the  immense
river  itself,  and  the  reasons  for  its  periodic  inundation,  and,  according  to  the

'  Maspero,  Mudex  de  Mythohgie  et  d'Areheologie  £gyptiennes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  335-338.  Herodotus  (II.
ix.,  clxxv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  Herodots  Zweites  Buch,  pp.  68,  69,  602)  fixes  twenty  days  for  the
voyage  from  Sais  to  Elephantine.  This  period  of  time  must  be  probably  correct,  since  at  the  present
day  dahabeahs  constantly  run  from  Cairo  to  the  second  cataract  and  back  in  two  months,  including
stoppages  of  ten  days  to  a  fortnight  for  seeing  the  monuments.  The  twenty  days  of  Herodotus
represent  the  minimum  duration  of  the  voyage,  without  taking  into  account  the  stoppages  and
accidents  which  often  delay  sailing  vessels  on  the  XUe.  Nine  days,  which  Herodotus  gives  as  the
time  for  reaching  Thebes  (II.  ix.),  is  not  sufficient,  if  the  voyage  is  undertaken  in  the  usual  way,
stopping  every  evening  for  the  night ;  but  it  would  be  possible  if  the  na\-igation  were  uninterrupted
day  and  niglit.  Tbis  is  now  rarely  done,  but  it  might  have  been  frequent  in  ancient  times,  especially
in  the  service  of  the  State.

-  HEi:oDOTrs,  II.  xci.,  from  which  it  would  seem  clear  that  Herodotus  stopped  at  Panopolis  and  had
communications  with  the  people  of  the  town.    [Panopolis  or  Khemmis  is  the  present  Ekhminj. — Tii.]

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Gaulier.

3    F


802       TEE  LAST  DATS    OF   THE   OLD   EASTERN    WORLD.

mental  attitude  impressed  on  him  by  his  education,  he  accepted  the  mytho-
logical solution  offered  by  the  natives,  or  he  sought  for  a  more  natural  one
in  the  physical  lore  of  his  own  savants:  thus  he  was  told  that  the  Nile  took
its  rise  at  Elephantine,  between  the  two  rocks  called  Krophi  and  Mophi,  and
in  showing  them  to  him  his  informant  would  add  that  Psammetichus  I.
had  attempted  to  sound  the  depth  of  the  river  at  this  point,  but  had  failed
to  fathom  it.^  At  the  few  places  where  the  pilot  of  the  barque  put  in  to
port,  the  populatioa  showed  themselves  unfriendly,  and  refused  to  hold  any
communication  with  the  Greeks.  The  interpreters,  who  were  almost  all  natives
of  the  Delta,  were  not  always  familiar  with  the  people  and  customs  of  the  Said,
and  felt  almost  as  completely  foreign  at  Thebes  as  did  thoir  employers.
Their  office  was  confined  to  translating  the  information  furnished  by  the
inhabitants  when  the  latter  were  sufficiently  civilised  to  hold  communication
with  the  travellers.  What  most  astonished  Herodotus  at  Panopolis  was  the
temple  and  the  games  held  in  honour,  so  he  believed,  of  Perseus,  the  son  of
Danae.  These  exercises  terminated  in  an  attempt  to  climb  a  regular  "  greasy
pole "  fixed  in  the  ground,  and  strengthened  right  and  left  by  three  rows  of
stays  attached  to  the  mast  at  different  heights ;  -^  as  for  Perseus,  lie  was  the
ithyphallic  god  of  the  locality,  Minu  himself,  one  of  whose  epithets — Pehresu,
the  runner — was  confounded  by  the  Greek  ear  with  the  name  of  the  hero.
The  dragomans,  enlarging  on  this  mistaken  identity,  imagined  that  the  town
was  the  birthplace  of  Danaos  and  Lyncaeus ;  that  Perseus,  returning  from  Libya
with  the  head  of  Medusa,  had  gone  out  of  his  way  to  visit  the  cradle  of  his
family,  and  that  he  had  instituted  the  games  in  remembrance  of  his  stay
there.^  Thebes  had  become  the  ghost  of  its  former  self;  the  Persian  governors
had  neglected  the  city,  and  its  princesses  and  their  ministers  were  so  impover-
ished that  they  were  unable  to  keep  up  its  temples  and  palaces.  Herodotus
scarcely  mentions  it,  and  we  can  hardly  wonder  at  it :  he  had  visited  the
still  flourishing  Memphis,  where  the  temj^les  were  cared  for  and  were  filled  with
worshippers.  What  had  Thebes  to  show  him  in  the  way  of  marvels  which  he
had  not  already  seen,  and  that,  too,  in  a  better  state  of  preservation  ?  His
Theban  ciceroni  also  told  him  the  same  stories  that  he  had  heard  in  Lower
Egypt,  and  he  states  that  their  information  agreed  in  the  main  with  that  which
he  had  received  at  Memphis  and  Heliopolis,  which  made  it  unnecessary  to
repeat  it  at  length.*     Two  or  three  things  only  appeared  to  him  worthy  of

'  For  the  sources  of  the  Nile  at  Elephantine,  cf.  Dawn  of  Civilization,  pp.  19,  38,  39.  A  resume
of  the  opinions  held  by  the  Greeks  with  regard  to  the  sources  of  the  Nile  will  be  found  in  Hugo
Bergee,  Geschichte  der  WitsemchaftUchen  Erdkunde,  vol.  i.  pp.  104-120.

-  See  the  illustration  in  Maeiette,  Denderah,  vol.  i.  pi.  23.

=  Herodotcs,  II.  xci. ;  cf.  Wiedem.\nn,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  365-371.

*  Herodotus,  II.  iii. ;  cf.  op.  cit.,  pp.  46-51.  He  cites  several  facts  and  legends  with  regard  to
Amon  (II.  slii.,  liv.,  Ivi.-lviii..  Ixssiii.),  Heracles  (II.  xlii.),  the  Sacred  Serpents  (II.  Ixxix.),  and
about  tlie  infrequency  of  rain  (III.  x.).


KEEMMIS,    THEBES,   ELEPHANTINE.


803


THK   MOrXTAIXS    HONEYCOMBED   WITH   TOMBS    AXD
QUARRIES.'


mention.  His  admiration  was  first  roused  by  the  360  statues  of  the  high
pi"iests  of  Amon  which  had  already  excited  the  wonder  of  his  rival  Hecatseus  ;
he  noted  that  all  these  personages  were,  without  exception,  represented  as  mere
men,  each  the  son  of  another  man,  and  he  took  the  opportunity  of  ridiculing
the  vanity  of  his  compatriots,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  inscribe  the  name  of  a
god  at  the  head  of  their  genealogies,  removed  by  some  score  of  generations
only  from  their  own.^  On  the  other  hand,  the  temple  servitors  related  to  him
how  two  Theban  priestesses,  carried  off  by  the  Phoenicians  and  sold,  one  in
Libya  and  the  other  in  Greece,  had  set  up  the  first  oracles  known  in  those  two
countries:  Herodotus  thereupon  re-
membered the  story  he  had  heard  in
Epirus  of  two  black  doves  which  had
flown  away  from  Thebes,  one  towards
the  Oasis  of  Ammon,  the  other  in  the
direction  of  Dodona ;  the  latter  had
alighted  on  an  old  beech  tree,  and  in
a  human  voice  bad  requested  that  a
temple  consecrated  to  Zeus  should  be
foimded  on  the  spot.'-  Herodotus  is
quite  overcome  with  joy  at  the  thought
that  Greek  divination  could  thus  be  directly  traced  to  that  of  Egypt,  for
like  most  of  his  contemporaries,  he  felt  that  the  Hellenic  cult  was  ennobled
by  the  fact  of  its  being  derived  from  the  Egyptian.^  The  traveller  on  the
Nile  had  to  turn  homewards  on  reaching  Elephantine,  as  that  was  the  station
of  the  last  Persian  garrison.  Nubia  lay  immediately  beyond  the  cataract,
and  the  Ethiopians  at  times  crossed  the  frontier  and  carried  their  raids
as  far  as  Thebes.  Elephantine,  like  Assuau  at  the  present  day,  was  the
centre  of  a  flourishing  trade.  Here  might  be  seen  Kushites  from  Napata  or
Meroe,  negroes  from  the  Upper  Nile  and  the  Bahr  el-Ghazal,  and  Ammonians,
from  all  of  whom  the  curious  visitor  might  glean  information  while  frequenting
the  bazaars.  The  cataract  was  navigable  all  the  year  round,  and  the  natives
in  its  vicinity  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  piloting  freight  boats  through  its
difficult  channel.  It  took  four  days  to  pass  through  it,  instead  of  the  three,  or
even  two,  which  suffice  at  the  present  day.     Above  it,  the  Nile  spread  out  and

'  Herodotcs,  II.  cxliii. ;  cf.  Wiedemakn,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  507-510.

-  Herodotus,  II.  liv.,  Iv. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  oj).  cit.,  pp.  242-246.  I  pointed  out  some  time  ago
(BouCHE  and  Leclercq,  Hutoire  de  la  Divination  dans  VAntiquite,  vol.  ii.  p.  2S3,  note  2)  that  this
indicates  a  confusion  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptian  dragomans  with  the  two  brooding  birds  of  Osiris,
Isis  and  Nephthys,  considered  as  Zarait,  that  is  to  say,  as  two  birds  of  a  different  species,  according
to  the  difterent  traditions  either  vultures,  roolis,  or  doves.

^  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Gautier.

'  Herodotus,  II.  liii.,  et  seq. ;  cf.  Wiedemann,  op.  cit.,  p.  233,  et  seq.


804       TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

resembled  a  lake  dotted  over  with  islands,  several  of  which,  such  as  Philse  and
Biggeh,  coutained  celebrated  temples,  which  were  as  much  frequented  by  the
EthiopiaDS  as  by  the  Egyptians.^

Correctly  speaking,  it  was  not  Egypt  herself  that  the  Greeks  saw,  but  her
external  artistic  aspect  and  the  outward  setting  of  Egyptian  civilisation.  The
vastness  of  her  monuments,  the  splendour  of  her  tombs,  the  pomp  of  her  cere-
monies, the  dignity  and  variety  of  her  religious  formulas,  attracted  their  curiosity
and  commanded  their  respect :  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  had  passed  into  a
proverb  with  tiiem,  as  it  had  with  the  Hebrews.  But  if  they  had  penetrated
behind  the  scenes,  they  would  have  been  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  beneath
this  attractive  exterior  there  was  hopeless  decay.  As  with  all  creatures  when
they  have  passed  their  prime,  Egypt  had  begun  to  grow  old,
and  was  daily  losing  her  elasticity  and  energy.  Her  spirit
had  sunk  into  a  torpor,  she  had  become  unresponsive  to
her  environment,  and  could  no  longer  adapt  herself  to
the  form  she  had  so  easily  acquired  in  her  youth :  it  was
as  much  as  she  could   do  to  occupy  fully  the  narrower

DABIUS  III.-'

limits  to  which  she  had  been  reduced,  and  to  maintain
those  limits  unbroken.  The  instinct  which  made  her  shrink  from  the
intrusion  of  foreign  customs  and  ideas,  or  even  mere  contact  with  nations
of  recent  growth,  was  not  the  mere  outcome  of  vanity.  She  realised  that
she  maintained  her  integrity  only  by  relying  on  the  residue  of  her  former
solidarity  and  on  the  force  of  custom.  The  slightest  disturbance  of  the  equili-
brium established  among  her  members,  instead  of  strengthening  her,  would
have  robbed  her  of  the  vigour  she  still  possessed,  and  brought  about  her
dissolution.  She  owed  whatever  activity  she  possessed  to  impulses  imparted
to  her  by  the  play  of  her  ancient  mechanism — a  mechanism  so  stable  in  its
action,  and  so  ingeniously  constructed,  that  it  had  still  a  reserve  of  power
within  it  sufficient  to  keep  tlie  whole  in  motion  for  centuries,  provided  there
was  no  attempt  to  introduce  new  wheels  among  the  old.  She  had  never  been
singularly  distinguished  for  her  military  qualities ;  not  that  she  was  cowardly,
and  shrank  from  facing  death,  but  because  she  lacked  energy  and  enthusiasm
for  warlike  enterprise.  The  tactics  and  armaments  by  which  she  had  won  her
victories  up  to  her  prime,  had  at  length  become  fetters  which  she  was  no
longer  inclined  to  shake  off,  and  even  if  she  was  still  able  to  breed  a  military
caste,  she  was  no  longer  able  to  produce  armies  fit  to  win  battles  without  the
aid  of  mercenaries.     In  order  to  be  successful  in  the  field,  she  had  to  associate

'  Herodotus,  II.  xsviii.,  xsis.,  where  the  context  shows  that  the  author  went  as  far  as  Elephantine  ;
cf.  WriiDEiiANN,  Herodots  Zweites  Buck,  pp.  113-127.

-  Drawn  by  Faucher-Gudin,  from  a  coin  in  the  Cabinet  des  Medaillee,  of  which  I  am  indebted  for
a  cast  to  the  courtesy  of  M.  Babelon  ;  cf  Babelon,  Les  Perses  AcMm^nides,  pi.  ii.  19.


WEAKNESS    OF   TEE  PERSIAN   EMPIRE.


805


with  her  own  troops  recruits  from  other  countries — Libyans,  Asiatics,  and  Greeks,
who  served  to  turn  the  scale.  The  Egyptians  themselves  formed  a  compact
body  in  this  case,  and  bearing  down  upon  the  enemy  already  engaged  by  the
mercenaries,  broke  through  his  ranks  by  their  sheer  weight,  or,  if  they  could
not  accomplish  this,  they  stood  their  ground  bravely,  taking  to  flight  only  when
the  vacancies  in  their  ranks  showed  them  that  further  resistance  was  impossible.
The  machinery  of  government,
like  the  organisation  of  their
armies,  had  become  antiquated
and  degenerate.  The  nobility
were  as  turbulent  as  in  former
times,   and   the   royal    authority

was  as  powerless   now  as  of   old  m^:'-f^i^BiL^,..  &^Mii  ^-^  ^JW-O/f

to  assert  itself  in  the  absence  of
external  help,  or  when  treason
was  afoot  among  the  troops.  Ke-
lio-ion  alone  maintained  its  as-
cendency,  and  began  to  assume  to
itself  the  loyalty  once  given  to
the  Pharaoh,  and  the  devotion
previously  consecrated  to  the
fatherland.  The  fellahin  had
never  fully  realised  the  degra-
dation involved  in  serving  a  stranger,  and  what  they  detested  in  the  Persian
king  was  not  exactly  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Persian.  Their  national  pride,
iudled,  always  prompted  them  to  devise  some  means  of  connecting  the  foreign
monarch  with  their  own  solar  line,  and  to  transform  an  Achcemenian  king
into  a  legitimate  Pharaoh.  That  which  was  especially  odious  to  them  in  a
Cambyses  or  an  Ochus  was  the  disdain  which  such  sovereigns  displayed
for  their  religion,  and  the  persecution  to  which  they  subjected  the  immortals.
They  accustomed  themselves  without  serious  repining  to  have  no  longer  one
of  their  own  race  upon  the  throne,  and  to  behold  their  cities  administered  by
Asiatics,  but  they  could  not  understand  why  the  foreigner  preferred  his
own  gods,  and  would  not  admit  Amon,  Phtah,  Horus,  and  Ea  to  the  rank  of
supreme  deities.  Ochus  had,  by  his  treatment  of  the  Apis  and  the  other
divine   animals,"-  put  it  out  of  his  power  ever  to  win  their   good   wdl.     His

>  Drawn  bv  Boudier  from  a  little  terra-cotta  group  from  Myrrl.ina  now  in  the  Louvre  This
object  rtlfroL  the  tte  of  the  Mngs  of  Pergamos,  and  the  soldier  round  whom  the  elephant  wrnds
his  trunk  in  order  to  dash  him  to  the  ground  is  a  Gaul  of  Asia  Mmor.

-  Cf.  for  this  subject,  supra,  p.  770.


AX    ELEPHAXT    AKMED   FOK  WAl!.'


806       THE  LAST  DAYS    OF  TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

brutality  had  made  an  irreconcilable  enemy  of  that  state  which  alone  gave
signs  of  vitality  among  the  nations  of  the  decaying  East.  This  was  all  the
more  to  be  regretted,  since  the  Persian  empire,  in  spite  of  the  accession  of
power  wiiich  it  had  just  manifested,  was  far  from  having  regained  the  eneigy
which  had  animated  it,  not  perhaps  in  the  time  of  Darius,  but  at  all  events
under  the  first  Xerxes.  The  army  and  the  wealth  of  the  country  were  doubt-
less still  intact — an  army  and  a  revenue  which,  in  spite  of  all  losses,  were  still
the  largest  in  the  world — but  the  valour  of  the  troops  was  not  proportionate  to
their  number.  The  former  prowess  of  the  Persians,  Medians,  Bactrians,  and
other  tribes  of  Iran  showed  no  degeneracy :  these  nations  still  produced  the  same
race  of  brave  and  hardy  foot-soldiers,  the  same  active  and  intrepid  horsemen  ;
but  for  a  century  past  there  had  not  been  the  improvements  either  in  the
armament  of  the  troops  or  in  the  tactics  of  the  generals  which  were  necessary  to
bring  them  up  to  the  standard  of  excellence  of  the  Greek  army.  The  Persian
king  placed  great  faith  in  extraordinary  military  machines.  He  believed  in
the  efficacy  of  chariots  armed  with  scythes;  besides  this,  his  relations  with
India  had  shown  him  what  use  his  Oriental  neighbours  made  of  elephants,  and
having  determined  to  employ  these  animals,  he  had  collected  a  whole  corps  of
them,  from  which  he  hoped  great  things.  In  spite  of  the  addition  of  these
novel  recruits,  it  was  not  on  the  Asiatic  contingents  that  he  chiefly  relied  in
the  event  of  war,  but  on  the  mercenaries  who  were  hired  at  great  expense,  and
who  formed  the  chief  support  of  his  power.  From  the  time  of  Artaxerxes  II.
onwards,  it  was  the  Greek  hoplites  and  peltasts  who  had  always  decided  the
issue  of  the  Persian  battles.  The  expeditions  both  by  land  and  sea  had  been
under  the  conduct  of  Athenian  or  Spartan  generals — Conon,  Chabrias,  Iphicrates,
Agesilas,  Timotheus,  and  their  pupils ;  and  again  also  it  was  to  the  Greeks — to
the  Khodian  Mentor  and  to  Memnon — that  Ochus  had  owed  his  successes.
The  older  nations — Egypt,  Syria,  Clialda^a,  and  Elam — had  all  had  tlieir  day
of  supremacy ;  they  had  declined  in  the  course  of  centuries,  and  Assyria  had
for  a  short  time  united  them  under  her  rule.  On  the  downfall  of  Assyria,
the  Iranians  had  succeeded  to  her  heritage,  and  they  bad  built  ujj  a  single
empire  comprising  all  the  states  which  had  preceded  them  in  Western  Asia ;
but  decadence  had  fallen  upon  them  also,  and  when  they  had  been  masters  for
scarcely  two  short  centuries,  they  were  in  their  turn  threatened  with  destruction.
Their  rule  continued  to  be  universal,  not  by  reason  of  its  inherent  vigour,  but
on  account  of  the  weakness  of  their  subjects  and  neighbours,  and  a  determined
attack  on  any  of  the  frontiers  of  the  empire  would  doubtless  have  resulted  in
its  overthrow.

Greece  herself  was  too  demoralised  to  cause  Darius  any  grave  anxiety.
Not  only  had  she  renounced  all  intention  of  attacking  the  great  king  in  his


THE  DEATH  OF   OCHUS — ABSES.  807"

own  domain,  as  in  the  days  of  the  Athenian  hegemony,  when  she  could  impose
her  own  conditions  of  peace,  but  her  perpetual  discords  had  yielded  her  an
easy  prey  to  Persia,  and  were  likely  to  do  so  more  and  more.    The  Greek  cities
chose  the  great  king  as  the  arbiter  in  their  quarrels ;  they  vied  with  each  other
in  obtaining  his  good  will,  his  subsidies  in  men  and  vessels,  and  his  darics;  they
armed  or  disarmed  at  his  command,  and  the  day  seemed  at  hand  when  they
would  become  a  normal  dependency  of  Persia,  little  short  of  a  regular  satrapy
like  Asiatic  Hellas.      One  chance  of  escape  from  such  a  fate  remained  to
them— if  one  or  other  of  them,  or  some  neighbouring   state,  could   acquire
such  an  ascendency  as  to  make  it  possible  to  unite  what  forces  remained  to
them  under  one  rule.    Macedonia  in  particular,  having  hitherto  kept  aloof  from
the  general  stream  of  politics,  had  at  this  juncture  begun  to  shake  off  its
lethargy,  and  had  entered  with  energy  into  the  Hellenic  concert  under  the
auspices  of  its  king,  Philip.     Bagoas  recognised  the  danger  which  threatened
his  people  in  the  person  of  this  ambitious  sovereign,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  give
substantial  support  to  the  adversaries  of  the  Macedonian  prince  ;  Chersobleptes
of  Thrace  and  the  town  of  Perinthus  receiving  from  him  such  succour  as
enabled  them  to  repulse  Philip  successfully  (340).    Unfortunately,  while  Bagoas
was  endeavouring  to  avert  danger  in  this  quarter,  his  rivals  at  court  endeavoured
to  prejudice  the  mind  of  the  king  against  him,  and  their  intrigues  were  so
successful  that  he  found  himself  ere  long   condemned  to  the  alternative  of
murdering  his  sovereign  or  perishing  himself.    He  therefore  poisoned  Ochus,  to
avoid  being  assassinated  or  put  to  the  torture,  and  placed  on  the  throne  Arses,
the  youngest  of  the  king's  sons,  while  he  caused  the  remaining  royal  children
to  be  put  to  death  (336).^     Egypt  hailed  this  tragic  end  as  a  mark  of  the
vengeance  of  the  gods  whom  Ochus  had  outraged.    A  report  was  spread  that  the
eunuch  was  an  Egyptian,  that  he  had  taken  part  in  the  murder  of  the  Apis
under  fear  of  death,  but  that  when  he  was  sure  of  his  own  safety  he  had  avenged
the  sacrilege.    As  soon  as  the  poison  had  taken  effect,  it  was  said  he  ate  a  portion
of  the  dead  body  and  threw  the  remainder  to  the  cats :  he  then  collected  the
bones  and  made  them  into  whistles  and  knife-handles.^    Ochus  had  astonished  his
contemporaries  by  the  rapidity  with  which  he  had  re-established  the  integrity  of
the  empire;  they  were  pleased  to  compare  him  with  the  heroes  of  his  race,  with
Cyrus  Cambyses,  and  Darius.     But  to  exalt  him  to  such  a  level  said  little
for  their  moral  or  intellectual  perceptions,  since  in  spite  of  his  victories  he  was
..    -      T.,   i      ^  iT,„  vs^f    AUrandri  S  5")  calls  the  successor  of  Ochus

3:r-  n^  r  •  ^rntiotrs^n^roetfaw'ak  and  .eve.t  other  .e..ers  of  the  ro,.
Aeh.u;enia„  race  are  kuowu  to  ^^^  j^^-^^^t' j^.^vilT  "ih  wt ^f'  the  ene.y  thrown  to  the
eat;  trhX;::?:^ rraelan  lafe'-rS  ttropSr-i^asiuattou,  which  eroP-P  a,.n  tu  the  Tale
ofsatoi  Khamois  ;  cf.  Ma.p.uo,  Les  Conies  populaires  de  V£gypte  anctenne,  2ud  edit.,  p.  200.


808  TEE  LAST  DAYS    OF   TEE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.

merely  a  despot  of  the  oidinary  type ;   his  tenacity  degenerated  into  brutal
obstinacy,  his  severity  into  cruelty,  and  if  he  obtained  successes,  they  were  due
ratlier  to  his  generals  and  his  ministers  than  to  his  own  ability.     His  son  Arses
was  at  first  content  to  be  a  docile  instrument  in  the  hands  of  Bagoas ;  but  when
the  desire  for  independence  came  to  him  with  the  habitual  exercise  of  power,  and
he  began  to  chafe  at  his  bonds,  the  eunuch  sacrificed  him  to  his  own  personal
safety,  and  took  his  life  as  he  had  done  that  of  his  father  in  the  preceding
year  (336).^     So  many  murders  following  each  other  in  rapid  succession  had
considerably  reduced  the  Achaemenian  family,  and  Bagoas  for  a  moment  was
puzzled  where  to  find  a  king:  he  at  length  decided  in  favour  of  Codoinannos,^
who  according  to  some  was  a  great-grandson  of  Darius  11.,^  but  according  to
others  was  not  of  the  royal  line,  but  had  in  his  youth  been  employed  as  a  courier.^
He  had  distinguished  himself  in  the  hostilities  against  the  Cadusians,  and  had
been  nominated  satrap  of  Armenia  by  Ochus  as  a  reward  for   his   bravery/'
He  assumed  at  his  accession  the  name  of  Darius ;  brave,  generous,  clement,
and  possessed  with  an  ardent  desire  to  do  right,  he   was  in  every  way  the
superior  of  his  immediate  predecessors,  and  he  deserved  to  have  reigned  at  a
time  when  the  empire  was  less  tiueateneJ.    Bagoas  soon  perceived  that  his  new
protege,  whose  conduct  he  had  reckoned  on  directing  as  he  pleased,  intended
to  govern  for  himself,  and  he  therefore  attempted  to  get  rid  of  him  ;  Bagoas  was,
however,  betrayed  by  his  accomplices,  and  compelled  to  drink  the  poison  which
he  had  prepared  for  Darius."     These  revolutions  had  distracted  the  attention
of  the  court  of  Susa  from  the  events  which  were  taking  place  on  the  shores  of
the  ^gean,  and  Philip  had  taken  advantage  of  them  to  carry  into  effect  the
designs  against  Persia  which  he  had  been  long  meditating.     After  having  been
victorious  against  the  Greeks,  he  had  despatched  an  army  of  ten  thousand
men  into  Asia  under  the  command  of  Parmenion  and  Attalus  (336).     We  may
ask  if  it  were  not  he  who  formed  the  project  of  universal  conquest  which  was
so  soon  to  be  associated  witli  the  name  of  his  son  Alexander.     He  was  for  the
moment  content  to  excite  revolt  among  the  cities  of  the  .^gean  littoral,  and
restore  to  them  that  liberty  of  which  they  had^been  deprived  for  nearly  a
century.     He  himself  followed  as  soon  as  these  lost  children  of  Greece  had
established  themselves  firmly  in  Asia.     The  story  of  his  assassination  on  the
eve  of  his  departure  is  well  known  (33(3),  and  of  the  difficulties  which  compelled

'  DiODORUs  SicuLUs,  xvii.  0  ;  Arrian,  Anahasis,  II.  xiv.  5,  where  it  is  stated  that  Codomaunos  had
been  Bagoas's  accomplice  in  the  murder  of  Arses.     Cf.  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  24,  p.  735.

=  Pompeius  Trogus  gives  liim  this  uame  of  Codomannos  (Justin,  x.  3),  probably  following  Dinoa.

^  DiODORUs  SiccLU.s,  xvii.  5,  says  that  his  grandfather  was  a  certain  Oatanes  who  would  have  been
the  brother  of  Artaserxes  II.,  probably  the  one  whom  Ctesias  calls  Oxandres  {Fragm.  29,  §  49,  iu
MiJLLER-DiDOT,  Glesise  Cuidii  Fragmenta,  p.  55).

*  Strabo,  XV.  iii.  §  24,  p.  735  ;   Plctaroh,  Life  of  Alexander,  §  IS.

'  JrsTitf,  X.  3,  where  Pompeius  Trogus  probably  followed  the  account  given  by  Diuon ;  cf.
DioDORrs  SiccLus,  xvii.  6.

'  DiODOBUs  SicuLus,  xvii.  0.


ALEXANDER   AND    THE  BATTLE   OB'   THE   GRANICUS.


809


Alexander  to  suspend  the  execution  of  the  plans  which  his  father  had  made.
Darius  attempted  to  make  use  of  the  respite  thus  afforded  him  by  fortune ;  he
adopted  the  usual  policy  of  liberally  bribing  one  part  of  Greece  to  take  up  arms
against  Macedonia — a  method  which  was  at  first  successful.  While  Alexander
was  occupied  in  the  destruction  of  Thebes,  the  Khodian  general  Memnon,  to  whom
had  been  entrusted  the  defence  of  Asia  Minor,  forced  the  invaders  to  entrench
themselves  in  the  Troac).     If  the  Persian  fleet  had  made  its  appearance  in


THE   BATTLK-FIIXD    (JF    ISSUS.'


good  time,  and  had  kept  an  active  watch  over  the  straits,  the  advance-guard  of
the  Macedonians  would  have  succumbed  to  the  enemy  before  the  main  body
of  the  troops  had  succeeded  in  joining  them  in  Asia,  and  it  was  easy  to  foretell
what  would  have  been  the  fate  of  an  enterprise  inaugurated  by  such  a  disaster.
Persia,  however,  had  not  yet  learnt  to  seize  the  crucial  moment  for  action :
her  vessels  were  still  arming  when  the  enemy  made  their  appearance  on  the
European  shore  of  the  Hellespont,  and  Alexander  had  ample  time  to  embark
and  disembark  the  whole  of  his  army  without  having  to  draw  his  sword  from  the
scabbard.  He  was  accompanied  by  about  thirty  tliousand  foot  soldiers  and  four
thousand  five  hundred  horse;  the  finest  troops  commanded  by  the  best  generals
of  the  time — Parmenion,  his  two  sons  Nikanor  and  Philotas,  Crater,  Clitos,
Antigonus,  and  others  whose  names  are  familiar  to  us  all ;  a  larger  force  than
Memnon  and  his  subordinates  were  able  to  bring  up  to  oppose  him,  at  all

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  by  Lortet;  cf.  Loetet,  La  Syrie  d'aujourd'hui,  p.  42.


810


TEE  LAST  DATS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WORLD.


events   at   the  opening  of  the  campaign,  during  the  preliminary  operations
which  detemiined  the  success  of  the  enterprise.

The  first  years  of  the  campaign  seem  like  a  review  of  the  countries  and
nations  which  in  bygone  times  had  played  the  chief  part  in  Oriental  history.
An  engagement  at  the  fords  of  the  Granicus,  only  a  few  days  after  the  crossing


^ciinaroMm^


1     In


^tin|inviw,,;r»llllintai


BAS-RELIEF  OX   A   SIDONIAN   SARCOPHAGUS  KKPBESENTING   AN   EPISODE   IN  THE   BATTLE   OF   ISSl'S."'

of  the  Hellespont,  placed  Asia  Minor  at  the  mercy  of  the  invader  (334).  Mysia,
Lydia,  Caria,  and  Lycia  tendered  their  submission,  Miletus  and  Halicarnassus
being  the  only  towns  to  offer  any  resistance.  In  the  spring  of  333,  Phrygia
followed  the  general  movement,  in  company  with  Cappadocia  and  Cilicia;
these  repregented  the  Hittite  and  Asianic  world,  the  last  representatives  of
which  thus  escaped  from  the  influences  of  the  East  and  passed  under  the
Hellenic  supremacy.  At  the  foot  of  the  Amanus,  Alexander  came  into  con-
flict not  only  with  the  generals  of  Darius,  but  with  the  great  king  himself.
The  Amanus,  and  the  part  of  the  Taurus  which  borders  on  the  Euphrates
valley,  had  always  constituted  the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  domain  of
the  races  of  tlie  Asianic  peninsula  and  that  of  the  Semitic  peoples.  A  second
battle  near  the  Issus,  at  the  entrance  to  the  Cilician  gates,  cleared  the  ground,

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  photograph  ;  cf.  Hamdt-Bey  and  Theodoee  Eeinach,  Les  Sarcopliages
de  Sidon,  pi.  xxv.


ISSUS,    THE   CONQUEST  OF  STBIA   AND    OF  EGYPT.


811


and  gave  the  conqueror  time  to  receive  the  homage  of  the  maritime  provinces.
Both  Northern  and  Coele-Syria  submitted  to  him  from  Samosata  to  Damascus.
The  less  important  towns  of  Phoenicia,  such  as  Arvad,  Byblos,  Sidon,  and  those
of  Cyprus,  followed  their  example ;  but  Tyre  closed  its  gates,  and  trusted  to  its
insular  position  for  the  preservation  of  its  independence,  as  it  had  done  of  old  in
the  time  of  Sennacherib  and  of  Nebuchadrezzar.    It  was  not  so  much  a  scrupu-


THE    ISTHMUS   OP   TYRK    AT   THE    PRESENT   DAY.'

lous  feeling  of  loyalty  which  emboldened  her  to  take  this  step,  as  a  keen  realisa-
tion of  what  her  conquest  by  the  Macedonian  would  entail.  It  was  entirely  owing
to  Persia  that  she  had  not  succumbed  in  all  parts  of  the  Eastern  Mediter-
ranean in  that  struggle  with  Greece  which  had  now  lasted  for  centuries  :  Persia
had  not  only  arrested  the  progress  of  Hellenic  colonisation  in  Cyprus,  but  had
given  a  fresh  impulse  to  that  of  Tyre,  and  Phoenician  influence  had  regained
its  ascendency  over  a  considerable  part  of  the  island.  The  surrender  of  Tyre,
therefore,  would  be  equivalent  to  a  Greek  victory,  and  would  bring  about  the
decay  of  the  city  ;  hence  its  inhabitants  preferred  hostilities,  and  they  were
prolonged  in  desperation  over  a  period  of  seven  months.  At  the  end  of  that
time  Alexander  succeeded  in  reducing  the  place  by  constructing  a  dyke  or
causeway,  by  means  of  which  he  brought  his  machines  of  war  ujd  to  the  foot  of
the  ramparts,  and  filled  in  the  channel  which  separated  the  town  from  the
mainland ;   the   island   thus   became   a  peninsula,  and  Tyre   henceforth  was

'  Drawn  by  Boudier,  from  a  sketch  by  Lortet;  cf.  Lortet,  La  Sijrie  d'aujburd'hui,  p.  133.


812  THE  LAST  DATS    OF  TEE   OLD   EASTEBN   WORLD.

reduced  to  the  rank  of  au  ordinary  town,  still  able  to  maintain  her  commercial
activity,  but  having;  lost  her  power  as  an  independent  state  (332).  Phoenicia
being  thus  brought  into  subjection,  Judaja  and  Samaria  yielded  to  the  conqueror
without  striking  a  blow,  though  the  fortress  of  Gaza  followed  the  example  set
by  Tyre,  and  for  the  space  of  two  months  blocked  the  way  to  the  Delta.  Egypt
revolted  at  the  approach  of  her  liberator,  and  the  rising  was  so  unanimous  as
to  dismay  the  satrap  Mazakes,  who  cajjitulated  at  the  first  summons.  Alexander
passed  the  winter  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  Finding  that  the  ancient  capitals
of  the  country — Thebes,  Sais,  and  even  Memphis  itself — occupied  positions  which
were  no  longer  suited  to  the  exigencies  of  the  times,  he  founded  opposite  to  the
island  of  Pharos,  in  the  township  of  Eakotis,  a  city  to  which  he  gave  his  own
name.  The  rapid  growth  of  the  prosperity  of  Alexandria  show^ed  how  happy
the  founder  had  been  in  the  choice  of  its  site  :  in  less  than  half  a  century  from
the  date  of  its  foundation,  it  had  eclipsed  all  the  other  capitals  of  the  Eastern
Mediterranean,  and  had  become  the  centre  of  African  Hellenism.  While  its
construction  was  in  progress,  Alexander,  having  had  opportunities  of  studying
the  peculiarities  and  characteristics  of  the  Egyptians,  had  decided  to  perform
the  one  act  which  would  conciliate  the  good  feeling  of  the  natives,  and  secure
for  him  their  fidelity  during  his  wars  in  the  East :  he  selected  from  among  their
gods  the  one  who  was  also  revered  by  the  Greeks,  Zeus-Ammon,  and  repaired
to  the  Oasis  that  he  miglit  be  adopted  by  the  deity.  As  a  son  of  the  god,
he  became  a  legitimate  Pharaoh,  an  Egyptian  like  themselves,^  and  on  return-
ing to  Memphis  lie  no  longer  hesitated  to  adopt  the  2)sclient  crown  with  the
accompanying  ancient  rites.-  He  returned  to  Asia  early  in  the  year  331,  and
crossed  the  Euphrates.  Darius  had  attempted  to  wrest  Asia  Minor  from  his
grasp,  but  Autigonus,  the  governor  of  Phrygia,  had  dispersed  the  troops
despatched  for  this  purpose  in  332,  and  Alexander  was  able  to  push  forward
fearlessly  into  those  regions  beyond  the  Euphrates,  where  the  Ten  Thousand  had
pursued  their  victorious  march  before  him.  He  crossed  the  Tigris  about  the
20th  of  September,  and  a  week  later  fell  in  with  his  rival  in  the  very  heart  of
Assyria,  not  far  from  the  village  of  Gaugamela,  where  he  took  up  a  jiosition
which  had  been  previously  studied,  and  was  particularly  suited  for  the
evolutions  of  cavalry.  At  the  Granicus  and  near  Issus,  the  Greek  element
had  played  an  important  part  among  the  forces  which  contested  the  field ;
on  this  occasion,  however,  the  great  kint^  was  accompanied  by  merely  two
or  three  thousand  mercenaries,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  whole  of  Asia

'  For  the  importance  and  significance  of  this  act,  ef.MASPERO,  Comment  Alexandre  devint  Dieu  en
£gijpte,  in  L'Annuaire  de  VEcole  des  Haules  Etudes,  1897,  pp.  4-30.

2  The  fact  is  mentioned  only  in  Pseudo-Callistheni:s,  §  xxxiv.,  ed.  MClleb-Didot,  p.  3S.  It  is,
however,  so  conformable  with  fact,  that  we  may  accept  it  as  fully  as  if  we  had  met  with  it  in  a  trust-
worthy historian:  the  author  of  the  romance  doubtless  took  it  from  some  good  source  (Mahaffv,
History  of  Egypt  under  the  Ptolemaic  Dynasty,  p.  4,  note  2).


ARBELA — THE  DEATH   OF  DARIUS.


813


seemed  to  have  roused  herself  for  a  last  effort,  and  brought  forward  her  most
valiant  troops  to  oppose  the  disciplined  ranks  of  the  Macedonians.  Persians,
Susians,  Medes,  Armenians,  Iranians  from  Bactriana,  Sakoe,  and  Indians  were
all  in  readiness  to  do  their  best,  and  were  accompanied  by  every  instrument  of
military  warfare  employed  in  Oriental  tactics;  chariots  armed  with  scythes,
the  last  descendants  of  the  chariotry  which  had  dominated  all  the  battle-fields
from  the  time  of  the  XVIII'"  Theban  dynasty  down  to  the  latest  Sargonids,  and,
employed  side  by  side  with  these  relics  of  a  bygone  day,  were  Indian  elephants,
now  for  the  first  time  brought  into  use  against  European  battalions.  These
picked  troops  sold  their  lives  dearly,  but  the  perfection  of  the  Macedonian
arms,  and,  above  all,  the  superiority  of  the  tactics  employed  by  their  generals.


THK    BATTLK    (IF


AKBELA,    FROM    THE    MOSAIC    OF    HEKCCLANEUM.'


carried  the  day  ;  the  evening  of  the  30th  of  September  found  Darius  in  flight,
and  the  Achfemenian  empire  crushed  by  the  furious  charges  of  Alexander's
squadrons.  Babylon  fell  into  their  hands  a  few  days  later,  followed  by  Susa,
and  in  the  spring  of  330,  Ecbatana  ;  and  shortly  after  Darius  met  his  end  on
the  way  to  Media,  assassinated  by  the  last  of  his  generals.

With  his  death,  Persia  sank  back  into  the  obscurity  from  which  Cyrus  had
raised  her  rather  more  than  two  centuries  previously.  With  the  exception  of
the  Medes,  none  of  the  nations  which  had  exercised  the  hegemony  of  the  East
before  her  time,  not  even  Assyria,  had  had  at  their  disposal  such  a  wealth  of
resources  and  had  left  behind  them  so  few  traces  of  their  power.  A  dozen  or
so  of  palaces,  as  many  tombs,  a  few  scattered  altars  and  stela?,  remains  of  epics
preserved  by  the  Greeks,  fragments  of  religious  books,  often  remodelled,  and
issuing  in  the  Avesta— when  we  have  reckoned  up  all  that  remains  to  us  of
'  Drawn  by  Boiulier,  from  a  pliotograpLi.


814       TEE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   OLD   EASTERN   WOULD.

her,  what  do  we  finrl  to  comjiare  in  interest  and  in  extent  with  the  monuments
and  wealth  of  writings  bequeathed  to  us  by  Egypt  and  Chaldtea?  The  Iranians
received  Oriental  civilisation  at  a  time  when  the  latter  was  in  its  decline,  and
caught  the  spirit  of  decadence  in  their  contact  with  it.  In  succeeding  to  the
patrimony  of  the  nations  they  conquered,  tliey  also  inherited  their  weakness  ;
in  a  few  years  they  had  lost  all  the  vigour  of  their  youth,  and  were  barely  able
to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  empire  they  had  founded.  Moreover,  the  great
peoples  to  whom  they  succeeded,  although  lacking  the  vigour  necessary  for  the
continuance  of  their  independent  existence,  had  not  yet  sunk  so  low  as  to
acquiesce  in  their  own  decay,  and  resign  themselves  to  allowing  their  national
life  to  be  absorbed  in  that  of  another  power :  they  believed  that  they  would
emerge  from  the  crisis,  as  they  had  done  from  so  many  otliers,  with  fresh  strength,
and,  as  soon  as  an  occasion  presented  itself,  they  renewed  the  war  against  their
Iranian  suzerain.  From  the  first  to  the  latest  of  the  sovereigns  bearing  the
name  of  Darius,  the  history  of  the  Achremenids  is  an  almost  uninterrupted
series  of  internal  wars  and  provincial  revolts.  The  Greeks  of  Ionia,  the
Egyptians,  Chaldoeans,  Syrians,  and  the  tribes  of  Asia  Minor,  all  rose  one  after
another,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes  in  concert ;  some  carrying  on  hostilities  for
not  more  than  two  or  three  years ;  others,  like  Egypt,  maintaining  them  for
more  than  half  a  century.  They  were  not  discouraged  by  the  reprisals  which
followed  each  of  these  rebellions ;  they  again  had  recourse  to  arms  as  soon  as
there  seemed  the  least  chance  of  success,  and  they  renewed  the  struggle  till
from  sheer  exhaustion  the  sword  fell  from  their  hand.  Persia  was  worn  out  by
this  perpetual  warfare,  in  which  at  the  same  time  each  of  her  rivals  expended
the  last  relics  of  their  vitality,  and  when  Macedonia  entered  on  the  scene,  both
lords  and  vassals  were  reduced  to  such  a  state  of  prostration,  that  it  was  easy  to
foretell  their  approaching  end.  The  old  Oriental  world  was  in  its  death-throes ;
but  before  it  passed  away,  the  successful  audacity  of  Alexander  had  summoned
Greece  to  succeed  to  its  inheritance.


INDEX


Abdimilkot,  351,352
Abu-Simbel,  graffito  at,  538

,  temple  of,  539

Abydos,  611
Achjemenes,  455

AchsBtnenian  empire  crushed  by
Alexander,  S13

king,  742,  745

ruins,  735

tombs,  737

Achferaenians,  the,  776

Achiemenides,  519

Adaush,  14

Adrammelech  (Adarmalik),  346

Adyattes.     See  Males

^olians,  the,  338,  704

Africa,  Egyptian  fleet  sails  round,

532,  533
Agusi.    See  Bit-Agusi.
Ahab,  69,  71,  75,  76,  77,  83,  218
Ahaz,  157, 189,  214,215,236,284

appeals  to  Assyria,  185,  186

Ahaziah  (of  Israel),  78,  80,  82

(of  Judah),  S3,  84

Ahura-mazda,450, 574,577,e«  seg.,
593,  594

,  bas-reliefs  of,  577,  579,  681

,  map  of  the  lands   created

by, 451
Akhiababa,  18
Akhuni,  32,  63,  64,  66,  68
Akkadians,  196

Alexander  I.ofMacedon,707,723
Alexander  the   Great,  808,  809,
810,  812

from  a  bust  in  the  Louvre.

697
Alexandria,  foundation  of,  812
AUabria,  241,  242,  250
Altaku  (Eltekeh),  288,  289,  293
Alum,  Egyptian,  646


Alyattes,  524,  525,  602.  603

,  Tumulus  of,  604

Amadai  (Madai).     See  Medes
Amanos.     See  Amanus
Amanus  (or  Amanos),  78,  79,  86,

109,  207
Amasis,  55C,  557, 640, 645, 650, 659

adoring  the  Apis,  642

,  buildings  of,  641

,  naos  of,  643

shows  favour  to  tlie  Greeks,

643
Amaziah,  122,  123,  157
Ambaridis  (Ambaris),  251
Amenertas,  queen,  490,  503,  504
Ameiha-spentas,  the,  580,  581,  584
Amika  (of  Zamru),  24,  25,  26
Ammibaal  (Princeof  Bit-Zamani),

21,  27,  31
Ammon  {or  Ammonites),  69,  71,

101,  190,  213,  542
Ammon,  oasis  of,  552,  664
Amon  (of  Judah),  474,  475,  477
Amon,  priests  of,  166,  171,  210,
211

,  priestesses  of,  490

Amorites,  the,  41

Amos  (the  prophet),  136,  137

Amyrtseus,  751,  763

Andaria,  369,  403

Angro-mainyus,  583,  587,  594

Anshan.orAnzan(see  aZ«o  Persia),

viii,  226,  227,  459
Apries  (Uaphres),  542,  544,  548,
790

.  head  of  a  sphinx  of,  443

,  sphinx  of,  542

^  vase  in    form  of   helmed

head  of,  444
!  Arabs  (see  aho  Aramaeans),  358,
i      367,  371,  431
1  J  submission  of,  to  Esarhad-

(       don,  359


Arabia,  submission  of,  to  Assur-

bani-pal,  431
Arabians,  460

AramiBan  inscriptions  on  coins,
777

language,  640

sheikhs,  398

tribes,  196,  785

Aramffians,  the,  43,  140,  153,  197,
200,  217,  254,  306,   310,  776,
778,  783
Aramaic  inscription  on  seal,  785

language,  the,  784

Axame  (King  of  Bit-Agusi),  70,
75,  78,  90

(King  of  Nairi),  62,  66,  67

Ararat,  mount,  vii.,  53
Arashtua,  23,  24
Araziash,  99
Arbela,  94,  194,  406,  412

,  battle  of,  813

Ardys,  341, 388

Argistis  I.  (see  aho  Urartu),  107,

108,  110,  117,  154
Argistis  IL,  249,  270,  369
Aribua,  43
Aridi,  62,  63

Aristagoras,  703,  704,  705
Armein,  73
Armenia,  99,  348
Arpad,  34,  99,  111,  120,  145,  148,
198,  233,  294,  779

,  Assyrian  campaign  around,

147
Arrapkha,  94,  112
Arses,  807
Artaxerxes  I.,  729,  732,  734,  741,

744,  746
Artaxerxes  II.(Arsaces),746, 750,
757,  761,  702,  7S6

on  a  coin  of  Straton  I.,  king

of  Sidon,  814
Artaxerxes  III.    See  Ochus


816


INDEX.


Arvad,  41,  70,  71,85,  3GS,3S4,  387

Aryans,  the,  450

Arzashkun,  67

Ashdod,  252,  253,  505

Asherah,  the,  133

Asia  Minor,  120,   194,  389,  521,

750,  758,  759,  704,  774, 778, 779

,  map  of,  329

Asian  ic  steppes,  120,  121

Asmakh,  500

Assur  (the  city),  94,  112,  482

(the  god),  74,  94,  154

,  fighting  for  the  king,  1

(Assyria),  Liinmu  of,  194

Assur-bani-pal  (Kandalanu),  378,

380,   381,  382,  387,  393,  420,

428,  441,  459,  4G4,  481,  491

and  his  queen,  413

,  bas-relief  of,  4t!l

captures  Babylon,  423

,  licad  of,  395

,  library  of,  403

,  submission  of  Arabia  to,  431

Assur-dain-pal,  94,  95,  97
Assurdan  II.,  3
Assurdan  III.,  112
Assur-etiliiani,  481,  482,  483
Assurirba,  3,  32
Assur- nadinakhe  II.,  3
Assur-nadin-shumu,  290
Assur-nazir-pal,  Frontispiece,  6,

13,21
,  campaign  on  the  Euphrates,

29

,  character  of,  50,  et  seq.

,  extent  of  his  empire,  42.  ct

seq.

,  flotilla  of,  30

,  Mediterranean  reached  by,

41

obelisk  of,  3

,  stele  of,  45

-,  winged  bulls  of,  40

Assur-nirari  III.,  112,  120
Assyria  (,or  Assur),  108,  231

,  art  of,  47,  203,  314

,  Egyptian  influence  on,

377,  401

,  cities  of,  94

conquers  Elam,  413

,  Ezekiel's  description  of,  320

,    first     encounter    of    with

Egypt,  235

■ ,  Hebrew  ideas  of,  144

,  her  losses  in  Syria,  110

,  limits  of,  118

,  Limmi  in,  194

,  map  of,  195

,  prisoners  of,  545,  547

,  revolt   of    Egypt  against,

379


Assyria,  state   of   under  Assur-

mizir-pal,  21
Assyrian  attack  on  a  fortress,  117

battering-ram,  10,  11

besieging  engines,  9,  10

cavalry,  7,  9,  189

,  raid,  315

carrying    an  inflated   skin,

221

finance,  203

,  head  of  an,  ivory,  114

helmet,  400

king,  510

lion-hunts,  401,  402

militia,  203

provincial    administrators,

201

soldier,  creasing  a  river,  2

soldiers,  raid  by,  297

states,  779

triangle  (map  of),  408

war-chariot,  37

Assyrians  carrying  away  cap-
tives, 547

Astyages  (Ishtuvigu),  529,  559,
598

Athaliah,  70,  100,  128

Athenian  campaign  in  Egypt,
731

Athens,  717,  724,  733,  748,  750,
760

Athribis,  373,  380

Atlila  (or  Dur-Assur),  20

Atyads,  the,  336,  337

Avesta,  575,  576

Azariah  (Uzziah)  of  Judah,  123,
151,  183

Azriyahu,  150,  152


B

Baal  (god),  476

Baal  I.,  King  of  Tyre,  368,  369,

375,  387

Baal  II.  (King  of  Tyre),  601

Baalirasi,  stele  at,  86

Babylon,  93,  97,  98, 222,  227,  500,
567,  622, 627,  686,  717, 730,  781,
782,  813

,  capture  of,  by  Assur-bani-
pal,  423

,  capture  of,  by  Cyrus,  635

,  conquest  of,  by  Sargon,  257

,  decadence  of,  783

,  destruction  of,  by  Sen-
nacherib, 309

,  fortifications  of,  561,  563

,  kings  of,  296,  037

,  lion  of,  507

. ,  rebuilding  of,  357


Babylon,  revolt  of,  under  Mero-
dach-baladan,  275

taken  by  Darius,  679

Babylonia  (see   aho   Karduniash

and  the  Kalda),  781
Babylonian  army,  198

bas-relief,  504

Canon,  the,  4

empire,  196

Bactriana,  025,  081
Baotrians,  the,  022
Balawat,  bronze  f,'ates  of,  61,  62,

63,  68,  95,  204
Baqani,  74

Bartutua,  354,  355,  472
Bau-akhiddin  (King of  Babvlon),

98
Bavian,  bas-reliefs  at,  312

,  stele  at,  313

Bazi,  4,  5

Bedawin,  tlie,  244,  786
Behistun,  rucks  of,  683
Bel,  ChaldsDan  statuette  of,  090
"  Bel,  taking  the  hands  of,"  12,
192,  222,  228,  257,  382,  423,  636
Bel-harran-beluzur,  stele  of,  208
Belibni  (King  of  Babylon),  275.

296
Bel-marduk,  308,  601,  634

,  temple  of,  at  Babylon,  382,

383,  415,  505
Bel-BIerodach,  or  Marduk,  .statue

of,  227
Bel-nadiushumu,  227
Benhadad  I.,  70,  76,  217
Benhadad  II.  (Adadidri  or  Hada-
dezer),  69, 77-79,  82,  (death  of)
83,  217,  279
Benhadad  III.  (.see  Mari),  102, 122
Bethel,  137
Biainas  (or  Biaina),  vi.,  61,  105,

249
Blt-Adini  (in  Bit-Dakkuri),  73,
74,  300

. (in  Mesopotamia),  30,   32,

33,  63,  67-69,  78,  79,  194
Bit-Agusi  (lakhanu),  34,  60,  70,

78,  111,  120,  146,  149,233
Bit-Amukkani,  73,  74,  191,  192,

306,  416
Bit-Bagaia,  town  of,  244
Bit-Bakhiani,  31,  32
Bit-Dukkuri  (or  Bit-Dakuri),  73,

256,  367,  416
Bit-Dayaukku,  the,  327
Bit-Imbi,  433,  434,  439
Bit-Khalupi,  17,  18
Bit-Shalani,  73
Bit-Shalli,  73

Bit-Yakin,  73,  74,  198,  223,  224,
270.  295,  310,  483


^ '  I


INDEX.


817


Bit-Zamani,  27,  43,  91.     -See  also

Ammibaal
Black  obelisk,  the,  62,  63,  67,  69,

71,86,87,89,92,93,125
Boccliorsl      (Bukunirinif),     210,

21-1,  et  seq.
Bohbait,  lion  of,  550
Borsippa,  98

,  canal  of,  257

Bubastis.  278

,  festival  ball  at,  101

,  temple  of,  -15D

Buriamman,  27
But5,  79-t
Byblos,  87,  150


C


465,  470,   480,  484,    516,  521,  ,

525,  598  I
Cyaxarea  attacks  Nineveb,  467  \
drives  back  the  Scytliian?,

481
Cypriot  chariot,  705
Cyprus,  368,  376,  614,  705,  753-

755,  704

submits  to  Sargon,  259

Gyrene,  551,  554,  645,  646,  663,

684,711

,  ruins  of,  553

Cyrus,    596-599,  616,   622,   624,

633,651

■,  bas-relief  of,  652

,  tomb  of,  653

the  younger.  749,  763


Galali,   112,  194,   222,  260,   264,
377,  482,  780

,  palace  of,   44,  45,  49,  50,

376
Cambyses,  655,  656,  662,  067,  669,

794
Cappadocia,  240,  251
Carchemish,  33,  39,  63,  64,   60,
121,  148,  308,  514,  779

,  battle  of,  517

,  an  Assyrian  prefecture,  239

Caria,  623,  700,  778
Carian  inscription,  497

mercenaries,  389,  498

Cariana,  the,  389,  390,  489,  491,

490,  792,  790.
Carthage     (Qart-hadehat),     280,

003,  084
Chaldsea,  263,  446,  781.     See  also

KarduniasU
ChaldiEan  empire,  the  new,  510,

et  teq.
Chalybes,  120,  338
Cilicia,  04,  89,  73,240,  251,  260,

351,  387
Cilician  empire,  33
Cimmerians,  the,  250,  342,  343,
347,  350,  352,  472

,  the,  attacked  by  Gyges,  39 1 ,

892

,  the,    battle     against    tbe

Greeks,  429

,  the,  in  Syria,  479

Ccele-Syria,  111
Colophon,  426
Comana,  332

Co8S2eans,the,4,196,227,  277
Croesus,  603,  608,  610,  Oil,  015,
016,  021,  062

on  his  pyre,  619

Cyasares    (Huvakshatara),    447,


D

Dagara,  22,  23

Damascus,  41,  09,  71,  75,  79,  83,

85,93,110,  122,123,  124,  125,

187,198,217,233,375

,  fall  of  kingdom  of,  187

,  list  of  kings  of,  188

,  map  of  kingdom  of,  185

Damdamusa,  19,  20,43,  50

Damunu,  119

Daphnaj,  497,  498,  548,711

,  fortress  of,  496

Darius  I.,,673,  677,  699,  703,  700

,  army  of,  093-695

,  dario  of,  691

,  head  of,  673

in  Egypt,  685

invades  Scythia,  701

receives  rebels,  681

,  stele  of,  711

takes  Babylon,  679

,  tomb  of,  736

Darius  II.,  746,  747,  748

Darius  III.,  coin  of,  804

Darius  Codomanos,  808

Dascylus  (Daskylos),  341,  388

Daskylos.     See  Dascylus

Datames  III.,  coin  of,  759

Dayaini,  107

Dajan-assur,  90,  91,  92

Deiokes.  324,  325,  446

Delphi,  611,  612,  646

Delta,  the,  166, 167,  649,791.793
795

Demavend  (Bikni),  142

,  peaks  of,  143

Dhibon  (Dibon),  80,  81,  124

Dhuspas,  106.     -See  Van

Dido  (Elissa),  280

Dirrteans,  the,  27

Durilu,  232


Dur-Ladinu,  256,  257
Dur-papsukal,  97
Dur-Sharrukin,  201,  203,  207,  et
seq..  310,  482

,  palace  at,  204,  265

,  plan  of,  266

Dur-YakiD,  224,  225,  258,  259
Dush,  fortress  of,  712


E


Eamukin-shumu,  4,  5

Eastern  Woild,  map  of  the,  420,

487
Echatana   (Agbatana),   (see    also
Hamadan),  325,  598,  599,  000,
614,  022,  081,  086,736,  794,  813

(in  Syria),  009,  671

,  kingdom  of,  325,  350

Edom  (see  also  Idumea),  101, 151.

190,  2.i3,  542
Edomites,  the,  123
Egypt,  an  Assyrian  province,  373,
387

,  an  Assyrian  province  second

time,  385

,  Athenian  campaign  in.  731

,  brook  of  (Wady-el-Arish),

122,  230,  351

conquered  by  Alexander.  812

,  Darius  in,  085

,  decadence  of,  020

,  Esarhaddon's  invasion  of,

371
,    first    encounter    of,    with

Assyria,  235

^  Greater,  the  end  of,  495

,  Greek  travellers  in,  791

,  Isaiah's  prophecy  against,

254

,  middle,  map  of,  172

reconquered  by   Tanuata-

manu,  397
,  revolt  of,  against  Assyria,

379

revolts  against  Persia,  751

,    the    Ethiopians   withdraw

from,  491
Egyptian  alliance  with  Greece,

°756

altar,  134

alum,  646  t

army,  531

dynasties,  last,  768

fleet,  531

sails  round  Africa.  532,

533

head,  Saite  period,  x.,  321

influence  on  Assyrian  art,

377,  161

3    G


818


INDEX.


Egyptian    ivory   from    Xineveh,
116,  219

navy,  Gol!

stelic.  712

toHO  at  Turin,  415

vessel,  .")30

Ek-ron,  2S5,  288,  289
Elam,  225, 227, 231, 242,  258,  263,
48G,  777

disabled  by  discord,  41!)

,  final  ruin  oC,  i  10,  441

lirst  subject  to  Assyria,  413

,  revolutions  in,  433

,    Sennaclierib's    expedition

against,  299,  304
Elamites,  19(J
Elealeh,  124
Elephants  in  war,  805,  806

as  tribute,  89

Elephantine,  802,  803

Eleusis,  bay  of,  map,  720

Elijah,  82

Elisha,  82,  84,  122,  136

Klissa.     See  Dido

EUipi,  241,  250,  270,  306,  327

Elulai,  284,  288,  368

Ephesus,  425,  426,  429,  610

,  ruins  of,  609

Eponym  Canon,  6

Esarhaddon   (Assur-akhc-iddiu).

323,  e*  »eq..  345,  et  seq..  380

as  Kiug  of  Egypt,  375

takes  Slemphis,  373,  376

Esarbaddon's  campaigns  against

the  Kalda,  349

invasion  of  Egypt,  371

Eth-baal  (of  Sidon),  279,  288
Ethiopia,  168,  254,  362,  663,  665
Ethiopian  empire  in  Egypt,  181

group,  665

kings,  the,  169,  et  seq.

types,  171

Ethiopians,  the,  167

,  the,  withdraw  from  Egypt,

491
EtiuB  (Etiaus),  110,  120,  249,  520
Eulbar-shakinshumi,  4,  5
Euphrates,  the,  28,  223

,  navigation  of,  30

Evagoras  II.,  coin  of,  764
Ezekiel  (the  prophet),  540,  558,

629
Eiekiel's  description  of  Assyria,

320
Ezion-geber,  80,  126
Ezra,  787,  789


Fariua  (or  Paripa),  66
FajTim,  fisheries  in,  711


G

Ganibiila  (or  Gambulu),  the,  119,

230,  255,  256,  306,  404
Gauanate,  72,  112
Garparuila,  70
Gath,  101

Gaza,  218,  233,  234,  658,  812
Gebel-Barkal,  168

,  hemispeos  of,  364,  365

Gilead,  100,  198

Gilzau,  14,25,63,  93,  103

,  tribute  from,  67,  68,  69

Gizilbunda,  96,  99

Gordyaean  mountains,  53,  62,  92,

103
(iozin,  99

Graoicus,  battle  of,  810,  812
Greece,  Egvptian  alliance  with,

756

,  relations  with  Persia,  695

Greek,  Egyptian,  497

mercenaries,  781,  806

in  Egypt,  752

SI  ttlements  in  Egypt,  649

struggles  with  Persia,  753,

754

trireme,  717

travellers    in    Egvi)t,   791,

801
Greeks,  battle  of  the  Cimmerians

agaiust  the,  429
Gnrgum,  34,  63,  70, 121, 146, 148,

252
Gyges,  342,  389,  390,   393,  424,

427,  492,  608


H

Habakkuk  (the  prophet),  536
Habardip,  227,  228
Habit,  temple  of,  713
Hadad,  the  god,  vi.,  38
Hadadezer    (or  Adadidri).      5ee

Benhadad  II.
Hadraoh  (Katarika),  100,  110,  e«

seq.,  123,  et  seq.,  150
Haggai  (the  prophet),  785
Hakoris,  753,  754,  755
Halebiyeh,  gorge  of,  28,  30
Halys,  banks  of,  337

,  battle  of  the,  527

,  caves  on  the  banks  of,  345

Hamadan  (see  also  Ecbatana),  326

,  view  of,  327

Hamath,  41,  69,  71,  78,  85,  124,

232,  et  seq.,  243,  244

,  captive  from,  100

Hannon  of  Gaza,  233,  234
Harllu,  the,  119


Harrau,  94,  95,  602

Harsusit,  166

Haurau,  the,  85

Hazael,  82,  83,  100,  101,  122,  218

Hazor,  288

Hebrew  literature,  129

merchants,  126

Hebrews,  dress  of,  127

,    industry     and     commeroi'

of,   125

,  the,  125,  217,  784

,  the,   political  organisation

of,  127

,  trade  of,  126

Heliopolis,  160
Heracleopolie,  166,  176
Heraclidae,    the,    336,   337,  341,

388,  390
Hermon,  llount,  187
Hermopolis,  166

,  temple  of,  175

Heshbon,  124

Hezekiah,  275,  286, 288,  289, 294,

368

,  reforms  of,  285

Hiram  II.,  281
Hittite,  21

empire,  110

states,  the,  41,  108

syllabary,  338

Hittites,  the,  56,  217.     See   also

Khati  and  Patina

,  the,  submission  of,  39

Hoplites,  Greek,  536,  806

■ — —  in  action,  489

Horses  as  tribute,  204,  205,  387

,  Iranian  sacrifice  of,  592

Hosea  (the  prophet),  139,  151
Hoshea,  King  of  Israel,  189,  213,

214
Huldah,  the  prophetess,  507


I


lanzu,  the,  79

lasbuki,  64

laubidi  of  Hamath,  233,  236

flayed  alive,  235

laudi,  HI

Idumea,  70.    See  also  Edom

Idumieans,  789

Ilauiu,  24,  25

Imgur-Bel  (Balawat),  50

Indabigash,  432,  433

India,  694,  774

,  conquest  of,  095

Indian  coin,  570
Ionia,  revolt  of,  703
Ionian  mercenaries,  498
lonians,  the,  338,  491,  496,  550
Iran,  452


INDEX.


819


Iranian  altars,  591,  592,  593^

architecture,  741

and  sculpture,  738

art,  737

conquest,  the,  571,  et  seq.

genii,  585,  587

genius,  an,  578

hunting-party,  597

religion,  573,  576

religious  customs,  588

soldiers,  475

tableland,  324

Iranzu,  237

Irba-ramnian,  3

Irkiinata  (Arqaiiatu),  70

Isaiah,  the   prophet,  183,  et  seq.,

214,  215,  236,   253,   284,  286,

475,  477
Isaiah's  prophecy  against  Egypt,

254
Ishpulnig    (Usbpina),    103,    105,

106,  154
Ishtar  (of  Arbela),  404,  405
Israel,  69,  77,  101

.  kingdom  of,  100,  375

, ,  fall  of,  216

pays  tribute  to  Sbplmaneser,

87
Israelite  captives,  100
Israelites,  the,  212

,  bas-relief  of,  125

Ibsus,  812

,  bas-relief  of  battle  of,  810

-,  battlefield  of,  809

Itua.  119

Izalla,  19,  31,  32,  43

Izirtu.     See  Zirtu


Jeconiah.    See  Jehoiachin
Jehoahaz  (of  Israel).  101,  122

or  Shallum  (of  .Tudali),  515

Jehoash  (of  ^rae!),  122,  123
Jchoiakim   (Jeconiah),  515,   534,

535,  536,  566

,  revolt  of,  537

Jeboram  (of  Judah),  70,  82
Jehoshaphat,  76,  77,  80,  81.  125
Jehu,   84,  85,   86,  93,  100,  101,

136

,  tribute  of,  86

Jeremiah  (the  prophet^  47S,  507,

.".17,  534,  535,  544,  628
Jeroboam  II.,  123,  151,  182
JerusaUm,  84,  184,  213,  784,786,

789

besieged  by  Kezin,  158

,  destruction  of,  545,  546

,  fortified  by  Hezekiah,  289


.lerusalem,  Nehemiah  at,  787

,  siege  of,  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar, 536

■, ,  by  Sennacherib,  293

,   temple   of,  284,  511,   539,

785

Jewish  captivity,  the,  627,  629,
637

concepts  of  God,  131,  132

histories,  130

priesthood,  133

prophets,  136

State,  the  new,  785

Jews,  return  of,  to  Jerusalem,
639

submit  to  Sennacherib,  291

.lezebel,  84

Jezreel,  S3

Joash  (of  Judah),  100,  101,  122

Joppa,  288

Joram  (of  Israel),  76,  78,  80,  82,
85

Josiah,  506,  507,  512,  513,  514

.Tosiah's  religious  reforms,  511

Jotham  (of  Judah),  151,  157,  183

Judsea,  812

,  map  of,  286

Judah,  kingdom  of,  76,  77,  100,
101,  236,  279,  475,  506

;  kings  of,  548

. , ,  their  merconaries,  128

,  subjects  of,  126,  127


Kakzi,  22,  23

Kalakh.     See  Calah

Kalda,  the  (or  Aramaeans),  4,  73,

98,  100,  119,  141,  189,196,198.

224,  231,  254,  258,   303,    310,

404,  416

,     Esarhaddon's     campaigns

/    against,  849

refugees,  223

Kaldu,  a,  191
Knminauu  (Comana),  251
'Karduuiash  {or  Babylonia),   98,

141,  197,  227,  259

invaded  by  Tammaritu,  399

Karnak,  gate  at,  771
Karoraama,  statuette   of   Queen,

117
Kashshunadinakhe,  4,  5
Kashta,  210,  211,  212
Kedar,  sheikhs  of,  358,  398,  431,

439,  533
Kelishin,  stele  of,  102,  106
Khabbisha,  715

,  revolt  of,  713

Kliabur,  the,  16


Khaldi,  the,  of  Urartu,  55
Khaldis  (the  XJrartian  god),  59,

60,  106
Khalludush,  227,  299,  304.  436

invades  Karduniash,  303

Khalule,  battle  of,  307

Klialybes,  the,  .~)G

Khalzidipkha,  19

Khamanu,  28

Kharkhar,  243,  328,  356,  357

Kharu  (see    Israel,  Judah,  Am-

mon,  and  Moab),  159
Khatarika,  100.    See  Hadrach
Kliati,  the,  32,  33,  56,  63,  64,  75,

79,  104.  120,  121,  237,239,  240,

368,  375,  376,   779.     See  also

Hittites

,  chariot  of,  36

,  twelve  kings  of,  70,  83

Khindanu,  18,  29.  :!()
Khindaru,  119
Khirki,  15
Khmunu,  161

•,  submission  of,  175

Khninsu(Heracleopolis — Ahnas),

161
Khninsu,  162,  167,  168

,  temple  at,  163

Klishatrita,   677,   678,   679,   681,

682
Khubushkia,  14,   15,   25,  62,  63,

68,  92,  99,  103,  108,  120,  243,

248
Khudun,  23,  24,  25
Khuraban-igaeli,  230,  231,  et  seq,

410,411,416,417,419
Khumban-numena,  226
Khumbau-Khaldash  II.,  367
Kinalua,  91,  111,  149
Kir-hareseth,  or  Ker-Moab  (Ke-

rak),  81
Kirkbi,  15,  22

Kir  of  Moab  {same  as  Kir-hare-
seth), 124
Kirruri,  14,  15
Kisbisim,  city  of,  241
Kissirtu,  23,  24
Kition,    or    Citium    (Amathus),

260,  283
Kouyunjik,  463

,  palace  of,  313

Kui,  the,  63,  64,  71,  86,  90,  121,

148,  244,  258,  259,  310
Kummukh,   16,   26,   33.  66,   121,

146,  252,  270
Kunulua,  38,  39
Kurkh,  monolith  of.  94
Kurkhi,  26

Kush,  254.     See  Ethiopia
Kuta,  98
Kutur-nakhunta,  227,  304,  305


820


INDEX.


Labdutlu,  119

Lachish  (Tell-el  Hesy),  126,  290,

292
Lalati  (or  Lulati),  G4
Laql,  18,  28,  30
Libnali,  82
Libya  (Lubim),  400

,  Greeks  in,  551

,  map  of,  554

Limir-patesi-asaur,  386
Limmi,  the,  194
Litau,  119
Liyan,  22G

Lubarna,  34,  38,  39,  40
Lubarua  It.,  91
Lubdi,  369,  403
Lullume,  22
Lycia,  624

submits  to  Cyprus,  623

Lyeian  city,  625

coin,  779

sarcophagus,  779

tomb,  778

Lycians,  the,  428,  778
Lydia,  330,  428,  446,  602,  613
,  kingdom  of,  337,  339,  388,

391
Lydian  coins,  607,  608

funerary  couch,  605

horsemen,  391

jewellery,  605

ornament  in  the  Louvre,  568

ornaments,  604,  606

Lydians,  580


M

Macedonia,  707

Madyes,  viii,,  471,  474,  480,  525

Magan,  300

Magi,  the  Persian,  586,  589,  593,

594,  595,  7S3
Magnesia  (of  Sipylos),  426
Malamir,  bas-relief  of,  229

,  princes  of,  229

Manasseh  (of  Judah),  368,  474,

754,  477

,  his  cajitivity,  369

Manda,  the,  viii.,  250

Mannai,  the  (the  Minni),  55,  6],

92,  99,  103,  106,  110,  237,  240,

241,  243,  310,  353,  394,  40),  403
,  the,  incursions  of,    under

Eaarhaddon,  353
Mansuati  {or  Mansuate),  100, 125
Mantumibait  (see  Montumib^it),

378
Marathon,  709


Marathon,  battle  of,  709

,  map  of,  708

Mardonius,  715,  722,  723
Marduk  (see  also  Bel-niarduk),  74
Marduk-abal-uzur,  93
Blarduk-balatsu-ikbi     (King     of

Babylon),  97,  98
Jlarduk-belusate,  72,  73
JMarduk-mudammiq  of  Narari,  79
Marduk-nadin-shumu,  72,  73,  74
Marduk-ushezib,  296
Mari  (eee  aim  Benhadad  III.),  102,

122
Mariru,  20
Mashauasha,  the  (JIasyes),  161,

489,  552,  555

,  flight  of  the,  499

Matiate,  26

Mausolus,  statue  of,  778

MaziBos,  coin  of  the  Satrap,  698

,  figure  of,  sii.

Medes.     See  also  Iranians

,  the,  112,  238,  324,  327,  328,

403,   449,   482,   518,   562,  595,

596,  708,  722
,    the,    attacked   by   Senna-
cherib, 277
,  the,  defeat  of,  by  Sargon,

243
Media,  99,  142,  153,  194,  263,  446

,  flora  and  fauna,  453

,  map  of,  141

,  wall  of,  562

Median  Empire,  the,  530,  571

,  fall  of,  590

town,  250

Medic  horseman,  467
Mediterranean,  3S5

reached  by  Assur-nizir-pal,

41

vessels,  300

Megabyzos,  731, 732,  733,  734, 735
Megiddo,  84,  514

,  battle  of,  514,  515

Meles,  341

Melitene,  70,  104,  146

Melukhkha,  300

Memphis,  161,  235,  278,  378,  396,

491,  548,  773,  795,  798,  643,  731,

732,  733

,  captured  by  Pionkhi,  177

,  monuments  at,  800

taken  by  Cambyses,  661

taken  by  Esarhaddou,  373,

376

,  temples  at,  797

Memphite  bas-relief,  504
Menahem,  128,  152,  156,  182

,  homage  of,  151

Menuas,  vi.,  103,  117,  154
,  conquests  of,  104,  el  seq.


Mermnadoj,  the,  341,  388,  523
Meroiiach-baladan,    or    Marduk-

abalidinna  (King  of  Babylon),

216,   225,   254,   258,  274,  296,

299,  303
Mesha  (King  of  Moab),  80,  81

•,  stele  of,  81,  129

Jlesopotamia,  map  of,  29
Messogis,  mountains  of,  522
MO-Turnat  {or  Meturnat),  72,  97
Midas,  330,  332,  336

,  monument  of,  331

Milesians,  fort  of  the,  497
Miletus,  426

,  site  of,  G23

Miliddu,  251,  252

Misi  {or  Misu),  96,  99

Misianda  in  the  North  {see  also

Misu),  238
Mita  (of  Mushki),  243,  259,  270
Mitanni,  368
Mititti,  237,  238,  240,  241,  242,

247
Moab,  80,  124,  100,  213,  253,  542

,  delivered  from  Israel,  81

Moabite  stone,  81,  129
Montumilialt,  385,  396,  491,  492,

493,  504

,  head  of,  3S6

Mugallu  (of  Milid),  370
Mushezib-marduk,  304,  305,  306,

307,  308

,  the,  submit  to  Sargon,  259

Mushku  (or  Mushki),  the,  16,  56,

258,  259,  520
Mutton  I.,  280
Mutton  II.  (or  Mattan),  188,  189,

281
Muzazir,  vi.,  59,  92,  103,  248
Muzri,  90,  93

,  tribute  of,  89

Mycale,  723

N

Naamau,  82

Nabo-bel-shumi,  434

Nabonazir  (or  Nabunazir),  King

of  Babylon,  141,  190
Nabonidus,  566,  567,   600,   601,

602,  616,  624,  626

,  unpopularity  of,  633

Nabopolassar      (Nabu-bal-uzur),

483.  486,  516,  561,  565
Nabosliumishkun,  5
Nabu-baliddin,  5,  42,  72,  141
Nagitu,  303
Nahr-el-Kelb,  374

,  mouth  of,  373

,  stele  of,  374


INDEX.


821


Nahum,  the  prophet,   400,  470

471
Nalri,  6,  21,  22,  42,  66,  67,  78
■ (Assar  -  uazir  -  pal's     First

Campaign  in),  15

(Assur-nazir-pal's   Second

Campaign  in),  10

(the    Third   Campaign    of

Assur-nazir-pal  in),  21

(Aseur  -  nazir  -  pal's  Fourth

Campaign  iu),  27

,  the  lanzu  of,  243

,  map  of,  15

Namri,  79,  89,  92,  99,  109,  110,

112,142
Xamroti,  162,  164,  168,  173,  174,

179,  180
Nana,  image  of,  436

.statueof,  416,  434

Naophoros,  statue  of,  663
Napata,  168,  396,  398,  067

,  ruins  of,  107

,  temple  of  Amon   at,   109,

170
Nappigi,  67
Ndr-marratmn,  the,  224

,  map  of,  300

,  the  fleet  of  Sennacherib  on,

301
Naram-sin,  vi.

,  bas-relief  of,  228

Naucratis,  497,  647,  648,  649,  790

,  plan  of,  647

Nebuchadrezzar  (Nebuchad-
nezzar), 516,  530,  541,  514,
558,  567

and  Media,  519

,  besieges  Jerusalem,  536

,  stele  of,  543

Nebuchadrezzar    III.,   676,    677

680
Necho,  379,  380,  396,  530,  534,

537
Neeho  II.,  512,  515

invades  Syria,  513

— — ,  scarab  of,  515
Nectanebo  I.  (Nakht  har-habit),
755,  757,  770,  771

,  head  of,  761

,  temple  of,  769

Nectanebo  II.,  704,  767,  769,  771,
772

,  naos  of,  770,  772

,  revolt  of,  761

Negub  (tunnel  of),  49
Nehemiah,  786

at  Jerusalem,  787

Nephorites,  751,  753,  770
Nergal-sharuzur,  601
Nergal-ushezib,  304
,  in  battle,  305


Nile,  view  on  the,  801
Nineveh,  94,  194,  222,  260,  300:
481,  686,  780

,  attacked  by  Cyaxares,  467

,  destruction  of,  485

,  fosse  at,  469

,  map  of,  408

. ,  mounds  of,  310

Ninip  (patron  of  Calab),  45
Ninip-kudurusur,  5
Nirbu,  20,  21,-43,  108
Nisaean  horses,  454
Nisaya,  450
Nishpi,  23    '
Nisibis,  95

Nomes,  the  seven,  166
Nubians,  the  (Put),  400
Nummi  {or  Nimmi),  14
Nurramman  (sheikh  of  Dagara),
22,  23,  26

O

Obelisk  (Black).     -See  Black
Obelisks  at  Eome,  541,  551
Ochus  (or  Artaxerses  III.),  763,
704,766,772,781,807,808

,  conquest  of  Egypt  by,  707

Omri,  83,  129

(fall  of  tbe  house  of),  So

Orontes,  35

Osiris  (recumbent),  641

Osorkon  I.,  160, 102

,  statuette  of,  158

Osorkon  II.,  100,  102,  104
Osorkon  III.,  166,  ISO
Oxyrrhynohos,  ruins  of,  173,  174


Pakruru,  491

Palestine,  263

Panopolis,  games  at.  802

Paripa  (or  Farina),  66

Parsua  (Parsuash),  89, 92,  99, 108,

242
PasargaiiE.  the.  455,  591, 736,  749

(city),  459

Patina,  the,  34,  35,  63,  04.  60,  70,

78,91,93,110

,  the,  gods  of,  37

,  the,  in  capt'.vity,  100

,  submission  of.  39

,  the,  tribute  from,  71

Pefzaabastit,  167,  176,  ISO
Pekah,  156.  158,  182,  186
Pelusium,  659

,  battle  of,  601

,  Sennacherib's   disaster  at,

294


Persepolis,  686,  736

,  necropolis  of,  591

,  propyliea  of,  740

,  ruins  of,  739

,  staircase  at,  741

Persia,  456,  613,  750

,  relations  with  Greece,  695

,  scene  in,  457

Persian,  a,  459.    See  also  Iranian

a,  from   a  sarcophagus  at

Sidon,  569

archer,  458

court  etiquette,  742,  743

empire,  decline  of,  805

,  map  of  the,  775

,reconstruction  of,  under

Ochus,  773

financial  system,  691

foot-soldiers,  466

government,  690

Gulf,  the,  223,  296

,  fleets  on,  299

intaglio,  322

king,  621

main  roads,  689

realm,  map  of  the,  455

sculpture,  741

Persians,  the,  455,  708,  776
Petubastis,  King,  165,  166
Pharuabazus,  756,  757

,  coin  of,  756

Philje,  769

,  island  of,  641

Philip  of  Macedou,  807
Philistines,  the,  101, 181, 180, 190,
212,  217,  252,  253,  310,  542,  789
Phoenicia,  70,  99,  376

. ,  cities  of,  35,  41,  150,  186

■ ,  northern,  233

,  revolt  of,  under  Ochus,  765

Phcenician  alijhabet,  129
bowl  with  Egyptian  decora-
tion, 115

fleet,  727

galley.  707

intaglio,  belonging  to  M.  do

Eouge',  220

language,  784

Phoenicians,  the,  375,  439,  514,

796
Phraortes  (Fravartish),  446,  454,

459,  464,  465
Phrygian  gods,  332-335
Phrygians,  120,  331,  338
Pioukhi,  172,  210

captures  Memphis,  177

invades  Middle  Egypt,  173

Pitru  (Pethor),  67
Plataea,  551,  723,  725

,  map  of,  724

Polyorates,  695


822


IXDKX.


PolyorateB,  fleet  of,  656,  6o7
Priene,  site  of,  523
Psammetichus  I.,  3S6,  387,  488,

492,  495,  498

,  buildings  of,  501

,  revolt  of,  425

statue  of,  425

,  Syrian  policy  of,  505

Psammetichus  II.,  537.  539,  541 ,

790
Psammetichus  III.,  661

,  hcail  of,  659

Psarauti,  209,  233
Pteria,  338,  344,  527,  529

,  ruins  of,  526

Pukuclu(orPuriudu),  Ihe(Pekod),

119,  101,  230,256,  306,416
Pal  (or  PuUi).  See  Tiglath-pileser

III.,  113
Pygmalion,  280
Pyramid,  tlie  step,  799,  800
Pyramids,  the,  SOO


Qarqar,  70,  75,  234
,  battle  of.  71,  101


K

Kabshakeh,  the,  of  2  Kings  xviii.

17,  290
,    under    Esarhaddon    and

Assur-bani-pal,  385
Ramman-nirari  II.,  3
Ramman-nirari  III,  4, 98, 10 1 , 1 1 9
Ramoth  (Gilead),  77,  122
Eaphia,  246,  371,  372

,  battle  of,  234

Razappa.     See  Rezeph

Red  i^ca,  the,  531

Rezeph  (Razappa),  194

Reziu  II.  (or  Rezou),  152,  156,

158,  188

,  fall  of,  190

,  homage  of,  151

Rowandiz,  stele  of  (see  also  Stele

of  Kilishin),  103
Rubuu,  tlie,  119
Rusas  I.,  237,  240,  241,  243
Rusas  II.,  vi.,  369

,  overthrow  of,  247

Rusas  in.,  412
Ruua,  the,  119


Sabaco  (Shabaka),  212,  246,  252,

379
,  cartouche  of,  278


Sacae.    See  Sakse
Sailyattes,  388,  889,  390
Sais,  378,  790

.  ruins  of,  505

Saka),  the,  622,  626,  708,  722,  774

Salamis,  719,  720,  721

Samalla,  34,  6.3,64,  66,  70,  111,

121,  147,  150

,  gods  of,  38

Samaria,  77,  82, 151,  214,  233, 812

,  Egyptian  faction  in,  182

,  fall  of,  216

,  revolt  of,  under  Hosea,  213

Samsi-ramman    IV.,  94,    97,   98,

103,  194

,  monolith  of.  97

Sardanapalus,  447,  780

Sardes  (Sardis),   337,   339,  341,

426,  603,  609,  704,  706,  722

,  taking  of,  617

,  view  of,  339

Sardis.    See  Sardes

Sargoii  of  Assyria,  216.  221,  ef  seq.

,  bas-relief  of,  217

,  death  of,  271

defeats  the  Medes,  243

,  glass  vessel  bearing  name

of,  218

stele  of,  at  Kition,  260

Sargon's    conquest   of   Babylon,

257
Sargonids,  the,  222
Satraps,  coins  of,  777,  784
Satrapies,  the,  08S,  6)S9

,  map  of  the,  687

Scythia,  Darius  invades,  701
Scythian,  a  young,  571

invasion,  the,  473

soldiers,  475

Scythians,  the,  250,  342,  343,  350,

352,  353,  .354,  471,  482,  506
,  the,  driven  back  by  Cyax-

ares,  481
,    the,  incursions   of    under

Esarhaddon,  353

tending  their  wounded,  473

Secudiauus     (Sogdiauus),     746,

747
Sennacherib  (Sin-akhe-irb.i),  271,

318,  et  seq.

,  bas-relief  of,  311

besieges  Jerusalem,  293

,  buildings  of,  314  /

,  head  of,  319

impression  of   seal    of  on

clay,  320

invades  Elara,  304

,  Jews  submit  to,  291

,  murder  of,  345

Sennacherib's  disaster  at   Pelu-

sium,  294


Sennacherib's  expedition  against

Elaiu,  290
Scpharvaim  (or  Sibraim),  212, 294
Shabaka.    See  Sabaco
Shabaku.    See  Sabaco
ShabaraiD.     See  Sepharvaim
Sh.abitoku,  279,  288,  300
Shadikanni,  16,  17
Shalmane.ser  III.  (known  also  as

Shalmaneser  II.),  51,   52,   61

68,  194,  218
— —  building  works  of,  93

campaigns  of,  53,  et  seq.

,  last  campaigns  of,  91

in  Syria,  78

Shalmaneser  III.  in  Urartu,  61

in  Van,  63

,  war  against  Babylon,  73

Shalmaueser  IV.,  108,  123

,  campaigns  in  Urartu,  109

Shalmaneser    V.    (Ululai).    113.

209,216,225
Shamasherib.  717
Shamash-niudamuiiq,  5
Shamash-shumukin,  378, 380,  381

383,  414,  416,  423,  492
Shapalulunie,  64,  60
Shapenuapit  II.,  490,  492,  493
Sharduris  I.,  King  of  Urartu,  62
Sliarduris  II.  {or  Seduri),  90,  92,

103,  140,  140,  146,  154
Sharduris  III ,  119,  120,  412
Sharezer,  346,  347,  348
Sheshbazzar,  639
Sheshonq  II.,  164
Shianu  (Sin)  or  Sianu,  70,  71
Shilanimshukamuna,  5
Shilkhak-iushushinak,    brick   of,

227
Shugnnia,  prisoners  from,  63
Shupria.  21,  360,  369,  370
Shutruk-nakhunta  I.,  227,  228
Shutruk-nakhunta  II.,  255,  299
Siamun,  sphinx  of,  162
Sidon  (see  also  Tyre),  86,  87,  273,

282,  287,  351,  352

,  destruction  of,  765

Siloam,  Hebrew   inscription    of,

157
Silphium,  554

,  weigliing.  555

Simasbshikhu  (or  Simbarshiku),

4,  5
Simbarshikhu.      See    Simasbshi-
khu
Sinai,  desert  of,  371
Sin-shar-ishkun,  482,  483
Sion,  Mount,  476
Sippara,  257
Smerdis,  655,  656
(pseudo,  Gaumata),  670,  674


INDEX.


823


Hparta,  717,  723,  724
Spartans,  752
Sukhi,  28,  30,  44,  93

,  country  of,  93

Sumeriana,  196

Suru,  18

Susa,  vi.,  22G.  519,  701,  781,  813

.  Apadana  of,  743

,  capital  from,  738

,  destruction  of,  435

,  gods  carried  off  from,  435

,  kings  of,  227

,  tumulus  of,  437

Syria,  6,  34,  99.  209.  263,   384,
486

,  coalition  against,  417

.  conquest  of,  by  Alexander,

811

, invaded  by  Necbo  XL,  513

,  inicasion  of,  under  TacliGs,

759

,  map  of,  33

(Northern),  41, 121. 149, 194,

240

,  revolt  of.  233

,  Tiglath-pileser  Ill.'s  cam-
paigns in,  188

Syrian  armies,  37

arts,  37

religions,  37

shipwrights,  300

states,  779

and  civilisation,  35

Syrians,  the  white,  3.S8,  342,  344,
388,  616


Tabal,  the,  56.  88,  120,  237,  239,

251,  2G3,   271,   370,   387,   392,

473,  520
Tachos,  75S,  759,  760,  761,  762,

769
Tofoakhti,  172,  179,  21o
Tafnakhti's  offerings,  181
Taharqa    (Tirhakah),    360,   361

368,  372,  375,  380,  396,  490

. and  his  queen,  361

,  buildings  of,  in   Ethiopia

365

bronze  statuette  of,  323

,  column  of,  at  Karnak,  363

,  head  of,  366

■ ,  second  defeat  of,  385

Takeloti  II.,  164,  165
Tammaritu,  412,  420,  434

invades  Karduniash,  390

Tanualamanu,  362,  396,  491
,  bas-relief  of,  397


Tanuatamanu  reconquers  Egypt,

397
"  Tarshish,  ship  of,"  80
Tartan,    the,     90;    of    2    Kings
xviii.  17,  292  ;  of  Isaiah  xx.  1.
253;  under   Esarhaddon,   384,
385
Teiria,  338

Teisbas  (Urartian  god),  60
Tela  or  Tila  (in  Nirbu),  15,  20
Teutramu,  166

Theban  queen,  statue  of  a,  491
Thebes,  137, 168, 235.  641. 802,803

pillaged  by  the  Assyrians,400

,  principality  of,  163

Thermopylae,  719
Thracia  (or  Thrace),  707
Thracians,  the,  328
Tiglath-pileser  II.,  3
Tiglath-pileser  III.  (or  Tul),  112,
117,  et  seq.,  128, 193.  197,  203

,  campaigns  in  Karduniash

and  Media,  141

,  campaigns  against  Ukinzir,

191

in  his  chariot,  152

in  Syria,  188

takes  Babylon,  192

Tila.     See  Tela

TiUuli,  43

Tirhakah.     See  Taharqa

Tiummau,  404,  40.3,  408,  409, 410,

412,  413,  433
Toprah-Kaleh,  57,  58
Treres,  the,  343,  344
Tukulti-ninip,  19
Tukulti-ninip  II.,  6
Tul-Abni,  72
Tul-Barsip  (capital  of  Bit-Adini),

31,  66.  67,  70,  75,  300
Tulgarimme,  251,  252
Tulllz,  406

,  battle    of,    407,    409,   411,

415
Turat,  quarries  of,  88
Tushkhau,  20,  27,  43,  94,  95
Tyre,  86,  87,  279,  368,  542,  543,
1       549,  601,  812

,  map  of,  283

,  ruin  of  its  kingdom,  289

,  the  present,  811

,  trade  of,  281

Tyrseni,  the,  336,  338


UUusunu,  241,  243,  248
Umman-minann,  305,  306,  307
Unki,    38,    111,    121,    149,    156,

198
Urartian  empire,  close  of,  249

stele,  109

Urartu,  or  Kingdom  of  Van
(Armenia),  52,  54,  61,  66,  79,
90,  91,  93,  96.  112,  149,  1.33,
237,  203,  369,  394,  521,  777

,  Assyrian  conquest  of,  155

, invasion  of,  144

,  civilisation  of,  57

,  expansion  of,  121

,  growth  of,  103

in  Syria,  143

,  map  of,  55

,  Shalmaneser  III.  iu.  61

,    Shalmaneser     IV.,     cam-
paigns in,  109

,  town  in,  248

,  view  of,  145

Urtaku,  399,  408

Urumiah,  Lake  (Lower  Sea  of
Nairi),  54,  55,  69,  96,  103,  108,
109
Urzana,  248
Usanata,  71
Ushanat  (Uznu),  70
Uzziah  (see  Azariah),  183


U

Uate,  439,  440
Ukiuzir.  190,  192
,  Tiglath-pileser    III.,  cam-
paigns against,  191


Van,  Lake  (Upper  Sea  of  Xaiii),

54,  05,  67

,  gods  of,  65

Van  (or  Dhuspas),  57,  106,  107,

369

,  citadel  of,  155

,  view  of,  153

Vatican,  lion  of  the,  773


X

Xerxes    I.   (Khshayarsha),   715,
716,  727,  744,  782

,  propylaea  of,  741

Xerxes  II.,  746,  747


Zab,  the  lesser  (Zab  Shupalu),  25,
119

.  the  greater  (Zabu  Ilu),  12,

13,48
Zamru.     See  Amika
Zamua,  22,  25,  26


824


INDEX.


Zamua,  map  of,  23
Zechariah  (the  prophet),  785
Zedekiah  (Mattaniah)  of  Judah,

537,  539,  544.  545
Zend-Avesta.     See  Avesta
Zephaniah  (tlie  prophet),  478
ZeuB  Labraundos  (on  coin),  340


Zikartu,  238,  239,  242,  247
Zinjirli  (or  Sinjirli),  34,  120

,  column  at,  207

,  gates  of,  147

,  plan  of,  147

■,  portico  at,  206

,  Royal  Castle  of,  149


Zinjirli  (m-  Sinjirli),  stele  at,  37  2

374,  375
Zion,  784
Zirtu  (Izirtu),  92
Zoroaster  (Zarathustra),  572,  573,

574,  575,  625


THE    EXD.


PKIKTEO  BY    WILLIA3I  CLOWES  AND  SOKS,  LIMITED,  LONDON  AND  BECCLES.


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


