The Mathnawí of Jalálu'ddín Rūmí, Vol. II (Nicholson) (Jalál al-Dîn Rūmí (R. A. Nicholson, trans.), 1926)
======================================================================
Nicholson's Mathnawi, Vol. 2 (1926): the English translation of Books I–II (E.J.W. Gibb Memorial, New Series IV.2). Completes the pre-1931 set's missing volume; Vols. 5–8 with batch 07. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.20683).

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

CENTRAL

ARCHAEOLOGICAL

LIBRARY

ACCESSION NO. &Q& 85
CALL

DTG.A. 79


No. 8 % 5


5/nitmj


Nic


•' ef<s '

fr** v -** ^-5- fr t '

*


ORIENTAL TEXTS APPROVED
BUT NOT FINANCED BY THE TRUSTEES
AND SOLD

BY MESSRS LUZAC & CO.


The Safar-nama, RawshanaTnW and Sa‘idat-A*ma of
Nisir-i Khuaraw (“Kaviani” Press, Berlin, 1923); h f-
The Zidu ’1-Musifirin of Nisir-i Khusraw (“Kaviatu” Press,

Berlin, 1923). 15** „ ..

The Wajh-i Dio of Nfcit-L Kt.as.aw ("Kaviam” Prs., Berhn.

1424). 4. L
The Silsdatu n-Nasab-i Safawiyya of Shaykh fiusayn ihn
Shaykh Abdil-i ZShicK (“feSnahahr” Press. Berlin, 1343.'



1 E. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL T
SERIES


NEW SERIES, IV. 2



A .k. 7/r


THE MATHNAWI

OF

JALALU’DDI N RUM I

EDITED FROM THE OLDEST MANUSCRIPTS
AVAILABLE: WITH CRITICAL NOTES,
TRANSLATION, © COMMENTARY

BY

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON

LITT.D., LL.D„ F.B.A.

Sit Tfl a WB Frtfynar ^Andie mdtomwlimt

Leilu r f X j "t Ptntibr in Mr Untterrity vf Cambridge


VOLUME II

CONTAINING THE TRANSLATION
OF THE FIRST & SECOND BOOKS



^qi -55L



PRINTED BY THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
FOR THE TRUSTEES OF THE ‘ E- J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL M
AND PUBLISHED BY MESSRS LlIZAC & CO.

46 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON. W.C.


CENTR AT. ^'M \EO LO CiAL


Aoc, ..



(Sail No.


SIT
* S^(

j - * 1 “ *


Mtf-


PJUNTV& IN GREAT HRITAL^


THIS VOLUME
IS ONE OF A SERIES
PUBLISHED BY THE TRUSTEES OF
THE "E. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL”


The funds of this Memorial ate derived from the Interest accruing
from a Sum of money given by the late MRS GIBB of Glasgow, to
perpetuate the Memory of her beloved Son

ELIAS JOHN WILKINSON GIBB


and to promote those researches into the History, Literature \ Philosophy
and Religion of the Turks , Persians and Arabs, to zchick, from ins
Youth upwards, until his premature and deeply lamented Death m his
forty-fifth year , on December 5, 19O1, his life was devoted.


v>lG * uit i-> : T dii


“ These are our works, these works our souls display;
Behold out tcorks when m have passed away**


uu -.jiSli'?,'


v-

£>

8


%

4

0


4


4 I E. J. \\\ GIBB MEMORIAL


ORIGINAL TRUSTEES
[JANE GIBB, tiled November 26, 1904]*

[E. Gv BROWNE, died January 5, 1926],

G. lk STRANGE,

[H- F, AMEDRGZ, died March 17, 1917].

A. G. ELLIS,

R, A. NICHOLSON,

Siii E. DENISON ROSS.

ADDITIONAL TRUSTERS
3 DA W + r-L OGILVY GREGORY, appointed 19*5.
C, A. STOREY, appointed 1926.

II- A. II GIBB, appointed 1726.

CLERK OF THE TRUST

W. L. RAYNES P

90 , REGENT STREET, CAMBRIDGE,

PUBLISHER FOR THE TRUSTERS
MESSRS LUZAC & CO. t

46, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.


“E, J, W. GIBB MEMORIAL” PUBLICATIONS

OLD SERIES. Us works, 39 published volumes.)

I. B&bur-nama (Turki text, fac-similc), ed, Beveridge,
1905. Out of print.

II. History of Taharist&n of Ibn Isfandiyar, abridged transl.
Browne, 1905- 8 j.

III, 1-5. History of Rasdli dynasty of Yatnan bval-KhaZ'
raji ; 1 , 3 transl. of Sir J ames Red house; 1907-8,7f, each j
3, Annotations by the same, 1908, cr.; 4, 5, Arabic text
ed. Muhammad 'Asal, 1908-1913, 81. each.

IV. Otnayyads and ‘Abbasids, transl. Margoliouth from the
Arab ic of G. ZaidK 1907, 51. Out of print.

V. Travels of Ibn Jubayr, Arabic text, ed.de Goeje, 1907,
lor. Out of print.

VI, 1, a. 3,5,6, 7. Yaqiit’s Diet, of learned men {Irshadu-'l-
Arib), Arabic text, ed. Margoliouth, 1998-1926; 20r.,
1 2J., tor., ($*., 15*., r 51. respectively. Y0L4 in preparation.

VII, 1,5,6. Tajaribu’l-U mam of Miskawayhi (Arabic text,
fac-stmile), cd. le Strange and others, 1909-1917, 71.
each yoL

VIII. Marzuban-nama (Persian text),ed. Mirza Muhammad,

1909, rat. Out of print.

IX. Textes Uo u rod its (French and Persian), by Iluart and
Rizi Tevfiq, 1909, tor.

X. Mu'jam, an old Persian system of prosody, by Shams-b
Qays. ed. Mirzi Muhammad, 1909, 15*. Out of print.

XI, 1, a. Chahar Maqala; t, Persian text, ed, and annotated
by Mirzi Muhammad, 1910. izs. Out of print. 2, English
transl. and notes by Browne, 1931, 15J.

XII. Introduction a I’Histoire des Mongols, by Blochet,

1910, ior.

XIII. D iwS n of H assan b. Thabit (Arabic tex t), cd. H i rschfdd,
1910, js. 6 d,

XIV, 1, 2. Ta’rilih-i-Gtutfda of Hamdu’llah Mustswfi;
i, Persian text, facsimile, 1911, 15#. Out of print,
z. Abridged translation and Indices by Browne and
Nicholson, 1913, tor.

XV. Nuqtatu'l-Xif (History of the Babis) by Mirzi Jani
(Persian text), ed. Browne, 1911, 12s.


XVI, 1,2,3. TaTfkh-i-Jahan-gushay of Juwa\m p Persian text,
ed. Mined Muhammad; i* Mongols, 1913* 15*. Out of
print. 2, KhwarazmshAhs* 1917+ 15*.; 3, Assassins, in
preparation,

XVII. Kashful-Mahj'ub (Sufi doctrine), transl. Nicholson,
1911,15*. Out Offprint.

X'VIII, 2 (all hitherto published), JAmPiTt-TawaHkh of Rashf--
dukJ-Din Fadlti'llAh (Persian text), ed P and annotated
by Blochet, 1912, 15s.

XIX. Kitabu'I-Wulat of aUKindf (Arabic text), ed. Guest*

1912, 13*.

XX, Kitabu'FAnsab of as-Sam'dni (Arabic text, fac-simile),

1913, 20*. Out of print,

XXI. Diwans of L Armr b* at Ttifayl and 'Abid b* al-Abras
(Arabic text and transl„ by Sir Charles ]. Lyall), 1913: 1 2*.

XXJL Kitabu l-Luma' (Arabic text), ed. Nicholson, 1914, 15*.

XXIII, i, 2, Nuzhatu-'l-Qulub of Hamdu’llah Mustawfi;
1* Persian text* ed. le Strange, 1915* 8*.; 2* English
transL 3 e Strange, 1918, 8s,

XXIV, Sbamsu'I- fc Ulum of NashwAn aUHimyart, extracts from
the Arabic text with German Introduction and Notes by
b Aximu h d-Din Ahmad* 1916* 5*.

[XXV. Diwans of at-Tufayl k* 4 Awf and a;-TinmmAh b*
Hakim (Arabic text}* ed. Krenkow, in the Press.]

NEW SERIES

L FArs-namaof Jbnul-Ealkh^ Persian texted, le Strange
and Nicholson* 1921* 20*.

II. Rahatu ^-§udiur (History of Saljuqs) of ar-RAwandi,
Persian text, ed- Muhammad Iqbal* 1921* 47*. bd,

HI- Indexes to Sir C, J. LyalFs edition of the Mufad-
daiiyat, compiled by A. A. Bevan, 1924, 42*.

IV- MathnawM Malawi of jalilu'ddfn Rumh 1, Persian
text of the First and Second Books* ed. Nicholson, 1925*
20*.; 2, Translation of the First and Second Books,
1926* 20*.

MAzandaran and Astarabad. by H. L. Rabino, with
Maps (in the Press),

Diwan of al-A*sh£, Arabic text with German translation
by R. Geyer (in the Press).


Jaw&mi'u^UHikAyAt of ‘Avvff, a critical study of its
scope, sources and value, by Nizimu’ddin (in the Press).

Turkbtin at the time of the Mongolian Invasion, by
W. Barthold, English Transl., revised by the author, aided
by H, A. R. Gibb (in the Press),

Letters of Rashfdu'd-Djn Fadlullub, abridged Eng Si sh
iransb by Muhammad Shaft*, followed by transl. of
Tanstiq-nima (on Precious stones) by the late Sir A.
Houtum“Schindler (in preparation).

A History of Chemistry in Mediaeval Island, by E,J,
Holmyard*


WORK SUBSIDISED BY THE TRUSTEES

Firdawsu- I-HIkmat of h Ali ibn Rabban al-Tabari, ed.
Muhammad az-Zubayr as-Siddfqi (in the Press).



INTRODUCTION


T il ER F, are complete translations of the MaSJntawf in Turkish 1 ,
Arabic 2 , and Hindustani 3 , but only the first two of the six
Books of the poem have hitherto been made accessible in
their entirety to European readers, though a number of extracts
from Books m-vi are translated in E, H. Whin field's useful
abridgment. While it may seem surprising that a work so celt'
hrated, and one which reflects (however darkly at times) so much
of the highest as well as the lowest in the life and thought of the
Mohammedan world in the later Middle Ages, should still remain
imperfectly known to Western students, I think that this gap in our
knowledge' can at feast be excused. Judged by modem standards,
the Mamntmd is a very long poem: it contains almost as many
verses as the I Had and Odyssey together and about twice as many
as the Diii/m Commedia ; and these comparisons make it appear
shorter than it actually is, since every verse of the Mathttam has
twenty-two syllables, whereas the hexameter may vary from
thirteen to seventeen, and the terza rima, like the Spenserian
stanza, admits only ten or eleven in each verse, so that the Math-
nawi with 25,700 verses is in reality a far more extensive work than
the Faerie Oueene with 33,500. On the Other hand, it is easily-
surpassed in' length by several Persian poems; and the fact that
the Shdhttdma has been translated from beginning to end into
English, French, and Italian answers the question asked by
Georg Rosen—“Who would care to devote a considerable part of
his lifetime to translating thirty or forty thousand Persian distichs
of unequal poetical worth? " The size of the Maiknaxd is not the
chief or the worst obstacle by which its translator is confronted.
He at once finds himself involved in the fundamental difficulty,
from which there is no escape, that if his translation is faithful, it
must he to a large extent unintelligible, and that if he tries to make
it intelligible throughout he must often substitute for the exact
rendering a free and copious paraphrase embodying matter which
properlv belongs to a commentary, though such a method cannot


1 In arox, by Uma'fl AnqiravJ in his commentary emiiled Fdtihu 'l-ubydt
(BiiUq, a.k. 1251 and Constantinople, a.h. 1289). A Turkish verer-tramlution
tw Sulivmait Nnhifi accompanies the Persian text in the B&lAq edition of the
Wathmnd (a.h. 1268). For Nabffi a*h, 1151) see E, J, W. Gibb, History
of Ottoman Poetry, vui, tv, pp. 78-85, where an account 1* pwn of d»e Circum¬
stances which led him to compose Ws version of the Mattmatri- Gibb * descrip¬
tion of it as "a liter#! and line for line rendering ” seems to me to require much

** ! In prose, by Viliuf b. Ahmad al-Mawlawl in his commentary entitled flf-
Man/iqj (Csiro. A-H. 1289). . . .

1 I do not think that a complete prose translation in Hindustani has vet
appeared, but there is one in verse, entitled Pirdhim-i Yiirufl, by Muhammad
Ytisuf 'Alt Shih (Lucknow, 1889; C'awnpon, 1897).


XIV


INTRODUCTION


satisfy any one who wants to understand the text and know what
sense or senses it is capable of bearing. Therefore a complete
version of the Mathnawi means, for scientific purposes, a faithful
translation supplemented by a full commentary; and considering
the scarcity of competent Persian scholars in Europe, no one need
wonder that the double task has not yet been accomplished. The
most important European translations are enumerated in the
following list, which shows incidentally that the greater part of the
work already done stands to the credit of this country,

J - Mesneiei oder Doppelverse ties Scheich Metoldnd Dscheldl-ed-
dm Rumi, aus dem Persischen uberlragen von Georg Rosen,
{Leipzig, 1849.J

Being w ritten in rhymed verse, this excellent version of about
a third of Book l (vv. 1-1371 in my edition) does not preserve the
literal form of the original, but as a rule the meaning is given
correctly even where misunderstanding would have been pardon¬
able, while the explanatory notes keep the reader in touch with the
mystical background of the poem. The translator has left out a
good deal and in verse-translations of Oriental poetry this is a
merit rather than a fault. His book, which was reprinted in 1913
with an introduction by his son. Dr F. Rosen, should help to
quicken the growing interest of Germany in Persian literature.

%. The Manevi of MevldnS Jeldlu'd-dln Mohammed er-Rfimi,
Book the First, together ti-Uh some account of the life and acts
of the Author, of his ancestors, and of his descendants, illus¬
trated hy a selection of characteristic anecdotes, as collected bv
their historical, Mevlana ShemstT d-dln Ahmed ei-Efiakl el-
‘Arift. Translated and the poetry versified Ay James W. Red-
house , {London, 1881.)

Sir James Redhouse's translation of Book 1 is much less accurate
than Rosen’s. Its peculiarities cause us to speculate why this
eminent Turkish scholar, who was not quite at home in Persian
mysticism, should have embarked upon a task so formidable; or,
how, with the sagacity to perceive and the candour to confess
his jack of skill in versifying, he allowed himself to be misled by*
the idea that any kind of verse is superior to prose as a medium for
the translation of poetry. The excerpts from AfljUd’s Mandaibu
’l-Arif in, though legendary in character, supplv valuable informs
lion concerning the poet and the circle of Stiffs in which he lived?

3 - Masnavi-i Ma’navi, the Spiritual Cotip/ets of Mauldttd
foldin'd-din Muhammad Riimi, translated and abridged bv
E.H. Wkinfield. (London, 1887; 2nd ed. t tfk>8.)

All students of the Mathnawi owe gratitude to Wh in field, who
was the first to analyse its contents and illustrate their rich quality
by his prose translation of selected passages from the six Books


INTRODUCTION


XV


amounting to something like 3500 verses altogether. His wide and
sympathetic knowledge of Oriental mysticism* already exhibited
in the notes to his edition and translation of the Guhhan 4 Rdz
(r8So)* makes him an admirable guide through the ma^es of the
MaUmaudy and in general his work deserves the high esteem which
it enjoys. I do not wish to criticise it in detail and will only
remark that the apparent simplicity of the Persian language is a
snare for translators -

3 * a T

J 14 jl * wvfiU jjji iyjJ J —- il >1

4. The Masnavl by J&l&ltfd-dlh iiftmij Book II translated for the
first time from the Persian into prose t s :cifh a Commentary, by
C m E. Wilson. (London, 1910.)

This is c, a plain literal prose translation* 11 based on sound prin¬
ciples and carefully executed. Comparing it with my ow n version
of the Second Book* I found that as similar methods produce
similar results the two versions often agreed almost word for word*
and that where they differed, the point at issue was usually one for
discussion rather than correction. My obligations to Professor
Wilson are not confined to the turns of phrase which I have
borrowed from him now and then: every translator, and particularly*
the translator of Such a poem as the Matfmaia, must feel the
advantage of being able to consult the work of a trustworthy
predecessor who has gone step by step over the same ground.

The present translation, in which tne numeration of the verses
corresponds with that of the text of my edition, is intended primarily
as an aid to students of Persian ; it is therefore as exact and faithful
as 1 can make it* but it does not attempt to convey the inner as
distinguished from the outer meaning: that is to say* it gives the
literal sense of the words translated without explaining either their
metaphorical or their mystical sense 1 . While these latter senses
have sometimes been indicated by words in brackets 2 * I have on
the whole adhered to the principle that translation is one thing*
interpretation another, and that correct interpretation depends on
correct translation* just as the most fertile source of misinterpreta¬
tion is inability or neglect to translate correctly. It follows that a
translation thus limited in scope will contain a great number of
passages which do not explain themselves and cannot be fully
ugleratood without a commentary, I should have preferred* as

1 Some day I hope to try in, a volume of elected passage* whether a
translator of the Maihmt may not merit ihe praise which Jerome bestowed
on Hilarv: L ' quasi captives smiufl in *uam linguam victoria jure transposmi-”

1 Frequency too the tersenMl of the original demands expansion In order to
bring out even the literal Benge. The brackets in this version mark otT what
belong* to a Strict rendering of the original text from whflT hw been added for
the purpose of explanation, I hive not, however, been bC pedantic as always to
indicate (he insertion of certain auxiliary parti of speech which an Engh&h
translate r would naturally use, though they are omitted 111 the Persian text.


XVI


INTRODUCTION


a matter of practical convenience p to include the commentary in
the same volume as the translation, but on the other hand I saw
grave objections to annotating part of the poem before the whole
had been studied and translated, u The MathmmH*' it has been
said, 44 is easier than easy tej the ignorant, hut harder than hard to
the wise 1 ' 1 ; and I confess that for me there are still many difficulties,
which may perhaps be removed by further study of the poem itself,
of works historically connected with it, and of relevant Persian and
Arabic literature. The Oriental commentaries, with all their
shortcomings, give much help. Amongst those used in preparing
this translation I have profited most by mtFdtihu 'l-abydf (Turkish)
of Isma'il Anqiravi and the Sharn-i Mathnatd~yt Matrfdttrf-yi
Rum { Persian) of Wall Mohammad AkbartibddI; I have also con¬
sulted the Mukdshafdt-i Radmvi ( Persian) of Muhammad Ridi, the
Sharh'i Malhnaud (Persian) of Muhammad *Abdu l-'AIi, who is
better known by his title of Bahru VUlum, fil-Mtinhaj al-qaui
(Arabic) of Yusuf b. Ahmad ai-Mawlawi, and for Rook t the
Shtirh-i A lathnmd-yi Sharif (Turkish) of H Abidin Pasha.

As stated in the Introduction to the first volume, no finality is
claimed for this edition. Where the text is uncertain, the transla¬
tion can only be provisional; but even where we fed confidence in
the text, cases occur in which every translator of the Mathnmii can
but offer the rendering that scons to him possible or probable,
and take comfort in the reflection that est quadam procure terms si
non ikitur ultra. Some passages, 1 believe, will always remain
mysterious, since the key to them has been lost: one knows
that words uttered by a great spiritual teacher may be almost
meaningless outside the group of his intimate friends and disciples,
or may become so by lapse of time. The loose and rambling structure
of the poem leads to other perplexities. When our author gives no
sign whether he is speaking in his own person or by the voice of
one of his innumerable puppets—celestial, infernal, human, or
animal who talk just like himself; when he mingles his comments
with their discourse and glides imperceptibly from the narrative
into the exposition; when he leaves tis in doubt as to whom he is
addressing or what he is describing — the translator is driven to
conjecture, and on occasion must leap in the dark. Hence a trans¬
lation of the Mathnm&ty however careful it may be, is necessarily
tentative in some rppects and capable of being improved, though
the process takes time. The corrections which I look fonvarJlo
publishing at a later stage, when the Commentary' on this volume
appears, are likely to be fewer, but also more important, than those
contained in the long list of textual corrections (voL J, pp, 21-28),
three-fourths of which any reader could have made for himself. '

1 ‘DM /jU j ji

ObU j* * JiU jj J\


INTRODUCTION


xvii

Although the question of literary form does not enter very
largely into a version so literal as this, 1 have attempted to pre¬
serve the idiomatic flavour of the original 1 - which can he more
hrmlv caught and retained in a prose translation-—and also its
variety of style, ranging from a plain semi-colloquial manner of
expression to a noble and elevated diction like that employed by
the author in his mystical odes. On certain topics he is too out¬
spoken for our taste and many pages are disfigured by anecdotes
worthy of an Apuleius or Petronius but scarcely fit to be trans¬
lated into the language nf these writers. To omit them, however,
would defeat the object I have in view, namely, to provide a
complete version of the work which, notwithstanding the author's
passion for self-effacement, reveals the breadth and depth of his
genius most adequately. It is important, for our comprehension of
him, to know that he could tell ribald stories in the easy tone of a
man of the world, and that the contrast often drawn between him
and Sa l di takes no account of some marked features which the
authors of the Mothnawi and the Gulistdn possess in common.

This is a translation for students of the text, but I venture
to hope that it may attract others neither acquainted with
Persian nor specially concerned with Sufism, To those interested
in the history of religion, morals, and culture, Let fables and folk-
lore t in divinity, philosophy, medicine, astrology and other
branches of mediaeval learning, in Eastern poetry and life and
manners and human nature, the Mathnmd should not be a sealed
book, even if it cannot always be an open one.

The prose headings inserted at short intervals throughout the
poem, transliterated words w r ith the exception of proper names,
and all direct quotations from the Qur'an except such as occur in
the headings are printed in italics, A few foot-notes have been
added, some of them for the benefit of the general reader.

1 It may be said ihai this aim is inconsistent with ihe iranslaTor'a duty to
write his own language idiomatically. That is true, and no compromise wdl unite
the contraries, bet 3 have done my" best to combine them.

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON

CAMBRIDGE,

December

|

POSTSCRIPT

It would not be fitting that this volume, the first to appear in the
4 i E. J. W. Gibb Memorial” Series since the death of Professor
E* G. Browne, should leave my hands without giving some ex¬
pression to the great sorrow felt by the Trustees at the loss of the
Scholar w r ho presided over the foundation oi the Trust, took the


XVlli


INTRODUCTION


chief pari in organising and administering it, and for more than
twenty years so fully enjoyed the confidence and affection of his
surviving col leagues. Amongst the works publish ed by the Trustees
or now in course of publication there are few that were not in¬
spired > suggested, supervised p or in some way influenced by him;
and his colleagues can never forget how much they have owed to
his energy, enthusiasm, and experience—energy sustained by
patience, enthusiasm controlled by judgement , experience as ready
to acknowledge any mistake of his own as to excuse it in others.
The Trustees hope eventually to include in the Series yet another
book from his pen, the Catalogue* which he has left almost
complete, of his fine collection of Arabic* Persian, and Turkish
manuscripts.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

BOOK I


PAGE

Preface (in prose} 3

Proem - 5

The King and the Handmaiden . . , 6-17

The Greengrocer and the Parrot , 17-21

The Jewish King whose Vizier contrived a plot against the

Christians , * * 21-41

The Caliph and Layla . 35

The description of Mohammed in the Gospel .... 41

Another Jewish King who persecuted the Christians, , . 42 -30

The punishment indicted on a man who scoffed at Mohammed 46

The Wind which destroyed the people of *Ad . 48

The Lion and the Beasts of chase. , * , 50^76

Azrael and the man ivho took refuge with Solomon Ir 34

Solomon and the Hoopoe * 67

The Fall of Adam „ 69

The Holy War against the Flesh * . . . , 76

The Caliph s Umar and the Ambassador , 77-85

How Adam acknowledged, whde Iblis denied, responsibility for

M St

u And He is with you, wheresoever ye be hl + , , + + S3

"‘Lei him who desires to sit with God m with the Sufis' 1 , 84

The Merchant and the Parrot which gave him a message to the

parrots of India .' , , 85-101

The Spiritual Birds that are Divine Intelligences + 87

Commentary on a saying of FaHdu'ddm 'Atfar * 88

The respect paid to Moses by Pharaoh p s magicians > . . 89

Commentary on a saying of Sana 7 , and a Discourse on a
Tradition of the Prophet concerning the jealousy of God . 96

The harmful ness of being honoured by the people * 101

"Whatsoever God wills cometh to pass'* „ 102

The Story of the Harper * 104-121

Explanation of a Tradition of the Prophet concerning Divine

inspiration . . . lofi

A Story of'A'isha and the Prophet . 109-112

Commentary on a verse of Sana*! no

“Take advantage of the coolness of the spring season 11 . * in


XX


CONTENTS


PACE


1*3

1Z 4

129


The Moaning Pillar . + . :I ^

A miracle performed by the Prophet in the presence of Abu Jab I 117

The Prodigal for whom the angels pray . * - ■ ■ 121

The munificent Caliph 122

The Arab of the Desert and his wife « r22-160

False saints * « . * * *

The power of Faith -

Light and colour + - * - - * ■ *

Explanation of the Tradition that women prevail over the wise

man, while the ignorant man prevails over them + - * *32

The mystery of closes and Pharaoh *■*- + ■ *33

" He has lost this life and the life to come 11 - 1 35

The prophet Salih and the people of Thamud , - * - *37

The barrier between the righteous and the wicked . . - 14°

What is meat to the saint is poison to the disciple - l 4 l

The Divine Bounty and those w r ho beg for it » < .

The two kinds of +H poor " . « * 1 5 °

The World's lovers..153


The proverb* 11 If you commit fornication p commit it with a free

womaiii and if you steal, steal a pearl 1 * * K 53

The Grammarian and the Boatman J 55

The Spiritual Guide . l ^°

The Prophet's injunction to "AH . , - . * + ■

The man of Qazwln who wanted to have a lion tattooed on his

shoulder t ^3

The wolf and the fox who went to hunt with the Lion a +164-170
The man who knocked at his friend's door and, on being asked

who he w-as, answered, M *Tis 1 " , 167

Description of Unification. 16&

Noah as the God-man + . i? 0

Why the Sufis who know God are seated in front of kings 171

Joseph and the guest-friend who could find no suitable gift for

him except a minor « 172

Mohammed and the scribe who wTOte down the Quriank

Revelations *,»»»*., + *• *76

RaTam son of B£ + ur * 179

Hirut and Martit ., + , + + + . . a S t

The deaf man and his sick neighbour .****, 183

Iblis the originator of analogical reasoning applied to the Word

of God * * » . « ... * 1S5

Mystical experiences must be kept hidden from the vulgar * 186

The contention between the Greek and Chinese artists , , 189


CONTEXTS


XXI


PAGE

The Vision of Zayd. + 190-201

Luqman and his fellow-servants . *95

The conflagration in Medina in the days of the Caliph 'Umar 201


'All and the infidel who spat in his face . . * aoa-ioS, %t$

1 All and his murderer # 208-214

The self-conceit shown by Adam towards lblis . * + * 211

The unworldUness of the Prophet - . * * - * 2I 4


BOOK II


Preface (in prose) *»-*«"*■-* 221

Proem - + * »■ - * ■ ■ * 222-227

The Caliph "Umar and the man who thought he saw the new
moon .-■*.***>*"

The fool who entreated Jesus to bring some hones to life 229, 245-247
The Stiff who enjoined the sen ant to take care of his ass .230-238
The King and his lost falcon , ,238-241

Shaykh Ahmad son of Khtzniya and his creditors 1 - 241-244

The answer of an ascetic who was warned not to weep, lest he

should become blind . 2 44


The peasant who stroked a lion in the dark , ■ * . 247

The Sufis who sold the traveller’s ass . 248-252

The greedy insolvent . .

Parable for those who say “if” , . . - ■ * l 59

The man who killed his mother because he suspected her of

adulter)' . Z<H

The King and his two slaves . 265-275


The King’s retainers who envied his favourite slave 275-279, 501-303

The falcon amongst the owls.279-282

The thirsty man who threw bricks into the water ... 282

The man who planted a thornbush in the road and delayed to

uproot it.* 284-292

Dhu 1 -Niin and the friends who came to visit him in the mad-

house..

The sagacity of Luqmin.- .296-301

The reverence of Bilqfe for the message of Solomon w hich was
brought to her by the hoopoe •■••••* 3°3

The philosopher who showed disbelief in the Qur’an . . 305

Moses and the shepherd. » . - * • * 3 to-3 1 7

The Amir and the sleeping man into w hose mouth a snake had

crept .. 3 lJS


Xxu


contents


The fool who trusted the bear


PAGE

320-326, 327-32^ 33 1


The blind beggar who said, “I have two blindnesses
Mos« and the worshipper of the golden calf
Galen and t he madman ,

J he cause of a bird's flying and feeding with a bird ihai is not
of its own kind .


Mohammed's visit to the sick Companion 332 p 33338-34^

The gardener who separated three friends in order to chafitfee
them singly *.

Bayard and the Shaykh who said/ 1 I am the Ka'ba
The novice who built a new house
DaJqak and the Sayyid-i Ajall ,

1 he Sainf who rode a cock-horse
The dog and the blind mendicant
The Police inspector and the drunken man
IbHs and Mu^wiya.

The Cadi who wept whilst he was being installed ,

The bitter grief of a man who missed the congregational prayers


323

326

329


33 °
348-355


- ---- (Jittttts

^ sdarni W ”° esc3ptt ^ because his accomplice gave a false


333

33&~337

33 <S

342
342-348

343
345

356-366

3^3
3^5


The Hypocrites and the Mosque of Opposition . ~

The true believer’s stray camel
The four Indians who lost their prayers
The Ghuz2 Turcomans and the two villagers

The sey^onceit and ingratitude shown by the worldly towards
the prophets and saints * J

The old man who complained to the doctor
Jiiy and the child .

" 1 * * -« b- *

The boy who was afraid of an effeminate man
The archer and the horseman
The Arab of the desert and the philosopher
The miracles of Ibrahim son of Adham
The beginning of the gnostic’s illumination


366
367-371, 377

372-377

378


379


38o
38a
383
385

385

386
388,394
389-393


The stranger who reviled the Shaykh ,

The man who declared that God would not punish his sins, and W
bhu ayb s answer to him . . , _ ’

The answer of the Prophet to *AW. who said that he perl
tormed the mual prayer in undean places ,

The mouse and the camel

1 he miracles of a dervish who was accused 0/ ihefi

The garrulous, greedy, and somnolent Stiff, and his reoiv to
the Shaykh who enjoined him to observe moderation ? '


396

399

400
402


4«3


CONTENTS


xxm


PAGE


The nature of intuitive knowledge
John the Baptist and Jesus .
Mute eloquence .

The search for the T ree of Life .


4°7
408
4 IQ
4 s 1


How four persons quarrelled about grapes, which were known
to each of them by a different name,

How Mohammed established unity amongst the Ansar .
Solomon and the birds .

The ducklings that were fostered by a hen +

The miracles wrought by an ascetic in the desert


4V3

4 J 4

4®S-4i7

417

4-S


*


■ BOO*l /


*


*


Ix the Name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful,

'This is the: Hook of the Mathnawi^ which is the roots of the
roots of the roots of the (Mohammedan) Religion in respect of
(its) unveiling the mysteries of attainment (to me Truth) and of
certainty; and which is the greatest science of God anti the
clearest (religious) way of God and the most manifest evidence
of God,

The likeness of the light thereof is as a niche in which is a
candle shining with a radiance brighter than the dawn, It is
the heart's Paradise, having fountains and boughs T one of them
a fountain called Salsabil amongst the travellers on this Path;
and in the view of the possessors of (mystical) stations and
(Divine) graces, it (die Mathnawi) is best as a station and most
excellent a {spiritual) resting-place. Therein the righteous eat
and drink, and thereby the (spiritually) free are gladdened and
rejoiced; and like the Nile of Egypt it is a (pleasant) drink to
them that endure patiently, but a grief to the people of Pharaoh
and the unbelievers, even as God hath said, He lets many be
misted thereby ami He lets many he guided thereby. It is the cure
for (sick) breasts p and the purge ot sorrows, and the expounder
of the Qur'an, and the (source of) abundance of (Divine) gifts s
and the (means of) cleansing (sordid) dispositions; (written) by
the hands of noble righteous scribes who forbid (with the words)
None shall touch it except the purified , Falsehood doth not ap¬
proach it either from before or behind, since God observes it and
watches over it, and fie is the best guardian and He is the most
merciful of them that show mercy . And it hath other titles of
honour which God hath bestowed upon it.

We have confined ourselves to this little (that has been
mentioned), for the little is an index to the much, and a mouthful
(of w ater) is an index to the (quality of the) pool, and a handful
(of wheat) is an index to (serves as a sample of the contents of)
a great threshing-floor (granary).

riaith the feeble slave who hath need of the mercy of God most
High, Muhammad son of Muhammad son of al-Husayn of (the
city of) Balkh may God accept (this offering) from him: “I
have exerted myself to give length to the Poem in Rhymed
Couplets, which comprises strange tales and rare sayings and
excellent discourses and precious indications, and the (religious)
path of the ascetics and the (spiritual) garden of the devotees —-
(at) this being) brief in expression 1 but manifold in meaning—
at the request of my master and stay and support, (who holds)
the place of the spirit in my body, and (who is) the treasure of

1 Literally, "short in respect eF the cDn&midiona (of its phracolopv 1 *"


4 MATHNAWf, BOOK !

my to-day and mv to-morrow,, namely, thy Shaykh, the exempl r
for them that know God and the leader of them that possess
right guidance and certainty, the helper of humankind, the
trusted keeper of (their) hearts and consciences p the charge
deposited by God amongst \ Its creatures* and His choice amongst
His creation, and [the object of) His injunctions to Ilis Prophet
and (of) IIis secrets (imparted} to His chosen one, the key of
the treasuries of the empyrean, the trustee of the riches stored
in the earth, the father of virtues, the Sword (Hiisdm) of the
Truth and Religion, Hasan son of Muhammad son of al-I.ksan,
generally known as I bn Akhi Turk, the Abu Yazid of the time,
the Jiinayd of the age* the entirely veracious son of an entirely
veracious sire and grands ire 1 —may God be well-pleased with
him and with them 1—a native of Urmiya, tracing his descent
to the Sharkh who is honoured for having said, Mn the evening
[ was a Kurd, and in the morning I was an Arab/ May God
sanctify' his soul and the souls of his successors! How goodly
is the ancestor and how goodly the successor!

His is a lineage upon which the sun hath cast its mantle, and
a renown of ancestry before which the stars have dimmed their
beams. Their (his familyV) courty ard hath ever been Fortune’s
cynosure (qibla), whither turn the sons of the (spiritual) rulers,
and Hope’s Ka ba which is circumambulated by deputations of
the suitors for bounty; and may it never cease to be thus, so
long as a star rises and an orient sun appears above the horizon,
to the end that it may be a fastness for the godlv T spiritual,
heavenly , super-celestial* illuminated ones who possess (mystical)
insight, the silent ones w'ho behold, the absent ones who are
present, the kings beneath threadbare garments, the nobles of
the nations, the owners of excellences, the luminaries who
display the (Divine) evidences. Amen, O Lord of all created
beings I And this is a prayer that will not be rejected, for it is
a prayer that includes (in its benefits) all classes of the creation.
Glory' be to God, the Lord of all created beings, and God bless
the best of His creatures, Mohammed, and his kin, the noble,
the pure! t+


1 Literally, Hl a fiddly , tilt soil of 1 fiddiq (who was) the son of the pddiq '


PROEM


5


lx the Name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate.

Listen to the reed how it telb a tale, complaining of separa¬
tions—

Saying* 11 Ever since l was parted from the reed-bed * my
lament hath caused man and woman to moan*

I want a bosom tom bv severance* that I may unfold (to such
a one) the pain of love -desire.

Every one who is left far from his source wishes back the
time when he was united with it*

In every company I uttered my wailful notes, I consorted 5
with the unhappy and with them that rejoice.

Every one became my friend from his own opinion; none
sought out my secrets from within me.

_\[y secret is not far from my plaint, but ear and eye lack the
light (whereby it should he apprehended).

Body is not veiled from soul, nor soul from body, yet none
is permitted to see the soul.

I This noise pf the reed is fire* it is not wind: whoso hath not
this fire* may he be naught!

Tis the fire of Love that is in the reed, ’tis the fervour of 10
Love that is in the wine.

The reed is the comrade of every one who has been parted
from a friend: its strains pierced our hearts 1 .

Who ever saw a poison and antidote like the reed? Who ever
saw a sympathiser and a longing lover like the reed?

The reed tells of the Way full of bbod and recounts stories
of the passion of Majntin.

Only to the senseless is this sense confided: the tongue hath
no customer save the ear.

In our woe the days (of life) have become untimely: our days 13
travel hand in hand "with burning griefs.

If our days are gone, let them go f—Tis no matter. Do Thou
remain, for none is holy as Thou art!

Whoever is not a fish becomes sated with His water; whoever
is without daily bread finds the day long.

None that is raw understands the state of the ripe: therefore
my words must be brief. Farewell!

G son^ burst thy chains and be free! How long wilt tltou be
a bondsman to 3 silver and gold?

If thou pour the sea into a pitcher* how much will it hold? z*

One day's store*

The pitcher, the eye of the covetous, never becomes full:
the oyster-shell is not filled with pearls until it is contented.

Literally ,. 1 ‘ rent our veiU," 1 Literally, « (in) the bond* of."


6


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

(alone) whose garment h rent by a (mighty) love is purged
of covetousness and all defect.

Hail, O Love that hringest us good gain -thou that art the
physician of all our ills,

The remedy of ourpride and vainglory, our Plato and our Galen!

35 Through Love the earthly body soared to the skies: the
mountain began to dance and became nimble.

Love inspired Mount Sinai, O lover, (so that) Sinai (was made)
drunken and Moses fell in a swoon.

W ere I joined (o the lip of one in accord with me, l too, like
the reed, would tell all that may be told;

(But) whoever is parted from one who speaks his language
becomes dumb, though he have a hundred songs.

When the rose is gone and the garden faded, thou wilt hear
no more the nightingale's story*

The Beloved is all and the lover (but) a veil; the Beloved is
living and the lover a dead thing.

When Love hath no care for him, he is left as a bird without
wings. Alas for him then l

How should I have consciousness (of aught) before or be¬
hind when the light of my Beloved is not before me and behind?

I^ve wills that this Word should be shown forth; if the
mirror does not reflect t how is that?

Dost thou know why the mirrnr (of thy soul) reflects nothing?
Because the rust is not cleared from its "face.

35 O my friends, hearken to this tale: in truth it is the very
marrow of our inward state.

The story of the king's falling m hme mth a handmaiden
and buying her.

In olden time there was a king to whom belonged the power
temporal and also the power spiritual.

It chanced that one day he rode with his courtiers to the chase

On the king's highway the king espied a handmaiden: the
soul of the king was enthralled by her.

Forasmuch as the bird, his soul, was fluttering in its cage, he
gave money and bought the handmaiden.

4# After he had bought her and won to his desire, hv Divine
destiny she sickened.

A certain man had an ass but no pack-saddle: {as soon as) he
got a saddle, the wolf carried away his ass.

He had a pitcher, but no water could be obtained: when he
found water, the pitcher broke.

The king gathered the physicians together from left and right
and said to them, "The life of us both is in your hands.

My life is of no account, (but) she is the life of my life J am
in pain and wounded: she is my remedy.


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN


7


Whoever heals her that is my life will bear away with him my n
treasure and pearls, large and small V"

They all answered him, saying, "We will hazard our lives 1
and summon all our intelligence and put it into the common
stock.

Each one of us is the Messiah of a world (of people): in our
hands is a medicine for every pain,”

In their arrogance they did not say., H4 If God will pp * therefore
Gnd showed unto them the weakness of Man*

1 mean (a case in which) omission of the saving clause is (due
to) a hardness of heart ; not the mere saying of these words, for
that is a superficial circumstance.

How many a one has not pronounced the saving clause, and =■ »
yet his soul is in harmony with the soul of it!

The more cures and remedies they applied, the more did die
illness increase* and the need was not fulfilled*

The sick girl 3 became (thin) as a hair* (while) the eyes of the
king flowed with tears of blood, like a river.

By Divine destiny, oxymel produced hile.and nil of almonds
was increasing the dryness.

From (giving) myrohalan constipation resulted, relaxation
ceased; and water fed the flames, like naphtha.

How it became manifest to the kinp that the physicians were unable
to at re the handmaiden 9 and how he tamed his face towards
God and dreamed of a holy man ,

When the king saw r the powerless ness of those physicians, he S5
ran bare-footed to the mosque.

He entered the mosque and advanced to the/mTrrdJj (to pray}:
the praver-carpet was bathed in the king^s tears.

On coming to himself out of the flood of ecstasy (fond) he
opened his lips in goodly praise and laud,

Saying* “O Thou whose least gift is the empire of the world ,
what shall I say, inasmuch as Thou knowest the hidden thing?

O Thou with whom we always take refuge in our need, once
again we have ntissed the way.

But Thou hast Said* 'Albeit I know thy secret, nevertheless^
declare it forthwith in thine outward act/”

When from the depths of his soul he raised a try (of supplica¬
tion), the sea of Bounty began to surge.

Slumber overtook him in the midst of weeping: he dreamed
that an old man appeared

And said, "Good tidings* O king! Thy prayers are granted.

If to-monmv a stranger come for thee, he is from me.

1 Qr r "my jwarb and fflrtl/'

* I*, "we will exert curatives w the utmost/"

* Lite ml ly, +l that slave-girl from sickness/"


8


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When he comes, he is the skilled physician: deem him
veracious, for he is trusty and true.

s* In Ids remedy behold absolute magic, in his temperament
behold the might of God 3 pp

When the promised hour arrived and day broke and the sun,
(rising) from the east, began to burn die stars,

The king was in the belvedere p expecting lo see that which
had been shown mysteriously.

He saw a person excellent and worshipful, a sun amidst a
shadow,

Coming from afar, like the new moon (in slenderness and
radiance): he was non-existent p though existent in the form of
phantasy.

7<j In the spirit phantasy is as naught, (yet) behold a world
(turning) on a phantasy!

Their peace and their war (turn) on a phantasy, and their
pride and their shame spring from a phantasy;

(But) those phantasies which ensnare the saints are the re¬
flexion of the fair ones 1 of the garden of God.

In the countenance of the stranger-guest was appearing that
phantasy which the king beheld in his dream.

The king himself, instead of the chamberlains, went forward
to meet liis guest from the Invisible.

75 Both were seamen who had learned to rwim, the souls of
both were knit together without sewing.

The king said,Thou wert my Beloved (in reality), not she;
hut in this world deed issues from deed.

O thou who art tome (as) Mustafa (Mohammed), while I am
like unto 'Umax -I will gird my loins to do thee service/*

Beseeching the Lord, who is our Helper , to help us to observe self-
control in all circumstances T and explaining the harmful and
pernicious consequences of indiscipline.

Let us implore God to help us to self-control: one who lacks
self-control is deprived qf the grace of the Lord.

The undisciplined man does not maltreat himself alone, but
he sets the whole world on fire.

A table (of food) was coming down from heaven without
headache (trouble) and without selling and buying,

(When) some of* the people of Moses cried disrespectfully
11 Where ss garlic and lentils? pp

(Straightway) the heavenly bread and dishes (of food) were
cutoff: there remained (for all of them) the toil of sowing and
(Labouring with) mattock and scythe.

Again, when Jesus made intercession, God sent food and
bounty (from heaven) on trays,

1 literally, 11 the moon-Iaccd onei. 1 *


1 Literal tv, “ amidst


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN 9

But once more the insolent fellow* omitted to show respect
and, like beggars* snatched away the viands,

(Although) Jesus entreated them* saying, *' This is lasting and sj
will not fail from off the earth.”

To show suspicion and greed at the table of Majesty is
ingratitude.

Because of those impudent wretches 1 who were blinded by
greed, that gate of mercy was closed upon them.

On account of withholding the poor-tax no rain -clouds arise,
and in consequence of fornication the plague spreads in all
directions,

Whatever befalls thee of gloom and sorrow is the result of
irreverence and insolence withal:

Any one behaving with irreverence in the path of the Friend ^
is a brigand who robs men, and he is no man.

Through discipline this Heaven has been filled with light,
and through discipline the angels became immaculate and holy.

By reason of irreverence the sun was eclipsed, and insolence
caused an Wzd'dl® to be turned back from the door.

The meeting of the king with the divine physician whose
coming had been announced to him in a dream.

I le (the king] opened his hands and clasped him to his breast
and received him, like love, into his heart and soul*

And began to kiss his hand and brow and inquire concerning
his home and journey.

(So) with many a question he led him to the dais. ** At last/ 1 95
said he, M I have found a treasure by being patient."

1 le said (also)* " O gift from God and defence against trouble,

(O thou who art) the meaning of 1 Patience is the key of joy 1 !

O thou whose countenance is the answer to every question,
by thee hard knots are loosed without discussion.

Thou interpretest ah that is in our hearts* thou gives! a
helping hand to even - one whose foot is in the mire*

Welcome, O chosen one, O approved one! If thou vanish,

D jsti n v will come (upon us) and the wide room will be straitened.

Thou art the protector of the people* Me that desires (thee) w
not hath gone to perdition. Nay, verity , if he do not refrain . . * / "

How the king fed the physician to the bedside of the sick girt ,
that he might see her condition.

When that meeting and bounteous (spiritual) repast was over*
he took his hand and conducted him to the harem.

He rehearsed the tale of die invalid and her illness, and then
seated him beside the sick (girl),

1 Literal Ey, “ beggar-faced ones/' a The name home by Ibtfa before hi* fall.


IO MATHNAWi, BOOK I

The p Eivsician observ ed the colour of her face, (felt) her pulse „
and (inspected) her urine; he heard both the symptoms and the
(secondary) causes of her malady.

He said, **None of the remedies which they have applied
builds up (health): they (the false physicians) have wrought
destruction.

Eihs They were ignorant of the inward state. I seek refuge with
God from that which they invent.”

He saw the pain, and the secret became open to him, but lie
concealed it and did not tell the king.

Her patn was not front black or yellow bile: the smell oi every
firewood appears from the smoke.

From her sore grief he perceived that she was heart-sore;
well in body, but stricken in heart.

Being in love is made manifest by soreness of heart: there is
no sickness like heart-sickness.

no The lover's ailment is separate from all other ailments: love
is the astrolabe of the mysteries of God.

Whether love be from this (earthly) side or from that
(heavenly) side, in the end it leads us yonder.

Whatsoever I say in exposition and explanation of Love* when
I come to Love (itself) I am ashamed oi that (explanation).

Although the commentary of the tongue makes (all) clear T yet
tongudess love is dearer.

Whilst the pen was making haste in writing, it split upon
itself as soon as it came to Love.

tx* In expounding it (Love), the intellect lay down (helplessly)
like an ass in the mire: it wa$ Love (alone) that uttered the
explanation of love and loverhood.

The proof of the sun is the sun (himself): if thou require the
proof* ao not avert thy face from himl

If the shadow gives an indication of him, the sun (himself)
gives spiritual light every moment.

The shadow, like chat in the night-hours, brings sleep to
thee; when the sun rises the moon is cloven asunder.

There is nothing in the world so wondrous strange as the
sun, (but) the Sun of the spirit is everlasting: it hath no yester¬
day.

im Although the external sun is unique, still it is possible to
imagine one resembling it;

The spiritual Sun, which is beyond the aether, hath no peer
in the mind or externally.

Where is room in the imagination for His essence f that the
like of Him should come into the imagination?

When news arrived of the face of ShamsuMdih (the Sun of
the Religion), the sun of the fourth heaven drew in its head
(hid itself for shame).


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN


It


Since his name has come (to my lips), it behaves me to set
forth some hint of his bounty.

At this moment my Soul 1 has plucked my skirt: he has caught i :
the perfume of Joseph's vest,

(He said): “For the sake of our years of companionship,
recount one of those sweet ecstasies.

That earth and heaven may laugh (with joy), that intellect
and spirit and eye may increase a hundredfold/*

(I said): "Du not lay tasks on me, for ] have passed away
from myself [fand)\ iny apprehensions are blunted and I know
not how to praise.

Everything that is said by one who has not returned to con¬
sciousness, if he constrains himself or boastfully exaggerates, is
unseemly.

How should I — not a vein of mine is sensible — describe that i .■>
Friend who hath no peer?

The description of this severance and this heart's blood do
chou at present leave over till another time/'

He said: “Feed me, for I am hungry, and make haste, for
Time is a cutting sword.

The Sufi is the son of the (present) timc% Q comrade: it ts
not the rule of die Way to sav ‘To-morrow/

Art not thou indeed a Sufi, then? That which is (in hand)
is reduced to naught by postponing the payment,”

I said to him: “It is better that the secret of die Friend should i :s
be disguised: do thou hearken (to it as implied) in the contents
of the tale.

It is better that the lovers' secret should be told in the talk
of others.'*

He said: “Tell it forth openly and nakedly and without un¬
faithfulness: do not put me off, O trifler!

Lift the veil and speak nakedly, for 1 ! do not wear a shirt
when I sleep with the Adored One/ 1

I said: 11 If Fie should become naked in (thy) vision, neither
wilt thou remain nor thy bosom nor thy waist.

Ask thy wish, but a$k with measure: a blade of straw will not
support the mountain*

It the Sun, by whom this world is illumined, should approach
a little (nearer), all will be burned.

Do not seek trouble and turmoil and bloodshed: say no more
concerning the .Sun of Tabriz! pp

This (mystery) hath no end: tell of the beginning. Go, relate
the conclusion of this tale,

* tJusarniTddfn.


12


MATHNAW I, BOOK I


Haw that mini demanded of the king to he alone with the
handmaiden for the purpose of discarering her malady.

He said: *'0 king p make the house empty; send away both
kinsfolk and strangers.

145 Let no one listen in the entrance-ha!te* that J may ask certain
things of this handmaiden/'

The house was left empty, and not one inhabitant (remained] :
nobody save the physician and that sick girl.

Very gently he said (to her)* “ Where is thy native town?
for the treatment suitable to the people of each town is separate.

And in that town who is related to thee? With what hast thou
kinship and affinity?’ 1

He laid his hand on her pulse and put questions, one by one T
about the injustice of Heaven.

15c When a thorn darts into any one's foot, he sets his foot upon
his knee,

And keeps searching for its head with the point of a needle, and
if he does not find it, he keeps moistening it (the place) with his lip,

A thorn in the foot is so hard to find: how (then) is it with a
thorn in the heart? Answer (that) l

If every base fellow had seen the thorn in the heart, when
would sorrow's gain the upper hand over any one?

Somebody sticks a thorn under a donkey’s tail: the donkey
does not know how to get rid of it: he starts jumping.

155 l le jumps* and the thorn strikes more firmly (pierces deeper):

it needs an intelligent person to extract a thorn.

In order to get rid of the thorn, the donkey from irritation
and pain went on kicking and dealing blows in a hundred places,

(But) that thorn-removing physician was an expert: putting
his hand on one spot after another he tested (it).

He inquired of the girl concerning her friends, by way of
narrative,

And she disclosed to the physician (many) circumstances
touching her home and (former) masters and fellow-townsmen*

160 He listened to her story (while) he continued to observe her
pulse and its beating,

So that at whosoever’s name her pulse should begin to throb,
(he might know that) that person is the object of her souFg
desire in the world.

He counted up the friends in her native town; then he
mentioned another towii by name.

He said: “When you went forth from your own town, in which
town did you live mostly?”

She mentioned the name of a certain town and from that too
she passed on (to apeak of another, and meanwhile) there was
no change in the colour of her face or in her pulse.


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN


13


Masters and towns, one by one, she told of* and about
dwelling-place and bread and salt.

She told stories of many a town and many a house, (and still)
no vein of her quivered nor did her cheek grow pale.

Her pulse remained in its normal state, unimpaired r till he
asked about Samarcand, the (city) sweet as candy.

(Thereat) her pulse jumped and her face went red and pale
(by turns), for she had been parted from a man of Samarcand,
a goldsmith.

When the physician found out this secret from the sick (girl),
he discerned the source of that grief and woe.

He $aid; “Which is his quarter in passing (through the town) ? ” j 70
“ Sar-iPttf (Bridge-head}/* she replied* “and Ghitafar street/’
Said he; 11 1 know what your illness is and I will at once
display the arls of magic in delivering you 1 .

Be glad and care-free and have no fear, for I will do to you
that which rain does to the meadow,

1 will be anxious for you* be not you anxious: I am kinder
to you than a hundred father^.

Beware! tell not this secret to any one, not though the king
should make much inquiry from you.

When your heart becomes the grave of your secret, that desire 175
of yours will be gained more quickly.”

The Prophet said that any one who hides his inmost thought
will soon attain to the object of his desired

When seeds are hidden in the earth, their inward secret be¬
comes the verdure of the garden.

If gold and silver were not hidden, how would they get
nourishment (grow and ripen) in the mine?

The promises and soothing words of the physician made the
sick (girl) safe (free) from fear*

There are true promises, grateful to the heart; there are false jSo
promises, fraught with disquietude.

The promise of the noble is current (sterling) coin; the pro¬
mise of the unworthy becomes anguish of soul.


How the mini i hazing discovered the (muse of) the illness,
laid it before the king .

Then he arose and went to see the king and acquainted him
with a portion of that matter.

“The (best) plan," said he, “ is that we should bring the man
here for the sake of (curing) this malady.

Summon the goldsmith from that far country; beguile him
w ith gold and robes of honour/"

J /,*. 41 [ wilt perform miracles on tout behnlf/'

Lite rally» K ' will soon be wedded io the object of his desire/'


*4


MATH N AW f, BOOK I


//oftf the king sent messengers to Sumuniiml to fetch the
goldsmith*

1S5 The king sent thither one or two messengers* clever men and
competent and very just.

To Samar can d came the two messengers for the goldsmith
debonair and wanton 1 p

Saying* 14 O hue master, perfect in know ledge* them whose
quality (of perfection in thy craft) is famous in (all) the lands,

Lo f such-and-such a king hath chosen thee for (thy skill in)
the goldsmith's craft, because thou art eminent.

Look now, receive this robe of honour and gold and silver;
when thou comest (to the king), thou wilt be a favourite and
boon-companion

190 The man saw the much wealth and the many robes t he was
beguiled* he parted from his town and children.

Blithely the man came into the road* unaware that the king
had formed a design against Ins life.

He mounted an Arab horse and sped on joyously: (what
really was) the price of his blood he deemed a robe of honour.

O (fool), who with a hundred consents thyself with thine
own foot didst enter on the journey to the faxed ill!

In his fancy (were dreams of) riches* power* and lordship.
Said 'Azri'fl (the Angel of Death), 41 Go (thy way). Yes, thou
wilt get (them) I M

195 When the stranger arrived (and turned) from the road, the
physician brought rum into the presence of the king.

Proudly and delicately they conducted him to the king of
kings* that he might bum (like a moth) on that candle of Tinu$ T

The king beheld him, showed great regard (for him), and
entrusted to him the treasure-house (full) of gold.

Then the physician said to him : "O mighty Sultan, give the
handmaiden to this lord*

In order that the handmaiden may be happy in union with
him, and that the water of union with him may put out the fire
(of passion).'"

200 The king bestowed on him that moon-faced one and wedded
those twain (who were) craving (each others) company.

During the space of six months they were satisfying their
desire, till the girl was wholly restored to health.

Thereafter he prepared for him a potion* so that when he
drank it he began to dwindle away before her.

When because of sickness his beauty remained not. the soul
of the girl remained not in his pestilence (deadly toils).

1 LjEcrallv r “one wb eicc«ds tho due measure hp or “one who busies
himself with Vain ihings." 1


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN 15

Since he became ugly and ill-favoured and sallow-cheeked,
little by little he became cold (irksome and unpleasing) in her

heart.

Those loves which are for the sake of a colour (outward -*<,
beamy) arc not love: in the end they are a disgrace,

M ould that he too had been disgrace (deformity) altogether,
so that that evil judgement might not have come Xo pass upon
him!

Blood ran from his eye (that flowed with tears) like 11 river;
his (handsome) face became the enemy of his life.

The peacock’s plumage is its enemy: O many the king who
hath been slain by his magnificence!

He said, H * I am the muskdeer on account of whose gland that
hunter shed my pure (innocent) blood.

Oh* I am the fox of the field whose head they (the hunters 210
springing forth) from the covert cut off for the sake of the fur.

Oh, I am the elephant whose blood was shed by the blow of
the mahout for the sake of the bone (ivory )

He who hath slain me for that which is other than I l w
does not he know that my blood sleepeth not (will not resL
unavenged)?

1 o-day it lies on me and to-morrow it lies on him: when does
the blood of one such as I am go to waste like this?

Although the wall casts a long shadow, (vet at last) the shadow
turns back again towards it.

This world is the mountain, and our action the shout: the 215
echo of the shouts comes (back) to us.”

He said this and at the (same) moment went under the earth
(gave up the ghost). The handmaiden was purged of pain and
love*

Because love of the dead is not enduring, because the dead
one is never coming (back) to us;

(But) love of the living is every moment Fresher than a bud in
the spirit and in die sight.

Choose the love of that Living One who is everlasting* who
gives thee to drink of the wine that increases ljfq T

Choose the love of Him from whose love all the prophets jm
gained power and glory.

Do not say* “We have no admission to that King/ 1 Dealings
with the generous are not difficult.


1 /.f r " on account of my beauty* which is not my rtal sdf/ T


I* MATHNAWI, BOOK I


Setting forth how the slaying and poisoning of the goldsmith teas
{prompted) by Divine suggestion , not by sensual desire and
wicked meditation r


330


The slaying of this man by the hand of the physician w as not
(done) on account of hope or fear.

He did not slay him to humour the king, (he did not slay
him) until the Divine command and inspiration came.

As for the boy whose throat was cut by Khadir, the vulgar
do not comprehend the mystery thereof.

He that receives from Cod inspiration and answer (to his
prayer), whatsoever he may command is the essence of right.

If one who bestows (spiritual) life should slav, it is allowable:
he is the (Divine) vicegerent, and his hand is the hand of God.

Like Isini‘il (Ishmael), lay your head before him; gladlv and
laughingly give up your soul before his dagger,

order that your soul may remain laughing unto eternity,
like the pure soul ol Ahmad (Mohammed) with the One (God).

Lovers drain the cup of joy at the moment when the fair ones
slay them with their own hand.

The king did not commit that bloodshed because of lust:
cease from thinking evil and disputing.

You thought that he committed a foul crime, (but) in (the
state of) purity how should the sublimation leave fanv) alloy
(behind)? ' 1


The purpose of this (severe) discipline and this rough treat¬
ment is that the furnace may extract the dross from the silver.

The testing of good and bad is in order that the gold mav
boil and bring the scum to the top. *

If his act were not the inspiration of God, he would have
been a dog that rends (its prev), not a king.

He was unstained by lust' and covetousness and passion:
(vvhat)he dtd (was) good, but good that wore the aspect of evil
If khadir stove the boat in the sea, (yet) in Khadirs staving
there are a hundred rightnesses

1 he imagination of Moses, notwithstanding his (spiritual)
illumination and excellence, was screened from (the compre-
hension of) that (act of Khadir). Do not thou fly without wings!

I hat (deed of the king) is a red rose {worthy of praise); do
not ca it blood (murder). He is intoxicated with Reason - do
not caJJ him a madman.


2^o


Had it been his desire to shed the blood of a Moslem I am
an infidel if I would have mentioned Ids name (with praise)

1 he highest heaven trembles at praise of the wicked, and
by praise of him the devout man is moved to think evil
He was a king and a very heedful king; he was elect and the
elect (favourite) of God,


the greengrocer and the parrot


n


? n ® wlro ,s . slain i by a king like this, he (the king) leads him
to fortune and to the best (most honourable) estate.

smirhln 'll - the had S f n advanta g e to him {die gold-

smith) in doing violence to him, how should that absolute
Mercy have sought to do violence?

*> ch f ambles at the barber’s scalpel (but) the f*md
mother is happy in that pain (of her child),

lie takes half a life and gives a hundred lives (in exchaneel-^
he gtves that which enters not into your imagination ^ 43
You are judging (his actions) irom (the analoev oft vniimrlf

Sr have ,all “A *>«.« fcSs,r£3S

The story 0/ the greengrocer and the parrot ami the parrot's
sptilmg the oil in the shop,

wZtSSZ rarmt engr0Cer ”' h ° had 1 parTOt ' a Sw<et ’ voiced

f iJ PcrcllL ^ ° n ,lu ' bench, it would watch over the shop (in
the owner s absence) and talk finely to all the traders. P (
in addressing human beings it would sneak (like them) - it
was (also) skilled in tJie song of parrots '

■hfbSSliof^: 0 ” ,ho be, ’ d ’ a ” d fle " ”*>■• “ vnw ...

Its master came from the direction of his house and seated
hirnsdf on the bench at his ease as a merchant does
( Then) he saw the bench was full of oil and his clothes greasv ■
he smote the parrot on the head: it was made bald by the blow

in ,h, grtwigrocer.

^ould that my hand had been broken (powerless) at that „

' S,nk ' fS “' h 3 bl ” w) ° n thc he * d <*

m ' vc,y d ™ h ' ,b>t h « ■<* •“

After three days and three nights, he was seated on the bench
distraught and sorrowful, like a man in despair
Showing the bird every' sort of marvel (in the hope) that
maybe it would begin to speak, p 1

Meanwhile a bare-headed dervish, dad in a jawlaq (coarse
woollen frock), passed by, witli a head hairless as the outside
ot bowl and basin*

Thereupon the parrot began to talk, screeched at the dervish ,*>
and said, Hey, feUowI

How were you mixed up with the bald, O bafdpatc? Did you
then,spill oil from the bottle?"


i8


MATHNAWf , BOOK I

The bystanders laughed at the parrot’s inference, because it
deemed the wearer of the frock to be like itself.

Do not measure the actions of holy men by {the analogy of)
yourself, though sher (lion) and shir (milk) are similar in
writing.

On this account the whole world is gone astray : scarcely any
one is cognisant of God's Ahddl (Substitutes) 1 ,
a65 They set up (a claim of) equality with the prophets; they
supposed the saints to be like themselves.

“Behold/ 1 they said, 14 we are men, they are men; both we
and they are in bondage to sleep and food,”

In (their) blindness they did not perceive that there is an
infinite difference between (them).

Both species of sanbur ate and drank from the (same) place,
but From that one (die hornet) came a sting, and from this
other (the bee) hone)'.

Both species of deer ate grass and drank water: from this one
came dung, and from that one pure musk.

*70 Both reeds drank from the same water-source, (but) this one
is empty and that one (full of) sugar.

Consider hundreds of thousands oi such Likenesses and observe
that the distance between the two is (as great as) a seventy years"
journey.

This one eats, and filth is discharged from him; that one eats,
and becomes entirely the light of God,

This one eats, (and of hi ml is born nothing but avarice and
envy; that une eats, (and of him) is bom nothing but love of
the One (God).

Tliis one is good (fertile) soil and that one brackish and bad;
this one is a fair angel and that one a devil and wild beast.

275 If both resemble each other in aspect r it may well be (so);
bitter water and sweet water have (the same) clearness.

Who knows (the difference) except a man possessed of
(spiritual) taste? Find (him): he knows the sweet water from
the brine.

Comparing magic with (prophetic) miracle > he (the ignorant
one) fancies that both are founded on deceit.

The magicians (in the time) of Moses, for contention's sake,
lifted up (in their hands) a rod like his,

(But) between this rod and that rod there is a vast difference;
from tliis action (magic) to that action (miracle) is a great way,
:2so TLiis action is followed by the curse of God, (while) that
action receives in payment the mercy (blessing) of God,

The infidels in contending (for equality with the prophets and
saints) have the nature of an ape: the (evil) nature is a canker
within the breast*

1 The Minis next in rank to the Qtitb, who is the head of the Spirits l hienirehy.


the greengrocer and the parrot


»9


, n ? an do ®’ thc L a Pe at every moment does the
bcinii. thing that he sees done by the min,

f Je thinks, I have acted like him ”: hotv should that quarrel-
Same-looking one know the difference?

w*t IS acts by the command (of God), and

he (the apish imitator) for the sake of quarrelling (rivalry). Pour
*? ead f*>f those who have quarrelsome faces!
l fiat (religious) hypocrite joins in ritual prayer with the (sincere) 2 s«
conformist (only) for quarrel ling’s sake, not for supplication ^
in prayer and tasting and pilgrimage and alms-giving the true

mh ,he hyv ° cr '' w ■" ' ( ' vhat brin * s)

^"p™ «■»

Although both are intent on one game, in relation to each

Ravv ,hC3 are ” ^ apar£ ^ the ™ n of Merv and the man of

Each one goes to his (proper) abiding-place; each one fares
according to his name.

It lie be called a true believer, his soul rejoices; and if von
«ay M hypocrite, he becomes filled with fire (rage). '

His (the true believer's) name is loved on account of its
essence (which is true faith); this one's (the hypocrite’s) name
is loathed on account of its pestilent qualities.

(Tbs four letters) miitt and fettte and tttim and nun do not
confer honour; the word murnin (true believer) is onlv for die
sake of denotation.

If you call him (the true believer) hypocrite, this vile name
is stinging (him) within like a scorpion!

If this name is not derived from Hell, then vvhv is there the
taste of Hell in it ?

The foulness of that ill name is not from the letters; the 395
bitterness of that sea-water is not from die vessel (containing

1 he letters are the vessel: therein the meaning is (contained)
like water; (but) the sea of the meaning is (with God) -n nth
Him is the Unimu ’I-Kitdb,

In this world the bitter sea and the sweet sea (are divided}—
between them is a barrier which they do not seek to cross.

Know that both these flow- from one origin. Pass on from
them both, go (all the way) to their origin!

Without the touchstone you will, never know in the assay
adulterated gold and fine gold by (using y-our own) judgement.

Any one in whose soul God shall put' die touchstone Jmj will jo©
distinguish certainty from doubt.

A piece of rubbish jumps into the mouth of a living man, and
only when he ejects it is lie at ease.


20


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When! amongst thousands of morsels (of food)* one tilde
piece of rubbish entered (his mouth), the living man's sense
(of touch or taste) tracked it down.

The worldly sense is the ladder to this world; the religious
sense is the ladder to Heaven,

Seek ye the well-being of the former sense from the physician;
beg ye the well-being of the latter sense from the Beloved.

3*3 The health of the former arises from the flourishing state of
the body: the health of the latter arises from the ruin of the
body.

Trie spiritual way ruins the body and, after having ruined it*
restores it to prosperity:

Ruined the house for the sake of the golden treasure, and
with that same treasure builds it better (than before);

Cut off die water and cleansed the river-bed, then caused
drinking-water to flow in the river-bed;

Cleft the skin and drew out the iron point (of the arrow or
spear)—then fresh skin grew over it (the wound);

31* Rased the fortress and took it from the infidel* then reared
thereon a hundred towers and ramparts.

Who shall describe the action of Him who hath no like? This
that 1 have said (is only what the present) necessity is affording.

Sometimes it (the action of God) appears like this and some¬
times the contrary of this: the work of religion is naught but
bewilderment*

(I mean) not one bewildered in such wise that his back is
(turned) towards Him; nay, but one bewildered (with ecstasy)
like this and drowned (in God) and intoxicated with the
Beloved*

The face of the one is set towards the Beloved, (while) the
face of the other is ju$t his own face (he is facing himself)*

315 Look Jong on the face of every one, keep watch attentively:
it may be that by doing service (to Sufis) you will come to
know the face (of the true saint).

Since there is many a devil who hath the face of Adam* it is
not well to give your hand to every hand,

Because me fowler produces a whistling sound in order to
decoy the bird 1 *

(So that) the bird may hear the note of its congener and
come down from the air and find trap and knife point.

The vile man will steal the language of dervishes* that he may
thereby chant a spell over (fascinate and deceive) one who is
$imple.

3*0 The work of (holy) men is (as) light and heat; the work of
vile men is trickery and shamelessness.


* Literally, M in order that thfc bird catcher may decoy .* 1


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS Zt

They make a woollen lion for the purpose of begging; they
give the title of Ahmad (Mohammed) to Bu Musaylim;

(But) to Bu Musaylim remained the title of Kadhdhdh (Unt\
to Mohammed remained (the title of) Ulu 'i-albdb (Endowed
with understanding).

The wine of God, its seal (last result) is pure musk, (but) as
tor (the outer) wine, its seal is stench and torment.


Story of the Jetuisk /ting teho for bigotry's sake used to
slay the Christians.


Amongst the Jews there was a king who wrought oppression,
an enemy of Jesus and a destroyer of Christians.

"l’was the epoch of Jesus and the turn was his J : he was the « s
Soul of Moses, and Moses the soul of him;

(But) the squint-eyed (double-seeing) king separated in the
iy of God those two Divine (prophets) who were (really) in
cord (with each othcrV


way


„ k i L’jtjk. irru l,j

accord (with each other).

"The master said to a squint-fved (pupil), - *Corne on; pp
fetch that bottle out of the room.**

Said the squint-eyed one: “Which of the two bottles shall
* bring to you? Explain fully."

“There are not two bottles,” replied the master; “go, leave
off squinting and do not be seeing more (than one).”
i( “O master,” said he, "don’t chide me." Said the
“Smash one of those two."


master, no


The bottle was one, though in his eyes it seemed two; when
he broke the bottle, there was no other.

When one was broken, both vanished from sight; a man i$
made squint-eyed by (evil) propensity and anger.

Anger and [ust make a man squint-eyed, they change the
spirit (an that it departs) from rectitude.

When self-interest appears, virtue becomes hidden; a hundred
veils rise from the heart to the eye.

When the cadi lets bribery gain hold of his heart, how should n$
he know the wronger from the wretched victim of wrong?

The king,from Jewish rancour,became so squint-eyed that(we
cry), “Mercy, O Lord, mercy (save us from such an affliction)!"

He slew hundreds of thousands of wronged (innocent) be¬
lievers, saying, “lam the protection and support of the religion
of Moses.”


Hoa the vizier instructed the king to plot.

He had a vizier, a miscreant and ogler (deceiver), who by
reason of (his exceeding) guile would tie knots on water.

“The Christians," said he, "seek to save their lives; they
hide thej r religion from the king.

1 /,f. it wus hi* cum is appear os a praphtc.


22 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

340 Slay them not, for shying (them) is useless: religion hath no
smell, it is not musk and aloes-wood.

The secret is concealed in a hundred coverings: its outward
form is (in agreement) with thee, resembling thee, (but) the
inward (reality) is (in) disagreement,”

The king said to him: ‘"fell (me), then, what is the (beat)
plan? What is the remedy against that deceit and imposture? —
So that there may not remain a single Christian in the world,
neither one whose' religion is manifest nor one who is con¬
cealed.”

'*0 king,” said he, “cut off my ears and hands, rip my nose
by bitter (cruel) decree;

34 1 Then bring me under the gallon's, that an intercessor may
plead for me.

Do this deed in the place for (public) proclamation, on a
highway where roads run in four directions.

Then banish me from thy presence to a distant land, that I
may cast mischief and confusion amongst them.


lime the vizier brought the Christians into doubt
ami perplexity.

Then 1 will say (to them), 1 1 am secretly a Christian. O God
who knowest (all) things hidden. Thou knowest me.

The king was informed of my (Christian) faith and from
bigotry sought to take my life.

3 $o I wished to hide my religion from the king and profess his
religion,

(hut) the king got a scent of my inmost beliefs, and mv
words were suspected (when 1 stood) before the king.

He said, “ Your words are like a needle in bread (specious but
pernicious); there is a window' between my heart and yours.

Through that window' I have seen vour (real) state: I see
your state and w ill not heed your words.”

Had not the spirit of Jesus been my aid, he would in Jewish
fashion have tom me to pieces.

3S5 h'or Jesus sake I would yield my life and give mv head and
lay on myself (confess) myriads of obligations to him.

I do not grudge Jesus my life, but full well am I versed in
the knowledge of his religion 1 .

Grief was coming over me (it seemed to me a pity') that that
holy religion should perish amongst those who are ignorant
{of it).

Thanks be to God and to Jesus that I have become a guide
to the true faith.

1 Jn this way he excuses himself for not having died a martyr's death.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 23

I have escaped from Jews and Judaism so (entirely) that I
have bound my waist with a (Christian) girdle.

The (present) epoch is the epoch of Jesus. O men, hearken jfra
with your souls unto the mysteries of his religion! 1 ?i

The king did to him that deed (mutilation) which he had
proposed: the people remained in amazement at his deed.

He (the king) drove him away to the Christians. After that,
he (the vizier) began to proselytise.

Haw the Christians let themselves be duped by the vizier .

Myriads of Christian men gathered round him, little by little,
in his abode,

(While) he secretly expounded to them the mysteries of
Gospel and girdle and prayer.

Outwardly he was a preacher of (religious) ordinances, but
inwardly he was (as) the whistle and snare (of the fowler).

On this account 1 some Companions (of Mohammed) begged
of the Prophet (that he would acquaint them with) the deceit-
fulness of the ghoul-like &oul%

Saying, 11 What of hidden selfish interests does it mingle in
acts of worship and in pure spiritual devotion ? ”

They were not seeking from him excellence of piety; thev
w p ere not inquiring where lay the outward defect*

Hair by hair, speck by speck, they were recognising the de-
ceitfulness of the fleshly soul as (plainly as the difference of)
the rose from parsley*

Even the hair-splitters (the most scrupulous) of the Com- 37tJ
panions used to become distraught in spirit at the (Prophet's)
admonition to them (the inquirers).

Hozv the Christians followed the vizier.

The Christians all gave their hearts to him: what (how great ),
indeed, is the strength of the (blind) conformity of the vulgar!

They planted love of him within their breasts, they were
regarding him as the vicar of Jesus,

He inwardly (in reality) was the accursed one-eyed Antichrist.

O God, do Thou (hear and) answer die cry (of those in trouble)

—what a good helper art Thou!

O God, there are myriads of snares and baits, and we are as
greedy food Jess birds.

From moment to moment-we are caught in a fresh snare.
though we become, each one, (like) a falcon or a Simurgh.

Every' moment Thou art delivering us, arid again w T e are
going to a snare, O Thou who art without want!

1 Because ii h hard to distinguish iruxh from falsehood.

J The appetitive souk ""the flesh. 0


24 MATHNAW1, BOOK I

We are putting com in this bam, (and then} we are losing the
corn that has been garnered.

(Y\hy), after all, do not we consider with intelligent mind
that this damage to the corn arises from the deceitful ness of
the mouse?

Since the mouse has made a hole in our barn, and our bam
has been ravaged by its guile,

O soul, in the first place avert the mischief of the mouse,
and then show fervour (zeal) in gamering the com.

Hear (one) of the sayings related from the Chiefest of the
Chief (the Prophet): “ No prayer is complete without‘presence'
(concentration nf the mind on God).”

If there is no thievish mouse in our barn, where is the com
of forty years' works (of devotion)?

W hy is the daily sincerity (of our devotions) not being stored,
bit by bit, in tins barn of ours?

Many a star (spark) of fire shot forth from the iron (of good
works), and that burning heart received (it) and drew (it) in;

3»j But in the darkness a hidden thief is laving his finger upon
the stars,

Extinguishing the stars one by one, that no lamp may shine
from the (spiritual) sky.

Though there be thousands of snares at our feet, when Thou
art with us there is not any trouble.

Every night Thou freest the spirits from the body's snare,
and dost erase (the impressions on) the tablets (of the mind).

The spirits are set free every night from this cage, (they are)
done with ordinance and talk and tale.

390 At night prisoners are unconscious of their prison, at night
governors are unconscious of their power.

There is no sorrow, no thought of gain or loss, nu fancy of this
person or that person.

.This is the state of the 'arij (gnostic), even without sleep:
God said, {Ihou mouldst deem them awake) whilst they slept.
Shy not at this 1 .

He is asleep, day and night, to the affairs of the world, like
a pen in the hand of the Lord’s control.

One who sees not the hand in the writing thinks (that) the
act (of writing proceeds) from the pen by means of movement.

393 He (God) hath shown forth some part of this state of the
‘driL (inasmuch as) the vulgar too are carried off (overtaken)
by sleep of the senses. . '

Their souls are gone into the desert that is without descrip¬
tion: their spirits and bodies are at rest; v

And with a whistle thou I cades t them back to the snare
leadcst them all (back) to justice and to the judge.

1 /-*. '"do noi deny this or disbelieve in it.”


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS *5

i Li | ke *? rifil (Seraphiel), He (Cod) who ciiukcs the dawn to
r , bpogs them alt from those lands (of spirit) into (the
world of) form. y

He embodies the spirits divested (of body). He makes each
body pregnant (laden) again (with actions and works).

, c makes die steed ui the souls bare of saddle: this is the 4^
ttieaning of " Sleep i$ the brother of Death
But in order that they may return in the davtime, He puts
a long tether on its leg,

So that in the daytime He may lead it back from that meadow
and bring it horn the pasture (to go) under the load.

Would that He had guarded this spirit as the Men of the
Cave or as the Ark of Noah,

ci ^ at t^is mind and eye and ear might be delivered from the
rlood or Wiikciulness and consciousness!

° h * ™ "<> r] d there is many a Man of die Cave beside ,°j

you. before you, at this time:

I he Cave is with him, the friend is in converse with him:
but your eyes and ears are sealed, (so) what docs it avail?


Story of the Caliph's teeing Lay id.

1 he Caliph said to Layla: 11 Art thou she bv whom Miijnijn
was distracted and led astray?

Thou art not superior to "other fair ones/" “Be silent/" she
replied p “since thou art not Majniin/ 1

\\ hosoever is awake {to the material world) is the more asleep
(to^ the spiritual world); his wakefulness fa worse than his sleep*
When our soul is not awake to God p wakefulness is like cl ns- 410
mg our doors (to Divine influences).

All day long, from the buffet* of phantasy and from (thoughts
of) loss and gain and from fear of decline,

There remains to it (the soul) neither joy nnr grace and glory
nor way of journeying to Heaven.

The one asleep (to spiritual things) is he who hath hope of
every vain fancy and holds parley with ft,

Diabolum per somnum videt tanquam virginem caelesteni*
deinde propter libidinem effundit cum diaboio aquam (semfnis),
Postquam semen generation^ in terrain salsuginosam infudit*
ipse ad se rediit* fugit ab eo ilia imago,

Ilinc percipit langiiorem capitis et (videt) corpus poJIutum.
Proh dolor oh fI!Lid simulacrum visum {sed revera) non visum!

1 he bird is flying on high, and its shadow is speeding on the
earth, flying like a bird:

Some fool begins to chase the shadow* running (alter it) so
far that he becomes powerless (exhausted),


26 MATHKAWfj BOOK I

Not knowing that it is the reflexion of that bird in the air,
not knowing where is the origin of the shadow*

420 He shoots arrows at the shadow; his quiver is emptied in
seeki ng (to shoot it):

The quiver of his life became empty: his life passed in running
hotly in chase of the shadow.

(But) when the shadow of God is his nurse, it delivers him
from (every) phantom and shadow*

The shadow of God is that servant of God who is dead to
this world and living through God.

Lay hold of his skirt most quickly without misgiving, that
you may be saved in the skirt (end) of the last days (of the
world) h

4zj (The shadow mentioned in the words) //o™ He (God) ex¬
tended the shadow is the form of the smuts, which guides to
the light of the Divine Sun.

Do not go in this valley without this guide; say, like Khalil
(Abraham), 11 / hoe not them that set™

Go t from the shadow gain a sun : pluck the skirt of the
(spiritual) king, Shams-i Tabriz! (the Sun of Tabriz)!

If you do not know the way to this feast and bridal, ask of
Ziyd'u ’l-Ilaqq (the Radiance of God) Husatmriddin.

And if on the way envy seize you by the throat, it belongs
to (is characteristic of) Iblis to go beyond bounds in envy;

For he because of envy hath disdain for Adam, and because
of envy is at war with felicity*

In the Way there is no harder pass than this T Oh, fortunate
he who is not companioned by envy!

This body, you must know, is the house of envy, for the
household arc tainted with envy.

If the body is the house of envy, yet God made that body
very pure.

(The text} Cleanse My house, ye twain, is the explanation of
(sueh) purity: it (the purified heart) is a treasure of (Divine)
light, t hough its talisman is of earth,

435 When you practise deceit and envy against one who is without
envy, from that envy black stains arise in your heart.

Become (as) dust under the feet of the men of God; throw
dust on the head of envy, even as we do.


Explanation of the envy of the vizier.

That petty vizier had his origin from envy, so diat for vanity
he gave to the wind (sacrificed) his ears and nose,

In the hope that by the sting of envy his venom might enter
the souls of the poor (Christians),


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS *7

Any one who from envy mutilates his nose makes himself with¬
out ear and without nose (unable to apprehend spiritual things).

The nose is that which catches a scent, and which die scent 44"
leads towards an abode (of spiritual truth).

Whoever hath no scent is without a nose; the scent (referred
to) is that scent which is religious.

When he has caught a scent and given no thanks for in,
(that) ingratitude comes and devours his nose (deprives him
of the organ of spiritual perception).

Give thanks (to God) and be a slave to those who give thanks:
be in dieir presence (as one) dead, he steadfast.

Do not, like the vizier, make brigandage your stock-in-trade ;
do not turn the people away from the ritual prayer.

The miscreant vizier had become (in appearance) a true re- -145
iigious counsellor, (but) he had craftily put garlic in the almond
cake.


Hate the sagacious among the Christians perceived the
guile ojf the vizier.

Whoever was possessed of (spiritual) discernment was feeling a
sweet savour in his words and, joined therewith, bitterness.

He (the vizier) was saying fine things mixed (with foul): he
had poured some poison into the sugared julep.

The outward sense of it was saying, ” Be diligent in die Way,”
but in effect it was saying to the soul, **Be slack/ 1

If the surface of silver is white and new t (yet) the hands and
dress are blackened by it*

Although fire is red-faced (bright and glorious) with sparks, 4 so
look at the black behaviour (displayed) in its action.

If the lightning appears luminous to the eye, (yet) from its
distinctive property it is the robber of sight (it strikes men blind),

(As for) any (Christian) who was not wary and possessed of
discernment, the words of him (the vizier) were (as) a collar
on his neck.

During six years, in separation from the king, die vizier
became a refuge for die followers of Jesus.

To him the people wholly surrendered their religion and
their hearts: at his command and decree they were ready to die P

Haw the king sent messages m secret to the vizier.

Messages (passed) between the king and him: the king had 4M
words of comfort from him 1 in secret.

The king wrote to him, saying, “ 0 my fortunate one, the
time is come: quickly set my mind at ea$e/ T

He replied: “ Behold, O king, I am preparing to cast disorders
into the religion of Jesus.”

1 1 Literally, 11 through him the king had comfort*-"


MATHNAWl, BOOK l


z8


Explanation of the twelve tribes of the Christians.

The people of Jesus had twelve amirs as rulers in authority
over them.

Each party followed one amir and had become devoted to its
own amir from desire (of worldly gain).

***> I Iicac twelve amirs and their followers became die slaves of
that vizier of evil sign.

7 hey all put trust in his words, they all took his procedure
as a pattern,

Each amir would have given up his life in his presence at
the time and hour (on the spot), if he (the vizier) had hidden
him die,

Horn the vizier confuted the ordinances of the Gospel.

He prepared a scroll in the name of {addressed to) each one s
the (written) form of each scroll (of) a different tenor.

The ordinances of each (of) a diverse kind, this contradicting
that from the end to the beginning.

*6,5 In one he made the path of asceticism and hunger to be the
basis of repentance and the condition (necessary ) for conversion.

In one he said: " Asceticism profits naught: in this Way there
is no place (means) of deliverance but generosity,”

If] one he said; Your hunger and generosity are (imply)
association on your part (of other objects) with (Him who is)
the object qf your worship.

Excepting trust (in God) and complete resignation in sorrow
and joy, all is a deceit and snare,”

In one he said: 41 It is incumbent fon you) to serve (God) 1 ;
else the thought of putting trust (in Him) is (a cause of) sus¬
picion.”

4?* In one he said- “There are (Divine) commands and prohi¬
bitions, (but they) are not for practice (observance): they are
(only) to show T our weakness (inability to fulfil them) p

So that we may behold our weakness therein and at that
time recognise the power of God.”

In one he said: " Do not regard your weakness: that weakness
is an act of ingratitude. Beware!

Regard your power, for this power is from Him: know that
your power is the gift of Him who is Hu (the Absolute God).”

In one he said: “Leave both these (qualities) behind: what¬
soever is contained in sight (regard for other than God) is an
idol (something which involves dualism).- 1

473 In one he said: “Do not put out this candle (of sight), for
this sight is as a candle (lighting the way) to (interior) concen¬
tration.


1 i.f* " to perform The q LIT Ward acts of worship,’ p


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS zg

When you relinquish sight and phantasy (too soon), you will
have put out die candle of union at midnight."

In one he said: ' Put it out 1 —have no fear—that you mav
see myriads or sights in exchange;

For by Potting it out the candle of the spirit is increased:
(lover) 1 "^ nia ^ our (beloved) becomes your Majnun


A'ia


+ 7 —-- --***«- fiui given you ne

sweet to you m (at the time of) bringing it into existence.

He made it easy (blessed) to you, and do you take it gladly ■
do not throw yourself into anguish." J ‘

In one he said: "Let go all that belongs to self, for it is
wrong and had to comply with your nature."

(Many) different roads have Become easy (to follow'): every
onos religion has become (to him) as (dear) as life.

If God's making (religion) easy ivere the (right) mad, evert'
Jew and Zoroastrian would have knowledge of Ilim. 7

In one he said: “That (alone) is made easy (biessed) that «a,i
(nothmg but) spiritual food should be the life of the heart "
When the enjoyments of the (sensual) nature are past, like
brackish soil Lhcy raise no produce and crop.

The produce thereof is naught but penitence; the sale thereof
yields only loss, nothing more.

. not end; its (true) name ultimately

is hard. *


Distinguish the hard from the easy: consider (what is) the
goodhness of this and that in the end.

In one he saidi “Seek a master (teacher): you will not find 49°
loresight as to the end among the qualities derived from
ancestors.

F.very sort of religious sect foresaw the end (according to
their own surmise): of necessity they fell captive to error.”

1 n foresee the end is nut (as simple as) a hand-loom; other¬
wise, how would there have been difference in religions?

In one he said: “ You are the master, because you know the
master.

Be a man and be not subject to men. Go, take your own
head (choose your own way), and be not one w hose head is turn¬
ing (bewildered in search of a guide).”

In one he said: "All this (multiplicity) is one; whoever sees 49s
two is a squint-eyed manikin.”

In one he said: "How should a hundred be one? lie who
thinks this is surely mad.”


l ,{*‘ "extinguish the slight which regards ‘other,’ we nothing but
Uwi>


30 MATHNAWJ, BOOK I

The doctrines, every one, are contrary to each other: how
should the)' be one? Are poison and sugar one?

Until you pass beyond (the difference of) poison and sugar l
how will you catch a scent of unity and oneness?

Twelve books of this sty le and fashion were drawn up in
writing by that enemy to the religion of Jesus.

Shewing ftmo this difference lies m the form of the doctrine t
not in the real nature of the Way.

500 He had no scent (perception) of the unico]ority of Jesus, nor
had he a disposition from (imbued with) the tincture of the
dyeing-vat of jesus.

From that pure vat a garment of a hundred colours would
become as simple and one-coloured as light.

(This) b not the unicolority from which weariness ensues;
nay, it is (a case) like (that of) fishes and clear water:

Although there are thousands of colours on dry land* (yet)
fishes are at war with dry ness.

Who is the fish and what is the sea in (my) simile* that die
King Almighty' and Glorious should resemble them?

505 In (the world uf) eristenee myriads of seas and fishes prostrate
themselves in adoration before that Munificence and Bounty,

How many a rain of largesse hath rained, so that the sea
was made thereby to scatter pearls !

How many a sun of generosity hath shone, so that cloud and
sea learned to be bountiful!

The sunbeams of Wisdom struck on soil and clay, so that
the earth became receptive of the seed.

The soil is faithful to its trust, and whatever you have sown
in it* you carry away the (equivalent in) kind thereof without
fraud (on the part of the soil).

310 It h as derived this faithfulness from th at (Divine) faithfulness,

inasmuch as the sun of Justice has shone upon it.

Until springtide brings the token of God, the soil does not
reveal its secrets*

The Bounteous One who gave to an inanimate thing these
informations and this faithfulness and this righteousness.

His grace makes an inanimate thing informed, (w r hile) Hb
wrath makes blind the men of understanding.

Soul and heart cannot endure that ferment: to whom shall
I speak? There is not in the w r orld a single car (capable of
apprehension),

513 Wherever there w'as an ear, through Him it became an eye;
wherever th ere was a stone, through Him it became a jasper.

He is an alchemist — what is alchemy (compared with His
action)? Me is a giver of miracles (to prophets)—what is magic
(compared with these miracles)?


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 31

T hLj of praise (to Him) is (really) die omission of

praise on my part, for this (praise) is a proof of (mv) being,
and being is a sm.

It behoves (us) to be not-being in the presence of His Being:
m His presence what is (our) being? Blind and blue.

Were it not blind it would have been melted (consumed) by
Him: it would have known the heat of (the Divine) sun;

And were it not blue from mourning, how would this region
(of phenomenal existence) have (remained) frozen like ice?

Setting forth how the vizier incurred perdition (by engaging)
in this plot. *

, The ''isier was ignorant and heedless, like the (Jewish) king-
he was wrestling with the eternal and inevitable, ’

With a God so mighty' that in a moment fie causes a hundred
worlds like ours to come into existence from non-existence:

A hundred worlds like ours He displays to the sight, when
He makes your eye seeing by (the light of) Himself.

IF the world appears to you vast and bottomless, know that
to Qrnmpotence it is not (so much as) an atom.

1 his world p indeed, is die prison of your souls: oh, go in $25
yonder direction h for there lies your open country*

This world is finite, and truly that (other) is infinite: image
□nd torm are a barrier to that Reality,

The myriads of Pharaoh’s lances were shattered by (the hand
of) .Moses (armed) with a single staff.

Myriads were the therapeutic arts of Galen: before Jesus
and Jus (life-giving) breath they were a laughing-stock.

Myriads were the books of (pre-Islamic) poems : at the word
of an illiterate (prophet) they were (put to) shame.

(Confronted) with such an all-conquering Lord, how should 130
any one not die (to self), unless he be a vile"wretch?

Many a mind (strong and firm) as a mountain did He uproot;
the cunning bird He hung up by its two feet.

To sharpen the intelligence and wits is not the (right) way:
none but the broken (in spirit) wins the favour of the King.

Oh, many die amassers of treasure, digging holes (in search
of treasure), who became an ox’s beara (dupe) to that vain
schemer (the vizier)!

Who is the ox that you should become his beard? What is
earth that you should become its stubble 1 ?

When a woman became pale-faced (ashamed) of (her) w icked- sjj
ness, God metamorphosed her and made her Zuhra (the planet
Venus).

To make a woman Zuhra was metamorphosis: what (then) is
it to become earth and clay, O contumacious one?

1 Lslem][y, " dry herbage/*


32 MATHNA WI y BOOK I

Your spirit was bearing you towards the highest sphere (of
heaven): you went towards the water and the day amongst the
lowest (of the low).

By this fall you metamorphosed yourself from that (state of)
existence which was the envy of the (spiritual) intelligences.

Consider, then, how is (what is the character of) this meta¬
morphosis : compared with that metamorphosis (of the woirnn)
this (which you have suffered) is exceedingly vile.

no You urged the steed of ambition towards the stars: you did
not acknowledge Adam who was worshipped (by the angels).

After all, you are a son of Adain. O degenerate ! how long
will you regard lowness as nobility?

How long will you say, “ 1 will conquer a whole world, 1 will
mate this world full of myself”?

If the world should be filled with snow from end to end, the
glow of die sun would melt it with a single look.

God by a single spark (of His mercy) maketh naught his
{the vizier's) burden (of sin) and (the burden) of a hundred
viziers and a hundred thousand.

545 He maketh the essence of that (false) imagination to be
wisdom; He maketh the essence of that poisoned water to be
a (wholesome) drink.

That whicn raises doubt He tumeth into certainty; He
maketh 1 ovingkindne$$e$ grow From the causes of hatred.

He cherishcth Abraham in the fire; He tumeth fear into
security of spirit.

By His burning (destroying) of secondary causes l am dis¬
traught; in (my) fancies of Him 1 am like a sophist (sceptic or
agnostic).

How the vizier started another plan to mislead the
(Christian) folk.

The vkier formed in his mind another plan; he abandoned
preaching and sat alone in seclusion.

550 He inspired ardour in his disciples from (their) longing (to
see him); he remained in seclusion forty or fifty davs.

The popple became mad from longing for him. and on
account of being separated from his (spiritual) feeling and dis¬
course and intuition.

They were making supplication and lament, while he in
solitude was bent double by austerities.

They stud, " Without thee we have no light: how (what) is
the state of a blind man without a leader?

By way of showing favour (to us) and for God's sake, do not
keep us parted from thee any longer;

353 We are as children and thou art our nurse: do thou spread
over us that shadow (of thy protection)/ 1


the JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 33

He said, " My soul is not far from them that love (me), but
there is no permission to come forth.*’

in repmtchT” “ ** intCTCM “®*. and ^e disciples came

t^S 5JSWSAS 2

hi.Xur f wT* 18

Steals!?«»— *

Allah! Allah! do not thou (O vizier) treat us with such

nSa J v °'L kl " dneSS t0 ‘ d L y * d /' not fP uE off till) to-morrow.

. , 1 s . th J heart give to thee (consent) tliat these who have
lost their hearts (to thee) should at last, being without thee
become (numbered) amongst them that have nothing left?

! he ? 5,11 are writhing like fishes on dry land; let loose the
water, remove the dam from the stream.

J> 5 “ * ,lt l ewIlQm •here is none in die world, for God’s sake
for God s sake, come to the aid of thy people 1 ”


How ike vizier refused the request of the disciples.
c J. fe *f‘ d: V ? ew * re * 9 L> nslaved by words and talk, ye who i6 *

'o A& ,,n8) of ^ *** of lh ' «*& «■

—■ ake

l he car ut the head is the cotton-wool of the ear of the
conscience: until the former becomes deaf, that inward (ear)
is deaf. ' /


Become without sense and without ear and without thoueht
that ye may hear the call (of God to the soul), * Return!'" ‘
So long as thou art (engaged) in the conversation of wake-
^0 ness, how wiJt thou catch any scent of the conversation of


Our speech and action is the exterior journey ; the interior s?>>
journey is above the sky.

I he (physical) sense saw (only) dryness, because it was bom
oi dryness (earth): the Jesus of the spirit set foot on the sea.

1 he journey of the dry body befell on drv land, (but) the
journey of the spirit set foot (took place) in the heart of the sea.

.Since thy hie has passed in travelling on land, now mountain,
now nver t now desert,

Whence wilt thou gain the Water of Life? Where wilt thou
cleave the waves of the Sea?

The waves of earth are our imagination and understanding 1? ,


34 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

and thought; the waves of water are (mystical) self-effacement
and intoxication and death {Jana).

Whilst thou art in this (sensual) intoxication, thou art far
from that (mystical) intoxication; whilst thou art drunken with
this, thou art blind to that cup.

Outward .speech and talk is as dust: do thou for a time make
a habit of silence. Take heed !

//ok? the disciples repeated their request that he should
interrupt his seclusion.

I hey all said: “O sage who seekcst a crevice (means of
evasion), say not to us this (word of) guile and harshness.

Lay on the beast a burden in proportion to its endurance,
lay on the weak a task in proportion to their strength.
sSo 1 be bait for every bird is according to its (the bird's) measure
(capacity); how should a fig be the food (lure) for every bird?

If you give a babe bread instead of milk, take it (for granted)
that the poor babe will die of the bread;

(Yet) afterwards, when it grows teeth, that babe will of its
own accord ask for bread.

When an unfledged bird begins to fly, it becomes a moutliful
for any rapacious cat;

(But) when it grows wings, it will fly of itself without trouble
and w ithout whistling (prompting), good or bad.

iTiy speech makes the Devil silent, thy words make our ears
(full of) intelligence.

Our ears are (full of) intelligence when thou art speaking;
our Jrv land is a river when thou art the ocean.

With thee, earth is better to us than heaven, O thou by
whom (the world from) Arctums to the Fish is illumined!

Without thee, darkness is over heaven for us, (but) com¬
pared with thee, O Moon, who is this heaven at all?

The heavens have the form of sublimity, (but) the essence
of sublimity belongs to the pure spirit.

>9® 'file form of sublimity is for bodies; beside the essence (reality)
bodies are (mere) names."

7 he refusal of the vaster to interrupt his seclusion.

He said: "Cut short your arguments, let my advice make its
way into your souls and hearts.

If 1 am trustworthy, the trustworthy is not doubted, even
though 1 should call heaven earth.

If I am (endowed with) perfection, why (this) disbelief in
my perfection.' and if I am not (perfect), why this molestation
and annoyance?

I will not go forth from this seclusion, because I am occupied
with inward experiences.”


the Jewish king and the Christians


35


Hmo the disciples raised objections against the vizier’s
secluding himself.

„J hC L aJI r° Vi7 ' kr ' k is nat disbelief: our words ares*
not as the words of strangers.

I he tears of our eves are running because of our separation
souls l ' a ^ rer s, S^ going (up) from the midst of our

A babe does not contend with its nurse, but it weeps, although
it Knows neither evil nor good. B

We are as die harp and thou art striking (it with) the plectrum
(playing on it): the lamentation is not from us, it is thou that
art making lamentation.

U e are as the flute, and the music in us is From thee: we are
as the mountain, and the echo in us is from thee.

We are as pieces of chess (engaged) in victor,- and defeat: our **»
V,C w?l? r IS , ^ rom diee, O thou whose qualities are comely 1

VVho are we, O thou soul of our souls, that we should remain
in being beside thee?

We and our existences are (really) non-existences: thou art
me absolute Bemg which manifests die perishable (causes
phenomena to appear). 1

We all are lions, but liuns on a banner: because of the wind
they are rushing onward from moment to moment.

Their onward rush is visible, and the wind is unseen: mav
that which is unseen not fail from us!

Our wind (that whereby we are moved) and our being are of 60s
wihoie existence is from thy bringing (us) into beinc.
Thou didst show-the delightful ness of Being unto not-being
(after) thou hadst caused not-bcing to fall in love with thee
Take not away the delightfuIncas of thy bounty ■ take not away
thy dessert and wine ana wine-cup! '

And if thou take it away, who is there that will make inquiry?

How should the picture strive with the painter? T

Dd not look 011 us, do not fix thy gaae on u&i look on thine
own kindness and generosity.

We were nat y and there was no demand on our part, (yet) s™
thy grace was hearkening to our unspoken prayer (and calling
us into existence)/* s

Before the painter and the brush the picture is helpless anti
bound like a child in the womb.

Before Omnipotence all the people of the (Divine) court of
audience (the world) are as helpless as die (embroiderer's)
fabric before the needle. f

Now He makes the picture thereon (one of) the Devil,now (of)

Adam; now He makes the picture thereon (one of) joy, now (one
of) grief. v


36 MATHNAWf| BOOK I

There is no power (to any one) that he should move a hand
in defence; no (right of) speech, that he should utter a word
concerning injury or benefit.

Atj Recite from the Qur an the interpretation of (r.r. a test which
interprets) the (preceding) verse: God said, Thou didst not
throw tchm thou thretoest.

If we let fly an arrow* that (action) is not from us: we are
(only) the bow* and the shooter of the arrow is God.

This is not jubr (compulsion); it is the meaning of jubbdri
(almightinm): the mention of almightiness is for the sake of
(inspiring us with) humility.

Our humility is evidence of necessity, (but) our sense of
guilt is evidence of freewill.

If there were not freewill* what is this shame? And what is
this sorrow and guilty confusion and abashment?

620 Why is there chiding between masters and pupils? Why is
the mind changing (so as to depart) from plans (already formed) ?

And if you say that he (the assertnr of freewill) takes no heed
of His (God's) compulsion, (and that) God’s moon has become
hidden in His cloud*

There is a good answer to this; if you hearken, you will re¬
linquish unbelief and incline towards the (true) religion.

Remorse and humility occur at the time of illness: the time
of illness is wholly wakefulness (of conscience).

At the time when you are becoming ill, you pray God to
forgive your trespass;

tzi The foulness of your sin is shown to you* you resolve to
come back to die (right) way;

You make promises and vows that henceforth your chosen
course (of action) will be nothing but obedience (to God):

Therefore it has become certain that illness gives to you con¬
science and wakefulness.

Note, then, this principle, 0 thou that seekest the principle;
every one who sutlers pain has caught the scent (thereof):

The more wakeful any one is* the more full of suffering he
is; the more aware (of God) he is, the paler he is in coun¬
tenance.

If you are aware of His jabr (compulsion), where is your
humility? Where is your feeling of (being loaded with) the
chain o( tils jahbdri (almightiness)?

How should one make merry w ho is bound in chains? When
does the captive in prison behave Like the man who b free?

And if you consider that your foot is shackled (and that) the
king's officers are sitting (as custodians) over you.

Then do not act like an officer (tyrannously) towards die
helpless* inasmuch as that is not the nature and habit of a
helpless mam


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 37

Since you do not feel His compulsion, do not say (that you
are compelled); and if you feel it, where is the sign of vour
feeling?

In every act for which you have Inclination, you are clearly 63s
conscious of your power (to perform it),

(But) m every act for which you have no inclination and
desire, in regard to that (act) you have become a necessitarian,
saying, “This is from God."

The prophets arc necessitarians in regard to the works of
this world, (white) the infidels are necessitarians in regard to
the works of the next world.

To the prophets the works of the next world arc (a matter
of) freewill; to the foolish the works of this world are (a matter
of) freewill, 1

Because every bird flies to its own congener: it (follows)
behind, and its spirit (goes) before, (leading it on).

Inasmuch as the infidels were congeners of Sijj,n (Hell), they 640
were well-disposed to the prison (n)'w) of tills world.

Inasmuch as the prophets were congeners of Httiyyin (Heaven),
they went towards the ‘Illiyydn of spirit and heart.

This discourse hath no end, but let us (now) relate the story
to its completion.

How the rimer made the disciples lose hope of hit
abandoning seclusion.

The vizier cried out from within, "O disciples, be this made
known to you from me.

That Jesus hath given me a such-like message: ‘ Be separated
from all friends and kinsfolk.

Set thy face to the wall, sit alone, and choose to be secluded &ts
even from thine own existence,’

After this there is no permission (for me) to speak; after this
I have nothing to do with talk.

Farewell, O friends! I am dead: I have carried my belongings
up to the Fourth Heaven,

In order that beneath the fiery sphere I may not burn like
firewood in woe and perdition,

(But) henceforth may sit beside Jesus at the top of the Fourth
Heaven."

How the vizier appointed each one of the amirs separately
as his successor.

And then he summoned those amirs one hy one and con- 650
versed with each (of them) alone.

He said to each one, “In the religion of Jesus thou art the
vicar of God and my khalifa (vicegerent).


3 ® MATHNAWf, BOOK I

And those other amirs art: thy followers; Jeans hath made
all of them thy assistants.

Any amir who lifts his neck (in rebellion), seize him and
either kill liim or hold him captive;

But do not declare this whilst I am alive: do not seek this
supreme authority until I am dead,

6 ** Until I am dead, do not reveal this: do not lay claim to
sovereignty and dominion.

Here is this scroll and the ordinances of the Messiah: recite
them distinctly, one by one, to his people."

Thus he spoke to each amir separately, (saying ), t€ There is
no vicar in the religion of God except thee/ J

He honoured each, one by one, (in this way): whatever he
said to that (amir) he also said to this.

To each he gave one scroll: every one was purposely the
contrary of the other,

Gfi* All the scrolls were different, like the forms of the letters (of
the alphabet) from yd to atif.

The rule (laid down) in this scroll was contrary' to the rule
in that: we have already explained (the nature of) this con¬
tradiction.

How the vizier killed himself in seclusion.

After that, lie shut the door for other forty days (and then)
killed himself and escaped from his existence.

When the people learned of his death, there came to pass at
his grave the scene of the Resurrection 1 .

So great a multitude gathered at his grave, tearing their hair,
rending their garments in wild grief for him,

6*5 That only God can reckon the number of them—Arabs and
Turks and Greeks and Kurds.

They put his (grave’s) earth on their heads; they deemed
anguish for him to be the remedy for themselves.

During a month those multitudes over his grave made a
way for blood from ihdr eyes (shed tears of anguish).

How the people of Jesus —on Mm be peuce!—asked the amirs T
Which om of you is the successor? "

After a month the people said, 14 Q chiefs, which of (the)
amirs is designated in his place.

That we may acknowledge him as our religious leader instead
of him (the vizier), and give our hands and skirts into his hand?

Since the sun is gone and has branded us (left the brand of
sorrow in our hearts), i$ not a lamp the (only) resource in his
stead?

1 J>. a scene of tumultuous prtef a nd lamcnCation.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 39

Since union with the beloved has vanished from before our
eyes, we must needs have a vicar as a memorial of him (iV.
one who will recall him to our memory).

Since the rose is past and the garden ravaged* From whom
shall we get the perfume of the rose? From rosewater/ J

Inasmuch as God comes not into sight, these prophets are
the vicars of God.

Nay T I have said (this) wrongly; for if you suppose that the
vicar and He who is represented by the vicar are tvvo t it (such
a thought) is bad, not good.

Nay; they are two so long as you are a worshipper of form, 675
(but) they have become one to him who has escaped from
(consciousness of) form.

When you look at Ehe form, your eye is two; look at its (the
eye's) light, which grew from the eye.

Tis impossible to distinguish the light of the two eyes, when
a man has cast his look upon their light*

If ten lamps are present in (one) place, each differs in form
from another:

To distinguish without any doubt the light of each* when
you turn your face towards their light, is impossible*

if you count a hundred apples or a hundred quinces, they
do not remain a hundred (but) become one* when you crush
them (together).

In things spiritual there is no division and no numbers; in
things spiritual there is no partition and no individuals.

Sweet is the oneness of the Friend with His friends: catch
(and ding to) the foot of spirit* Form is headstrong 1 *

Make headstrong form waste away with tribulation, that be¬
neath it you may tlescry unity, like a (buried) treasure;

And it you waste it not away* His favours will waste It—oh,
my heart is His vassal.

He even showeth Himself to (our) hearts, He seweth the &s 3
tattered frock of the dervish 2 .

Simple were we and all one substance; we were all without
head and without foot yonder.

We were one substance, like the Sun; we were knotless and
pure, like water.

When that goodly Light took form, it became (many in)
number like the shadows of a battlement.

Rase ye the battlement with the manjattu} (mangonel), that
difference may vanish from amidst this company (of shadows).

I would have explained this (matter) with (eager) con tendon, &90
but I fear lest some (weak) mind may stumble.

The points (Involved in it) are sharp as a sword of steel; if you
have not the shield (of capacity to understand), turn back and flee I

1 /-f. opposed id spiritual unity. * A*. Hfr unites the fhjltic with Himself.


4<5 MATHNAWf > BOOK I

Do not come without shield against this adamant (keen blade),
for the sword is not ashamed of cutting

For this cause I have put the sword in sheath t that none who
misreads may read contrariwise (in a sense contrary to the true
meaning of my words).

We come (now) to complete the bile and (speak) of the
loyalty of the multitude of the righteous,

695 Who rose up after (the death of) this leader, demanding a
vicar in his place.

The quarrel 0/ the amirs concerning the succession.

One of those amirs advanced and went before that loyal -
minded people.

“Behold/' said he, “I am that man's vicar: I am the vicar
of J esu$ at the present time.

Look, this scroll is my proof that after him the viearate
belongs to me. 11

Another amir came forth from ambush 2 his pretension re¬
garding the vicegerency was the same;

7&0 He too produced a scroll from under his arm, so that in
both (amirs) there arose the Jewish anger.

The rest of the amirs, one after another, drawing swords of
keen mettle,

Each with a sword and a scroll in his hand, fell to combat
like raging elephants.

Hundreds oi thousands of Christians were slain, so that there
were mounds of severed heads;

Blood flowed T on left and right, like a torrent; mountains of
this dust (of bailie) rose in the ais\
jus The seeds of dissension which he (the vizier) had sown had
become a calamity (cause of destruction) to their heads.

The walnuts (bodies) were broken, and those which had the
kernel had, after being slain, a spirit pure and fair.

Slaughter and death which befalls the bodily frame is like
breaking pomegranates and apples:

That which h sweet becomes pomegranate-syrup, and that
which is rotten is naught but noise:

That which has reality' is made manifest (after death), and
that which is rotten is put to shame T
71* Go, strive after reality, O worshipper of form, inasmuch as
reality is the wing on form's body.

Consort with the followers of reality, that you may both win
the gift and be generous (in giving youisdf up to God).

Beyond dispute, in this body the spirit devoid of reality is
even as a wooden sw ord in the sheath :

Whilst it remains in the sheath, it is (apparently) valuable.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 41

(but) when it has come forlli it is an implement (only fit) for
burning.

Do not take a wooden sword into the battle! First see
(whether your sword is a real one), in order that your plight
may pot be wretched.

If it is made of wood, go, seek another; and if it is adamant, 71*
march forward joyously.

1 he sword (of reality) is in the armoury of the saints: to see
(and associate with) them is for you (as precious as) the Elixir.

All the wise have said this same thing: the wise man 1 is
a (Divine) mercy to created beings.

If you would buy a pomegranate, buy (it when it is) laughing
(having its rind cleft open), so that its laughter (openness) mav
give information as to its seeds.

Oh, blessed is its laughter, for through its mouth it shows
the heart, like a pearl from the casket of the spirit.

Unblcsi was the laughter (openness) of the red anemone, 720
front whose mouth appeared the blackness of its heart.

! u? lau & hin S Pomegranate makes the garden laughing (gay
and blooming); companionship with (holy) men makes vnu one
of the (holy) men.

I hough you be rock or marble, you will become a jewel when
you reach the man of heart (the saint).

. the love of the holy ones within your spirit; do not
give vour heart (to aught) save to the love of them whose
hearts are glad.

Go not to the neighbourhood of despair: there are hopes.

Go not in the direction of darkness: there are suns.

Ihe heart leads you into the neighbourhood of the men of 7:;,
heart (the saints); the body leads you into the prison of water
and earth.

Oh, give vour heart food from (conversation with) one who
is in accord with it; go, seek (spiritual) advancement from one
who is advanced.


flew honour w as paid to the description of Mustafa {Mohammed),
on whom be peace, which teas mentioned in the Gospel.

The name of Mustafa was in the Gospel—(Mustafa) the
chief of the prophets, the sea of purity.

There was mention of his (external) characteristics and ap¬
pearance; there was mention of his warring and fasting and
eating.

A party among the Christians, for the sake of the Divine
reward, whenever (in reading the Gospel) they came to that
name and discourse,

1 J>, the prophet or saint who knows God.


4 s MATHNAWf, BOOK I

ft* Would bestow kisses on that noble name and stoop their faces
towards that beauteous description.

In this tribulation of which we have told, that part}' were
secure from tribulation and dread,

Secure from die mischief of the amirs and the vizier, seeking
refuge in the protection of the Name of Ahmad (Mohammed),

Their offspring also multiplied: the Light of Ahmad aided
and befriended them.

And the other party among the Christians (who) were holding
the Name of Ahmad in contempt,

735 They became contemptible and despised through dissensions
caused by the evil-counselling and evil-plotting vizier;

Moreover, their religion and their law became corrupted in
consequence of the scrolls which set forth all perversely.

The Name of Ahmad gives such help as this, so that (one
may judge) how his Light keeps guard (over his followers),

Since the Name of Ahmad became (to the Christians) an
impregnable fortress, what then must be the Essence of that
trusted Spirit?

The story of another Jewish king who endeavoured
to destroy the religion of Jesus,

After this irremediable bloodshed which befell through the
affliction (brought upon the Christians) by the vizier.

Another king, of the progeny of that Jew, addressed himself
to the destruction of the people of Jesus.

If you desire information about this second outbreak, read
the chapter of the Quriin (beginning): By Heaven which both
the (zodiacal) signs .

This second king set foot in the evil way that was originated
by the former king.

Whosoever establishes an evil way (practice), towards him
goes malediction every hour.

The righteous departed and their ways remained, and from
the vile there remained (nothing but) injustice and execrations,
745 Until the Resurrection, the face of every congener of those
wicked men who comes into existence is turned towards that
one (who belongs to his own kind).

Vein by vein 1 is this sweet water and bliter water, flow ing in
(Cod’s) creatures until the blast of the trumpet (at the Resur¬
rection).

To the righteous k the inheritance of the sweet water. What
is that inheritance? We hare caused (those of Our servants whom
We have chosen) to inherit the Book.

If you will consider, the supplications of the seekers (of God)
are rays (proceeding) from the substance of prophethood,

1 /*. separate snd never mingling with each ocher.


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 43

I lie rays are circling with the substances (whence they spring):

gucs (ultimately) in the direction where that (substance)is.
The window-gleam runs round the house, because the sun ^c*
goes from sign to sign of the zodiac.

Any one who has affinity with a star (planet) has a concur¬
rence (of qualities) with his star.

If his ascendant star be Venus* his whole inclination and love
and desire is for joy;

And if he be one born under Mars* one whose nature is to
shed blood, he seeks war and malignity and enmity.

Beyond the (material) stars are stars in which is ho conflagra¬
tion or sinister aspect*

(Stans) moving in other heavens, not these seven heavens
known to all,

(Stars) immanent in the radiance of the light of God T neither
joined to each other not separate from each other.

When any one's ascendant (fortune) is (from) those stars, his
soul burns the infidels in driving (them) off.

His anger is not (like) die anger of the man bom under Mars
perverse 1 , and of such nature that it is (now) dominant and
(now) dominated.

1 he dominant light (of the saints) is secure from defect and
dimness between the two fingers of the Light of God,

God hath scattered that light over (all) spirits, (but only) the ?so
fortunate have held up their skirts (to receive it);

And he (that is fortunate), having gained that strown largesse
of light, has turned his face away from all except God,

Whosoever h as lacked (such) a ski rt of 1 0ve is 1 eft without share
in that strown largesse of light.

The faces of particulars are set towards the universal:
nightingales play the game of love with the rose.

The ox has his colour outside, but in the case of a man seek
the red and yellow hues within.

The good colours are from the vat of purity; the colour of ?6s
the wicked is from the black water of iniquity.

The baptism of God is the name of that subtie colour; the curse
of God is the smell of that gross colour.

That which is of the sea is going to the sea: it is going to
the same place whence it came—

From the mountain-top the swift-rushing torrents, and from
our body the soul whose motion is mingled with love.

1 Literally, “ with fsce inverted / 1 r>, directed towards base ends.


44


MATHNAWf, BOOK t


Ilott* the Jewish king made afire and plated an idol beside it, saying*
c< Whoever hows dawn to this idol shall escape the fire "

Now sec what a plan this currish Jew contrived! He set up
an idol beside the fire,

77 o Saying P u He that bows down to this idol is saved, and if he

bow not, he shall sit in the heart of the fire/"

Inasmuch as he did nnt give due punishment to this idol of
sdf J , from the idol of his self the other idol was bom.

The idol of your self is the mother of fall) idols, because that
(material) idol is (only) a snake, while this (spiritual) idol is a
dragon.

The self is (as) iron and stone (whence fire is produced),
while the (material) idol is (as) the sparks: those sparks are
quieted (quenched) by water*

(But) how should the stone and Iron be allayed by water?
How should a man, having these twain, be secure?

The idol is the black water in a jug; the self is a fountain for
the black water.

That sculptured idol is like the black torrent; the idol-making
self is a fountain full of water for it,

A single piece of stone w r ill break a hundred pitchers, but
the fountain is jetting forth water incessantly-

Tis easy to break an idol, very easy; to regard the self as
easy (to subdue) is folly, folly*

6 son, if you seek (to know) the form of the self, read the
story of Hell with its seven gates,

?e* Every moment (there proceeds from the self) an act of deceit,
and in every one of those deceits a hundred Pharaohs are
drowned together with their followers.

Flee to the God of Moses and to Moses, do not from
Pharaoh's quality (rebellious insolence) spill the water of the
Faith.

I,ay your hand on (cleave to) the One (God) and Ahmad
(Mohammed)! O brother, escape from the Bu Jahl of die body!


How a child began la speak amidst the fire and urged the
people to throtc themselves into the fire.

That Jew brought to that idol a woman with her child, and
the fire was blazing, +

lie took the child from her and cast it into the fire: the
woman was affrighted and withdrew her heart from (abandoned)
her faith.

7 s 5 She was about to bow down before the idol (when) the child
cried, “Verily, I am not dead.

■ Nnfi, this appetitive aoul F “ the flesh."


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 45

Come in, O mother: 1 am happy here, although in appear¬
ance 1 am amidst the fire.

The fire is a spelt that binds the eye for the sake of screening
(the truth); this is (in reality) a Divine mercy which has
raised its head from the collar (has been manifested from the
Unseen).

Come in, mother, and see the evidence of God T that thou
mayst behold the delight of God's elect.

Come in s and see water that has the semblance of fire; (come
away) from a world which is (really) fire and (only) has the
semblance of water.

Come in, and see the mysteries of Abraham, who in the fire 790
found cypress and jessamine.

I was seeing death at the time of birth from thee: sore was
my dread of falling from thee;

(But) when I was bom, 1 escaped from the narrow prison
(of the womb) into a world of pleasant air and beautiful
colour.

Now 1 deem the (earthly) world to be like the womb, since
in this lire l have seen such rest:

In this fire I havd seen a world wherein every atom possesses
the (life-giving) breath of Jesus.

Lo. (it is) a world apparently non-existent (but) essentially &j
existent, while that (other) world is apparently existent (but)
has no permanence.

Come in, mother ( (I beseech thee) by the right of mother¬
hood: see this fire, how it hath no fieri ness.

Come in, mother, for felicity is come; come in, mother, do
not let fortune slip from thy hand.

Thuu hast seen the power of that (Jewish) cur: come in T that
thou mayst see the power of God's grace.

Tis (only) out of pity that I am drawing thy feet (hither), for
indeed such is my rapture that 1 have no care for thee.

Come in and call the others also, for the King has spread a 8*0
(festal) table within the fire.

O true believers, come in, all of you : except this sweetness
('adhbf) all is torment ^adiuib).

Oh, come in, all of you, like moths; (come) into this fortune
which hath a hundred springtimes/*

(Thus) he was crying amidst that multitude: the souls of the
people were filled with asve.

After that, the folk, men and women (alike), cast themselves
unwittingly 1 into the fire—

Without custodian, without being dragged, for love of the
Friend, because from Him h the sweetening of every bitter¬
ness—


1 Literally, "* beside theoiKivts / 1


46 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Until it came to pass that the (king's) myrmidons were
holding back the people, saying, "Do not enter the fireP'

The Jew became black-faced (covered with shame) and dis¬
mayed; he became sorry and sick at heart.

Because the people grew more loving (ardent) in their Faith
and more firm in mortification (fand) of the body .

Thanks (be to God) f the Devil's plot caught him in its toils;
thanks (be to God), the Devil saw himself disgraced 1 .

Hro That which he was nibbing (the shame he was inflicting) on
the faces of those persons (the Christians) was all accumulated
on the visage of that vile wretch.

He who was busy rending the garment (honour and integrity)
of the people—his own (garment) was rent p (while) they were
unhurt.

Note the mouth remained a wry of a man who pronounced
the name of Mohammed, on whom be peace ^ derisively.

He made his mouth wry and called the name of Ahmad
(Mohammed) in derision : his mouth remained awry*

Hu came back, saving, “Pardon me, O Mohammed, O thou
to whom belong the (Divine) gifts of esoteric knowledge.

In my folly 1 was ridiculing thee, (but) i myself was related
to ridicule and deserving it.”

ms When God wishes to rend the veil of any one (expose him
to shame). He turns his inclination towards reviling holy men.
When God wishes to hide the blame of any one, he (that
person) does not breathe a word of blame against the blame¬
worthy.

When God wishes to help us, He turns our inclination to¬
wards humble lament*

Oh, happy the eye tint is weeping for His sake 1 Oh p fortunate
the heart that is seared - for His sake I
The end of every weeping is laughter at last; the man who
foresees the end is a blessed servant (of God).

Wherever is flowing water, there is greenery: wherever are
running tears, (the Divine) mercy is shown.

Be moaning and moist-eyed like the water-wheel, that green
herbs may spring up from the courtyard of your soul.

If you desire tears, have mercy on one who shed* tears; if
you desire mercy, show mercy to the weak,

Horn the fire reproached the Jetmh king.

The king turned his face to the fire, saying, 11 0 fieree-
tempered one, where is thy world-consuming natural dis¬
position?

How art thou not burning? What has become of thy specific
1 LUemLIy. " black-faced.” 1 Literally, 11 roasted**


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 4-

propertv ? Or has thy intention changed because of our
fortune? 1

Thou hast no pity (even) on the fire-worshipper; how (then)
has he been saved who does not worship thee?

Never, Q fire, art thou patient: how bumest thou not? What
is it? Hast thou not the power?

Is this a spell, I wonder, that binds the eve or the mind?
How doea the lofty pyre not bum ?

Has some one bewitched thee? Or is it magic, or is thy
unnatural behaviour 5 from our fortune? " J

The fire said: " I am the same, I am fire: come in, that thou
mayst fed my heat.

Mvnature and element have not changed: I am the sword of s™
God and by (His) leave I cut.

The Turcoman dogs fawn at the tent-door before the guest,

But if any one having the face of a stranger pass by the tent’
he will see the dogs rushing at him like lions.

I am not less than a dog in devotion, nor is God less than a
Turcoman in life (living power).”

If the fire of your nature nuke you suffer pain, it bums by
command of the Lord of religion;

If the fire of your nature give you joy, (that is because) the sj;
Lord of religion puts joy therein.

When you feel pain, ask pardon of God; pain, by command
of the Creator F is efficacious.

When He pleases, pain itself becomes joy; bondage 3 itself
becomes freedom.

Air and earth and water and fire are (His) slaves: with you
and me they are dead, but with God they are alive.

Before God, fire is always standing (ready to do His behest),
writhing continually day and night, like a lover.

If you strike stone on iron, it (die fire) leaps out: ’tis by a,c
God’s command that it puts forth its foot.

Do not strike together the iron and stone of injustice, for
these two generate like man and woman.

The stone and the iron are indeed causes, but look higher,

O good man!

for this (external) cause was produced by that (spiritual)
cause:when did a cause ever proceed from itself without a cause?

And those causes which guide the prophets on their way are
higher than these (external) causes.

That (spiritual) cause makes this (external) cause operative;
sometimes, again, it makes it fruitless and ineffectual.

(Ordinary) minds are familiar with this (external) cause, but
the prophets arc familiar with those (spiritual) causes,

1 I.t. because Fate SO ordained.
f Literally, ,b the eonrniriety to thy nature.'*


* Literally, “ the Fetter / 1


48 MATHNAWi , BOOK I


S50


What is (the meaning of) this {word) '‘cause” (sahab) in
Arabic? Say: “cord” ( rasan ). This cord came into this well
(the -world) by (Divine) artifice.

The revolution of the water-wheel causes the oord (to move),
(but) not 10 see the mover of the water-wheel is an error.

Beware, beware! Do not regard these cords of causation in
the world as (deriving their movement) from the giddy wheel

Lest you remain empty and giddy like the (celestial) wheel,
lest through brainlessness you burn like markh wood.

By the command of God air becomes fire: both are drunken
with the wine of God.

O son, when you open your eyes you will see that from God
too are the water of clemency and the fire of anger.

Had not the soul of the wind been informed by God, how
would it have distinguished (the believers and unbelievers)
amongst the people of* Ad ?


The story of the mind which destroyed the people of "Ad in the
time of {the prophet) Hud, on whom be peace .

Hud drew a line round the believers: the wind would become
soft (subside) when it reached that place,

(Although) it was dashing to pieces in the air all who were
outside of the line.

Likewise Shayban the shepherd used to draw a visible line
round his flock

Whenever he went to the Friday service at prayer-time, m
order that the wolf might not raid and ravage there :

No wolf would go into that (circle), nor would any sheep

stray bevond that mark; ,

The wind of the wolf’s and sheeps’ concupiscence was barred
because of (by) the circle of the man of God.

66 a Even so, to those -who know' God { l driftin) the wind of Death
is soft and pleasant as the breeze (that wafts the scent) of (loved)

ones like Joseph. .

The fire did not set its teeth in Abraham : how should it bite
him, since he is the chosen of God?

The religious were not afflicted by the fire of lust which bore
all the rest down to the bottom of the earth.

The waves of the sea, when they charged on by God’s com¬
mand, discriminated the people of Moses from the Egyptians.

The earth, when the (Divine) command came, drew Qanin
(Korah) with his gold and throne into its lowest depth,
ssj The water and clay, when it fed on the breath of Jesus,
spread wings and pinions, became a bird, and flew.

Your glorification (of God) is an exhalation from the water


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 49

and day (of your body); it became a bird of Paradise through
the breathing (into it) of your heart's sincerity.

Mount Sinai , from (seeing) the radiance of Moses, began to
dance, became a perfect Sun, and was freed from blemish.

What wonder if the mountain became a venerable Sufi? The
body of Moses also was (formed) from a piece of clay.

How the Jewish king scoffed and denied and would not accept
the counsel of his intimates.

The king of the Jews beheld these marvellous things, (but)
he had naught (to say) except mockery and denial.

His counsellors said, “Do not let (this injustice) go beyond b»
bounds, do not drive the steed of obstinacy so far.”

He handcuffed the counsellors and confined them, he com¬
mitted one injustice after another 1 .

When die matter reached this pass, a shout came_“Hold

thy foot (stop), O cur! lor Our vengeance is come.”

*^ftcr that, the lire blazed up iorLy ells high, became a rincr
and consumed those Jews. *’

from fire was their origin in the beginning: they went (back)
to their origin in the end, 1

That company were born of (ire; the way of particulars is
towards the universal.

They' were only a fire to consume the true believers- their
nrc consumed itself like rubbish.

„ He mother is Hdiciya (Hell-fire)— Htmiya shall become
Jus cell (abode).

Ihe mother of the child is (always) seeking it; the fun da-
mentals pursue the derivatives.

If water is imprisoned in a tank, the wind sucks it up, for it
(the wind) belong? to the original (source):

It Sets it free, it Wafts it away to its source, little bv little, so
that you do not see its wafting;

And our souls likewise this breath (of ours) steals away, little
by little, from the prison of the world.

Ihe perl times of our (good) words ascend even unto Him h
ascending from us whither God knoweth*

Our breaths soar up with the choice (words), as a gift from
us, to the abode of evcTlastmgness;

Then comes to us the recompense of our speech, a double
(recompense) thereof, as a mercy from (God) the Glorious;

1 hen He causes us to repair to (makes us utter) good words hb^
like those (already uttered), that His servant may obtain (some¬
thing more) of what he has obtained.

Thus do they (our good words) ascend while it (the Divine
1 laterally, “he made injunct (fo be) Jink on link, iji. continuouj, F *

N H


4


5 ° MATHNAWf t BOOK I

mercy) descends continually: mayst thou never cease to keep
up that (ascent and descent) J

Let us speak Persian 1 : the meaning is that this attraction
(by which God draws the soul towards Himself) comes from
the same quarter whence came that savour (spiritual delight
experienced in and after prayer).

The eyes of every' set of people remain (turned) in the direc¬
tion where one day they satisfied a (longing for) delight.

T he delight of (every) kind is certainty in its own kind (con¬
gener): the delight of the part, observe, is in its whole;

S90 Or else, that (part) is surely capable of (attachment to) a
(different) kind and, when it has attached itself thereto, be¬
comes homogeneous with it,

As (for instance) water and bread, which were not our con¬
geners, became homogeneous with us and increased within us
(added to our bulk and strength).

Water and bread have not the appearance of being our con¬
geners, (but) from consideration of the end (final result) deem
them to be homogeneous (with us).

And if our delight is (derived) from something not homo¬
geneous, that (thing) will surely resemble the congener.

That which (only) bears a resemblance is a loan: a loan is
impermanent in the end.

figs Although the bird is delighted by (the fowler’s) whistle, it
takes fright when it (sees him and) does not find its own con¬
gener.

Although the thirsty' man is delighted by the mirage, he runs
away when he comes up to it, and seeks for water.

Although the insolvent are pleased with base gold, yet that
(gold) is put to shame in the mint.

(Take heed) lest gildedness (imposture) cast you out of the
(right) way, lest false imagination cast you into the well.

Seek the story (illustrating this) from (the book of) KaJila
(and Dimna), and search out the moral (contained) in the story.

Selling forth how tke beasts of chase told the lion to trust
in God and cease from exerting himself,

oon A number of beasts of chase in a pleasant valley were harassed
by a lion.

Inasmuch as the lion was (springing) from ambush and carry¬
ing them away , that pasturage had become unpleasant to them all.

They made a plot: they came to the lion, saving, "Wo wili
keep thee full-fed by means of a (fixed) allowance/

Do not go after any prey beyond thy allow ance, in order that
this grass may not become bitter to us."

* The five preceding verses are in Arabic.


the lion and the beasts

Hous the lion answered the beasts and explained the
advantage of exertion.


5 r


^ es » a ;?'d * ie > if I s&e (find) good faith (on your part),
JJJJ Bakr 1 ’ ^ ° ftCn h3VC 1 ? Suffertd J frauds from Zayd

k;»! an L d T e ta - *■** the <=™ning and fraud of men, I am 903
bitten by the sting of (human) snake and scorpion ;

»t « 1 V /° TS A m f rdU(i ari d spite is the man of

the flesh (nafs) Jving in wait within me*

My ear heard ‘The believer is not bitten (twice),’ and
adopted (this) saymg of the Prophet with heart and soul,”

Hotc the beasts asserted the superiority of trust in God to
exertion and acquisition „

They all said; "Q knowing sage, let precaution alone: it is
oi no avail against the Divme decree.

In precaution is the embroilment of broil and woe: go. put

thy trust In God: trust in God is better. S ’ P

Do not grapple with Destiny, O fierce and furious one, lest 9-
Destiny also pick a quarrel with thee.

One must be dead in presence of die decree of God. so that
no blow may come from the Lord of the daybreak ”

Ham the lion upheld the superiority of exertion and acquisition
to tryst in Cod and resignation ,

t "(kut) if trust in God is the (true) guide,

(yet use of) the means too is the Prophet’s rule (Swmai
Ihe Prophet said with a loud voice, ‘While trusting in God
bind the knee of thy camel.'

Hearken to the signification of 'The earner (worker) is be-
oved of God : through trusting in God do not become neg¬
lectful as to the (ways and) means." B


Hots the beasts preferred trust in God to exertion .

I he party (of beasts) answered him, saying, "Regard acqui- 913
siuon (work), arising from the infirmity of (God’s) creatures
as a moudiful of deceit proportionate to the size of the gullet,
there is no work better than trust in God: what, indeed, is
dearer (to God) than resignation?

Often do they flee from affliction (only) to (fall into) affliction;
dragon thCy fr ° m **" smk<? ( on W to ( mcet with) the

1 Zayd and Bakr are typical names of men in Arabic.


20683


52 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Man devised (something), and his device was a snare (wherein
he was trapped): that which he thought to be life was (actually)
the drainer of his blood (his destroyer).

He locked the door while the foe was in the house: the plot
of Pharaoh was a story of this Sort.

910 ' That vengeful man slew hundreds of thousands or babes,
while the one he was searching after was in his (Pharaoh’s) house.

Since in our eyesight (foresight) there is much defect, go, let
your own sight pass away (fond) in the sight of the Friend (God).

His sight for ours—w'hat a goodly recompense! In His sight
you will find the whole object of your desire.

So long as the child could neither grasp (exert strength) nor
run, he had nothing to ride on but his father's neck:

When he became a busybody and plied hand and foot (exerted
himself), he fell into trouble and wretchedness 1 ,
sis The spirits of created beings, before (the creation of) hand
and foot, by reason of their faithfulness were flying in (the
realm of) purity; ,

When they were constrained by the (Divine) command. Get
ye down, they became engaoled in anger and covetousness and
contentment. ,

We are the family of the Lord and craving after milk (like
Infanta): he (the Prophet) said, ‘The people are God’s family/

He who gives rain from heaven is also able, from His mercy,
to give us bread/’

Hove the lion again pronounced exertion to be superior
to trust in God .

"Yes,” said the lion; "but the Lord of His servants set a
ladder before our feet,

Step by step must we climb towards the roof: to be a necessi¬
tarian here is (to indulge in) foolish hopes.

You have feet: why do you make yourself out to be Lame? you
have hands: why do you conceal the fingers (whereby you grasp)?

W’hen the master put a spade in the slave’s hand, his object
was made known to him (the slave) without (a word falling from
his) tongue.

Hand and spade alike are His (God’s) implicit signs; (our
powers of) thinking upon the end are His explicit declarations.

When you take His signs to heart, you will devote your life
to fulfilling that indication (of His will).

He will gi vc you many hints (for the understanding) of
mysteries. He will remove the burden from you and give you
(spiritual) authority.

Do you bear (His burden)? He will cause you to be borne

1 The rendered by Wretchedness” arc kur u kabud, “blind and

blue-"


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 53

(aloft). Do you receive (His commands)? He will cause you
to be received (into His favour).

If you accept His command, you will become the spokesman
(thereof); if you seek union (with Him), thereafter you will
become united.

Freewill is the endeavour to thank (God) for His beneficence;
your necessitarianism is the denial of that beneficence.

Thanksgiving for the power (of acting freely) increases your
power; necessitarianism takes the (Divine) gift (of freewill) out
of your hand.

Your necessitarianism is (like) sleeping on the road; do not ->40
sleep! Sleep not, until you see the gate and the threshold!

Beware! do not sleep, O inconsiderate necessitarian, save
underneath tliat fruit-laden tree,

So that every moment die wind may shake the boughs and
shower upon the sleeper (spiritual) dessert and provision for
the journey.

Necessitarianism is to sleep amidst highwaymen; how should
the untimely bird receive quarter?

And if you turn up your nose at His signs, you deem
(yourself) a man, but when you consider (more deeply), you
are (only) a woman.

This measure of understanding which you possess is lo$t:Q-is
a head from which the understanding is severed becomes a

tail.

Because ingratitude is wickedness and disgrace and brings
the ingrate to the bottom of Hell-fire.

If you are putting trust in God, put trust (in Him) as regards
(your) work: sow (the seed), then rely upon the Almighty.”


Hmv the beasts once more asserted the superiority of trust
in God to exertion.

They all lifted up their voices (to dispute) with him, saying,

“" Those covetous ones who sowea (the seed of) means 1 .

Myriads on myriads of men and women—why, then, did
they remain deprived of fortune?

From the beginning of the world myriads of generations have 950
opened a hundred mouths, like dragons:

Those clever people devised plots (of such power) that the
mountain thereby teas tom up from its foundation.

The Glorious (God) described their plots (when He $aid):
{though their guile be such) that the tops of the mountains might
be muted thereby.

(But) except the portion which came to pass (was predestined)


■ hud recourac to ciertiflll 35 a mean* of attaining to iheir desire r


54 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

in eternity, nothing showed its face (accrued to them) from
their scheming 1 and doing*

They all fell from (failed in) plan and act; the acts and
decrees of the Maker remained.

955 O illustrious one, do not regard work as aught but a name!
0 cunning one, think not that exertion is aught but a vain
fancy! ”

Hinv 'AzttFU (Azrael) hooked at a certain man , and how that man
fled to the palace of Solomon; and setting forth the superiority
of trust lit Gad to exertion and the uselessness of the latter .

One forenoon a freeborn (noble) man arrived and ran into
Solomon J s hall of justice ,

His countenance pale with anguish and both lips blue. Then
Solomon said, '"Good sir, what is the matter? i+

He replied, il Azrael cast on me such a look, so full of wrath
and hate.™

“Come," said the king, “what (boon) do you desire now?
Ask (it)! lp “O protector of my life/ 1 said he, ^command the
wind

To bear me from here to India. Maybe p when thy slave is
come thither he will save his life.”

Lo + the people are fleeing from poverty; hence are they a
mouthful for (a prey to) covetousness and expectation.

The fear of poverty is like that (man's) terror: know thou
that covetousness and striving are (like) India (in this tale).

1 le (Solomon) commanded die wind to bear him quickly over
die water to the uttermost part of India.

Next day, at the time of conference and meeting, Solomon
Said to Afcraeh

"Didst thou look with anger on that Moslem in order that
he might wander (as an exile) far from his home? ”

Azrael said, '"When did I look (on him) angrily? I saw him
as I passed by, (and looked at him) in astonishment,

For God had commanded me, saying, 1 Hark, to-day do thou
take his spirit in India. 1

From wonder I said (to myself), '(Even) if he has a hundred
wings, J ti& a far journey for him to be in India (to-day)/

In like manner judge of all the affairs of this world and open
your eye and see!

97u From whom shall we flee? From ourselves? Oh, absurdity!
From whom shall we take (ourselves) away? From God? Oh,
crime!


1 Reading for jtfi.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


55


Hots the lion again declared exertion to be superior to trust
in God and expounded the advantages of exertion,

said the lion; "but at the same time consider the
exertions of the prophets and the true believers.

God, exalted is He, prospered their exertion and what they
suffered of oppression and heat and cold.

Their plans were excellent in all circumstances; everything
done by a goodly man is goodly.

Their snares caught the Heavenly bird, ail their deficiencies
turned to increment."

O master, exert thyself so long as thou const in (following) on
the way of the prophets and saints I

Endeavour is not a struggle with Destiny, because Destiny
itself has laid this (endeavour) upon us.

I am an infidel if any one has suffered loss a single moment
(while walking) in the way of faith and obedience.

Your bead is not broken: do not bandage this head. Exert
yourself (in doing good works) for a day or two (»,«?, during
this brief life), and laugh unto everlasting!

An evil resort sought he that sought this world; a good state
sought he that sought the world to come.

Plots for gaining (the things of) this world are worthless,
(but) plots for renouncing this world arc inspired (by God),

The (right) plot is that he (the prisoner) digs a hole in his
prison (in order to escape); if he blocks up the hole, that is a
foolish plot.

This world is the prison, and we arc the prisoners : dig a
hole in the prison and let yourself out!

What is this world? To be forgetful of God; it is not mer¬
chandise and silver and weighing-scales and women.

As regards the wealth that you carry for religion's sake, "How
good is righteous wealth (for the "righteous man)!” as the
Prophet recited.

Water in the boat is the ruin of the boat, (but) water under- 9S5
neath the boat is 3 support.

Since he cast out from his heart (the desire for) wealth and
possessions, on that account Solomon did not call himself (by
any name) but "poor."

The stoppered jar, (though) in rough water, floated on the
water because of its wind-filled, (empty) heart.

When the wind of poverty is witliin (any one), he rests at
peace on the surface of the water of the world;

Although the whole of this world is his kingdom, in the eye
of his heart the kingdom is nothing,

'Therefore stopper and seal the mouth of your heart, and fill q90
jt from the inward ventilator.


56 MATHNAWf* BOOK I

Exertion is a reality, and medicine and disease are realities:
the sceptic in his denial of exertion practised (and thereby
affirmed) exertion.

Haw the superiority of exertion to trust in God
teas established.

The Kon gave many proofs in (his style, so that those necessi¬
tarians became tired of answering (him).

Fox and deer and hare and jackal abandoned (the doctrine of)
necessity and (ceased from) disputation.

They made covenants with the furious Han t (ensuring) that
he should incur no loss in this bargain,

(That) the daily ration should come to him without trouble,
and that he should not need to make a further demand.

Day by day the one on whom the lot fell would run to the
lion as (swiftly as) a cheetah.

When this cup (of death) came round to the hare, the hare
cried out* "Why, how long (are we to endure this) injustice? 11

How the beasts of chase blamed the hare for his delay
in going to the Han.

The company (of beasts) said to him: "All this time we have
sacrificed our lives in troth and loyalty.

Do not thou seek to give us a bad name t O rebellious one!
Lest the lion be aggrieved, go, go! Quick! Quick!”

How the hare answered the beasts.

joqo 11 0 friends,” said he, “ grant me a respite, that by my cunning
ye may escape from calamity,

That by my cunning your lives may be saved and this
(safety) remain as a heritage to your children,”

Every prophet amidst the peoples used to call them after
this manner to a place of deliverance.

For he had seen from Heaven the way of escape, (though) in
(their) sight he w'as contracted (despicable) like the pupil of the eye.

Men regarded him as small like the pupil: none attained to
(understanding of) the (real) greatness (worth) of die pupiL

How the beasts objected to the proposal of the hare .

too* The company (of beasts) said to him: "O donkey, listen
(to us)! Keep thyself within the measure of a hare!

Eh, what brag i$ this — (an idea) which thy betters never
brought into their minds?

Thou art self-conceited p or Destiny is pursuing us; else, how
is this speech suitable to one like thee?**


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


57


How the hare again answered the beasts.

He said: *'0 friends, God gave me inspiration: to a weakling
there came a strong judgement (wise counsel)/'

That which God taught to the bees is not (belonging) to the
lion and the wild ass.

It (the bee) makes houses of juicy fyahed (sweetmeat): God i-mn
opened to it the door of that knowledge;

That which God taught to the silkworm—does any elephant
know' such a device?

Adam, created of earth, learned knowledge from God: (his)
knowledge shot beams up to the Seventh Heaven.

He (Adam) broke the name and fame (pride) of the angels,
to the confusion of that one who is in doubt concerning God.

He (God) made the ascetic of so many thousand years (Iblis)
a muzzle for that young calf (Adam),

That he (Adam) might not be able to drink the milk of 1^15
knowledge of religion, and that he might not roam around that
lofty castle.

I he sciences of the followers of (external) sense became a
muzzle, so that he (the believer in sense-perception) might not
receive milk From that sublime knowledge.

(But) into the blood-drop (core) of the heart there fell a
jewel which He (God) gave not to die seas and skies.

How long (this regard for) form? After all, O form-wor¬
shipper, has thy reality-lacking soul not (yet) escaped from form?

If a human being were a man in virtue of form, Ahmad
(Mohammed) and Bu Jahl would be just the same.

The painting on the wall i$ like Adam: see from the (pictured)
form what thing in it is wanting.

The spirit is wanting in that resplendent form: go, seek that
jewel rarely found!

The heads of all the lions in the world were laid low when
They (God) gave a hand to (bestowed favour on) the dog of
the Companions (of the Cave).

What loss does it suffer from that abhorred shape, inasmuch
as its spirit was plunged in the ocean of light?

Tis not in pens to describe (the outward) form 1 : (what h
written) in letters is (qualities like) M learned" and +l just";

(And qualities like) lL learned "and "just " are only the spiritual iws
essence which thou wilt not find in (any) place or in front or
behind.

The sun of the spirit strikes (with its beams) on the body
from the quarter where (the relation of) place does not exist:
it (that sun) is not contained in the sky.

i l.e. "it is not the extern*] features of a man thM nre praised IJ1 corn-
plmientajy letters ad dressed to him.”


5®


M ATHNAWf j, BOOK I


An account of the knowledge of the hare and an explanation of the
excellence and advantages of knowledge.

This topic hath no end. Give heed! Listen to the story of
the Hare.

Sell your asinine (corporeal) ear and buy another ear, for the
asimne ear will not apprehend this discourse.

Go, behold the foxy tricks played by the hare; behold how
the hare made a plot to catch the lion,
iq 3 <j Knowledge is the seal of the kingdom of Solomon: the whole
world is form, and knowledge is the spirit.

Because of this virtue, the creatures of the seas and those of
mountain and plain are helpless before naan.

Of him the pard and lion are afraid, like the mouse; from
him the crocodile of the great river is in pallor and agitation.

From him peri and demon took to the shores (sought refuge):
each took abode in some hiding-place.

Man hath many a secret enemy: the cautious man is a wise
one.

(There are) hidden creatures, evil and good: at every instant
their blow's are striking on the heart.

If you go into the river to wash yourself, a thorn in the water
inflicts a hurt upon you.

Although the thorn is hidden low in the water t you know h
is there, since it is pricking you.

The pricks of (angelic) inspirations and (satanic) temptations
are from thousands of beings, not (only) from one.

Wait (patiently) for your (bodily) senses to be transmuted,
so that you may see them (the hidden beings), and the difficulty
may be solved t

to.,* So that (you may see) whose words you have rejected and
whom you have made your captain.


How the beasts requested the hare to tell the
secret of his thought.

Afterwards they said, “O nimble hare, communicate what is
in thy apprehension,

O thou who hast grappled with a lion, declare the plan which
thou hast thought of.

Counsel gives perception and understanding: the mind is
helped by (other) minds.

The Prophet said, ‘ O adviser, take counsel (with the trust¬
worthy), for he whose counsel is sought is trusted. 511


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


59


Haw the hare withheld the secret from them ,

He said, “One ought not to say forth every secret: sometimes i«u
the ev en number turns out to lie odd, and'sometimes the odd
number to be even,”

If from giiilelessne&s you breathe words to a mirror, the
mirror at once becomes dim to us.

Do not move your lip in explanation of these three things,
(namely) concerning your departure and your gold and your
religion;

For to these three there is many an adversary and foe standing
in wait for you when he knows (about anv of'them).

And if you tell (only) one or tw o (a few people), farewell (to
your secret): every secret that goes beyond the twain (who
share it) is published abroad.

If you tie two or three birds together, they will remain on iojo
the ground, imprisoned by grief;

(But in truth) they hoid a consultation wet [-disguised and
mingled, in its (apparent) significance, with that which casts
error (into the mind of any one who observes them),

(Similarly) the Prophet used to take counsel, (speaking) crypti¬
cally , and they (his companions) would answer him and (would
be) without knowledge (of his real meaning).

He would Speak his opinion in a covert parable 1 , in order tW
the adversary might not know foot from head.

He (the Prophet) would receive his answer from him (the
adversary'), while the other would not catch the smell (drift)
of his question.


The story of the hare's stratagem.

He delayed awhile in going, then he went before the lion i«$j
who rends (his prey) with claws.

Because he tarried late in going, the lion was tearing up the
earth and roaring.

u f said,” cried the lion, "that the promise of those vile tines
would be vain—vain and frail and unfulfilled.

Their palaver has duped me 2 : how long will this Time de¬
ceive me, how Jong?”

The prince that hath no strength in his beard 3 is left sorely
in die lurch when by reason of his folly he looks neither back¬
wards nor forwards.

The road is smooth, and under it are pitfalls: amidst the
names there is a dearth of meaning,

1 Literally, "wrapped'in a parable/"

1 Liieratiy. “has thrown me from the «■*,"

* Ij. foolish.


Io 6 j


io?0


1075


1080


6o MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Words and names are like pitfalls: the sweet (flattering) word
is the sand for (the sand that sucks up) the water of our life +

The one sand whence water gushes is seldom to be found?
go, seek it.

He that searches after wisdom becomes a fountain of wisdom;
he becomes independent of acquisition and (ways and) means.

The guarding tablet 1 becomes a Guarded Tablet*; his under¬
standing becomes enriched by the Spirit.

When a man's understanding has been his teacher, after this
the understanding becomes his pupil.

The understanding says, like Gabriel, “O Ahmad (Mo¬
hammed), if I take one (more) step, it will bum me;

Do thou leave me* hencefordi advance (alone): this is my
limit, O sultan of the soul! ”

Whoever, through heedlessness* remains without thanks¬
giving and patience (self-control)* knows (no resource) but this*
that he should follow in the beds of necessity (jabr)*

Any one who pleads necessity (as an excuse) feigns himself to be
ill, with the result that the (feigned) illness brings him to the grave.

The Prophet said* "Illness (assumed) in jest bring? (real)
disease, so that he (the jester) dies like a lamp/'

What is (the meaning of )jabri To bind up a broken (limb)
or tie a severed vein.

Inasmuch as you have not broken your foot in this path,
whom are you mocking? Why have you bandaged your foot?

But as for him who broke his foot in the path of exertion*
Burdq came up to him* and he mounted (and rode).

He was a bearer of the (true) religion, and he became one
who is borne; he was an accepter of the (Divine) command,
and he became accepted.

Until now, he was receiving commands from the King;
henceforth he delivers the (King's).commands to the people.

Until now, the stars were influencing him; henceforth he is
the ruler of the stars.

If (on this account) perplexity arise in thy sight (mind), then
thou wilt have doubts concerning The moon was cloven asunder r

Refresh thy faith* (but) not with talk of the tongue, O thou
who hast secretly refreshed thy (evil) desire.

So long as desire is fresh* faith is not fresh, for 'tis this
desire that locks (against thee) that gate.

Thou hast interpreted (and altered the meaning of) the virgin
(uncorrupted) Word: interpret (alter) thyself* not the (Divine)
Book,

Thou interpretest the Qur’an according to thy desire: by
thee the sublime meaning is degraded and perverted.

1 His heart, which Guards and preserves, (he lesson* pf wisdom.

1 /^ r an, inviolable source of Divine know Ledge,


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


61


The baseness of ihe foul interpretation given by theffy.

The fly was lifting up bis head, like a pilot, on a blade of
straw and {a pool of) ass's uriiu\

* 4 I have called (them) sea and ship/" said he; “I have been
pondering over that (interpretation) for a long while.

Look! here is this sea and this ship, and J am the pilot and
skilled (in navigation) and judicious.

He was propelling the raft on the “sea”: that (small) quantity
appeared to him illimitable.


That urine was boundless in relation to him: where was the
vision that should see it truly?

His world extends (just) as far as his sight reaches; hi$ eye
is so big, his +S sea ” is big in the same proportion,

So with the false interpreter (of the Qur'an): like the fly T his
imagination is {foul as) asa T s urine and his conception (worthless
as) a straw.

If the fly leave off interpreting by (following his own) opinion p
Fortune will turn that fly into a humdy.

One who possesses this (Divine) indication (of the true 1090
meaning) is not a fly: his spirit is not analogous to his (outward}
form.

How the Hon roared tvrathfully because the hare
teas late in coming*

As (for example) the hare who struck against die lion: how
was his spirit analogous to his stature?

The lion from fury and rage was saying, 41 By means of my
ear the enemy has bound up my eye 1 .

The tricks of the necessitarians have bound me (in captivity);
their wooden sword has wounded my body*

After this I will not hearken to their pafaver: all that is (only
meant to deceive, like) the cry of demons and ghouls.

O my heart, tear them to pieces, do not lag; rend their skins s 10^5
for thev have naught but skin.”


What is skin? Specious words, like ripples on water which
have no continuance.

Know that these words are as the skin (rind)* and the meaning
is (as) the kernel; these words are as the form, and the meaning
is like the spirit.

The skin hides the defect of the bad kernel; it (also) hides
jealously the secrets of the good kernel.

When the pert is of wind and the scroll of water, whatever
you write perishes speedily;

It is written on water: if you seek constancy from it, you will um
return biting your hands (in disappointment),

1 /-** 1 have let myself he blinded by liatening to the beasts.* 1


62


MATHNAWf, BOOK 1

The wind in men is vanity and desire; when yon have aban¬
doned vanity p (then) isfthc time for) the message from Him (God),

Sweet are the messages of die Maker, for it (that message)
from head to foot (from first to last) is enduring.

The khufbas 1 for kings change (and pass), and their empire;
(all will pass) except the empire and khutbas {insignia) of the
prophets,

Because ihe pomp of kings is from (earthly) vanity, (while)
the glorious privilege of the prophets is from (Divine) Majesty.

1105 The names of kings are removed from the dirhems, (but)
the name of Ahmad (Mohammed) is stamped on them for ever.

The name of Ahmad is the name of all the prophets; when
the hundred comes (is counted), ninety' is with us as well*.

Further setting forth the stratagem of the hare *

The hare made much delay in going; he rehearsed to himself
the tricks (which he was about to play).

After long delay he came on (took) the road, that he might
say one or two secrets into the ear of the lion.

Think, what worlds are in commerce with Reason I How
wide is this ocean of Reason!

In this sweet ocean our forms are moving fast, like cups on
the surface of water:

Until they become full, (they float) like bowls on the top of
the sea* (but) when the bowl is filled it sinks therein.

Reason is hidden, and (only) a world (of phenomena) is
visible: our forms are the waves or a spray of it (of that hidden
ocean),

Whatsoever (thing) the form makes (uses as) a means of
approach to It (to Reason), by that (same) means the ocean
(of Reason) casts it (the form) far away.

So lung as the heart does not see the Giver of (its) conscience,
so long as the arrow does not see the far-shooting Archer 3 ,

He {who is thus blind^ thinks hb horse is lost, though (all
the while) he is obstinately speeding his horse on the road.

That fine fellow thinks his horse is lost, while his horse b
sweeping him onward like the wind.

In lamentation and inquiry dial scatterbrain (runs) from door
to door in every direction, asking and searching:

“Where and who is he that stole my horse?' 3 What is this
(animal) under thy thigh, O master?

41 Yes, this b the horse, but where is the horse?” O dexterous
rider in Search of thy horse, come to thyself!

s The kfmfha t& a prayer for the Prophet and the mgninH sovereign,
which forms part of the public worship of MoiEcmi.

: Mohammed, being- the Last of thv prophets„ includes them all, us the
firtnl sum includes nil the units of which it is composed, a Cf + y. 1143.


the lion and the BEASTS 63

The Spirit is lost (to view) because of its being so manifest 1120
and near: how, having thy belly full of water, art thou dry-
lipped like a jar? 1

I low wilt thou sec red and green and russet, unless before
(seeing) these three (colours) thou see the light?

But since thy mind was lost (absorbed) in (perception of) the
colour p those colours became to thee a veil from (debarred thee
from contemplating) the light

Inasmuch as at night those colours were hidden, thou sawest
that diy vision, of the colour was (derived) from the light.

There is no vision of colour without the external light: even
so it is with the colour of inward phantasy.

This outward (light) is (derived) from the $un and from 1135
Suha 1 , while the inward (light) is from the reflexion of the
beams of (Divine) Glory.

The light which gives light to the eye is in truth the light of
the heart: the light of the eye is produced by the light of hearts*

Agam n the tight which gives light to the heart is the Light
or God* which is pure and separate from the light of intellect
and sense.

At night there was no light: thou didst not see the colour :
then it (the light) was made manifest by the opposite of light
(by darkness). *

(First) comes the seeing of light, then the seeing of colour;
and this thou knowest immediately by the opposite of light
(darkness),

God created pam and sorrow for the purpose that happiness uyj
might be made manifest by means of this opposite.

Hidden things, then, arc manifested by means of their
opposite; since God hath no opposite, He is hidden:

For the sight fell (first) on the light, then on the colour: op¬
posite is made manifest by opposite, like Greeks and Ethiopians.

1 hereto re thou knewest light by its opposite: opposite reveals
opposite in (the process of) coming forth.

1 he Light of God hath no opposite in (all) existence, that by
means of that opposite it should be possible to make Him
manifest;

Necessarily (therefore) our eves do not perceive Him, though n33
He perceives (us): sec this (fact) from (the case of) Moses and
the mountain (Sinai).

Know that form springs from spirit (reality) a $ the linn from
the jungle> or as voice and speech from thought.

This speech and voice arose from thought; thou knowest not
where is the sea of thought,

But since thou hast seen that die waves of speech are fair,
thou knowest that their sea also is noble.

1 A smflEI star.


6+ MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When the waves of thought sped on from (the sea of) Wisdom,
it (Wisdom) made (for them) the form of speech and voice.

1140 The form was bom of the Word and died again, the wave
drew itself back into the sea.

The form came forth from Formlessness and went back
(thither), for Verily unto Him are tee returning.

Every instant, then, thou art dying and returning: Mustafa
declared that this world is (but) a moment.

Our thought is an arrow (shot) front Him (Hu) into the air
(hand) : how should it stay in the air: It* comes (back) to
God,

Every moment the world is renewed, and wc are unaware oi
its being renewed whilst it remains (the same in appearance).

1 ms Life is ever arriving anew, like the stream, though in the body
it has the semblance of continuity.

From its swiftness it appears continuous, like the spark which
thou whirlest rapidly with thy hand.

If thou whirl a firebrand with dexterity, it appears to the
sight as a very long (line of) fire.

The swift motion produced by the action of God presents
this length of duration (Time) as (a phenomenon arising) from’
the rapidity of Divine action.

Even if the seeker of this mystery is an exceedingly learned
man, (say to him), “ Lo, Husdmu’ddin, who is a sublime book
(where you will find the mystery revealed)."


The hare's coming to the lion and the lion's anger with him,

1IJ0 The lion, incensed and wTathful and frantic, saw the hare
coming from afar,

Running undismayed and confidently, looking angry and
fierce and fell and sour.

For by coming humbly (he thought) suspicion would be
(excited)", while by boldness every' cause of doubt would be
removed.

When he came further on, near to the “shoe-row 1 ," the lion
shouted — “ Ha, villain I

I who have tom oxen limb from limb, I who have rubbed
the ear of (chastised and vanquished) the ferocious elephant—
ii5» Who (what) is a half-witted (feeble) hare, that he should thus
throw on the ground (disregard) my behest:"

Abandon the hare's slumber and hcedlessness 1 Give ear,
O donkey, to the roaring of this lion l 2


1 The place near the dc«r h where visitor* take off their shoes before
advancing EO the dais at the upper end -of the room.

1 This verse is an admonition addressed to the reader.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 65

The hare's apology .

"Mercy!" cried the hare, “I have an excuse, if thy Lord*
ship’s pardnn come to my aid 1 *”

"What excuse?” said he. “Oh, the shortsightedness of Fools!

Is tins the time for them to come into the presence of kings?

Thou art an untimely bird: thy head must be cut off. One
ought not to hear the excuse of a fool.

The fool's excuse is worse than Jits crime; the excuse of the n*>
ignorant is the poison that kills wisdom.

T hy excuse, 0 hare, is devoid of wisdom: what hare- am I
that thou sh<midst put it in my ear? "

“O king," he replied, "account a worthless one to be worthy:
hearken to the excuse of one who has suffered oppression.

In particular, as an aims (thank-offering) for thy high estate,
do not drive out of dty way one whose way is lost.

The ocean, which gives some water to every stream, lays on
its head and face (surface) every piece of rubbish.

By this bounty' the sea w ill not become less: the sea is neither 1165
increased nor diminished by its bounty."

I lie lion said, ’T will bestow bounty' in its (proper) place,

I will cut every one’s clothes according to his stature."

“Listen,” cried die hare, "if I am not a fit object for (thy)
grace, I lay my head before the dragon of (thy) violence*.

^ At breakfast-time I set out on the way, [ came towards the
king with my comrade.

111 at party 1 (of beasts) had appointed, for thy sake, another
hare to go along with me as consort and companion.

On the road a lion attacked thy humble slave, attacked both 1170
the companions in travel who were coming (to thee).

I said to him , 4 We are the slaves of the King of kings, the
lowly fellow-servants of that (exalted) court . 1

He said, ‘The King of kings! Who is he? Be ashamed! Do
not make mention of every base loon in my presence.

Both thee and thy king I will tear to pieces* if thou and thy
friend turn back from my door/

I said to him, 1 Lee me behold once more the face of the king
and bear die news of thee (to him): 1

He said^ 'Place thy comrade with me {in my keeping) as a 1175
pledge; otherwise, thou art a sacrifice (thy life is forfeit) ac¬
cording to my law/

We entreated him much: it was no use. He seized my friend
and left me to go alone.

1 Literally, "Give me a (helping) hand,” i\e. "if thou wilt pardon mv
presumption ;ind permit me to excuse myself, [ will do so / 3

3 /-*- The Persian word for hare is kktfrguih = ass-ej red.

1 /.f, M 1 surrender myself TO thy vengrance,”

y M


5


66 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

My friend, from his plumpness, made three of me both in
comeliness and beauty and (size of) body*

Henceforth this road is barred by that lion: the thread of our
covenants is broken.

Cut off (abandon) hope of thy allowance henceforth; I am
telling thee the truth, and truth is bitter,
iito If thou want the allowance, clear the way! hey, come on
and repel that irreverent one!"

How the Hon answered the hare and set off with him <

« Come on in God’s name,” said he, "let me see where he is!
Go thou in front, if thou art speaking truth,

That I may give him and a hundred like him the punishment
they deserve', or if this is a lie, that I may give thy deserts to

thee ” . k . ,

The hare set out on the way, (going) in front like a guide,
that he might lead him towards Ids snare,

Towards the well which he had designated: he had made
the deep well a snare for his (the lion’s) life.

.ifl 5 (Thus) were these twain going till (they arrived) near the well*
Look you, (this was) a hare (deceitful) as a (pool of) water

(hidden) under straw. ..

The water bears a blade of straw (down) to the plain: how,
I wonder, will the straw bear away a mountain ?

The snare of his (the hare’s) guile was a noose for the Jinn:
a marvellous hare (he), who was carrying off a lion (as his prey)!
A Moses draws Pharaoh, with his army and mighty host,

into the river Nile; . ,

A single gnat with half a wing cleaves intrepidly the suture

of Nimrod’s skull. _ ,

ji<* Behold the state of him who hearkened to the words ot his
enemy, and the retribution of him who became the friend of

the envious one — ... , ,

The state of a Pharaoh who hearkened to H3man, and the
state of a Nimrod who hearkened to Satan.

Albeit the enemy speak to thee in friendly wise, know (his
words to be) the snare, though he speak to thee of the grain

^lf he give thee some candy, regard it as poison; if he do a
kindness to thy body, regard It as cruelty*

W hen the (Divine) destiny comes to pass, you see naught but
the skin (outward appearance): you do not distinguish enemies

from friends. ... . .

ti 9 s Since the case is thus, begin humble supplication; set about
lamenting and glorifying (God) and fasting.

Lament continually, crying, "O Thou who well knowest the


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 67

hidden things, do not crush us beneath the stone of evil
contrivance,

O Creator of the Hon, if we have wrought currishness p do
not set the Hon (to spring) on us from this covert.

Do not give to sweet water the form of fire, do not put upon
fire the form of water.

"Tien Thou makest (us) drunken with the wine of Thy
wrath, Thou givest to things non-existent the form of existence.”

What is (this) drunkenness? Thai which binds (prevents) 1200
the eye from (true) eyesight, so that a (common) stone appears
a jewel, and wool (pashm) a jasper {yashm).

What is (this) drunkenness? The perversion of the senses,
the change of tamarisk- wood into sandal-wood in the (per¬
verted) sight.

■

4

Story of the hoopoe and Solomon , showing that when the
Divine destiny comes to pass , clear eyes are sealed:

When the tent-pavilion was pitched for Solomon, the birds
came before him to pay obeisance.

They found (him) speaking the same tongue (as themselves)
and familiar with them: one bv one they aped with (eager) soul
into his presence.

All the birds, having ceased from twittering, (in converse)
with Solomon became more distinct (spoke more articulate!v)
than your own brother.

To speak the same tongue is a kinship and affinity: a man, 1205
(when he is) with those in whom he cannot confide", is like a
prisoner in chains.

Oh, many are the Indians and Turks that speak the same
tongue; oh, many the pair of Turks that are as strangers (to
each other).

Therefore the tongue of mutual understanding is different
indeed: to be one in heart is better than to be one in tongue.

Without speech and without sign or scroll, hundreds of
thousands of interpreters arise From the heart.

The birds, all and each, their secrets of skill and knowledge
and practice

Were revealing, one by one, to Solomon, and were praising mo
themselves by way of submitting a request (for his considers-
trim).

Not from pride and self-conceit, (but) in order that he might
give them access to him 1 .

When a captive wants a lord (to buy him as a slave), he
offers a preface (summary account) of his talent ;

1 Ij. them the privilege of bemjf freely Admitted to his presence.


68 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

(Bin) when he is ashamed (disgusted) at his buying him, he
makes himself out to be sick and palsied and deaf and lame*

The turn came for the hoopoe and his craft and the explana¬
tion of his skill and thoughtfulness,

1315 “O king,” said he, " I will declare (only) one talent, which
is an inferior one; *tis better to speak briefly.”

“Tell on," said Solomon; “let me hear what talent that is.”
The hoopoe said, “At the time when I am at the zenith,

l gaze from the zenith with the eye of certainty and I sec the
water at die bottom of the earth.

So that (1 know) where it is and what is its depth; what its
colour is, whence it gushes forth — from clay or from rock.

O Solomon, for the sake of thine army's camping-place keep
this wise one (beside thee) on thy expeditions.”
i3io Then said Solomon, “O good companion in waterless far-
stretching wastes!"

lime the crow impugned the claim of the hoopoe.

When the crow heard (this), from envy he came and said to
Solomon, " He has spoken false and ill.

It is not respectful to speak in the king’s presence, in par¬
ticular (to utter) lving and absurd self-praise.

If he had always had this (keen) sight, how would not he
have seen the snare beneath a handful of earth?

How would he have been caught in the snare? How would
he have gone into the cage willy-nilly?"

Then Solomon said: “ O hoopoe, is it right that these dregs
have risen from thee at the first cup?

O thou who hast drunk buttermilk, how dost thou pretend
intoxication and brag in my presence and tell lies besides?”

The hoopoe's answer to the attach of the crow,

] le said, “ O king, for God’s sake do not listen to the enemy’s
words against me, bare beggar as I am.

If this which I claim is not (true), I lay my head (before
thee): sever this neck of mine.

The crow, who disbelieves in the (absolute) authority' of the
Divine destiny, is an infidel, though he have thousands of
wits.

ia 3 o Whilst there is in you a single k (derived) from Xho kdfirun
(infidels), you are the seat of stench and lust, velut rima femoris.

I see the snare (when 1 am) in the air, if the Divine destiny
do not muffle the eye of my intelligence.

When the Divine destiny comes, wisdom goes to sleep, the
moon becomes black, the sun is stopped (from shining).


SOLOMON AND THE HOOPOE


69

How is this disposal (of things) by (he Divine destiny (to be
called) singular ? 1 Know that it is by the Divine destiny that he
(the infidel) disbelieves in the Divine destiny.

The story of A dam , on rchom be peace, and hom the Divine destiny
sealed up his sight so that he failed to observe the plain meaning
of the prohibition and to refrain from interpreting it .

The father of mankind, who is the lord of He (God) taught
(Adam) the Names, hath hundreds of thousands of sciences in
every win.

To his soul accrued (knowledge of) the name of every thing, rjj*
even as that thing exists (in its real nature) unto the ena (of the
world).

No title that he gave became changed: that one whom he
called ‘brisk 1 did not become "lazy/

Whoso is (to be) □ believer at the last, he saw at the first;
whoso is (to be) an infidel at the last, to him it became manifest.

Do thou hear the name of every thing from the knower:
hear the inmost meaning of the mystery of lit taught the Names,
With us s the name of every thing is its outward (appearance);
with the Creator, the name of every thing is its inward (reality).

In the eyes of Moses the name of his rod was 'staff'; in the 1340
eyes of the Creator its name was 1 dragon,*

Here the name of 4 Umar was 'idolater," but in Almi* his
name was + believer/

That of which the name, with us, was 'seed 1 was, in the
sight of God t thou who art at this moment beside me.

This "seed" was a form (idea) in non-existence (potentiality),
existent with God, neither more nor less (than the form in
which it appeared externally).

In brief, that which is our end is really our name with God,

Me bestows on a man a name according to his final state, not 134s
according to that (state) to which He gives the name of "a loan/
Inasmuch as the eye of Adam saw by means of the Pure
Light, the soul and inmost sen$e of the names became evident
to him h

Since the angels perceived in him the rays of God t they fell
in worship anil hastened to do homage.

The Adam like this whose name I am celebrating, if I praise
(him) till the Resurrection, I fall short (of what is due).

All this he knew; (yet) when the Divine destiny came, he was
at fault in the knowledge of a single prohibition,

Wondering whether the prohibition was for tire purpose of 1=50
making unlawful (the thing prohibited), or whether it admitted
of an interpretation and was a cause of perplexity.

1 lx. *' How ia it strange that I * ho aid have teen deceived?”

1 lx. Sti the world of prc-raUime*.



70 MATHKAWft BOOK I

Whom (the: view that it admitted of) interpretation prevailed
in his mind, his nature hastened in bewilderment towards the
wheat L .

When the thorn went into the foot of the gardener (Adam).
the thief (Satan) found an opportunity and quickly carried off
the goods.

As soon as he escaped from bewilderment, he returned into
the (right) road; (then) he saw that the thief had carried off
the wares from the shop.

He cried, l O Lord, we have done wrong f and ' Alas, 1 that is
to say, 'darkness came and the way was lost. 1

This Divine destiny is a cloud that covers the sun: thereby
Hons and dragons become as mice.

If I (the hoopoe) do not see a snare in the hour of Divine
ordainmentp his not I alone who am ignorant in the course of
Divine ordamment/*

Oh, happy he that clave to righteousness, he (that) let (his
own) strength go and took to supplication!

Jf the Divine destiny shrouds thee in black like night, yet the
Divine destiny will take thy hand (and guide thee) at the last.

If the Divine destiny a hundred times attempts thy life, yet
the Divine destiny gives thee life and heals thee +

126* This Divine destiny, if a hundred times it waylays thee,
(nevertheless) pitches ihy tent on the top of Heaven,

Know that this is from the lovingkindness (of God), ihat He
terrifies thee in order that He may establish thee in the kingdom
of security.

This subject hath no end. Tis late 2 . Hearken (now) to the
story of die hare and the lion.

How the hare drew back from the lion when he
approached the well .

When die lion came near the well, he saw that the hare lagged
on the way and stepped back.

He said, Why have you stepped back? Do not step back,
come on! ”

1*65 The hare said, “Where is my (power to move a) foot? for
(both) hand and foot are gone. My soul trembles and my
heart (courage) has fled.

Seest thou not the colour of my face (pale) as gold? My
colour indeed is giving knowledge of my inward state.

Since God has called the (external) sign (aspect) informative,
the eye of the gnostic has remained turned towards the sign.

Colour and scent are significant like a bell: the neigh of a
horse makes (one) acquainted with the horse.

The soupd made by any thing conveys knowledge of it t so

1 /.*. die forbidden fruit. { 1 1>. *' there has been a long digression/*


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 7 *

that you may distinguish the bray of an ass from die creat
of a door.

Touching the discrimination of persons (one from another), 1270
the Prophet said,' A man is hidden when his tongue is folded up.'

The colour of the face indicates the state of the heart: have
pity on mc t implant love of me in thy heart*

A red complexion has the sound of (declares and expresses)
thankfulness (satisfaction); the sound (signification) of a pale
complexion is patience and unthank fulness.

There has come upon me that which took away hand and
foot, took away colour of face and strength and (every outward)
mark;

That which shatters every thing it comes upon, tears up
every tree from root and bottom;

There has come upon me that by which man and animal, 1*75
mineral and plant have been checkmated.

These indeed are (only) parts, (but) wholes (too) are by him
(Doom) made yellow in hue and corrupt in odour.

So dial the world is now patient, now thankful; the garden
now puts on a robe (of verdure) and again is bare.

The sun, which rises fire-coloured, at another hour sinks
headlong.

Stars shining in die four quarters (of the sky) are, from time
to time, afflicted with (consumed by) burning.

The moon p which excels the stars in beauty; becomes like a
phantom from the malady of a hectic fever.

Tins earth, quiet and controlled, is thrown by earthquakes
into feverish tremors.

Oh, from this inherited woe many a mountain in the w F orld
has become tiny fragments and (grains of) sand.

This air is conjoined with the (vital) spirit, (but) when the
Divine destiny comes, it turns foul and stinking.

The sweet water that was a sister (congenial) to the spirit,
(after standing) in a pool, became yellow and bitter and turbid.

The fire that has wind in its moustache 1 —a single puff of e=6s
wind calls death upon it.

The state of the sea (b such that) from its agitation and com¬
motion (you may) perceive the changes of its mind.

The whirling heaven, which is (ever engaged) in seeking and
searching — its state is like the state of its children;

Now nadir, now r middle., now zenith; therein are host on
host of stars fortunate and unlucky.

From thyself, Q part made up of wholes, apprehend the state
of every simple (uncompounded) thing.

Inasmuch as wholes suffer grief and pain, how should their
part not be pale-faced (sick and subject to decay)?

1 /.f r #l that is puffed up with pride.”



72 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Especially a part which is composed of contraries—of water
and earth and fire and air.

It is no wonder that the sheep recoiled from the wolf; the wonder
is that this sheep set its heart on (became friendly with) the wolf*

Life is the peace (harmony) of contraries; death is the fact
that war arose between theirs.

The grace of God has given amity to this lion and wild-ass—
these two far distant contraries.

3395 Since the world 1 $ sick and a prisoner, what wonder if the
sick one is passing away?”

From this point of view he (the hare) recited counsels to the
lion* 11 1 have lagged behind,” said lie, * L because of these bonds/*

How the lion asked the reason of the hare's drawing back.

The lion said to him, "Amongst (all) the causes of your
malady tell (me) the special cause, for this is my object/*

"That lion/* he said, lf lives in this well: within tins fortress
he is safe from harms/*

Every one who is wise chose the bottom of the well (to live
in), because spiritual joys are (to be attained only) in solitude.

new The darkness of the well is better than the dark shades of
the world; he that followed at the heels of die world never saved
his head.

"Come on/* said the lion; " my blow subdues him: see thou
whether that lion is in the well at present/'

The hare answered, “I am consumed with (dread of) diat
fieriness (wrath): perhaps thou wilt take me beside thee,

That with thy support, Q mine of generosity, I may open
my eyes and look into the well/*

How the lion looked into the well and saw the reflexion of
himself and the hare in the water.

When the lion took him to his side, under the lion's pro¬
tection he began to run towards the well.

1305 As soon as they looked at the water in the well, there shone
forth in the water the light (reflected) from the lion and him
(die hare).

The lion saw his own reflexion: from the water shone the
image of a Hon with a plump hare at his side.

When he beheld his adversary in the water, he left him (the
bare) and sprang into the well.

He fell into the well which he had dug, because his iniquity
was coming (back) on his own head.

The iniquity of evil-doers became (for them) a dark well: so
have said a]] the wise.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


73

The more iniquitous one is, the more frightful is his well: 1310
(Divine) Justice has ordained worse (punishment) for worse (sin),

O you who from iniquity are digging a well (for others), you
are making a snare for yourself.

Do not weave (a cocoon) round yourself, like the silkworm.

You are digging a well for yourself (to fall in): dig with modera¬
tion (not too deep).

Deem not the weak to be without a champion: recite from
the Qur'an (the words). When the help of God shall rvme.

If you are an elephant and your foe fled from you, lo t the
retribution came upon you, birth iti flocks.

If any poor man on the earth beg for mercy, a loud tumult 1315
falls on (arises among) the Host of Heaven.

If you bite him with your teeth and make him bleed, tooth¬
ache will attack you — how will you do (then)?

The lion saw himself in the well, and m his fury he did not
know himself at that moment from the enemy.

He regarded his own reflexion as his enemy: necessarily he
drew a sword against himself.

Oh, many an iniquity that you see in others is your own
nature (reflected) in them, Q reader!

In them shone forth all that you are in your hypocrisy and tyzo
iniquity and insolence.

\ou are that (evihdoer), and you are striking those blows at
yourself: ‘tis yourself you are cursing at that moment.

You do not see clearly the evil in yourself, else you would
hate yourself with (all) your soul.

You are assaulting yourself, Q simpleton f like the Uon w r ho
made a rush at himself.

When you reach the bottom of your own nature, then you
will know that that viJeness was from yourself.

At the bottom (of the well) it became manifest to the lion that 1323
he who seemed to him to be another was (really) his own image*
Whoever tears out the teeth of a poor wretch is doing what
the falsely-seeing lion did.

O you who see the had reflexion on the face of your uncle,
it is not your uncle that is bad t it is you: do not run away from
yourself!

The Faithful are mirrors to one another: this saying is related
from the Prophet.

You held a blue glass before your eye: for that reason the
world seemed to you to be blue.

Unless you are blind, know that this blueness comes from 1330
yourself: speak ill of yourself, speak no more ill of any one (else),
if the true believer was not seeing by the Light of God, how
did things unseen appear naked (plainly revealed) to the true
believer?


74 MATHNAWf, BOOK T

Inasmuch as you were seeing by the Fire of God, you did
not discern the difference between good and evil.

Little by little throw water on the fire, that your fire may
become light , O man of sorrow I

TTirow Thou, O Lord, the purifying water, that this world-
fire may become wholly light.

U35 All the water of the sea is under Thy command; water and
fire, O Lord, are Thine,

If Thou wiliest, fire becomes sweet water; and if Thou wiliest
not, even water becomes fire.

This search (aspiration) in us is also brought into existence
by Thee; deliverance from iniquity is Thy gift, Q Lord.

Without (our) seeking Thou hast given us this search, Thou
hast given (us) gifts without number and (without) end.


[foie the hare brought to the beasts of chase the news that
the lion had fallen into the well.

When the hare was gladdened by deliverance (from the lion),
he began to run towards the beasts until (he came to) the desert,
ij4o Having seen the lion miserably slain in the well, he was
skipping joyously all the way to the meadow,

Clapping his hands because he had escaped from the hand
of Death; fresh and dancing in the air, like bough and leaf.

Bough and leaf were set free from the prison of earth, lifted
their heads, and became comrades of the wind;

The leaves, when they had burst (forth from) the bough,
made haste to reach the top of the tree;

With the tongue of (seed that put forth) its sprouts each fruit
and tree severally is singing thanks to God,
iSaying, “The*Bounteous Giver nourished our root until the
tree grew big and stood upright."

(Even so) the spirits bound in clay, when they escape glad
at heart from their (prisons of) clay,

Begin to dance in the air of Divine Love and become flawless
like the full moon’s orb,

Their bodies dancing, and their souls—nay, do not ask (how
their souls fare); and those things from which comes the soul’s
delight—nay, do not ask (of those things)!

The hare* lodged the lion in prison. Shame on a lion who
was discomfited by a hare!

ui© He is in such a disgrace, and still—this is a wonder—he
would fain be addressed by die title of Fahhr-i Din 1 .

O thou lion that liest at the bottom of this lonely well, thy
hare-like soul (nafs) has shed and drunk thy blood;


1 fiH Pride of the Reliidon (of


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


75


Thy hare-soul is feeding m the desert „ (whilst) thou art (lying)
at the bottom of this well of 11 How? ■ 1 and 41 Why ? IP

That lion-catcher (the hare) ran towards the beasts, crying,

** Rejoice, O people, since the announcer of joy is come.

G ad news! Glad news, O company of merry-makers ! That
hell-hound has gone back to Hdl.

Glad news! Glad news! The enemy of your lives — his teeth os*
have been tom out by the vengeance of his Creator,

He who smote many heads with his daws—him too the
broom of Death has swept away like rubbish,"


How the beasts gathered round/ the hare atui spoke
in praise of Mm m

Then all the wild beasts assembled s joyous and laughing
gleefully in rapture and excitement.

They formed a ring, he (the hare) in the midst like a candle:
all die animals of the desert bowed (in homage) to him.

“Art thou a heavenly angel or a peri? Xo, thou art the
A^rael of fierce lions.

Whatever thou art, our souls are offered in sacrifice to thee. ij*q
T hou hast prevailed. Health to thy hand and arm!

God turned this water into thy stream. Blessing on thy
hand and arm!

Explain how thou didst meditate with guile, and how thou
didst guilefully wipe out that ruffian.

Explain, in order that the tale may be the means of curing
(our malady); explain, that it may be a salve For our souls.

Explain! for in consequence of the iniquity of that tyrant
our souls have myriads of wounds*”

IH G SixSp” said he, **it was (by) God's aid; else, who in the ttfs
world is a hare (who am I, that I should have been able to
do this)?

He (God) bestowed power on me and gave light to my heart;
the light in my heart gave strength to hand and foot,"

From God come preferments (to high position), from God
also come changes (w hich bring one to low estate)►

God in (due) course and turn is ever displaying this (Divine)
aid to doubters and seers (alike)*

Take heed J Do not exult in a kingdom bestowed in turns
(passing from one to another). O thou who art die bondsman
of Vicissitude, do not act as though thou wert free !

(But) those for whom is prepared a kingdom beyond Viriaai- t 3 ?o
tude, for them the drums (of sovereignty) are beaten beyond
the Seven Planets.

Beyond Vicissitude are the kings everlasting; their spirits are
circling with the Cupbearer perpetually.



7& MATHN AW J f BOOK I

If thou wilt renounce this drinking (of worldly pleasures) for
a day or two (for thv brief lifetime), thou wilt dip thy mouth
in the drink of Paradise.


Commentary on (the Tradition) " IVe have returned from the
lesser Jihad to the greater jfthdd"

O kings, we have slain die outward enemy, (hut) there re¬
mains within (us) a worse enemy than he.

To slay this (enemy) is not the work of reason and intelli¬
gence: the inward lion is not subdued by the hare.
u ?3 This carnal self (nafi) is Hell, and Hell is a dragon (the fire
of) which is not diminished by oceans (of water).

It would drink up the Seven Seas, and still the blazing of
that consumer of all creatures would not become less.

Stones and stony-hearted infidels enter it, miserable and
shamefaced,

(But) still It is not appeased by all this food, until there comes
to it from God this cal!—-

“x4rt thou filled, art thou filled?" It says/*Not yet; to* here
is the fire, here is the glow, here is the burning I”
isto It made a mouthful of and swallowed a whole world, its
belly crying aloud, "h there any more?”

God/from (the realm) where place is not, sets His foot on it:
then it subsides at (the command) Zfe, and it teas.

Inasmuch as this self of ours is a part of Hell, and all parts
have the nature of the whole,

To God (alone) belongs this foot (power) to kill it: who, indeed,
but God should draw its bow (vanquish it)?

Only the straight arrow is put on the bow, (but) this bow
(of the self) has (its) arrows bent back and crooked.
iis 5 Be straight, like an arrow, and escape from the bow, for
without doubt every straight (arrow) will fly from the bow (to
its mark).

When I turned back from the outer warfare, I set my face
towards the inner warfare.

We have returned from the lesser Jihad, we are engaged
along with die Prophet in the greater jihad.

I prqy God to grant me strength and aid and (the right of)
boastingthat 1 may root up with a needle 3 this mountain
of Qdf.

Deem of small account the lion (champion) who breaks the
ranks (of the enemy): the (true) lion is he that breaks (conquers)
himself,

L /_*. the success which would entitle me to beast of having conquered
my il wlf/ r

1 I*, slowly and painfully.


* UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR


77


Horn the ambassador of Rum came to the Commander of the
Faithful, 1 Lmar, may God be well-pleased with him , and wit¬
nessed the gifts of grace with which 1 Umar, may God be well-
pleased with him, was endowed*

To ‘Umar in Medina there came through the wide desert an rjgo
ambassador from the Emperor of Rum.

He said, * S Q ye attendants, where b the palace of the Caliph,
that I may take thither my horse and baggage?'*

The folk said to him, * l He has no palace: 'Umar's (only)
palace is an illumined spirit.

Though he has a (great) renown from being Commander (of
the Faithful), he has (no dwelling except) a hut, like the poor.

O brother, how wilt thou behold his palace, when hair has
grown, in the eye of thy heart ?

Purge thy heart S s eye of hair and defect, and then hope to e^*
behold his palace.

Whoever hath a spirit purged of (sensual) desires will at once
behold the Presence and the Holy Porch,

When Mohammed was purged of this fire and smoke (of
human passions), wheresoever lie turned his face, tvas the Face
of Allah.

Inasmuch as thou art a friend to the evil suggestions of the
malign one (Satan), how wilt thou know (the true meaning of)
There is the Face of Allah}

Every one in whose breast the gate is opened will behold
from every city the sun (shining),

God is manifest amongst others as the moon amidst the stars, u™
Lay two finger-ends on thy two eyes, and wilt thou see aught
of the world? Deal justly (confess that thou wilt sec nothing).

If thou dost not see this world, (yet) it is not non-existent:
the fault tics not save in the huger of thy evil self.

Come* lift the finger from thine eye, and then behold what¬
soever thou wishest.

To Noah his people said, 1 Where is the Divine recompense? *

He said, 'On the other side of they cover themselves with their
garments „

Ye have wrapped your faces and heads in your clothes: of mg*
necessity ye have eyes and see not,'

Man is eye, and (all) the rest is (worthless) skin: the sight of
that (eye) is (consists in) seeing the Beloved.

When there is not sight of the Beloved, it (the eye) is better
blind; the beloved who b not everlasting is better afar (away
and out of sight),”

When the ambassador of Rfint admitted these fresh (spiritual)
words into his hearing (gave ear to them), be became more
full of longing.


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

He fixed his eye on seeking ‘Umar, he let hi$ baggage and
horse be lost.

1410 He was going in every direction after that man of (great)
accomplishment, inquiring madly for him,

Saying, “Can there be in the world such a man, and he be
hid, like the spirit, from the world? ”

He sought him, that he might be as a slave to him: inevitably
the seeker is a finder.

An Arab woman of the desert saw that he was a stranger-
guest. “Look,” said she, “there is ‘Umar under that palm.

There he is under the palm-tree, apart from the people:
behold the Shadow of God asleep in the shade!*'

How the ambassador of Rum found the Commander of the

Faithful, * Umar, may God be toell-pleased faith him, sleeping

tinder the palm-tree.

1413 He came thither and stood afar off; he saw ‘Umar and fell
a-trembling.

An awe came upon the ambassador from that slumbering
man; a sweet ecstasy lodged in his soul.

Love and awe are contrary to each other; he saw these two
contraries united in his heart 1 .

He said to himself : “ I have seen (many) kings, I have been
great (in esteem) and chosen (for honour) in the presence of
sultans:

I had no awe or dread of kings, (but) awe of this man has
robbed me of my wits,

t4 «■ I have gone into a jungle of lions and leopards, and my face

did not change colour because of them;

Often where the ranks are arrayed on the field of battle have
I become (fierce) as a lion at the time when the affair is grievous
(desperate) ;

Many a heavy blow have I suffered and inflicted, I have been
stouter in heart than (all) the others.

This man is asleep on the earth, unarmed, (and yet) I am
trembling in my seven limbs (my whole body): what is this?

This is awe of God, it is not from created beings, it is not
awe of this man who wears the frock of a dervish.

i^ij Whoever is afraid of God and has chosen fear of God (as
his religion), the jinn and mankind and every one who sees
(him) are afraid of him.”

Thus meditating, he folded his hands reverently. After a
while 'Umar sprang up from sleep.


1 Literally , 11 liver.'


4 UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR


79


How the ambassador of Rum saluted the Commander of the
Faithful t may God be ell-pleased with him.

He did homage to "Umar and salaamed: the Prophet said*
"(First) the salaam T then the talk,”

Then he (‘Umar) said, "To thee (greeting)/* called him (to
come) forward, reassured him p and bade him sit down by
his side +

Fear ye not is die hospitality offered to those who fear: that
is proper (entertainment) for one who is afraid.

When any one is afraid„ they make him (feel) secure; they 1430
soothe (his) fearful heart.

How should you say "Fear not" to one who has no fear?
Why give lessons (to him)? He needs no lessons.

lie ( A Umar) made that disturbed mind (be) of good cheer
and made his desolate heart (be) flourishing (happy).

Afterwards he addressed to him subtle discourses and (spoke)
of the holy attributes of God — how good a Friend is He! — -

And of the lovingkindnesses of God to the Abddl (saints)*
in order that he (the ambassador) might know (the meaning of)
magdm (permanent station) and hdl (passing state).

The hdl is like the unveiling of that beauteous bride* while 143s
the maqdm is the (king's) being alone with the bride.

The unveiling is witnessed by the king and by others as well*
(but) at the time of being alone (with the bride) there is no one
except the mighty king.

The bride unveils before commons and nobles (alike); in the
bridal chamber the king is (alone) with the bride.

There is many a one of the Sufis who enjoys hdl, (but) he
that has attained to maqdm is rare amongst them.

He ('Umar) reminded him of the stages traversed by the suul s
and he reminded him of the journeys of the spirit.

And of the Time which has (ever) been void of time, and of i-uo
the Station of Holiness which has (ever) been majestical*

And of the atmosphere wherein the Simurgh of the spirit h
before this (material life), has flown and experienced (the bounty
of Divine) grace 1 .

Every single flight thereof (being) greater than the horizons
(of this world) and greater than the hope and greed of the longing

lover.

When 'Umar found the stranger in appearance a friend (in
reality), he found (that) his soul (was) seeking (to learn) the
(Divine) mysteries.

The Shaykh ( A Umar) was adept and the disciple (the am¬
bassador) eager: the man (rider) was quick (dexterous) and the
beast belonged to the royal court (was nobly bred and docile).

1 Literally K "hits seen flight and (Divine) bounty. 9 "


So MATHNAWf, BOOK I

M45 That spiritual guide ('Umar) perceived that he (the am¬
bassador) possessed (the capacity for receiving) guidance: he
sowed the good seed in the good soil

Hose the ambassador of R um questioned the Commander of
the Faithful f may God he well-phased with him m

The man said to him, "'Q Commander of the Faithful* how
did the spirit come to the earth from above?

How did the infinite bird go into the cage?” He replied,
“ Cod recited spells and incantations over the spirit*

When He recites spells over the non-existences which have
no eye or ear, they begin to stir.

Because of His spells the non-existences at that very moment
are dancing joyously into existence,
ijjoi When, again. He recited a spell over the existent, at His
word the existent marched (back) post-haste into non-existence.

He spake into the ear of the rose and made it laughing
(blooming); He spake to the stone and made it a cornelian of
the mine T

He spake to the body a sign (message), so that it became
spirit; He spake to the sun, so that it became radiant*

Again He puts into its ear a fearful saying, and upon the face
of the sun fall a hundred eclipses.

Consider what that Speaker chanted into the ear of the cloud,
so that it poured tears from its eye, like a waterskin.

1455 Consider what God has chanted into the ear of the earth, so
that it became regardful and has (ever since) remained silent/ 1

Whosoever in perplexity is sorely troubled, God has spoken
the riddle into his ear,

That He may imprison him in two (doubtful) thoughts,
(namely), “Shall I do what He told (me) or the contrary
thereof ? n

From (the decree of) God also, one side obtains the prepon¬
derance, and from that (Divine) quarter he chooses one of the
two (alternatives)*

If thou wouldst not have the mind of thy spirit in (a state of)
perplexity, do not stuff this cotton-wool into thy spiritual ear,
1460 So that thou mayst understand those riddles of His, so that
thou mayst apprehend (both) the secret sign and the open.

Then the spiritual car becomes the place where wahy (in¬
spiration) descends. What is wafiyl A speech hidden from
sense-perception.

The spiritual ear and eye are other than diis sense-perception,
the ear of (discursive) reason and the car of opinion are destitute
of this (inspiration).

The word “compulsion” (jabr) made me impatient (uncon-


'UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR Si

tmllable) for love's sake, while it confined in (the prison of)
compulsion him who is not a lover,

1 his is union with God* and it is not compulsion: this is the
shining forth of the moon, this is not a cloud*

And if this be compulsion, it is not the compulsion of (suffered 1465
by) the vulgar: it is not the compulsion of (exerted by) the evil-
commanding self-willed (soul),

Q son, (only) they know (the real meaning of) compulsion
in whose hearts God has opened the sight (of the spiritual eye).

1 0 them the unseen things of the tutu re became manifest;
to them recollection of the past became naught.

Their freewill and compulsion is different (from that of
ordinary' men): in oyster-shells drops (of rain) are pearls.

Outside (01 the shell) it is a drop of water* small or great,
(but) within the shell it is a small or big pearl.

Those persons have the nature of the muskdeer's gland: u?a
externally they are (as) blood, while within them is the fragrance
of musk.

Do not say* “ This substance externally is blood: how should
it become a musky perfume when it goes into the gland? 1 '

Do not say s "This copper externally was despicable: bow
should it assume nobility in the heart (midst) of the elixir? "

In thee (the matter ol) freewill and compulsion was a (mere)
fancy,(but)when it went into them it became the light of (Divine)
Majesty.

When bread is (wrapped) in the tablecloth it is the inanimate
thing (so-called), (but) in the human body it becomes the glad
spirit (of life). ' B

It does nut become transmuted in the heart of (within) the table-
cloth: the (animal) soul transmutes it w ith (the water of) SalsabiL
G thou who reddest aright, such is the power of the soul:
what, then, must he the power of that Soul of soul?

The piece oi flesh which is Man, endowed with intelligence
and soul p cleaves mountain and sea and mine.

1 he strength ol the mountain-riving soul b (shown in) the
splitting of rocks; the strength of the Soul of sou) in the moon
was split asunder.

If the heart should open the lid of the wallet of (this) mystery,
the soul would rush (in rapture) towards the highest heaven.

Hour Adam imputed tint! fault {which he had committed) to himself^
saying , 44 O Lord, we have done wrong, ' and how IbUs imputed
his own sin to God, saying, i4 Because Thou hast seduced me."

Consider both our action and the action of God. Regard our i+s*
action as existent. This is manifest.

If the action of created beings be not in the midst (obviously
existent), then say not to any one, 11 Why have you acted thus? 11

S3! G


ft


Sz


M ATHNAWf | BOOK I

The creative act of God brings our actions into existence:
our actions are the effects of the creative act of God*

A rational being perceives either the letter (the outer sign)
or the (inner) purple (the spirit): how should he comprehend
two accidents at once?

If he goes (turns his mind) to the spirit, he becomes un-
heedful of the letter: no eye sees forward and backward at the
same moment,

■ Is5 At the time when you look in front, how at the same time

can you look behind you? Recognise this.

Inasmuch as the soul does not comprehend (both) the letter
and the spirit, how should the soul be the creator of them
both?

O son, (only) God comprehends both: the (one) action does
not hinder Him from the other action,

Satan said Because Thou hast seduced me: the vile Devil con¬
cealed his own act.

Adam said We heme done wrong unto ourselves: he was not,
like us* unheedful of the action of God,

if£o From respect he concealed it (the action of God) in ^regard
to) the sin: by casting the sin upon himself he ate fruit (was
blessed).

After his repentance, ITe (God) said to him, m O Adam, did
not 1 create in thee that sin and (those) tribulations?

Was it not My foreordain ment and destiny? How didst thou
conceal that at the time of excusing thyself? ”

He (Adam) said, “I was afraid, (so) 1 did not let respect go
(did not fail to observe due respect)." He (God) said* 14 1 too
have observed it towards thee, 11

Whoever brings reverence gets reverence (in return): whoever
brings sugar eats almond-cake.

1495 For whom are the good women ? For the good men. Treat thy
friend with honour; offend (him) and see (what will happen).

O heart, bring (forward) a parable for the sake of (illustrating)
a difference, that thou mayst know (what distinguishes) com¬
pulsion from freewill.

(Take the case of) a hand that is shaking from (morbid or
involuntary) tremor and (the case of) a person whose hand you
cause to shake (by knocking it away) from its place.

Know that both (these) movements are created by God, but
it is impossible to compare the latter with the former.

You are sorry for having caused it (his hand) to shake: how r
is the man afflicted with (a morbid) tremor not sorry?

1500 This is the intellectual quest. What is (the use of such a)
quest, O ingenious one? 1 hat perchance (by its means) a man
of weak understanding may find his way to that place (gain
some idea of the truth).


‘UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR 83

(\ fct) the intellectual quest, though it be (fine as) pearls and
13 t ™ e ^ than the spiritual quest.

J he spiritual quest is on another plane; the spiritual wine
has another consistency.

At the time when the intellectual quest was in keeping (with
the circumstances), this ‘Umar was intimate with Bu ’ 1 -Hakam,
(But) when L mar went away from intellect towards spirit,

Bu l-llikiim became Bu Jalil (the lather of ignorance) in
searching into that (subject). '

He is perfect on the side of sense-perception and under- ijoi
standing, though indeed he is ignorant in regard to the spirit.

Know that the quest of the intellect and the senses is (con¬
cerned with) effects or secondary causes. The spiritual quest
is either wonder or the father of wonder (either wonderful or
beyond wonder).

'lire illumination of the spirit comes: (then) there remains
not, O thou who seekest illumination, conclusion and premise
or that which contradicts (a statement) (or) that which renders
(its acceptance) necessary,

Because the seer on whom His (God's) Light is dawning is
qinte independent of the (logical) proof which resembles a
(blind man s) staff.

Commentary on “And He is with you wheresoever ye be.”

Once more wc come back to the tale: when, indeed, did we
go forth from the tale?

If we come to ignorance, that is His prison, and if we come lSlo
to knowledge, that is His palace;

And it wc come to sleep, we are His intoxicated ones: and if
to wakefulness, we arc in His hands;

And if w r e weep, we arc a cloud laden with the bounty dis¬
pensed by Him; and if wc laugh, at that time we are His

lightning 1

And if (we come) to wrath and war, 'tis the reflexion of His
Might; and if to peace and forgiveness, tis the reflexion of
His Love.

Who are we? In this tangled (complex) world what (tiling
other than He) indeed hath He (who is single) like alif> Nothing,
nothing, *

Uaic the ambassador asked ‘ Lmar, may God be well-pleased with
him, concerning the cause of the tribulation suffered by spirits
in these bodies of clay.

He said, “O “Umar, what was the wisdom and mystery of ,j,j
imprisoning that pure one (the spirit) in this dirty' place?

The pure water has become hidden in mud: the pure spirit
has become bound in bodies/*


84


MATHNAWf,BOOK I


He (*Umar) said, "Thou art making a profound inquiry,
thou art confining a meaning in a word.

Thou hast imprisoned the free (unconditioned) meaning,
thou hast bound the wind in a word.

This thou hast done for a benefit (good purpose). O tiiou
who thyself art blind 1 to the benefit (good purpose) of God.

15*0 He from whom (every) benefit was born, how should He not

see that which was seen by us? . , . .. .

There are myriads of benefits, and every myriad is (but) a

few beside that one 4 . . .

The breath of thy speech, which is a part ot the parts (bodily
members), became beneficial; why (then) is the whole of the
whole (the universal connexion of spirit and body) devoid (ot

^Thou who art a part—thy act (of speaking) is beneficial;
why (then) dost thou lift thy hand to assail the whole?

If there is no benefit in speech, do not speak; and if there is,
leave off making objections, and endeavour to give thanks.

Thanksgiving to God is a collar on every neck (every one s
duty); it Is not (thanksgiving) to dispute and make ones face
look sour.

If thanksgiving is only to look sour, then there is no thanks’

river like vinegar. ... ». _

" If vinegar wants (to find) the way to the liver, let it become

oxymel by (being mixed with) sugar. .

The meaning in poetry has no sureness of direction, it is like

the sling, it is not under control.


is^s


On the inner sense of" Let him who desires to sit with God
sit with the Sufis."

The ambassador became beside himself from these one or
two cups (of spiritual discourse): neither embassage nor message
remained in his memory.

1 5 jo He became distraught at the power of God. T he ambassador

arrived at this place (state) and became a king.

When the torrent reached the sea, it became the sea; when
the seed reached the corn land, it became the crop of corn.

When the bread attained to connexion with the animal (man),
the dead bread became living and endowed with knowledge.

When the wax and firewood were devoted to the fire, their
dark essence became (filled with) light.

When the (powdered) stone of antimony went into the eyes,
it turned to sight and there became a scout (one who observes
the enemy from some point of vantage).

1 Liicffllly/'in a veil,"

1 The confiiirmeni of (he spirit in ihe body.


'UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR %

Qli, happy is the man who was freed from himself and united ijjj
with the existence of a living one!

Alas for the living one who consorted with the dead! He
became dead, and life sped away from him.

When you have lied (for refuge) to the Quran of God, you
have mingled with the spirit of the prophets.

The Qur^n is (a description of) the States of the prophets,
(who are) the fishes of the holy sea of (Divine) Majesty.

And if you read and do not accept (take to heart) the Qur’an
suppose you have seen the prophets and saints (what will that
avail you?);

But if vou are accepting (the Qur’an), when you read the
stories (of the prophets)* the bird* your soul, will be distressed
in its cage.

The bird that is a prisoner in a cage, (if it) is not seeking to
escape, ’tis from ignorance.

The spirits which have escaped from their cages are the
prophets, (those) worthy guides.

From without comes their voice, (telling) of religion, (and
crying), 11 This, this is the way of escape for thee.

By this we escaped from this narrow cage: there is no means
of escape from this cage but this way*

(That) thou shouldst mate thyself ill, exceedingly wretched, iju
in order that thou mayst be let out from (the cage of) repu¬
tation,”

Worldly reputation is a strong chain: In the Way how is this
less than a chain of iron?

The story of the merchant to whom the parrot gave a message for

the parrots of India on the occasion of his going (thither) to

trade .

There was a merchant, and he had a parrot imprisoned in a
cage, a pretty parrot.

When the merchant made ready for travel and was about to
depart to India,

Because of his generosity he said to each male slave and each
handmaid, "What shall I bring (home) for you? Tell (me)
quickly/*

Each one asked him for some object of desire: that good man 1550
gave his promise to them all.

He said to the parrot, "What present would you like me to
bring for you from the land of India? rfc

The parrot said," When thou seest the parrots there, explain
my plight (and say),

*Such and such a parrot, who is longing for you, is in my
prison by the destiny of Heaven.


$6


MATHNAWI, BOOK l

She salutes you and asks for justice and desires (to learn)
from you the means and way of being rightly guided,
ijjs She savs, “ Is it meet that I in yearning (after you) should
give tip the ghost and die here in separation?

Is this right — (that) I (should be) in grievous bondage, while
ye are now on green plants, now on trees?

The faith kept by friends, is it like this?— I in this prison
and ye in the rose-garden.

o ye noble ones, call to mind this piteous bird, (and drink
in memory of me) a morning-draught amongst the meadows!

Happy it is for a friend to be remembered by friends, in par-
ticular when that (beloved) is Layla and this (lover) Majnun.
'5<k> O ye who consort with your charming and adored one, am
I to be drinking cups filled with mv own blood?

(G thou who art my beloved), quaff one cup of wine in
memory of me, if thou desirest to do me justice.

Or (at least), when thou hast drunk, spill one draught on the
earth in memory' of this fallen one who sifts dust.

Oh, where, Twonder, is that covenant and oath? Where are
the promises of that lip like candy?

If thy having forsaken thy slave is because of (his) ill service
(to thee)- when thou doest ill to the ill-doer, then what is the
difference (between master and slave)?
ijGs Oh, the ill thou doest in wrath and quarrel is more delightful
than music and the sound of the harp.

Oh, thy cruelty is better than felicity', and thy vengeance
dearer than life.

This its thy fire: how (what) must be thy light! This is (thy)
mourning* so how (what) indeed must be thy festival!

In respect of the sweetnesses which thy cruelty both* and in
respect of thy beauty * no one gets to the bottom of thee 1 .

I complain, and (yet) I fear Lest he believe me and from
kindness make that cruelty less.

is?*? I am exceedingly enamoured of his violence and his gentle¬
ness; K tis marvelous (that) I (am) in love with both these
contraries.

By God, if (I escape) from this thorn (of sorrow) and enter
the garden (of joy), because of this I shall begin to moan Ike
the nightingale.

This is a wondrous nightingale that opens his mouth to eat
thorns and roses together.

What nightingale is this? (Nay), *tis a fiery monster: because
of (his) love all unsweet things are sweetness to him.

He is a lover of the Universal p and he himself is the Universal:
he is in love with himself and seeking his own love/' 1 *’


1 /.p, thy pweetnejs and beauty is unfathomaHi?.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 87


Description of the icings of the birds that are Divine
Intelligences.

Such-like is the tale of the parrot which is the soul: where is
that one who is the confidant of (the spiritual) birds?

Where is a bird, weak and innocent* and within him Solomon
with (all) his host?

When he moans bitterly, without thanksgiving or complaint,
a noise of tumult falls on (arises in) the Seven Spheres (of
Heaven).

At every moment (there come) to him from God a hundred
missives* a hundred couriers; from him one (cry of) “O my
Lord!’ 1 and from God a hundred (cries of) "Lahboyka"

( A “ Here am I").

In the sight of God his backsliding is better than obedience;
beside his infidelity all faiths are tattered (worthless).

Every moment he hath an ascension (to God^ peculiar to him- 1 jSo
self: I Ie (God) lays upon Ins crown a hundred peculiar crowns.

His form is on earth and his spirit in '"no-place*” a "no¬
place” beyond the imagination of travel Sets (on the mystic
Way):

Kot such a ” no-place" that it should come into thy under¬
standing (or that) a fancy about it should be born in thee every
moment;

Nay, place and “no-place 1 * are in his control, just as the
four (Paradisal) rivers are in the control of one who dwells in
Paradise.

Cut short the explanation of Lhis and avert thy face from it:
do not breathe a word (more) — and God knows hest what is

right.

We return from this (matter), O friends, to the bird and the
merchant and India.

The merchant accepted this message (and promised) that he
would convey the greeting from her (the parrot) to ner con¬
geners.

More the merchant saw the parrots of India m the plain and
delivered the parrot's message.

When he reached the farthest bounds of India, he saw r a
number of parrots in the plain.

hie halted his beast; then he gave voice* delivered the greeting
and (discharged) the trust.

One of those parrots trembled exceedingly* fell* and died,
and its breath stopped.

The merchant repented of having told the new-s, and said,

“ 1 have gone about to destroy the creature.


ss


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

This one, surely;, is kin to that little parrot (of mine): they
must have been two bodies and one spirit.

Why did I do this? Why did I give the message? I have
consumed the poor creature by this raw (foolish) speech/*

This tongue is like stone and is also fired ike h and that which
springs from the tongue is like fire.

Do not vainly strike stone and iron against each other, now
for the sake of relating (a story), Bow For the sake of boasting,
because it is dark, and on every' side are fields of cotton :
how should sparks be amongst cotton?

Iniquitous are those persons who shut their eyes and by such
(vain) words set a whole world ablaze.

A single word Jays waste a (whole) world, turns dead foxes
into lions .

Spirits in their original nature have the (life-giving) breath
of Jesus, (hm while they remain embodied) one breath of it
(the spirit) is a wound, and the other a plaster.

If the (bodily) screen were removed from the spirits, the
speech of every spirit would be like (the breath of) the Messiah.
1600 IF you wish to utter words like sugar, refrain from concu¬
piscence and do not eat this sweetmeat (the desires of the flesh).

Self-control is the thing desired by the intelligent' sweetmeat
is what children long for.

Whoever practises self-control ascends to Heaven, whoever
eats sweetmeat falls farther behind.

Commentary on the saying of Fariduddin 'Aftdr. may God
Sanctify his spirit —

" Thou art a sensualist: O heedless one , drink blood (mortify
thyself) amidst the dust (of thy bodily existence),

For if the spiritualist drink a poison, it will be (to him as) an
antidote,**

It does not harm the spEritualist (saint) though he drink
deadly poison for all to sec,

because he has attained to (spiritual) health and has been
sci free from (the need for) abstinence, (while) the poor seeker
(of God) is (still) in the (state of) fever,
z 6 o$ The Prophet said, ' l O bold seeker, beware! Do not contend
with any one who is sought."

In thee b a Nimrod: do not go into the fire, if thou wish to
go in, first become Abraham]

When thou art neither a swimmer nor a seaman, do not cast
thyself (into the sea) from a (feeling of) self-conceit,

l ie (the saint) fetches pearls from the bottom of the sea, from
losses he brings gain to the surface.

If a perfect man (saint) take earth, it becomes gold; if an
imperfect one has carried away gold, it becomes ashes*


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 89

Since that righteous man is accepted of God, his hand in 1&1*
(all) things is the hand of God.

The hand of the imperfect man is the hand of Devil and
demon, because he is in the trap of imposition and guile.

If ignorance come to him (the perfect man), it becomes
knowledge, (but) the knowledge that goes into the imperfect
man becomes ignorance.

Whatever an ill man takes becomes illness, (but) if a perfect
man takes infidelity it becomes religion.

G thou who, being on foot, hast contended with a horseman,
thou wilt not save thy head. Now hold thy foot (desist)!

How the magicians paid respect to Moses , on whom be peace ,
saying, " IVhat dost thou command? Wilt thou cast doum thy
rod first, or shall we?”

The magicians in the time of the accursed Pharaoh, when i&js
they contended with Moses in enmity,

Yet gave Moses the precedence — the magicians held him in
honour —

Because they said to him t +M Tis for thee to command: (if)
thou wishest to he the first, do thou cast down thy rod first
{Of all).”

“Nay/* said he, “first do ye + O magicians, cast down those
tricks (objects of enchantment) into the middle (where all can
see them)/*

This amount of respect purchased their (belief in) (the true)
religion, $0 that it (the true belief) cut off the hands and feet
of their contention (prevented them from disputing further with
Moses).

When the magicians acknowledged his (Moses 1 ) right, they
sacrificed their hands and feet (as a penance) for the sin of that
(contention).

To the perfect man (every) mouthful (of food) and (every)
saying is lawful. Thou art not perfect: do not eat, be mute,
Inasmuch as thou art an ear and he a tongue, not thy con¬
gener: God said to the ears, “Be silent”

When the sucking babe is born f at first it keeps silence for
a while, it is all ear.

For a while it must close its lips (and refrain) from speech,
until it learns to speak;

And if it is not (silent like) an ear but makes babbling sounds, 1
it makes itself the dumbest creature in the world.

He that is deaf by nature, he that had no ear at the beginning,
is dumb: how should he burst into speech?

Since, in order to speak, one must first hear, do thou come
to speech by the way of hearing.


90 MATHNAWl, BOOK I

Enter ye the houses by their doors, and seek ye the ends in
their causes.

There is no speech independent of the way of hearing except
the speech of the Creator who is without want.

1630 He is the Originator, He follows no master; He is the support
of all things. He hath no support,

(While) the rest, (engaged) in handicrafts and talk, follow a
master and have need of a pattern.

If thou art not alien to (unfit to hear) this discourse, assume
the frock of a dervish and (take to shedding) tears in some
deserted place*

Because Adam by means of tears escaped from that reproof:
moist tears are the breath (speech) of the penitent.

For weeping's sake Adam came (down) to the earth, that he
might be weeping and moaning and sorrowful.

1635 Adam, (cast out) from Paradise and from above the Seven
(Heavens), went to the M shoe-row” 1 for the purpose of ex¬
cusing himself.

If thou art from the back of Adam and from his loins, be
constant in seeking (forgiveness) amongst his company.

Prepare a dessert of heart-fire (burning grief) and eye-water
(tears): the garden is made open (blooming) by cloud and sun.

What dost thou know of the taste of the water of the eyes?
Thou art a lover of bread ? like the blind (beggars).

If thou make this wallet empty of bread, thou wilt make it
full of glorious jewels.

1640 Wean the babe, thy soul, from the Devil’s milk, and after
that make it consort with the Angel*

Whilst thou art dark and vexed and gloomy, know that thou
art sucking from the same breast as the accursed Devil.

The mouthful that gave increase of light and perfection is
obtained from lawful earnings.

The oil that comes and quenches our lamp—when it quenches
a lamp, call it water.

From the lawful morsel are burn knowledge and wisdom;
from the lawful morsel come love and tenderness.

1645 When from a morsel thou seest (arise) envy and guile, (and
when) ignorance and heedlessness arc bom (of it), know that
it is unJawfuL

Wilt thou sow wheat and will it produce barley? Hast thou
seen a mare bring forth an ass's colt?

The morsel is seed, and thoughts are its fruit; the morsel
i$ the sea, and thoughts are its pearls.

From Ehe lawful morsel in the mouth is bom the inclination
to serve (God) and the resolve to go to yonder world,

1 S« £.64, note 1. The meaning is that he stood in ihe place of
pentturn.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT gi

How the merchant rein ted to the parrot what he had witnessed
on the part of the parrots of India ,

The merchant finished his trading and returned home glad at
heart.

He brought a present for every male slave, he gave a token
to every slave-girl.

"Where is my present?” asked the parrot, “Relate what
ihou hast said and seen.”

"Nay,” said he, “indeed I am repenting of that (which 1
said), gnawing my hand and biting my fingers (in remorse).

Why, from ignorance and folly, did I idly bear (such) an
inconsiderate message?”

“O master,“ said the parrot, “what is thy repentance for?
What is it that causes this anger and grief? ”

“I told thy complaints,” said he, L, to a company of parrots r&j*
resembling thee.

One parrot got scent of (understood) thy pain: her heart
broke 1 , and she trembled and died.

1 became sorry, (thinking) 4 why did I Say this? 5 but what
was the use of repenting after 1 had said it?"

Know that a word which suddenly shot from the tongue is
like an arrow shot from the bow,

Q son, that arrow does not turn back on its way: you must
dam a torrent at the source.

When it left the source behind, it Swept over a world (of i6w>
countiy): if it lays w aste the world, his no wonder*

There is an unseen bringing forth of effects to (our) action, and
the results born of it are not in the control of (human) creatures:

Those results are all created by God without any partner,
though they are imputed to us.

Zayd let fly an arrow in the direction of "Amr: his arrow
gripped \ 4 mr like a leopard.

During 3 long time, a (whole) year, it was producing pain:
pains arc created by God, not by man.

If Zayd who shot (the arrow) died of fright at the moment 1^5
(when 1 Amr was wounded! t (nevertheless) pains are continually
being produced there (in 'Arnr's body) until (‘AmrY) death.

Inasmuch as he ( l Amr) died from the results of the hurt
(inflicted on him), for this cause call Zayd, who shot (the arrow),
the murderer.

Impute those pains to him, though all of them are the work
of the Creator.

So with sowing and breathing (speaking) and (laying) snares
and sexual intercourse: the results of those (actions) are amen¬
able to (determined by the will of) God,

1 Liitr-iUy, ,L hcr gLilt-bladder buret,”


92 MATUNAWft BOOK I

The saints possess power (derived) from God: they turn back
from its course the arrow that has sped.

1670 When the saint repents, he doses the doors of the results
(shuts off the results) from the cause 1 by that hand (power) of
the Lord.

Through the opening of the door (of Divine grace), he makes
unsaid what has been said, so that neither spit nor roast-meat
is burnt thereby 3 .

He wipes out the saying from all the minds that heard it,
and makes it imperceptible.

O sire, if thou must needs have demonstration and proof (of
this), recite 4 i {Whatever) verse (MV cancel) or cause to be for¬
gotten 1.”

Read the verse " They made you forget My teaming"** acknow¬
ledge their (the saints') power to put forgetfulness (in men's
hearts).

1675 Since they are able to make (you) remember and forget, they
are mighty over all the hearts of (God V) creatures.

When he (the saint) has blocked the road of (your) mental
perception by means of forgetfulness, it is impossible (for you)
to act, even if there be virtue (in you).

Think ye those exalted ones are a laughing-stock? Recite
from the Qur'an as far as (the words) 11 They made you forget."

He that owns a village is king over bodies- he that owns a
heart 5 is king over your hearts.

Without any doubt, action (practice) is a branch of (sub¬
ordinate to) seeing (theory) 4 : therefore Man is nothing but
“ the little man*’ (the pupil of the eye),

1660 I dare not expound the whole of this (subject): hindrance
thereto is coming from those who are at die centre.

Inasmuch as the forgetfulness and recollection of (God's)
creatures are with him (depend on the perfect saint), and he
comes at their call for help,

Every night that glorious one is empty ing from their hearts
hundreds of thousands of good and evil (thoughts),

(While) in the daytime he is filling their hearts therewith—
he is filling those oyster-shells with pearls s

By (Divine) guidance (after sleep is past) all those thoughts
of former things recognise the spirits (to which they were
attached).

Your handicraft and skill come (back) to you, that they may
open to you the door of (wavs and) means.

The goldsmith’s craft did not go to the irunsmith; the dis-

1 /,e. he widen* the Cause inoperative.

1 I*. SO that no harm is done.

* l.f. ihe saint.

4 f.e. the mi malleus action* of the saints depend on mystical knowledge
and insight.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 93

position of the good-natured man did not go to the disagreeable
one.

On the day of Resurrection the handicrafts and dispositions
will come, like articles of property, to the claimant (owner).

After sleep also, the handicrafts and dispositions come back
in haste to aim that claims them as his.

At the hour of dawn the handicrafts and thoughts went to
the same place where that good and evil (formerly) were.

Like carrier pigeons, they bring things useful (to know) from 1690
(other) cities to their own city.

How the parrot heard wluit those parrots had done, and died in
the cage, and how the merchant made lament for her 4

When the bird heard what that (other) parrot had done, she
trembled exceed i ugly s fell, and became cold.

The merchant„ seeing her thus fallen, sprang up and dashed
his cap on the ground.

When he saw her in this guise and in this state, the merchant
sprang forward and tore the breast of his garment.

He said, "O beautiful parrot with thy sweet ery\ what is
ibis that has happened to thee? Why hast thou become like
this?

Oh, alas for my sweet-voiced bird! Oh, alas for my bosom- 1695
friend and confidant I

Oh, alas for my melodious bird, the wine of my spirit and
my garden and my sweet basil!

"Had Solomon possessed a bird like this, how indeed should
he have become occupied with those (other) birds ?

Oh p alas for die bird which I gained cheaply, and (so) soon
turned my face away from her countenance!

O tongue, thqu arc a great damage to me* (but) since thou
art speaking} what should I say to thee?

O tongue, thou art both the "fire and the stack: how long wilt i?™
ihou dart this fire upon ibis stack?

Secretly my soul is groaning because of thee, although it is
doing whatsoever thou biddest it.

O tongue, thou art a treasure without end. O tongue, thou
art also a disease without remedy.

Thou art at once a whistle and decoy for birds, and a com¬
forter in the desolation of absence (from the Beloved).

How long wilt thou grant me mercy* O merciless one, O thou
who hast drawn the bow to take vengeance on me?

Lo t thou hast made nty bird fly away. Do not browse (any tm
more) in the pasture of injustice!

Either answer me or give redress or mention to me (what
wall be) the means of (producing) joy.


94 MATHN A WI, BOOK I

Oh t alas for my darkness-consuming dawn! Oh, ala$ For my
day-enkindling light!

0h T alas, for my bird of goodly flight, that has flown from
mv end (my last state) to my beginning (my first state).

The ignorant man is in love with pain unto everlasting. Arise
and read (in the Qur'an) / swear 1 as far as (the words) in trouble,
1710 With thy face I was free from trouble, and in thy river l was
unsailed by froth.

These cries of * Alas 1 are (caused by) the phantasy (idea) of
seeing (the Beloved) and (by) separation from my present
existence.

TwaS the jealousy of God* and there is no device against
God: where is a heart that b not (shattered) in a hundred pieces
by God's love?

1 he jealousy (of God) is this, that He is other than all things*
that He is beyond explanation and the noise of words*

Oh, alas! Would that my tears were an ocean, that they
might be Strewn as an offering to the fair charmer!

1715 My parrot, my clever-headed bird, the interpreter of my
thought and inmost consciousness*

She has told me from the first, that l might remember it t
whatsoever should come to me as my allotted portion of right
and wrong."

The parrot whose voice comes from (Divine) inspiration and
whose beginning was before the beginning of existence—*

That parrot is hidden within thee: thou hast seen the re¬
flexion of her upon this and that (the things of the phenomenal
world).

She takes away thy joy* and because of her thou art rejoicing:
thou reed vest injury from her as though it were justice
17H0 O thou who wen burning the soul for the body's sake* thou
hast burned (destroyed) the soul and illumined (delighted) the
body.

1 am burning (with love of God): does any one want tinder,
let him set his rubbish ablaze with fire from me.

Inasmuch as tinder is combustible* take tinder that catches
fire (readily)*

O alas, 6 alas, Q alas that such a moon became hidden under
the clouds I

How r should I utter a word ?—for the fire in my heart is grown
fierce, the lion of separation (from the Beloved) lias become
raging and blood-shedding.

One that even when sober is violent and furious, how* will it
be when he lakes the wine-cup in his hand?

The furious Lion who is beyond description is too great for
(cannot be contained in) the wide expanse of the meadow*

1 Literally* ,a / itcrtir not.™ S-ee Wright’s Arabtc Grammar k jrd td, p vcl. 11 p p, jqj .


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 95

I am thinking of rhymes, and my Sweetheart says to me*

41 Do not think of aught except vision of Me.

Sit at thy ease. My rhyme-meditating (friend): in My
presence thou art rhymed with (attached to) felicity.

What are words that thou should** think of them? What are
words? Thoms in the hedge of the vineyard,

( will throw word and sound and speech into confusion, that 1 ?jo
without these three 1 may converse with thee.

That word which i kept hidden from Adam I will speak to
thee T O (thou who art the) consciousness of the world +

(I will tell to thee) that word which I did not communicate
to Abraham, and that pain (love) w hich Gabriel doss not know/ 1
That word of which the Messiah (Jesus) breathed not a word
God, from jealousy, did not utter even without md.

What is md in language? Positive and negative 1 , I am not
positive, I am selfless and negated.

I found (true) individuality in non-individuality: therefore 1 1711
wove (my) individuality into non-individuality.

All kings are enslaved to their slaves, all people are dead
(ready to die) for one who dies for them.

All kings are prostrate before one who is prostrate before
them, all people are intoxicated with (love for) one who is
intoxicated with them.

Hie fowler becomes a prey to the birds in order that of a
Sudden he may make them his prey.

The hearts of heart-ravishers arc captivated by those w ho have
lost their hearts (to them): all loved ones are the prey of (their)
lovers.

Whomsoever thou didst deem to be a lover, regard (him) as 1740
the loved onc p for relatively he is both this and that.

If they that are thirsty seek w ater from the w orld, (yet) water
too seeks in the world them that are thirsty.

Inasmuch as He is (thy) lover, do thou be silent: as He i$
pulling thine ear, be thou (all) ear.

Dam the torrent (of ecstasy) when it runs in flood- else it
w ill work shame and ruin.

What care I though ruin be (wrought)? Under the ruin there
is a royal treasure.

He that is drowned in God wishes to be more drowned, (while) 1745
his spirit (is tossed) up and down like the waves of die sea T
(Asking), 'Ms the bottom of the sea more delightful, or the
top? Is His (the Beloved's) arrow' more fascinating, or the
shield?"

O heart, thou art torn asunder by evil suggestion if thou
recognise any difference between joy and woe.

Although the object of thy desire has the taste of sugar, is
1 Literal Ey, '‘affirmation and negation,“


96 MATHNAW'f, BOOK I

not absence ot any object of desire (in thee) the object of the
Beloved’s desire?

Every star of His is the blood-price of a hundred new moons:
it is lawful for Him to shed the blood of the (whole) world,

1750 We gained the price and the blood-price: we hastened to
gamble our soul away.

Oh, the life of lovers consists in death: thou wilt not win the
(Beloved's) heart except in losing thine own.

I sought (to win) His heart with a hundred airs and graces,
(but) He made excuses to me (put me off) in disdain.

I said, " After all, this mind and soul (of mine) are drowned
in Thee.” “Begone," said He, “begone! Do not chant these
spells over Me (do not seek thus to beguile Me),

Do not 1 know what thought thou hast conceived? 0 thou
who hast seen double, how hast thou regarded the Beloved?
j/ij O gross-spirited one, thou hast held Me in light esteem,
because thou hast bought Me very* cheaply.

He that buys cheaply gives cheaply: a child will give a pearl
for a loaf of bread,”

1 am drowned in a love (so deep) that therein are drowned
the first loves and the last.

I have told it summarily, 1 have not explained it (at length),
otherwise both (thy) perceptions and (my) tongue would be
consumed.

When 1 speak of “ lip," ’tis the lip (shore) of the Sea; when 1
sav " not,” the intended meaning is '‘except.”
i76u By reason of (inward) sweetness I sit with sour face: from
fullness of speech 1 am silent.

That in die mask of sour-facedness my sweetness may be
kept hidden from the two worlds.

In order that this subject may not come to every ear, I am
telling (only) one out of a hundred esoteric mysteries.

Commentary on the saying of the Hakim (Sami'f):

" Any thing that causes thee to be left behind on the Way, what
mailer whether it be infidelity or faith?

Any form that causes thee to fall far from the Beloved, what
matter whether it be ugly or beautiful?"—
and (a discourse) on the meaning of the words of the Prophet, on
whom be peace: “ Verify, Su'd is jealous , and 1 am more jealous
than Sa*d, and Allah is more jealous than I; and because of His
jealousy He hath forbidden foul actions both outward and
inward .

The whole world became jealous because God is superior to
alt the world in jealousy.

He is like the spirit, and the world is like the body: the body
receives from the spirit (both) good and evil.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 97

Any one whose prayer-niche is turned to the (mystical) reve- 1765
lation, do thou regard his going (back) to (the traditional) faith
a$ shameful.

Any one who has become Master of the robes to the King,
it is loss for hint to traffic on the King's behalf.

Any one who becomes the intimate friend of the Sultan, it is
an injury' and swindle (for htmj to wait at his door.

When (the privilege of) kissing the (King’s) hand has been
bestowed on him by the King, it is a sin it he prefers to kiss
the (King's) foot.

Although to lay the head on the (King's) foot is an act of
obeisance p (yet) compared with the former act of obeisance it
h a fault and backsliding.

The King is jealous of any one who, after having seen the 1770
face, prefers the (mere) scent.

To speak in parables, God's jealousy is the wheat, (while)
men's jealousy is die straw in the stack/

Know that the root of (all) jealousies is in God: those of
mankind are an offshoot from God, without resemblance (being
implied)*

I will leave the explanation of this and will begin to complain
of the cruelty of that fickle Beauty.

I wail because wailings are pleasant to Him: He wants from
the two worlds wailing and grief.

How should I not wail bitterly on account of His de- 1 773
ceit, since I am not in the circle of those intoxicated with
Him?

How* should I not mourn, like night, without His day and
without the favour of His day-illuming countenance?

His unsweetness is sweet in my soul: may my soul be sacri¬
ficed to the Beloved who grieves my heart!

I am in love with my grief and pain for the sake of pleasing
my peerless King,

I make the dust of sorrow a salve for mine eye, that the two
seas of mine eyes may be filled with pearls.

The tears which people shed for His sake are pearls—and
people think they are tears,

I am complaining of the Soul of the soul, (but in truth) I am
not complaining: I am (only) relating.

My heart h saying, 11 1 a m tormented by Him,” and I have
(long) been laughing at its poor pretence.

Du (me) right, O glory of the righteous, Q Thou who art the
dais, and I the threshold of Thy door!

Where are threshold and dais in reality? In the quarter where
our Beloved is, where are “we” and "I”?

O Thou whose soul is free from +l w r c TT and 11 1O Thou who 17S5
art the subtle essence of the spirit in man and woman,


*


7


98 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When man and woman become one, Thuti art that One;
when the units are wiped out, lo, Thou art that (Unity)*

Thou didst contrive this M l a * and "we” in order that Ihou
mightst play the game 1 of worship with Thyself,

That all “IV T and “thou! 1 *” should become one soul and
at last should he submerged in the Beloved.

All this is (true)p and do Thou come, O (Lord of the) Creative
Word-, O Thou who transcendest 44 Come” and (all) speech!

1 77 a The body can sec Thee (only) in bodily fashion: it fancies
(pictures to itself) Thy sadness or laughter.

Do not say that the heart that is bound (conditioned) by
(such bodily attributes as) sadness and laughter is worthy of
seeing Thee (as Thou really art).

tie who is bound by sadness and laughter is living by means
of these two borrowed (transient and unreal) things.

In the verdant garden of Love, which is without end* there
are many fruits besides sorrow and joy.

Love is higher than these two states of feeling: without spring
and without autumn it is (ever) green and fresh.

1735 Pay the tithe on Thy fair face* O Beauteous One: relate the
story of the soul that is rent in pieces,

For by the coquetry of a glance One who is given to glancing
amorously has branded mv heart anew.

I absolved Him if He shed my blood: I was saying, 11 It is
lawful (I absolve Thee)*” and lie was fleeing (from me).

Since Thou art fleeing from the lament of those who are (as)
dust p why pourest Thou sorrow on the hearts of the sorrowful ?

O Thou* whom every dawn that shone from the East found
overflowing (with abundant grace) like the bright fountain (ol
the sun}* ,

igoo Ilow didst Thou give (nothing but) evasion to 1 hy irenzied
loverp 0 Thou the sugar of whose lips hath no price?

0 Thou who art a new soul to the old world, hear the cry
(that comes) from my body (which is) without soul and heart.

Leave the tale of the R "se! For God's sake set forth the tale
of the Nightingale that is parted from the Rose!

Our emotion is not caused by grief and joy* our consciousness
is not related to fancy and imagination.

There is another state (of consciousness)* which is rare: do
not thou disbelieve, for God te very mighty .
is*3 Do not judge from the (normal) state of man h do not abide
in wrong-doing and in well-doing-

Wrong-doing and well-doing, grief and joy* are things that


1 Lite rally, mrd, b kind of backgammon.

* Literally, "Tht Command (which is) 'Bcf

= 4, 0 Thou who E ihe Command/ 1


Another reading is


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 99

-cornu Into existence; those who come into existence die: God
is their heir.

Tis dawn. Q Thou who art the support and refuge of the
dawn, ask pardon (fur me) of my Lord IlusAmu’ddm!

Thou art He who asketh pardon of the Universal Mind and
Soul,Thou art the Soul of the soul and the Splendour of the coral.

The light of dawn has shone forth, and from Thy light we
arc engaged in drinking the morning-drink with the wine of
Thy Mansur L

Inasmuch as Thy gift keeps me thus f crura vished), who (what) 1S10
is (other) wine that it should bring me rapture?

Wine in ferment is a beggar suing for our ferment ; Heaven
in revolution is a beggar suing fur our consciousness.

Wine became intoxicated with us ? not we with it; the body
came into being from u$, not we from it.

We are as bees, and bodies are as wax (honeycomb): we have
made the body, cell by cell, like wax.


Revirting to the tale of the merchant who went to trade
(m India).

This (discourse) is very long. Tell the story of the merchant,
that we may see what happened to that good man.

The merchant in fire (burning grief) and anguish and yearning iSi S
was uttering a hundred distracted phrases like this.

Now self-contradiction, now disdain, now supplication, now
passion for reality p now metaphor (unreality).

The drowning man suffers an agony of soul and clutches at
every straw.

For fear of (losing) hi$ head (life), he flings about (both)
hand and foot to see whether any one will take his hand (help
him) in peril.

The Friend loves this agitation: it is better to struggle vainly
than to lie still.

lie who is the King (of all) is not idle, (though) complaint
from Him would be a marvel, fur He is not ilk

For this reason said the Merciful (God), O son, 11 Every day
He h [busy) in an affair” O son*

In this Way be thou ever scraping and scratching (exerting
thyself to the utmost): until thy last breath do not be unoccupied
for a moment.

So that thy last breath may be a last breath in which the
(Divine) favour is thy bosom-friend.

Whatsoever the soul which is in man and woman strives to
do, the ear and eye of the soul's King are at the window,

1 //, Haltiij, who •said "Ana "


JQQ


MATHNAWJ f BOOK I

How the merchant east the parrot out of the tag* and how
the dead parrot flew away.

i£as After that, he cost her out of the cage. The little parrot flew
to a lofty bough.

The dead parrot made such a (swift) flight as when the
orient sun rushed onward.

The merchant was amazed at the action of the bird: without
understanding he suddenly beheld the mysteries of the bird.

He lifted up his face and said, “O nightingale, give us profit
(instruction) by explaining thy case.

What did she (the parrot) do there (in India), that thou didst
leam, devise a trick, and bum us (with grief) ,p ?
ifiio The parrot said t “She by her act counselled me — 'Abandon
thy charm of voice and thy affection (for thy master).

Because thy voice has brought thee into bondage': she
feigned herself dead for the sake of (giving me) this counsel.

Meaning (to sayk 'O thou who hast become a singer to high
and low, become dead like me, that thou mays! gain release. 111

If you are a grain, the little birds will peck you up- if you
are a bud, the children will pluck you off.

Hide the grain (bait), become wholly a snare j hide the bud,
become the grass on the roof.

1035 Any one who offers his beauty to auction, a hundred evil fates
set out towards him (and overtake him).

Plots and angers and envies pour upon his head, like water
from waterskins.

Foes tear him to pieces from jealousy; even friends take
his lifetime away.

He that was heedless of the sowing and the springtide, how
should he know the value of this lifetime?

You must flee to the shelter of God's grace, who shed
thousandfold grace upon (our) spirits,
iM That you may find a shelter. Then how (will you lack) shelter?
Water and fire will become your army.

Did not the sea become a friend to Noah and Moses? Did it
not become overbearing in vengeance against their enemies?

Was not the fire a tor tress for Abraham, so that it raised
smoke (sighs of despair) from the heart of Nimrod?

Did not the mountain call Yahya (John the Baptist) to itself
and drive off his pursuers with blows of stone?

4:1 0 Yahya,” it said," come, take refuge in me, that 1 may be
thy shelter from the sharp sword/"


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT


101


IIozc the parrot bade farewell to the mm hunt and flew away.

The parrot gave him one or two counsels full of (spiritual) ityj
savour and after that bade him the farewell of parting.

The merchant said to her, u Go f God protect thee! Just now
thou hast shown to me a new Wav*"

Said the merchant to himself, “This is the counsel for me;

I will take her Way, for this Wav is shining with light.

How should my soul be meaner than the parrot? The soul
ought to follow a good track like this,”


The harmfulness of being honoured by the people and of
becoming conspicuous.

The body is cage-like - the body, amidst the cajoleries of those
who come in and go out, became a thorn to the soul.

This one says to him, "l will be thy confidant,” and that 1850
one says, “ Nay, 1 am thy partner.”

This one says to him, "There is none in existence like thee
for beauty ancl eminence and for kindness and liberality.”

That one says to him, "Both the worlds are thine* all our
souls are thy soul's parasites/*

When he sees the people intoxicated with (desire for) him,
because of arrogance he loses self-control.

He does not know that the Devil has cast thousands like him
into the water of the river (of destruction)*

The world's flattery and hypocrisy is a sweet morsel; cat less iSg*
of it (eat it not), for it is a morsel full of fire.

Its fire is hidden and its taste is manifest; its smoke becomes
visible in the end.

Do not say* "How should I swallow that praise? He is
speaking from desire (for reward): I am on his track (and see
quite well what he is after)/ 1

If your bdauder should satirise you in public, your heart
would burn for (many) days on account of those scorches (of
vituperation).

Although you know that he (only) said it in disappointment
because the hopes he had of you brought him no gairi h

(Vet) the effect thereof is remaining within you. The same j&fo
experience happens to you in the case of praise.

The effect of that too lasts fur many days and becomes a
source of arrogance and deception of the soul*

But it does not $how r it$df> because praise is sweet; (in the
case of blame) the evil shows itself, because blame is bitter*

It (blame) is like (bitter) decoctions and pills which you
swallow- and for a long time you arc in disturbance and pain,


103


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Whereas s if you eat halted (sweetmeat) p its taste is momentary:
this effect, like the other, is not end urine for ever.

Since it does not endure (perceptibly), it endures imper¬
ceptibly: recognise every opposite by means of its opposite.

When the effect of sugar endures (remains latent), after a
while it produces boils that call for the lancet.

Pharaoh was made (what he was) by abundance of praises;
be lowly of spirit through meekness, do not domineer.

So far as you can* become a slave, do not be a monarch.
Suffer blows: become like the ball, do not be the bat.

Otherwise, when this elegance and beauty remains with you
no more, you will be loathed by those companions.
iSjt? The set of people who used to flatter you deceitfully, when
they behold you will call you a devil.

When they see you at their doors, they all will cry, “A dead
man has risen from his grave. M

(You will be) like the beardless youth whom diey address as
lb Lord vt that by this hypocrisy they may make him infamous.

As soon as he has grown a beard in infamy, the Devil is
ashamed to search after him.

The Devil approaches Man for the sake of wickedness : he
does not approach you because you are worse than the Devil*

So long as you were a man the Devil was running at your
heels and bidding you taste (his) wine.

Since you have become confirmed in devilry, the Devil is
fleeing from you, O good-for-nothing!

At that (former) time they clung to your skirt: when you
became like this they all fled.

Explanation of {the Tradition) “ Whatsoever God trills
tomttA to pass"

We have spoken all these words, but in preparing ourselves
(for the journey before us) we are naught, naught without the
favours of God.

Without the favours of God and God + s elect ones, angel
though he be, his page is black.

iwv O God, O Thou whose bounty fulfils (every') need, it is not
allowable to mention any one beside Thee.

This amount of guidance Thou hast bestowed (upon us); till
this (present time) Thou hast covered up many a fault of ours.

Cause the drop of knowledge which Thou gavest (us) hereto¬
fore to become united with Thy seas-

In my soul there is a drop - of knowledge: deliver it from
sensuality and from the body's clay,

Before these clays drink it up, before these winds sweep it
sway.


THE ALM1GHTINES5 OF GOD JOJ

Although, when they sweep it away. Thou art able to take it is^s
back from them and redeem it.

The drop that vanished in the air or was spilled (on the
earth}—when did it flee {escape} from the storehouse of Thy
omnipotence?

If it enter into non-existence or a hundred non-existences, it
will make a foot of its head (will return in headlong haste) when
* Thou cal lest it.

Hundreds of thousands of opposites are killing their oppo¬
sites: Thy decree is drawing them forth again {from non-
existence) *

There is caravan on caravan, O Lord, (speeding) continually
from non-existence towards existence.

In particular, every night all thoughts and understandings
become naught, plunged in the deep Sea;

Again at the time of dawn those Divine ones lift up their
heads from the Sea, like fishes.

In autumn the myriads of boughs and leaves go in rout into
the sea of Death,

(While) in the garden the crow clothed in black like a mourner
makes lament over the (withered) greenery. ' ,

Again from the Lord of the land 1 comes the edict (saying) to
Non-existence, “ Give back what thou hast devoured!

Give up, O blaek Death, what thou hast devoured of plants 1*05
and heating herbs and leaves and grass!"

O brother, collect thy wits for an instant (and think}: from
moment to moment (incessantly) there is autumn and spring
within thee.

Behold the garden of die heart, green and moist ami fresh,
full of rosebuds and cypresses and jasmines;

Boughs hidden by the multitude jof leaves, vast plain and
high palace hidden bv the multitude of flowers.

These words, which are from Universal Reason, are the scent
of those flowers and cypresses and hvacinths.

Didst thou (ever) smell the Scent of a rose where no rose was? 1 *>
Didst thou (ever) see the foaming of wine where no wine was?

The scent is thy guide and conducts thee on thy way: it will
bring thee to Eden and Kawthar, _

The scent is a remedy for the (sightless) eye; (it is) light¬
making: the eve of Jacob was opened by a scent.

The foul scent darkens the eye, the scent of Joseph succours

Tllou who art not a Joseph, be a Jacob: be (familiar), like
him, with weeping and sore distress.

Hearken to this counsel from the hageof Ghazna \ that thou j
mayst feel Freshness in thy old body:

1 Literally ; "the headman of the village."


1 Sanri-


t°4 MATHNAWf* BOOK I

“Disdain needs a face like the rose; when thou hast not
(such a face), do not indulge in 1 ill-temper.

Ugly is disdain in an uncomely face, grievous is eye-ache in
an unseeing eye / 1

In the presence of Joseph do not give thyself airs and behave
like a beauty: offer nothing but the supplication and sighs of
Jacob.

The meaning of dying (as conveyed) by the parrot was
supplication (self-abasement): make thyself dead in supplication
and poverty (of spirit),

wo That the breath of Jesus may revive thee and make thee
fair and blessed as itself*

How should a rock be covered with verdure by the Spring?
Become earth, that thou may at grow flowers of many a hue.

Years hast thou been a heart-jagging rock: once, for the sake
of experiment, be earth!

The story 0/ the old harper who in the time of 1 Umar, may God be
well-pleased with him , on a day when he teas starving played
the harp for God's sake in the graveyard.

Hast thou heard that in the time of 'Umar there was a harper,
a fine and glorious minstrel?

The nightingale would be made beside herself by his voice:
by his beautiful voice one rapture would be turned into a
hundred.

His breath was an ornament to assembly and congregation,
and at his song the dead would arise.

(He was) like Israfil (Seraphicl), whose voice will cunningly
bring the souls of the dead into their bodies.

Or he was (like) an accompanist z to Israfil, for his music would
make the elephant grow tvings*

One day l&rAfil will make a shrill sound and will give life to
him that has been rotten for a hundred years.

The prophets also have (spiritual) notes within, whence there
comes life beyond price to them that seek (God) P
The sensual ear does not hear those notes, for the sensual ear
is defiled by iniquities.

The note of the peri 3 is not heard by man t for he is unable
to apprehend the mysteries of the peris,

Although the note of the peri too belongs to this world. The
note of the heart is higher than both breaths (notes) 4 .

For peri and man (alike) are prisoners: bom are (captive) in
the prison of this ignorance.

E LitrnillVp "do not roam found*"

1 Literally, " accompanist*. 1 F Cf_ Book [II, 1473,
f M one of The Jinn.

* L r. the note (voice) of min and the note of the peri.


THE STORY OF THE HARPER 105

Recite Q community of Jinn (and mm) in the Siiratu P-
Rahman; recognise (the meaning of) j f ye be abie to pass forth ,

The inward notes of the saints say, at first, il O ye particles i-)=s
of Id (not = Hot-being),

Take heed, lift up your heads from the Id of negation, put
forth your heads from this fancy and vain imagining.

0 ye who all are rotten m (the world of) generation and cor¬
ruption, vour everlasting soul neither grew nor came to birth/'

If I tell (even) a tittle of those (saintly) notes, the souls will
lift up their heads from the tombs.

Put thine ear close, for that (melody) is not far off, but T ri$
not permitted to convey it to thee.

Hark! for the saints are the Iariffla of the (present) time:
from them to the dead comes Life and freshness.

At their voice the dead souls in the body's grave start up in
their winding-sheets.

He (that is thus awakened) says, “This voice is separate from
(all other) voices: to quicken (the dead) is the work of the voice
of God.

We (had) died and were entirely decayed: the call of God
ca me: we all arose/’

The call of God, (whether it be) veiled or unveiled, bestows
that which He bestowed on Mary from fils bosom.

0 ye who are rotten with death (in your hearts) underneath 1935
the skin, return from non-existence at the voice of the Friend!

Absolutely, indeed, that voice is from the King (God), though
it be from the larynx of God's sen-ant.

He (God) lias said to him (the saint), “I am thy tongue and
eye; I am thy senses and l am thy good pleasure and thy wrath.

Go, for thou art (he of whom God saith), 1 By Me he hears
and by Me he sees 1 : thou art the (Divine) consciousness (itself):
what is the occasion (propriety') of (saying), 'Thou art the
possessor of the (Divine) consciousness'?

Since thou hast become p through bewilderment, * He that
belongs to God/ I am thine* for s God shall belong to him/

Sometimes 1 say to thee, “Tis thou/ sometimes, 'Tis I 1 : f-j+u
whatever I say, I am the Sun illuminating (all).

Wheresoever 1 shine forth from the lamp-niche of a breath
(Divine word), there the difficulties of a (whole) world are
resolved.

The darkness which the (earthly) sun did not remove,
through My breath that darkness becomes like bright morning/'

To an Adam He In His own person showed the (Divine)
Names; to the rest He was revealing the Names by means of
Adam.

Do thou receive His light either from Adam or from Himself:
take the wine either from the jar or from the gourd (cup),


io6 MATHNAWf, BOOK ]

For this gourd is very dowdy connected with the jar: the
blessed gourd is not rejoiced (by the same causes) as thou
art.

Mustafa (Mohammed) said, “Happy he that has seen me
and he that looks at him that saw my face,”

When a lamp has derived (its) light from a candle, every one
that sees it (the lamp) certainly sees the candle.

If transmission (of the light) occurs in this way till a hundred
lamps (are lighted), the seeing of the last (lamp) hecumes a
meeting with the original (light) 1 .

Either take with (all) thy soul from the hindmost light — there
is no difference—or from the candelabrum.
t s SQ Either behold the light (of God) from the lamp of the last
(saints), or behold His light from the candle of those who have
gone before.

Explanation of the Tradition , " Verify, your Lord hath, during
the days of your time , certain breathings: oh, address your-
selves to {receive} them.”

The Prophet said, “In these days the breathings of God
prevail :

Keep ear and mind (attentive) to these (spiritual) influences,
catch up such-like breathings. 1 ’'

The (Divine) breathing came, beheld you, and departed: it
gave life to whom It would, and departed.

Another breathing has arrived. Be thou heedful, that thou
mavst not miss this one too, O comrade,
i,., i55 The soul of fire gained therefrom an extinguisher of (its) fire,
the dead soul felt within itself a movement (of life).

This is the freshness and movement of the Tubd-tree, this is
not like the movements of animals.

If it fait on earth and heaven, their galls will turn to water
at once (they will be consumed with terror).

Truly, from fear of this infinite breath (they were filled with
dismay): recite (the words of the Qur’an) but they reftised to
bear it (the trust offered to them).

Else, how should (the words) they shrank from it have been
(in the Qur’dn), unless from fear of it the heart of the mountain
had become blood?

1560 Yesternight this (breath) presented itself (to me) in a different
guise (but) some morsels (of food) came in and barred the way.
For a morsel’s sake a Luqmdn has become (held in custody
as) a pledge: ’tis the time for Luqmdn: begone, O morsel!

1 I.e. the eye tees the lisht of the lost lamp, but what realty meets the
eye is ihc %h"t of the candle.


DIVINE INSPIRATIONS


IO 7

These pricks (0/ the flesh) for the sake of a morsel 1 Pluck ye
forth the thorn from the sole of Luqman.

In his sole there is (really) no thorn or even the shadow of it,
hut because of concupiscence ye have not that discernment.

Know that the thorn is that which thou, because thou art
very greedy and very blind, hast deemed to be a date.

Inasmuch as Luqman ’s spirit is the rose-garden of God, why i<M
is the foot of his spirit wounded by a thorn?

This thorn-eating existence is (like) a camel, and upon this
camel one bom of Mustafa (Mohammed) is mounted.

O camel, on thy back is a bale of roses, from the perfume
of which a hundred roscries grew within thee.

Thy inclination is towards thorn-bushes and sand: ! wonder
what roses thou wilt gather from worthless thorns.

O thou who in this search hast roamed from one quarter
to another, how long wilt thou say, “Where, where is this rose-

garden?" ,

Until thou extract this thorn in thy foot, thine eve is dark ><>?»
(blind): how wilt thou go about?

Man, who is not contained in the world, becomes hidden in
the point of a thorn 1

Mustafa (Mohammed) came (into the world) to make har¬
mony: (he would say) “Speak to me, O Huimyri, speak! ”

0 Humayra, put the horse-shoe in the fire, that by means of
thy hone-ahoe this mountain may become (glowing with love,
like) rubies.

'Phis “llumayTa ” is a feminine word, and the Arabs call the

(word for) “spirit" feminine’

But there is no fear (harm) to the Spirit from being feminine: 197s
the Spirit has no association (nothing in common) with man
and woman.

It is higher than feminine and masculine: this is not that
spirit which is composed of dryness and moisture.

This is not that spirit which is increased by (eating) bread,
or which is sometimes like this and sometimes like that,

Ii is a doer of (what is) sweet, and (it is) sweet, and the
essence of sweetness. Without (inward) s%veetness there is no
sweetness, O taker of bribes'!

When thou art (made) sweet by sugar, it may be that at some
time that sugar will vanish from thee;

(But) when thou becomest sugar from abundance of faithful- i$&>
ness, then how should sugar be parted from sugar?

When the lover (nf God) is fed from (within) himself with
pure wine, there reason will remain lost and cnmpanionless.

Partial (discursive) reason is a denier of Love, though it may
give out that it is a confidant,

* The “ taker of bribes ” is he W ho takes pleas lire i n anything other then Gad .


log MATHNAWf, BOOK t

It is clever and knowing, but it is not naught (devoid of self-
existence): until the angel has become naught, he is an Ahriman
(Devil). .

It (partial reason) is our friend in word and deed, (but) when
you come to the case of inward feeling (ecstasy), it is naught
(of no account).

is$s It is naught because it did not (pass away) from existence
and become non-existent: since it did not become naught
willingly, (it must become naught nevertheless, for) there is
many a one (who became naught, i.e. died) unwillingly.

The Spirit is perfection and its call is perfection: Mustafa
(Mohammed) used to sav, ” Refresh us, O Bilal!

O Bilal, lift up thy mellifluous voice (drawn) from that breath
which I breathed into thy heart,

From that breath by which Adam was dumbfounded and
the wits of the people of Heaven were made witless.”

Mustafa became beside himself at that beautiful voice: his
prayer escaped him (was left unperformed) on the night of the

1930 He did not raise lus head from that blessed sleep until the
(time of the) dawn-prayer had advanced to (the time of)

forenoon, . . . ..

On the night of the ta'ris his holy spirit gained (the privilege
of) kissing hands in the presence of the Bride.

Love and the Spirit are, both of them, hidden and veiled:
if I have called Him (God) the Bride, do not find fault.

I would have been silent from (fear of) the Beloved’s dis¬
pleasure, if He had granted me a respite for one moment

But He keeps saying, " Say on! Come, ’tis no fault, ’tis but
the requirement of the (Divine) destiny in the World Unseen.”

i3<}5 The fault is (in him) who sees nothing but fault: how should
die Pure Spirit of the Invisible see fault?

Fault arises (only) in relation to the ignorant creature, not
in relation to the Lord of favour (clemency).

Infidelity, too, is wisdom in relation to the Creator, (but)
when vou impute it to us, infidelity is a noxious thing.

And if there be one fault together with a hundred advantages
(excellences), it resembles the w r ood (woody stalk) in the
sugarcane.

Both (sugar and stalk) alike are put into the scales, because
they both are sweet like body and soul.

2000 Xot idly, therefore, the great (mystics) said this: "The body
of die holy ones (the saints) is essentially pure as (their) spirit.”

Their speech and soul and form, all (this) is absolute spirit
without (external) trace,

1 This, word is used of travellers who hah fo t in the latter part

of the night.


‘A’isha and the prophet 109

The spirit that regards them with enmity is a mere body;
like the plus in (the game called) ttard, it is a mere name.

That one (the body of the enemy of the saints) went into the
earth (grave) and became earth entirely; this (holy body) went
into the salt and became entirely pure—

The (spiritual) salt through w’hich Mohammed is more refined
(than all others): he is more eloquent than that salt-seasoned
(elegantly expressed) liadtth.

This salt is surviving in his heritage: those heirs of his are i«js
with thee. Seek them!

He (the spiritual heir of Mohammed) is seated in front of
thee, (but) where indeed is thy “front”? He is before thee,
(but) where is the sout that thinks “before”?

If thou fancy thou hast a “before” and “behind,” thou art
tied to body and deprived of spirit.

“Below'’ and “above,” “before” and “behind” are attri¬
butes of the body: the essence of the bright spirit is without
direction (not limited by relations of place).

Open thy (inward) vision with the pure light of the King.
Beware of fancying, Uke one who is short-sighted,

That thou art only this very (body living) in grief and joy. *>n>
O (thou who art really) non-existence, where (are) “before”
and “behind” (appertaining) to non-existence?

Tis a day of rain: journey' on till night—not (sped) by this
(earthly) rain but by the rain of the Lord.

The story of'A*isha, may God be tecll-pleased with her, hoso she
asked 1Mustafa {Mohammed), on whom be peace, saying, “It
rained to-day: since thou »ventest to the graveyard, how is it
that thy clothes are not u-et?”

One dav Mustafa went to the graveyard: he went with the
bier of a man (who was one) of his friends.

He made the earth so that it filled his grave: he quickened
his seed under the earth.

These trees are like the interred ones: they have lifted up
their hands from the earth.

They are making a hundred signs to the people and speaking 1015
plainly to him that hath ears (to hear).

With green tongue and with long hand (fingers) they are
telling secrets from the earth’s conscience (inmost heart).

(Sunk in earth) like ducks that have plunged their heads in
water, they have become (gav as) peacocks, though (in winter)
they' were (dark and bare) as crows.

If during the winter He imprisoned them (in ice and snow),
God made those “crows ” “ peacocks” (in spring).

Although He put them to death in winter, He revived them
by means of spring and gave (them) leaves.


no


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


2 D JO Thu sceptics say, "This (creation), surely, is eternal; why
should we fix it on a beneficent Lord?”

God, in despite of them, caused (spiritual) gardens and plots
of sweet dowers to grow in the hearts of His Iriemis.

Every rose that is sweet-scented within, that rose is telling
of the secrets of the Universal,

Their scent, to the confusion of the sceptics, is going round
the world, rending the veil (of doubt and disbelief).

The sceptics, (shrinking) from the scent of the rose like a
beetle, or like a delicate (sensitive) brain at the noise of the drum,
202s Feign themselves to be occupied and absorbed, and with¬
draw their eyes from the flash and the lightning.

They withdraw their eyes, but no eye is there: the eye is

that which sees a place of safety .

When the Prophet returned from the graveyard, he went to
the Siddiqa 1 and confided (in her). 4

As snon as the eye of the Siddiqa fell upon his countenance,
she advanced and began to lay her hand on him,

On his turban and his face and his hair, on his collar and
chest and arm,

„ J0 Said the Prophet, " What art thou seeking so hastily ? hhe
replied, “To-day rain fell from the clouds;

I am searching thy garments in quest (of moisture), I do not
feel them wet with the rain. Oh, how wonderful 1 ’

The Prophet said, “ What wrap hast thou thrown over thy
head?" Said she, “I made that ridd (plaid) of thine (serve as)

ahead-covering." . . . ~ , , ,

He said, “G pure-bosomed one, that is why God revealed
to thy pure eye the rain of the Unseen.

That ratn is not from your clouds; there are other clouds and
another sky.”


Commentary on the verse of Hakim {StmdH):

“ In the realm of the soul are skies lording Over the sbf of this world.
In the I Vay of the spirit there are lotvlands and highlands , there
are lofty mountains and seas."

. OJi The Unseen World has other clouds and water (than ours),
it has another sky and sun.

That is not discerned save by the elect; the rest are in doubt
as to a new creation.

There is rain for the sake of nurture; there is (also) rain for
the sake of decay.

Marvellous is the benefit of the rain of springtime, (but) to
the garden the autumnal rain is like a (consuming) fever,

1 "The exceedingly veracious woman.” & name given to 'A'isha.


*A*1SHA AND THE PROPHET


11 1

That vernal (rain) makes it tenderly nurtured (flourishing),
while this autumnal (rain) mates it sickly and wan.

Similarly know that cold and wind and sun are at variance jo 4 >
(produce various effects}; and find the due.

Even so in the Unseen World there are these different sorts,
{consisting} in loss and gain and in profit and defraudment
(damage).

This breath of the Abddt (saints) is from that (spiritual)
springtide: from it there grows a green garden in heart and soul.

From their breaths there comes (is produced) in him who is
fortunate the (same) effect (as that) of the spring rain on the tree.

If there he in the place a dry tree p do not deem its defect to
be due to the life-quickening wind.

The wind did its own work and blew on: he that had a soul ->*c
chose it in preference to his souk

On the meaning of the Tradition , f+ Take advantage of the
coolness of the spring season , etc”

The Prophet said, '"Give heed, my friends! Do not cover
your bodies from the cold of spring.

For it does to your spirits the same thing that spring does
to the trees;

But flee from the cold of autumn, for it does what autumn
did to the garden and the vines/ 1

The traditionists have referred this (saying) to the outward
(sense), and have been content with that same (outward) form.

That class (of people) were ignorant of the spirit: they saw
the mountain, they did not see the mine in the mountain.

In the sight of God that "autumn 1 ' is the flesh (tutfs) and
(its) desires: the reason and the spirit are the essence or spring
and are everlasting life.

Thou hast a partial reason hidden (within thee}: (now'} in this
world seek one whose reason is perfect.

Through his whole thy part is made whole (and perfect):
Universal Reason is like a shackle on the neck of the nesh.

Therefore, according to the (right) interpretation, it (the
meaning) is this, that the holy breaths are like spring and the
life of leaf and vine.

The sayings of the saints, whether soft or rough, do not thou J055
cover thy body (against them), for they are the support of thy
religion.

Whether he (the saint) speak hot or cold, receive (his words)
with joy: thereby thou wilt escape from the hot and cold
(of Nature) and from Hell-fire.

His "hot” and ‘"cold"" is life's new season of spring, the
source of sincerity and faith and Service.


112 MATHNAWf , BOOK I

Inasmuch as the garden of the spirits is living through him,
and the sea of (his} heart is filled with these pearls.

Thousands of griefs lie (heavy) on a wise man’s heart, if from
the garden of his heart (even) a toothpick fail (be missing) 1 .

How the Stddiqa (‘A'isha), may God be well-phased with her,
asked Mustafa (Mohammed), God bless him and j*tve him peace,
saying, " What was the inner meaning of to-day s rami

soto The Siddiqa said, f, 0 (thou who art the) cream of existence,
what was the (true) reason of to-day’s rain?

Was it (one) of the rains of mercy, or (was It) for the sake
of menace and the justice of (Divine) Majesty r

Was it from the favour of the vernal attributes, or from a
baneful autumnal attribute? ’’ , .

He said, “This (rain) was for the purpose of allaying the
grief that is upon the race of Adam in calamity.

If man were to remain in that fire (of grief), much rum and

loss would befall. , , .

it*; This world would at once become desolate: (all) selfish desires

would go forth from men," ,.

Forgetfulness (of God), O beloved, is the pillar (prop) of this
world: (spiritual) intelligence is a bane to this world.

Intelligence belongs to that (other) world, and when it

prevails, this world is overthrown,.

Intelligence is the sun and cupidity the ice; intelligence is
the water and this world the dirt.

A little trickle (of intelligence) is coming from yonder worU,
that cupiditv and envy may not roar (too loudly) m this world,
?il if the trickle from the Unseen should become greater, m this
world neither virtue nor vice will be left.

This (topic) has no bound. Go to the starting-pomt, go back
to the tale of the minstrel.

The remainder of the story of the old harper and the explanation
of its issue (moral).

That minstrel by whom the world was filled with rapture,
from whose voice wondrous phantasies grew (arose in the minds
of those who heard him), ... ,

At whose song the bird of the soul would take wing, and at
whose note the mind of the spirit would be distraught—

When time passed and he grew old, from weakness the lalcon,
his soul, became a catcher of gnats.

1 /.f, tht wise man fetts bililr remorse if he oeplecK the least oppor¬
tunity of enriching himself with the spiritual blessing's dispensed by the
saints.


THE STORY OF THE HARPER


“3

His back became bent like the back of a wine-jar, the brows 2075
over his eyes like a crupper-strap.

His charming soul-refreshing voice became ugly and worth
nothing to anv one.

The tone that had (once) been the envy of Zuhra (Venus)
was now r like the bray of an old donkey.

Truly, what fair thing is there that did not become foul, or
what roof that did not become a carpet? — -

Except the voices of holy men in their breasts, from the
repercussion of whose breath is the blast of the trumpet (of
Resurrection).

(Theirs is) the heart by which (all) hearts are made drunken, zbSo
( theirs is) the non-existence whereby these existences of ours
are made existent.

He (the saint) is the amber (magnet) of (all) thought and of
every voice; he is the (inward) delight of revelation and in¬
spiration and (Divine) mystery.

When the minstrel grew older and feeble, through not earning
(anything) he became indebted for a single loaf of bread.

He said, ltf Thou hast given me long life and respite: O God,
Thou hast bestowed (many) favours on a vile wretch*

For seventy years I have been committing sin, (yet) not for
one day hast Thou withheld Thy bounty' from me.

I (can) earn nothing: today I am Thy guest, I will play the 3085
harp for Thee, I am Thine.”

He took up his harp and went in search of God to the grave¬
yard of Medina, crying "Alas!”

He said, iH I crave of God die price of silk (for harps trings),
for He in His kindness accepts adulterated coin.”

He played the harp a long while and (then), weeping, laid his
head down: he made the harp his pillow and dropped on a tomb.

Sleep overtook him: the bird, his soul, escaped from cap¬
tivity, it let harp and harper go and darted away*

It became freed from the body and the pain of this world in 2*90
the simple (purely spiritual) world and the vast region of the soul.

There his soul was singing Avhat had befallen (it), saying,

"If they would but let me stay here.

Happy would be my soul in this garden and springtide, drunken
with this (far-stretching) plain and mystic anemone-held.

Without head or foot 1 would be journeying, without lip or
tooth I would be eating sugar.

With a memory and thought free from brain-sickness, I would
frolic with the dwellers in Heaven.

With eye shut I would be seeing a (whole) world, without a 30*5
hand I would be gathering roses and basil.”

The water-bird (his soul) Avas plunged in a sea of honey- —
the fountain of Job, to drink and wash in,


1


Il + MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Whereby job, from his feet to the crown of his head, was
purged of afflictions (and made pure) like the light of the

sunrise. ,

If the Malhnmrf were as the sky in magnitude, not half the
portion of this (mystery) would find room in it,

For the exceeding broad earth and sky (of the material world)
caused my heart, from (their) narrowness (in comparison with
the spiritual universe), to be rent in pieces ; _ .

mm And this world that was revealed to me in this dream (of
the minstrel) has spread wide my wings and pinions because
of (its vast) expansion.

If this world and the way to it were manifest, no one would
remain there (in the material world) for a single moment.^

The (Divine) command was coming (to the minstrel)— 41 Nay,
be not covetous: inasmuch as the thorn is out of thy foot,
depart " —

(Whilst) his soul was lingering there in the spacious demesne
of His (God’s) mercy and beneficence.


3TM


2 110


How the heavenly voice spoke to * Umar y may God he sir if (I-pleased
with him r while he was asleep ^ sayings 4i Give a certain sum of
gold from the public treasury to the man who is deeping in the
graveyard.' 9

Then God sent such a drowsiness upon T mar that he was
unable to keep himself from slumber ,

He fell into amazement saving, “This is (a thing) unknown.
This has fallen from the Unseen, ‘ris not without purpose
He laid his head down, and slumber overtook him. He
dreamed that a voice came to him from God: his spirit heard
That voice which is the origin of every cry and sound: that
indeed is the (only) voice, and the rest are echoes.

Turcoman and Kurd and Persian-speaking man and Arab
have understood that voice without (help of) ear or lip.

Ay, (but) what of Turcomans t Persians, and Ethiopians,
(Even) wood and stone have understood that voice.

Eveiy moment there is coming from Him (the call), Am not
1 (your Lord)?** and substance and accidents arc becoming
existent.

If (the answer) “ Yea" is not coming from them, yet their
coming from non-existence (into existence) is (equivalent to)
“ Yea.

Listen to a goodly tale in explanation of what 1 have said
concerning the friendliness (awareness) of stone and wood.


THE MOANING PILLAR


US

How the moaning pillar complained when they made a pulpit for
the Prophet, on whom be peace—-for the multitude had become
greats and said, " We do not see thy blessed face when thou
\'art exhorting iu ”—and how the Prophet and his Companions
heard that complaint, and how Mustafa conversed with the
pillar in clear language.

The moaning pillar was complaining of (its) separation from
the Prophet, just as rational beings (might do).

The Prophet said, “O pillar, what dost thou want?” It said,

11 My soul is turned to blood because of parting from thee.

I was thy support: (now) thou hast run away from me: thou ms
hast devised a place to Lean against upon the pulpit,”

“Dost thou desire,” said he, “to be made a date-palm, (so
that) the people of the East and the West shall gather fruit
from thee?

Or that He (Gud) should make thee a cypress in yonder
world, so that thou %ilt remain everlastingly fresh and flour¬
ishing?”

it replied, “I desire that whereof the life is enduring for
ever.” Hearken, O heedless one! Be not thou less than a
piece of wood!

He (the Prophet) buried that pillar in the earth, that it may
be raised from the dead, like mankind, on the day of Resur-
rcction,

That (hence) thou mayst know that every one whom God
has called (to Himself) remains disengaged from all the work of
this world.

Whosoever hath his work and business from God, gains
admission there and goes forth from (abandons worldly) work,

He that hath no gift (portion) of spiritual mysteries, how
should he believe in the complaining of inanimate things?

He sap “Yes,” not from his heart (but) for agreement's sake,
lest people should say that he is a hypocrite (in his religion).

Unless there were knowers of the (Divine) command “ Bel”,
this doctrine (that inanim ate th ings are capable of speech) w'ould
have been rejected in the world.

Myriads of conformists and legalists 1 are cast into the abyss
(of destruction) by a single taint (of doubt),

For their conformity and their drawing evidence from logical
proofs and all their wings and wing-feathers (every' means which
they employ in order to arrive at the truth) depend on opinion.

The vile Devil raises a doubt (in their minds): all these blind
ones fall in headlong.

The lee of the syllogisere is of wood: a wooden leg ts very
infirm,

1 Literally, " follower* of signs (eilema.1 evidences).’*


116


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


213,0


Unlike the Qutb (supreme saint) of the age, the possessor of
(spiritual) vision, by whose steadfastness the mountain is made

riddy-headed (amazed). _ . , , , „

The blind man’s leg is a staff, a staff, so that he may not fall

headlong on the pebbles. . , .

The cavalier that became (the cause of) victory for the army,
who is he for (the army of) the religious? One possessed of

(sp'ntual^sight.^d a the blbd have seen their way,
[yet only) under the protection of (other) people are they clear-

S ' g \Vere there no men of vision and (spiritual) kings, all the

blind in the world would be dead. # .

From the blind comes neither sowing nor reaping nor culti¬
vation nor tradings and profit.

si« If He (God) did not bestow mercy and grace upon you, the
wood of your logical deduction would break.

What is this staff? Inferences and (logical) demonstration.
Whogavethem (the blind) that staff? The all-seeing and almighty

^^incc the staff has become a weapon of quarrel and attack,
break that staff to pieces, O blind man!

He gave you the staff that ye might approach (Hun) : with
that staff ye struck even at Him in your anger.

O company of the blind, what are ye doing? Bring the seer

between (you and God) 1 !

sue Lay hol'd of His skirt who gave thee the staff: consider what
(dreadful) things Adam suffered from disobedience.

Consider the miracles of Moses and Ahmad (Mohammed),
how the staff became a serpent and the pillar was endowed
with knowledge.

From the staff (came) a serpent and from the pillar a moaning:
they (the staff and the pillar) are beating (the drams of honour)
five times daily for the sake of the Religion®.

Unless this savour (perception of spiritual truths) were non-
intellectual, how should all these miracles have been necessary:

Whatever is intelligible, the intellect is swallowing (receiving)
it without the evidence of miracles and without contention,

-ns This virgin (untrodden) Way deem unintelligible, deem (it)
' accepted in the heart of every fortunate (elect) one.

As in fear of Adam devil and wild beast fled to the islands*

ir °Bo In fcar of the miracles of the prophets have the sceptics
slunk away under the grass,

1 j, e , "seek access w God by means of the e«r."

s I.r, rhesc miradea arc a perpetual proclamation m fhf sovereignty
the true Religion,


MOHAMMED AND ABl) JAHL ”7

That they may live in hypocrisy with the reputation of being
Moslems, and that you may not know who they are.

Like counterfeiters, they smear the base coin with silver and
(inscribe on it) the name of the King.

The outward form of their words is profession of the Divine =u u
Unity and the religion (of Islam): the inward meaning thereof
is like darnel (?) seed in bread.

The philosopher has not the stomach 1 (courage) to breathe
a word: if he utter a word, the true Religion will confound
him.

His hand and foot are inanimate, and whatever his spirit says
(commands), those two are under its control.

Albeit they (the sceptics) propound (reasons for) suspicion
with their tongues, their hands and feet give testimony (against
them).

How the Prophet, on whom be peace, manifested a miracle by
the speaking of the gravel in the hand of Abu Jahl—God’s curse
on him / — and by the gravel's bearing witness to the truth of
Mohammed, on whom be God's blessing and peace.

There were some pebbles in the hand of Bii Jahl: “O
Ahmad,” said he, “ tell quickly what this is.

If thou art the Messenger (of God), w'hat is hidden in my fist? s‘s s
(Speak), since thou hast knowledge of the mysteries of Heaven.”

He said, How dost thou wish (me to do)? Shall 1 say what
those (hidden) things are, or shall they declare that 1 am

truthful and right?” „

Bu Jahl said, "This second (thing) is more extraordinary.
“Yes” said the Prophet, "(but) God hath greater power than
that”

Without delay, from the middle of his (dosed) fist every’
pebble began to' pronounce the (Moslem’s) profession of faith.
Each said, “ There is no god" and (each) said, “ except Allah ” ;
(each) threaded the pearl of "Ahmad is the Messenger of Allah .

When fiii Jahl heard this from the pebbles, in his anger he
dashed those pebbles on the ground.

The rest of the story of the minstrel, and how the Commander of
the Faithful, * Umar , may God be well-pleased with him, con¬
veyed to him the message spoken by the heavenly voice.

Turn back and hear the plight of the minstrel, for the
minstrd had (now) become desperate from waiting (so long).

The voice (of God) came to ‘Umar, saying, U Umar,
redeem Our servant from want.

1 Literally, Bl the RBl]-bydcf,"


nS MATHNAWf t book I

We have a servant, a favourite and highly esteemed one:
take the trouble to go on foot to the graveyard.

O ‘Umar* spring up and put in thy hand full seven hundred
dinars from the public treasury*

?!*_■, Carry them to him (and say)* 'O thou who art Our choice,
accept this sum now and excuse (Us for offering such a small gift)*

Spend this amount on the price (purchase) of silk r when it
is spent, come here (again) / ”

Then ‘Umar in awe of that voice sprang up that he might
gird his loins for this service.

'Umax set his face towards the graveyard with the purse
under his arm, running in search (of God s favourite)*

Long did he run round about the graveyard: no one was
there but that poor old man.

He said, "This is not he/ s and ran once more. He became
tired out and saw none but the old man.

He said, "God taid, ‘We have a servant: he is a pure and
worthy and blessed one/

How should an old harper be the chosen of God? O Hidden
Mystery, how excellent* how excellent art Thou! M

Once again he wandered about the graveyard p like the hunting
lion about the desert*

When it became certain to him that none was there except
the old man, he said, “Many an illumined heart b (to he found)
in darkness/ 1

^175 He came and sat down there (beside him) with a hundred
marks of respect. 4 Umar happened to sneeze* and the old man
sprang to his feet.

He saw 'Umar and stood fixed in amazement: he resolved to
go and began to tremble (with fear).

He said within himself, " O God, help, I beseech thee! The
Inspector has fallen upon a poor old harper/'

When ‘Umar looked on the old man's countenance, he saw
him ashamed and pale.

Then "Umar said to him, " Fear not, do not flee from me p for
I have brought thee glad tidings from God*
ztfo How often has God praised thy disposition, so that He has
made 'Umar in love with thy face!

Sit down beside me and do not make separation (between us),
that I may say into thine ear the secret (message) from (the
Divine) favour*

God sends thee greeting and asks thee how thou farest in
thv distress and boundless sorrows.

Do* here are some pieces of gold to pay for silk. Spend them
and come back to this place/*

The old man heard this, trembling all over and biting his
hand and tearing his garment,


THE STORY OF THE HARPER


119

Crying, **0 God who hast no like I ” inasmuch as the poomis
old man was melted 1 with shame.

After He had wept long and ids grief had gone beyond (all)
bounds, he dashed his harp on the earth and broke it to bits.

He said, 11 0 thou (harp) that hast been to me a curtain
(debarring me) from God, O thou (that hast been) to me a
brigand (cutting me off) from the King’s highway,

O thou that hast drunk my blood for seventy years, O thou
because of whom my face is black (disgraced) before (the
Divine) perfection!

Have mercy, O bounteous God who keepest faith, on a life
passed in iniquity!

God gave (me) a life, the value of every single day whereof 11 go
none knoweth except Him.

I have spent my life, breath by breath: I have breathed it all
away in treble and bass.

Ah me,that in minding the (musical) mode and rhythm of I raq
the bitter moment of parting (from this world) went out of
my mind (was forgotten).

Alas that front the liquid freshness of the minor sirafgand
the seed sown in my heart dried up, and my heart died.

Alas that from (my preoccupation with) the sound of these
four-aitd-twenty (melodies) the caravan passed and the day grew
late.’*

O God, help (me) against this (self of mine) that is seeking sm
help (from Thee): 1 seek justice (redress) from no one (else,
but onlv) from this justice-seeking (self).

1 shall not get justice for myself from any one except, surely,
from Him who is nearer to me than I;

For this “I-hood" comes to me from Him moment by
moment: therefore when tills has failed me, I see (only) Him,

As (when you are with) one who is counting out gold to you,
you keep your gaze (directed) towards him, not towards your¬
self.

flour 'Umar, may God be well-pleased 1eith him , bade him (the
harper) turn k is gaze from the stage of Keeping, which is (self-)
existence, to the stage of absorption (in God), which is a on-
existence (of self)*

Then ‘Umar said to him, ‘‘This wailing of thine is also (one
of) the marks of thy sobriety (self-consciousness).

The way of him that has passed away (from self-conscious- ziao
ness) is another wav, because sobriety is another sin.

Sobriety exists (arises) from recollection of what is past: past
and future are to thee a curtain (separating thee) from God.

1 Literally, "became wafer."


120


MATHNAWf, BOOK l

Cast fire on them both: how long* because of these twain*
wilt thou be full of knots (joints) like a reed?

Whilst the reed is knotted, it is not a sharer of secrets: it is
not the companion of the (flute-player’s) lip and voice.

When thou art (engaged) in going about (seeking God) thou
art indeed wrapped in (thy) going about 1 : when thou hast come
home* thou art still with thyself (self-conscious).

2205 O thou whose knowledge is without knowledge of the Giver
of knowledge, thy repentance is worse than thy sin.

O thou that seekest to repent of a state that is past, say, when
wilt thou repent of this repentance?

At one time thou tumest to the (low) sound of the treble,
at another thou dost kiss (art in love with} weeping and wailing, 11 '

When PAruq ( H Umar) became a reflector of mysteries, the old
man's heart was awakened from within.

He became without weeping or laughter* like the soul: his
(animal) soul departed and the other soul came to life.

2210 In that hour such a bewilderment arose within him that he
went forth from earth and heaven—

A seeking and searching beyond (all) seeking and search:
I know not (how to describe it) ; (if) you know, tell!

Words and feelings beyond (all) feelings and words—he had
become drowned in the beauty of the Lord of majesty,

Drowned, not in such wise that there should be for him any
deliverance* or that any one should know him except the
(Divine) Ocean.

Partial reason would not be telling of (the mysteries of) the
Universal (Reason), if there were not demand after demand
(perpetual Divine impulses necessitating the manifestation of
these mysteries).

Since demand after demand is arriving, the waves of that
Sea (Universal Reason) reach this place (the world of partial
reason).

Now that the story of the old man’s (spiritual) experiences
has come to this point, the old man and his experiences have
withdrawn behind the veil.

The old man has shaken his skirt free from talk and speech:
half of the tale has remained in our mouth (has not been
told).

It behoves (us), for the sake of procuring (such) delight and
enjoyment, to gamble away (sacrifice) hundreds of thousands of
souls (lives).

In chase of the spiritual forest be (as) a falcon, be one tvho
gambles his soul (life) away, like the sun of this world.
mo The lofty sun is life-diffusing: every moment it become?
empty and is filled.

1 I* r "thou an absorbed in thy search, not in God/'


THE STORY OF THE HARPER


121


O Sun of Reality, diffuse spiritual life s show forth newness to
this old world!

Soul and spirit are coming from the Unseen into human
existence, like running water.

Commentary on the prayer of the two angels who daily make
proclamation in every market , saying *“ O God, bestow on every
prodigal some boon in exchange l O God % bestow on every
niggard some bane {in return)"; and an explanation that the
prodigal is he that strives earnestly in the Way of God , not he
that squanders his wealth in the way of sensuality.

The Prophet said, “For admonishment's sake two angels are
always making goodly proclamation.

Saying, s O God/ keep the prodigals fully satisfied, give
hundred-thousandfold recompense for every dirhem that they
spend.

O God p do not give the niggards in this world anything but -^25

loss upon loss! T t . *

Oh, (there is) many an act of niggardhness that is better
than prodigality: do not bestow what belongs to God except by
the command of God,

That thou mayst gain infinite treasure in return, and that
thou mayst not be numbered among the infidels

Who were offering camels in sacrifice in order that their
swords might prevail against Mustafa. *

Endeavour to find out the command of God from one who
is united (with God)t not every heart understands the comman

° f £ > (for example) the slave, the enemy (of God), who did awo
justice (in his own opinion, and) bestowed what belonged to
the King upon those who rebelled against Him ,

In the Qur’an there is warning to the heedless that all their
spendings are a (cause of) bitter gnef to them

What increase does the equity and justice of this enemy
produce in the sight of the King? Banishment and a black

countenance (disgrace). ., . „ , . j

The chiefs of Mecca (when) at war with the Prophet offered

sacrifice in hope of (Divine) favour. . f _

On this account the true believer is saying in his prayer, from
fear, “ Lead (us) in the right path! ” .

It beseems the generous man thus to give money, (but) vcnlj
the generosity of the lover is the surrender of h is soul (life).

If you give bread for God’s sake, you will be given bread (in
return); if you give your life for God’s sake, you will be given

If the leaves of this plane-tree drop off, the Creator will
bestow on it the provision of lcaflessness (spiritual poverty).


122


MATHNAWl, BOOK I

If because of your liberality no wealth remains in your hand,
how should the bounty of God let you be down-trodden ?

When any one sows, his barn becomes empty (of seed)* but
there is goodline$s in his cornfield;

«4o And* if he leaves it (the seed) in the bam and saves it up,
weevils and mice and calamities (of time and decay) devour it.

This world is negation (of reality): seek (reality) in affirma¬
tion (of God), Your form (body) is void (of reality): seek in
your essence.

Bring the briny bitter (animal) soul to the sword: buy die
(heavenly) soul that is like a great sweet river.

And if you cannot become (one of the frequenters) of this
threshold (sublime court)* at least hear from me the following
tale*

The story of the Caliph who in his time surpassed Hdtim of Tayyi*
in generosity and had no rival.

In former days there was a Caliph who made IJitirn die
slave of his liberality,

2-45 He had raised high the banner of munificence and largesse,
he had removed poverty and want from the world.

He was a sea of pearls* pure bounty: his largesse reached
from Qdf to QaL

In this world of dust he was die cloud and die rains he was
the centre wherein the bounty of the Giver of all displayed itself.

His gifts caused sea and mine to quake (tremble with shame):
caravan on caravan (were hastening) towards his liberality.

His gate and portal was the point to which Need turned: the
fame of his munificence had gone (far and wide) into the world,

1250 Persians and Greeks, Turcomans and Arabs, w T ere lost in
amazement at his liberality and generosity.

He was the Water of Life and the Ocean of Bounty; by him
both Arabs and foreigners were revived.

Story of the poor Arab of the desert and his wife's altercation
with him because of (their) penury and poverty.

One night a Bedouin woman said to her husband—and she
carried (her) talk beyond bounds—

“We are suffering all this poverty' and hardship: all the world
are (living) in happiness, we (alone) are unhappy.

We have no bread* our (only) condiment is anguish and envy:
we have no jug, our (only) water is the tears (that flow) from
our eyes*

Our garment by day is the burning sunshine* at night our
bed and coverlet is (made) of die moonbeams.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE I2 3

We fancy the disk of the moon is a disk (round cake) of bread
and lift up our hands towards the sky.

The (poorest of the} poor feel shame at our poverty: day is
turned to night (darkened) by our anxiety about our daily

portion (of food). ^ « ...

Kinsfolk and strangers have come to nee from us in like

fashion as Simiri from men.

If I beg a handful of lentils from some one, he says to me,

* Be silent, O death and plague I'

The Arabs take pride in fighting and giving: thou amongst jigs

the Arabs art like a fault in writing.

What fighting (can we do)? We are killed without fighting,
we are made giddy (utterly distracted) by the sword of want.

What gifts (can we mate)? We are continually in beggary,
we are slitting the vein of (slaughtering) the gnat in the air.

If any guest arrive, if I am I (as sure as I am living) 1 will
go for liis"tattered cloak when he falls asleep at night.


Haio disciples (novices in Sufism) are beguiled in their need hy false
impostors and imagine them to he Shaykhs and venerable per-
sonages and (saints) united (with Goa), and do not know the
difference between fact (naqd) and fiction (naql) and between
tchat is tied on (artificially) and what has grown up (j naturally ).


For this reason the wise have said with knowledge, One
must become the guest of those who confer benefits.

Thou art the disciple and guest of one who, from his vilencss, ii&j
robs thee of all thou hast.

He is not strong i h.ow should lie mskc tlioc strong + tic oots
not give light, (nay) he makes thee dark. . . , . ,

Since he had no light (in himself), how in association (with
him) should others obtain light from him?

(He is) like the half-blind healer of eyes: what should he put
in (people’s) eves except wool?

Such is our state in poverty and affliction: may no guest be


C ff l thou hast never seen a ten years’ famine in (visible) forms,


open thine eyes and look at us.

Our outward appearance is like the inward reality of the
impostor: darkness in his heart, his tongue flashy (plausible).
He has no scent or trace of God, (but) his pretension is
greater than (that of) Seth and the Father of mankind (Adam).

The Devil (is so ashamed of him that he) has not shown to
him even his portrait, (yet) he (the impostor) is saying, c
are of the AbddP and are more (we are superior even to them).


1 See p , iSp note 1.


124 MATHNAWI 1 BOOK I

He has stolen many an expression used by dervishes, in order
that he himself may be thought to be a (holy) personage.

2275 In his talk he cavils at Rdyazid, (although) Yazid would be
ashamed of his existence.

(He is) without (any) portion of the bread and viands of
Heaven: God did not throw a single bone to him.

He has proclaimed, l I have laid out the dishes, I am the
Vicar of God t I am the son of the (spiritual) Khalifa:

Welcome (to the feast), O simple-hearted ones, tormented
(with hunger), that from my bounteous table ye may eat your
fill* —of nothing.

Some persons, (relying) on the promise of/To-morrow/ have
wandered for years around that door, (but) ( To-morrow 1 never
comes.

2 2&a It needs a long time for the inmost conscience of a man to
become evident, more and less (both in great and small matters),
(So that we may know whether) beneath the wall of his body
there is treasure, or whether there is the house of snake and
ant and dragon.

When it became clear that he was naught (worthless), (by
that time) the life of the seeker (disciple) had passed: what use
(was) the knowledge (to him)?

Explaining how it may happen, {though) rarely , that a disciple
sincerely puts his faitit in a false impostor {and believes) that he
is a {holy) personage ^ and by means of this faith attains unto a
(spiritual) degree which his Shaykfi has never (even) dreamed of ,
and (then) fire and water do him no hurt , though they hurt his
Shaykh; but this occurs very seldom r

But exceptionally comes (the case of) a disciple to whom,
because of his (spiritual) illumination „ that falsehood (of the
impostor) is beneficial.

He, by his goodly purpose, attains unto a (high) degree,
although he fancied (the impostor to be) soul, and that (soul)
proved to be (only) body.

j 3 8 5 (It is) like trying to find the qibla in the heart (depth) of night:
the oibla is not (found), but his (the seeker's) prayer is valid.

The impostor has a dearth of soul within, but we have a
dearth of bread without.

Why should we conceal (our poverty) like the impostor and
suffer agony for the sake of false reputation ? ”


THE BEDOUIN AND IIIB WIFE


1*5


7 /oa? the Bedouin bade his wife be patient and declared to her
the excellence of patience and poverty.

Her husband said to her, “How long wilt thou seek ^income
and seed-produce? What indeed is left of (our) liter \io$t

(of it) is past. __ ,

The sensible man does not look at increase or deficiency, be¬
cause both (these) will pass by like a torrent.

Whether it (life) be pure (dear and untroubled) or whether ss^c
it be a turbid hood, do not speak of it, since it is not enduring

for a moment. , , . .. .

In this world thousands of animals are living happily, without

up and down (anxiety ). _ , , , L

The dove on the tree is uttering thanks to God, though her
food for the night is not (yet) ready. , ,

The nightingale is singing glory' to God (and saying), l reiv
on Thee for my daily bread, O Thou who answerest (prayer).

The falcon has made the king’s hand his joy (the place m
which he takes delight), and has given up hope of (has become

indifferent to) all carrion. ,

Similarly you may take (every animal) from the gnat to the
elephant: they all have become God’s family (dependenton Him
for their nourishment), and what an excellent nourisher is God!

All these griefs that are within our breasts arise from the
vapour and dust of our existence and wind (vain desire).

These uprooting griefs are as a. scythe to us: (to think that)
this is such and such or that that is such and such is a tempta¬
tion (of the Devil) to us 1 . ^ , . , iU .

Know that every pain is a piece of Death: expel (that) part
of Death from thee, if there be a means (of doing so).

When thou canst not flee from the part of Death, know that
the whole of it will be poured upon thy head.

If the part of Death has become sweet to thee, know that

God will make the whole sweet.

Pains are coming from Death as (his) messengers: do not
avert thv face from his messenger, O foolish one!

Whoever lives sweetly (pleasantly) dies bitterly (painfully);
whoever serv es his body- does not save his soul.

Sheep are driven from the plains (to the town): the falter they

are. the quicker they are killed. , , .

The nieht is past and dawn is come. O my pul, how' long
wilt thou take up (again) the tale of gold from the beginning .

Thou wert young (once), and (then) thou wert!more con- ■ s*>s
tented; (now) thou hast become a seeker of gold, (but) at first
thou wert gold indeed (precious and perfect).

i /» 11 we oueht not H> complain of our lot bul put eur trail in Cud-
■ I t. “how Ion* wilt you begin again and again to talk about money


126 MATENAwl p BOOK I

Thou wert a fruitful vine: how hast thou become unsaleable
(worthless)? How hast thou become rotten when thy fruit is
ripening?

Thy fruit ought to become sweeter and not move farther
backwards like rope-makers 1 .

Thou art my wife; the wife must be of the same quality (as
the husband) in order that things may go rightly.

The married pair must match one another: look at a pair of
shoes or boots.

2*io If one of the shoes is too tight for the foot, the pair of them
is of no use to thee.

Hast thou ever seen one leaf of a (folding) door small and
the other large, or a wolf mated with the Hon of the jungle?

A pair of sacks on a camel do not balance properly w hen one
is small and the other of full size.

I march with stout heart towards contentment: why art thou
betaking thyself to revilement?”

In this fashion the contented man, moved by sincerity and
ardour, was talking to his wife till daybreak,

Hmz the wife counselled her husband, saying, “Don't talk any
mare about thy merit and (spiritual) rank — 'why say ye that
which ye do not? 9 —for although these words are true f yet thou
host not attained to the degree of trust in God f amt to speak thus
above thy station and devotional practice is harmful and 'ex¬
ceedingly hateful in the sight of God/ 31

2315 The wife cried out at him, saying, "0 thou who makest
reputation thy religion, I will not swallow thy spells (deceiving
speeches) any more.

Don't talk nonsense in thy presumption and pretension: be¬
gone don't speak from pride and arrogance,

Hcftv long (wilt thou utter) pompous and artificial phrases?
Look at thine ow m acts and feelings and be ashamed 1
Pride is ugly p and in beggars (all the) more ugly; (it is like)
wet clothes after a cold snowy day 1 .

How long (this) pretension and palaver and bluster 3 , O thou
whose house is (frail) as the house of the spider?

When hast thou illumined thy soul by contentment? Of con¬
tentment thou hast learned (only) the name.

The Prophet said/ What is contentment? A treasure/ Thou
canst not distinguish the gain from the pain.

This contentment is the souls treasure; do not thou boast
(of possessing it) p O (thou who art) grief and pain to my soul

1 I.e. relrtJgffsj and deteriorate.

1 Literally, “ The day cold end inow— and then the dathes wed"

1 Literally, "wind of the moustache,"


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


127


Don’t call me thy mate, don’t flap so much 1 . I am the mate
of justice, I am not the mate of fraud.

How art thou walking (consorting) with amir and bey, when
thou art slitting the veins of (killing for food) the locust in
the air?

Thou art contending with dogs for the sake of a bone, thou ijsj
art wailing like an empty-bellied reed-pipe.

Don’t look at me dully (coldly) with contempt, lest I tell
(others) what is in thy veins (disclose thy hidden faults).

Thou hast deemed thy understanding superior to mine, (but)
how hast thou (truly) seen me, who am deficient in under¬
standing?

Don’t spring upon me like a reckless wolf! Oh, better be
without understanding (mad) than (suffer) the disgrace ol
(having) thy understanding. . ,

Since thy understanding is a shackle for mankind, it is not
understanding: it is a snake and scorpion.

May God be the enemy of thy iniquity and deceit1 May the 23 j*
deceitfulness of thy understanding fall short of (fail to injure) usl

Thou art both 'the snake and the charmer -oh, wonderful t
Thou art (both) the snake-catcher and the snake, O thou dis¬
grace to the Arabs! .

If the crow knew’ its ugliness, from grief and sorrow it would

melt like snow. . . .

The charmer chants (a spell) as an enemy (does); he is
(casting) a spell upon the snake and the snake is (casting) a

spell upon him, ... , „ , , 1

If his trap were not (devised by him as) a spell for the snake
(a means of catching it), how would he become a prey to the
snaked spell?

The charmer, from greed and (desire of) getting and making ijjs
( monev), is not conscious of the snake’s spell at the time.

The snake savs, ‘O charmer, beware, beware! Thou hast
beheld thine own spell (and its effect upon me): now behold


mine


Thou beguilest me with the Name of God in order that thou
mavst expose me to shame and confusion. _

The Name of God enthralled me, not thy contrivance: thou
madest the Name of God a trap: woe to thee!

The Name of God will take vengeance from thee on my
behalf: 1 commit my soul and body to the Name ot God.

Either it will sever the vein of thy life bv my stroke, or it ^0
will bring thee into a prison as (it has brought) me.

Rough speeches of this sort, (whole) volumes, the woman
recited to her youthful husband.


* !, t , "don't moke inch * show of •flection."


MATHNAwf, BOOK 1


ts8

How the man counselled his wife, saying, “Do not look with
contempt on the poor , but regard the work of God as perfect,
and do not let thy vain thought and opinion of thine own penury
cause thee to sneer at poverty and revile the poor.''

“O woman,’’ said he, "art thou a woman or the father of
sorrow? Poverty is (my) pride, and do not thou beat me on
the head (lash me with thy reproaches).

Wealth and gold are as a cap to the head: ’tis the bald man
that makes a shelter of his cap,

(But) he that has curly and beautiful locks is happier when
his cap is gone.

2J4 j The man of God (the saint) resembles the eye: therefore (his)
sight is better bare (unveiled) than covered.

When a slave-dealer offers (slaves) for sale, he removes from
the (sound) slave the garment that hides defects.

But if there be any defect, how should he strip (the slave).
Nay, he tricks him (the purchaser) by means of the garment.

’This one,’ says he, ‘is ashamed of good and evil: stripping
him would cause him to run away from thee.'

The (rich) merchant is plunged in vice up to the ears, (but)
the merchant has money, and his money covers his vice,

^so For because of cupidity none that is covetous sees his vice:
feelings of cupiditv are a bond uniting (men’s) hearts;

And if a beggar speak a word like the (pure) gold of the mine,
his wares will not hnd the way to the shop.

The affair of (spiritual) poverty is beyond thy apprehension:
do not look on poverty with contempt.

Because dervishes are beyond property and wealth: they
possess an abundant portion from the Almighty,

The High God is just, and how should the just behave
tyrannously to the dispirited (poor and weak)?

335i ' (How should they) give fortune and goods to that one, while
thev put this one on the fire?

The fire bums him because he hath this (evil) thought about
the Lord who created both worlds.

U (the saying) 'Poverty is my pride’ vain and false? No;
’tis thousands of hidden glories and disdains.

Thou in anger hast poured nicknames on me: thou hast
called me a catcher (deceiver) of friends and a catcher of snakes.
If I catch the snake, I extract its fangs in order that I may
save it from having its head crushed.

2360 Because those fangs are an enemy to its life, I am making
the enemv a friend by mean# of this skill.

Never do I chant my spell from (motives of) cupidity: I have
turned this cupidity upside down (I have entirely vanquished
it).


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 129

God forbid I I desire nothing from created beings: through
contentment there is a (whole) world within my heart.

Thou, (sitting) on the top of the pear-tree 1 , seest (things) like
that: come down from it, that the (evil) thought may not con¬
tinue.

When thou tumest round and round and becomest giddy,
thou seest the house turning round, and T tis thou (thyself) art
that (revolving object).


Explaining how fiwy one’s movement (action) proceeds from tin’
place twere Ac if, (m that) he sees every one (else) from the circle
of his own self-existence: a blue glass shows the sun as blue,
a red glass as red, (but) when the glass escapes from (the sphere
of) colour, it becomes white , (aid then) it is more truthful than
all other glasses and if fAc Imam (exemplar to them all).

Abu Jahl saw Ahmad (Mohammed) and said, ‘Tis an ugly ajej
figure that has sprung from the sons of Hashim!"

Ahmad said to him, ‘Thou art right, thou hast spoken truth,
although thou art impertinent , 1

The Siddi'q (Abu Bakr) saw him and said, ‘ O Sun, thou art
neither of East nor of West: shine beauteausly! *

Ahmad said, ‘Thou hast spoken the truth, O dear friend,

0 thou that hast escaped from this world of nothingness.

Thcv that were present said, ‘O king, why didst thou
call both of them truth-tellers when they contradicted each

He replied, *1 am a mirror polished by the (Divine) hand: 23 r-
Turcoman and Indian behold in me that which exists (in them¬


selves ). 1 . , ,.

O wife, if thou deemest me very covetous, nse above this

womanish care (for worldly things). , ,

This (state of mine) resembles cupidity and (m reality) it is
j (Divine) mercy : where that (spiritual) blessing is, where is

^Make trial of poverty for a day or two, that thou mayst see

(find) in poverty double riches.

Have patience with poverty and abandon this disgust, be¬
cause in poverty there is the light of the Lord of gtonr.

Do not look'sour*, and (thou wilt) see thousands of souls 337s
plunged, through contentment, in an ocean of honey.

Behold hundreds of thousands of bitterly suffering souls
steeped in rose-syrup, like the rose. , ,

Oh, alas, would that thou hadst comprehension, so that the
unfolded tale of my heart might be shown forth to thee from
my soul,

* Alluding to a story 10W in Book IV, 35+&

* Literally, “do not **H vinegar.


*


S SJ


9


JJO MATHNAWr, BOOK I

This discerns b milk in the teat of the $oul : it will not flow
well without some one to suck (the teat).

When the hearer has become thirsty and craving, the preacher,
(even) if he be (as good as) dead, becomes eloquent.

2-jSto When the hearer is fresh and without fatigue (not bored), the
dumb and mote will find a hundred tongues to speak withal.

When a stranger comes in at my door, the women of the
harem hide themselves in the veil,

But if a harmless relative should come in, those covered ones
will lift up their face-veils.

Everything that is made beautiful and fair and lovely is made
(so) for the eye of him that sees.

How should the sound of melody and treble and bass be
(made) for the insentient ear of one who is deaf?

23S5 Not in vain did God make musk fragrant: He made it (so)
for the sense (of smell), He did not make it for one whose
nostrils are stopped (by disease).

God hath fashioned the earth and the sky. He hath raised in
the midst much fire and light.

(He made) this earth for those (created) of clay, (He made}
heaven to be the abode of the celestials.

The low (base) man is the enemy of what is high: the pur¬
chaser (seeker) of each place (Heaven or Hell) is manifest (made
known by hb actions),

O chaste woman, itast thou ever risen up and decked thyself
for the sake of 1dm that is blind?

If I should fill the world with hidden pearls (of wisdom),
how should I fare (what good would it do me), since they are
not thy portion (since thou art unfit to receive them)?

O wife, take leave of quarrelling and waylaying, and if thou
wilt not, (then) take leave of me!

What room have I for quarrelling with the good or the bad ?
—for this heart of mine is recoiling (even) from acts of peace.

If thou keep silence, ( p tis well), and if not, I will so do that
at this very moment I will leave my house and home,”

How the zvife paid regard to her husband and begged God to
forgive her for what she find said.

When the wife saw that he was fierce and unmanageable, she
began to weep: tears in sooth are a woman’s lure.

2J595 She said* "When did I imagine such (words) from thee?
I hoped of thee something different/ 7

The wife approached by the way of self-naughting (self-
abasement). 4 T am thy dust,” said she, ‘"not (worthy to be)
thy lady-wife.

Body and soul and all I am is thine: die entire authority and
command belongs to thee.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE ijt

If because of poverty my heart has lost patience*, it is not
for my own sake, but for thine.

Thou hast been my remedy in afflictions: I am unwilling that
thou shouldst be penniless.

On my soul and conscience, this is not for my own sake: this uo*
wailing and moaning is qn account of thee.

(I swear} by God that at every moment my self would fain
die for thy seif before thee.

Would that thy soul, to which my soul is devoted, were aware
of my soul's inmost thoughts!

Inasmuch as thou hast such (an ill) opinion of me, I am grow n
weary both of soul and of body.

I cast earth on (renounce) silver and gold, since thou be¬
haves! thus to me t O comfort of my soul.

Thou w T ho dwelleat in my soul and heart, wilt thou declare - jo*
thyself to be quit of me for this (small) amount (of offence)?

Be quit (then) 1 for thou hast the power* (but) oh, my soul
pleads against thy making this declaration.

Remember the time when I w T as (beautiful) as the idol, and
thou fadoring) as die idolater.

Thy slave has kindled her heart (in eagerness) to comply
with thee; whatever thou cal lest "cooked/ she says it is
+ burnt V

Whatever thou mayst cook me with, I am thy spinach 5 :
whether (thou art) sour broth (to me) or sweet, thou art worthy
(of my affection),

I uttered infidelity (blasphemy): lo p I have returned to the 24m
true faith, I am come (to submit) with all my soul to thy
command*

I did not know thy kingly nature, I rudely urged my beast
(intruded) before thee.

Since I have made (for myself) a lamp of thy forgiveness, I
repent, I cast'away (abandon) opposition.

I am laying before thee sword and winding-sheet; I am
bending my neck towards thee: smite!

Thou art talking of bitter separation (from me): do whatever
thou wilt* but do not this.

Thy conscience wit!tin thee is a pleader on my behalf, it is 2115
a perpetual intercessor with thee in my absence.

What pleads within thee for me is thy (noble) nature; from
reliance on it my heart sought (to) sin (against thee)*

Have mercy* unbeknown to thyself (without any self-conceit),

0 angry one, 0 thou whose nature is better than a hundred
maunds of honey/'

1 Licerzlh-, h ’ipr*ng away fruiti patience/"

1 /,f, l ' she outdoes you in ardour."

* /.*. “ it matter! nor how you treat me: I am devotedly attached to you / 1


132


-VI ATHNAWf i BOOK I


In this fashion was she speaking graciously and winningly -
meanwhile a (fit of) weeping came upon her.

When the tears and sobs passed beyond bounds—rrom tier
who was fascinating even without tears—
lr20 There appeared from that rain a lightning-flash (that) shot a
spark of fire into the heart of the lonely man.

She by whose beauteous lace rnan was enslaved* how will it

be when' she begins to play the (humb le) slave ?

She at whose haughtiness thy heart is trembling, how wilt
thou fare when she falls a-weeping before theer

She from whose disdain thy heart and soul are bleeding, now
will it be when she turns to entreaty?

She in whose tyranny and cruelty we are snared, what plea
shall we have when she rises to plead?

Wi (The love of desired things , women, etc,) ri decked out for men
(made attractive to them): God has arranged it: how can t ey

escape from what God has arranged? , ,

Inasmuch as He created her (the woman) that he (Adam)
might take comfort in her , how can Adam be parted from

^Though he (the husband) be Rustam son of Zal and greater
than tfinza (in valour), as regards authority he is his old

woman’s (his wife’s) captive. , . .

He (the Prophet), to whose words the (whole) world was

enslaved (obedient), used to cry, ' Speakto ,

The water prevailed over (extinguished) the fire by its dread
onset, (but) the fire makes it seethe when it (the water) is screened

1JJD ^WheQ 1 ? cauldroncomes between (them), O king 1 , it (the fire)
annihilates the water and converts it into air.

If outwardly thou art dominatmg thy wife, like the (fire-
quenching) water, (yet) inwardly thou art dominated and art
seeking (the love of) thy wife.

This is characteristic of Man (alone): to the (other) animals
love is wanting, and that (want of love) arises from (their)
inferiority (to Man),


Explanation of the Tradition , “ Verify, they (women) prevail over
the inh man, and the ignorant man prevails over them.

The Prophet said that woman prevails exceedingly over the

wise and intelligent, ..

(While), on the other hand, ignorant men prevail over woman,
for in them the fierceness of the animal is imprisoned.

They lack tenderness, kindness, and affection, because
animality predominates over their (human) nature.

1 The reader is addressed.


THE BEDOUIN AND HtS WIFE 133

Love and tenderness are human qualities, anger and lust are
animal qualities.

She (woman) is a ray of God, she is not that (earthly) beloved;
she is creative, you might say she is not created.


How the man yielded to his wife's request that he should seek the
means of livelihood, and regarded her opposition {to him) as a
Divine indication. (Verse):

To the mind of every knowing man it is a fact that with the re¬
volving object there is one that causes it to revolve.


The man became as sorry for that speech (of his) as at the
hour of death a tyrannical officer (is sorry) for his tyranny.

He said, 44 How did I become the adversary of (her who is)
the life of my soul? How did I bestow kicks on the head of

mvsoul?” . „ . . ,. .

'When the (Divine) destiny comes, it muffles the sight, so that

our Intellect cannot distinguish foot from head.

As soon as the destiny is past, it (the intellect) devours itself
(with grief): rending the veil (without regard for appearances),
it tears its bosom.

The man said, " O wife, I am repenting: if 1 have been an
infidel, I will (now) become a Moslem.

I am a sinner against thee: have mercy, do not dig me up all
at once from root and foundation (do not bring me to utter

'tf the old infidel is repenting, he becomes a Moslem when

he pleads for pardon. .

He (God) is the merciful and hountitul Lord: both existence j-hj

and non-existence are in love with Him.

(Both) infidelity and faith are lovers of that Majesty', both
Copper and silver are slaves to that lilixir.


Explaining that both Moses and Pharaoh are subject to the Divine
IFi// Uke antidote and poison and darkness and light f and haw
Pharaoh conversed in solitude with God , praying that tie would
not destroy his {good) reputation.

Moses and Pharaoh were servants (worshippers) of Reality,
(though) outwardly the former keeps the way (is rightly guided),
while the latter has lost the way. . .

In the daytime Moses was making lament (supplication) to
God: at midnight Pharaoh would begin to weep.

Saying, "O God, what shackle is this on my neck? \>ere it
not for the shackle, who would say 4 1 am I i , ,

Bv that (will) whereby Thou hast made Moses to be illumined, :*jo
by that (same will) Thou hast made me to be darkened;


134 MATHNAWf t BOOK I

By that whereby Thou hast made Moses* face like the moon
Thou hast made the moon of my soul to be black-faced
(eclipsed).

My star was not better than a moon (so that it should be exempt
from eclipse) : since it has suffered eclipse, what help have I r

If they beat drums in my honour (proclaiming me) as Lord
and Sultan, (’ti& like as when) the moon is eclipsed and the
people beat bowls (of metal).

They 1 beat those bowls and raise a clamour: they put the
moon to shame by their blows.

24,'s I, who am Pharaoh, oh, woe is me because of (what is being
done by) the people: my (title of) ‘My supreme Lord' is (like)
the blows on the bowl (since it proclaims my eclipse).

We (Moses and I) are fellow-servants (to Thee), but Thy
axe is cleaving the sappy boughs in Thy forest;

Then it makes one bough to be firmly planted, another bough
to be Left uncared for.

The bough has no power against the axe: no bough escaped
from the power of the axe,

(I entreat Thee) by the truth of the might which belongs to
Thv axe, do Thou graciously make these crooked (perverse)
actions (of ours) straight (righteous)."

34E4 Once more Pharaoh said to himself, "Oh, wonderful! Am

not I (occupied) the whole night in (crying) ‘O our Lord*?

In secret 1 am growing humble and harmonious: when I
reach Moses, how am I becoming (so different)?

The colour (gilt) of base gold is (laid on) in ten coats : how is
it becoming black-faced in the presence of the fire?

Is it not (true) that my heart (spirit) and body are under His
control, (so that) at one moment He makes me a kernel, at
another moment a rind?

When He bids me be a cornfield, I become green; when He
bids me be ugly, I become yellow'.

nsj At one moment He makes me a moon, at another black,”
How, indeed, is the action of God other than this?

Before the (blows of the) bat of His decree, "Be, and it teas,"
we are running (like balls) in Space and beyond 1 .

Since colourlessness (pure Unity) became the captive of
colour (manifestation in the phenomenal world), a Moses came
into conflict with a Moses.

When y ou attain unto the colourlessness which you (originally)
possessed, Moses and Pharaoh are at peace (with each other).

If it occurs to you to ask questions about this mystery,(I reply),
how should (the world of) colour be devoid of contradiction?

*470 The marvel is that this colour arose from that which is colour¬
less: how did colour arise to war with the colourless?

1 Literally, "in ipace and nan*&paee/ +


MOSES AND PHARAOH >35

Inasmuch as oil has been formed (by God) from water, why
have oil and water become opposites?

Since the rose springs from the thorn, and the thorn front
the rose, why are both of them at war and (engaged) in re¬
crimination? . „

Or is this not (really) war? Is it for (the Divine) purpose,

(and is it) an artifice, ifke the bickering of those who sell asses?

Or is it neither this nor that? Is it bewilderment? The
treasure must be sought and this (bewilderment) is the ruin
(where it is hidden).

That which you imagine to be the treasure—through that .*475
vain imagination vou are losing the treasure.

Know that fancies and opinions are like the state of cultiva¬
tion: treasure is not (to be found) in cultivated spots.

In the state of cultivation there is existence and strife (con¬
trariety): the non-existent is ashamed of (all) existent things.

It is not the case that the existent implored help against
(sought to escape from) non-existence; nay, ( T twas) the non¬
existent (that) repelled the existent, .

Do not say, "I am fleeing from the non-existent ; nay, it is
fleeing from you. Stopl (Do not fancy yourself to be fleeing.)

Outwardly it is calling you towards itself, but inwardly it is =■!&>
driving you away with the cudgel of rejection.

O man of sound heart (mind), 'tis (a case of) reversed shoes 1 :
know that the rebelliousness of Pharaoh was (really) from
(caused by) Moses*.

The reason salty the unblest are disappointed 0/ both worlds,
{according to the text] '"he has lost this life and the life to
Come.”

The wretched philosopher being firmly convinced that the sky
is an egg and the earth like its yolk, _ , , ., >

Some one asked him how this earth remains, in the midst or
this surrounding expanse of sky, _

Suspended in the air like a lamp, moving neither to the

bottom nor to the top.

The philosopher said to him, ** It remains in the air because 44*5
of the attraction exerted by the sky from (all) six directions.

(The sky is) like a vault moulded (made) of lodestone: (the
earth like) a suspended piece of iron remains in the middle.

Said the other, “How should the pure sky draw the dark

earth to itself? ,

Nay, it is repelling it (the earth) from (all) six directions:

1 I.f. u in which the
1 /,(, it was the effect of
who was his opposite.


appearance n contrail- w ™
live inward repudiation of Pharaoh hy Mosta*


136 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

hence it (the earth) remains (suspended) amidst the violent
winds (currents),”

(Similarly), then, because of the reputsion exerted bv the
beam of the perfect (saints), the spirits of Pharaohs remain in
perdition,

;+9Q Therefore h through being rejected by this world and by that
world T these lost ones have been left without cither this or that*

If you turn awav vour head from the (holy) servants of the
Almighty, know that they are disgusted by your existence.

They possess the amber: when they display it, they make the
straw of your existence frenzied (with desire for it).

When they conceal their amber, they- quickly make your sub¬
mission (to God) rebellion (against Him).

That (position which you hold in relation to them) is like
the stage of animality, which is captive and subject to (the
stage of) humanity.

449j Know that the stage of humanity is subject to the power of
the saints as the animal (is subject to man), O master.

Ahmad (Mohammed) in righteousness called (the people of) the
whole world his servants: read (the text)," Say t O My servants ."

Your intellect is like the camel-driver, and you are the camel:
it drives you in every direction under its bitter control 1 .

The saints are the intellect of intellect, and (all) intellects (from
the beginning) to the end are (under their control) like camels.

Come now, look upon them with (profound) consideration:
there is (but) one guide, and a hundred thousand souls (fol¬
lowing him).

asm What is the guide and what the camel-driver? Get thee an
eye that mav behold the Sun!

' Lo, the world has been left nailed fast in night, (while) day
is waiting expectantly, depending on the sun.

Here is a sun hidden in a mote, a fierce lion in the fleece of
a Iamb,

Here fa an ocean hidden beneath straw: beware, do not
step on this straw with hesitancy.

(But) a feeling of hesitancy and doubt in the heart (of the
foolish) is a Divine mercy in regard to the (spiritual) guide,

zjej Every prophet came alone into this world: he was alone, and
(yet) he had a hundred unseen worlds within him.

' By his power he enchanted the macrocosm (universe), he
enfolded himself in a very small frame*.

The foolish deemed him to be lonely and weak: how is he
weak who has become the King’s companion?

The foolish said, “ He is a man, nothing more”: woe to him
that recks not of the end!

1 11 B coniroJ which you tanner avoid, whether you like tt or not,”

1 I.e, in the body of man, who is the microcosm,.


*37


sAlih and the people of tham^d

How the eyes of (external) sense regarded Salih and Ids she-camel
as despicable and without a champion; (for) when God is about
to destroy an army fie makes their adversaries appear despicable
and few'in their sight , even though the adversary be superior in
strength: ”and He was making you few in their eyes, that
God'might bring to pass a thing that was to be done."

The she-camel of Salih was in (outward) foim a camel: that
bitter (graceless) tribe hamstrung (and slaughtered) her in their

*° when they became her foes on account of the water (which
she shared with them), they were blind to bread and blind to
water (ungrateful for the blessings of God).

God’s she-camel drank water from brook and cloud: they
(really) withheld God’s water from God.

The she-camel of Salih became, like the bodies of righteous
men, an ambush for the destruction of the wicked.

That (you may see) what (the Divine command), Let God s
she-camel have her portion of water, wrought against that people,
through the ordainment of death and woe.

The vengeance, which is God’s minister, demanded from
them an entire town as the blood-price of a single camel.

His (the prophet’s or saint’s) spirit is like SdlHi, and his body -m
is the she-camel: the spirit is in union (with God), the body

in want (distress). , ...

The Silih-spirit is not susceptible to afflictions: the blows
fall on the camel (body), not on the essence (spirit).

No one gains victory over their (the saints ) hearts, harm
comes (only) to the oyster-shell, not to the pearl.

The SAlih-spirit is not capable of being hurt; the light of
God is not subject to infidels.

The Soul (God) attached to it (the spirit) the earthly body,
that they (the infidels) might hurt (it) and suffer tribulation,

Not knowing that to hurt this (body) is to hurt (offend) 1 lira:
the water in this jar is joined with the water in the river.

God connected (the spirit) with a body, in order that he (the
prophet or saint) might become a refuge for the whole world.
b Be a slave to the camel, which is the saints body, that you
may become the fellow-servant of the Salih-spin t .

Salih said (to the people of Thamud), " Inasmuch as vc have
shown this envy, alter three days the punishment will arme

^^Afterthree more days there will come from the Taker of life
a calamity that hath diree signs.

The colour of all your faces will be changed, (they will be of)

colours different to look at.

1 J.t, join the sain'* spirit in worship of God.


138 MATHNAwf, BOOK I

On the first day your faces will be like saffron, on the second
your faces will be red like argktttcdn (flowers of the Judas-tree).

On the third, all your faces will become black: after that, the
vengeance of God will arrive.

If ye desire from me the sign of this threatened chastisement,
the she-earners foal has run towards the mountains:

If ye can catch him, there is help (for you); else the bird of
hope hath surely escaped from the snare,’'

25.1° None was able to overtake the foal: he went into the moun¬
tains and vanished.

Salih said, “Ye see, the (Divine) destiny has been ratified and
has beheaded the phantom of your hope,”

What is the she-camel’s foal? His (the saint's) heart, which
ye may bring back to its place (win again) by means of well¬
doing and piety,

[f his heart comes back (is reconciled), ye are saved from
that (Divine punishment) ; otherwise ye are despairing and biting
your fore-arms (in remorse).

"When thev heard this dark threat, they cast down their eyes
and waited for it (to be fulfilled),

1535 On the first day they saw their faces yellow: from despair
they were sighing heavily,

6n the second day the faces of all became red: the time for
hope and repentance was (irretrievably) lost.

On the third day all their faces became black : the prediction
of Salih came true without (possibility of) dispute.

When they all were cast away (and plunged) in despair, they
fell on their knees, like (crouching) birds.

Gabriel, the trusted (angel), brought in the Qur’An the
description of this kneeling, (which is described by the word)
jdthimin.

2no Do thou kneel at the time when they (the saints) arc teaching
thee and bidding thee dread such a kneeling as this.

They (the people of Thamud) were waiting for the stroke of
vengeance: the vengeance came and annihilated this town,

Salih went from his solitude to the town: he beheld the
town amidst (wrapt in) smoke and heat.

I le heard (the sound of) wailing from their limbs : the lamenta¬
tion was plain (to hear), those who uttered it (were) invisible.

He heard wailings from their bones: tears of blood (poured)
from their spirits, like hailstones.

1543 Salih heard that and set to weeping: he began to lament for
them that made lamentation.

He said, “O people that lived in vanity, and on account of
you I wept before God !

God said (to me), ‘Have patience with their iniquity: give
them counsel, not much remains of their (allotted) period. 1


sAL!9 AND THE PEOPLE of THAMtfD »39

I said,' Counsel is barred by ill-treatment: the milk of counsel
gushes forth from love and joy.

Much ill-treatment have they bestowed on me, (so that) the
milk of counsel is curdled in m"v veins."

God said to me, 1 1 will give thee a boon, I will lay a plaster
on those wounds (of thine).’

God made my heart dear as the sky. He swept vour op¬
pression out of my mind. . , , , , *

1 went (back) once more to admonition, 1 spake parables and

words (sweet) as sugar,

1 produced fresh milk from the sugar, I mingled milk and
honey with my words.

In you those words became like poison, because ye were
filled with poison from the root and foundation.

How should I be grieved that grief is overthrown? Ye were ssss
grief (to me), O obstinate people. .

Does any one lament the death of grief? Does any one tear
out his hair when the sore on his head is removed?”

(Then) he turned to himself and said, “O mourner, those
folk are not worth thy mourning." t

Recite correctly—do not regard my misquotation—(the
words in the Qur'in) 11 Say, haw shall I be grieved jar an unjust

people 1 ?" . ,

Again he felt a weeping in his eye and heart: an uncaused

(involuntary) compassion shone forth in him.

He was raining drops of water (shedding tears)—and he 1560
had become distraught—an uncaused drop from the Ocean of

ITis^ntelitet was saving, 11 Wherefore is this weeping: Ought
one to weep for such scoffers ? , . , ., r

Tell me. what art thou weeping lor? For their fraud. ror
the host of their ill-shod (miserable) hatreds?

For their murky hearts full of rust? For their venomous

snake-1 ike tongues) , . .. „.

For their fugw-like breath and teeth ? For their mouths and

eyes teeming with scorpions? —

“ For their wrangling and sneering and scoffing? Give thanks, -J*i
since God has imprisoned (restrained) them.

Their hands are perverse, their feet perverse, their eyes
perverse, their love perverse, their peace perverse, their anger

P *FoiMhe sake of blind conformity and (for the sake of fol¬
lowing) the standards of tradition, they set their feet (trampled)
on the camels of Reason, the venerable guide.

They were not eager for a guide {ptr-khar): they all had


1 This vrrte, which in
Quranic tcsci hm been dt


its the Story, is addressed to rctdfiT. The
far metric:*] ind other


140 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

became (like) an old donkey {pir k/ntr) from paying hypocritical
observance to each other's eyes and ears*

God brought the (devout) worshippers from Paradise that
He might show unto them the nurslings of Hell-fire.

On the meaning of tr He let the two seas go to meet one another:

between them is a barrier which they do not seek (to cross)/ 1

Behold the people of (destined for) the Fire and those of
Paradise dwelling in the same shop, (yet) between them is a
barrier which they do not seek to cross.

He hath mixed the people of the Fire and the people of the
Light: between them He hath reared the mountain oi Qaf.

He hath mixed (them) like earth and gold in the mine: be¬
tween them are a hundred deserts and caravanserays,

(They are) mixed even as pearls and jet beads in the necklace,
(soon to be parted) like guests of a single night.

One half of the sea is sweet like sugar: the taste sw r eet, the
colour bright as the moon.

The other half is bitter as snake's venom: the taste bitter and
the colour dark as pitch .

Both (halves) dash against one another h from beneath and
from the top* wave on wave like the water of the sea.

The appearance of collision, (arising) from the narrow body,
is (due to) the spirits' being intermingled in peace or war.

The waves of peace dash against each other and root up
hatreds from (men's) breasts.

In other form do the waves of war turn (men's) loves upside
down (confound and destroy them),
as*® Love is drawing the bitter ones to the sweet, because the
foundation of (all) loves is righteousness.

Wrath is carry ing away the sweet one to bitterness: how should
the hitter sort with (be suited to) the sweet?

The bitter and the sweet are not visible to this (ocular) sight*
(but) they can be seen through the window of the latter end.

The eye that sees the end (dkftir) can see truly; the eye that
sees (only) the stable (dkhur) is delusion and error.

Oh, many the one that is sweet as sugar, but poison is con¬
cealed in the sugar.

■£5^5 He that is more sagacious (than the rest) will know it by the
smell; another (only) when it touches his lips and teeth:

Then his lips will reject it before (it reaches) his throat,
although the Devil is shouting, “Eat ye!”

And to another it will declare (itself) in his throat, while to
another it will unmask in hi$ body;

And to another it will give burning pain in evacuation: its
outgoing will give him instruction as to its incoming (will show
him what he has sw allowed);


THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED


‘ 4 1


And to another (it will become manifest) after days and
months; and to another after death> from the depth ot t t

gr And if he be given a respite in the depth of the grave, (then)
it will inevitably’ become manifest on die Day of Resurrection.

Every piece of candy and sugar (desirable thing) in the world
manifestly has a period granted to it irnm the revolution of 1 mte-
Years ire needed in order that the ruby in (exposed to the
rays of) the sun may obtain (the perfect) tint and splendour and

Vegetables, again, reach maturity in two months, while the

red rose comes to perfection in a year.

For this reason the Almighty and Glorious God in the huratu
'[. 4a'dm has made mention of an appointed term (ajat).

You have heard this (discourse): may the whole of you, hair
by hair, be an ear (to receive it)! Tis the Water of Life: (if)
you have drunk, may it do you good I

Call it the Water of Life, call it not a discourse: behold the
new spirit in the body of the old letter! _ , . ...

(Now), my friend, hearken to another saying (which is), like
the soul, very clear (to mystics) and abstruse (to the rest) ►

In a certain place (spiritual degree), through Divine disposi¬
tions even this poison and snake (worldliness and sensuality) is

(rendered) digestible, ,

In one place (it is) poison and in. one place medicine, in one

place infidelity and in one place approved. . .

Although there it is injurious to the soul, when it arrives here *&»

it becomes a remedy. , . . . , . . „

In the young grape (ghura) the juice is sour, but it is sweet

and good when Uieghiira comes to be an augur (npe grape).

Again in the wine-jar it becomes bitter and unlawful, (but)
in the state (form) of vinegar how excellent it is as a seasoning.

Concerning the impropriety of the disciple’s (murid) presuming to
do the same things as are done by the saint (wall), inasmuch as
sued meat does no harm to the physician, but is harmjut to the
skk and frost and Snow do m harm to the ripe grape, but are
injurious to the young fruit; for he (the discipfe ) ts -jjj

Jay, for he has not (yet) become (the saint to whom are apphi abk
tSte wards in the Qur’an): "That God may forgive thee thy
former and latter sins/

If the saint drinks a poison it becomes an antidote, but if the
seeker (disciple) drinks it, his mind is darkened

From Solomon have come the words, O Lord,

(a kingdom that it behoves not any one after me toobtaas), that
is, “do not give this kingdom and power to any but me.


I


142 MATHNAWf* BOOK I

2605 Do not bestow this grace and bounty on any but me/ 1 This
looks like envy, but it was not that (in reality).

Read with your soul the mystery of “if behaves not” do not
deem the inward meaning of " after me” (to be derived) from
his (Solomon^) avarice-

Nay, but in sovereignty' he saw a hundred dangers: the
kingdom of this world was (has ever been), hair by hair (in
every respect), fear for one's head*

Fear for head with fear for heart with fear for religion—
there is no trial for us like this.

Therefore one must needs possess the high aspiration of a
Solomon in order to escape from these myriads of colours and
perfumes (enticing vanities).

z6i* Even with such (great) strength (of spirit) as he had, the
waves of that (worldly) kingdom were stifling his breath (choking
him).

Since dust settled on him from this sorrow 1 , he had com¬
passion for all the kings of the world.

Hence he interceded (with God on their behalf) and said,
“Give this kingdom (to them) with (accompanied by) the
(spiritual) perfection wrrich Thou hast given to me.

To whomsoever Thou wilt give (it) p and (on whomsoever)
Thou wilt confer that bounty p he (that person) is Solomon, and
I also am he.

I le is not 1 after me * he is with me* What of 4 with me/ indeed:
I am without rival.”

3615 Tis my duty to explain this, but (now) I will return to the
story of the man and wife.


The moral of the altercation 0/ the Arab and his wife*

The heart of one who is sincere * is seeking (to find) a moral 3
for the altercation of the man and wife.

The altercation of the man and wife has been related (as a
story): know that it is a parable of your own flesh ( ttafs ) and
reason.

This man and wife, which are the flesh and the reason, are
very' necessary for (the manifestation of) good and evil;

And this necessary pair in this house of earth are (engaged)
in strife and altercation day and night.

2630 The wife is craving requisites for the household, that is to
say h reputation and bread and viands and rank*

Like the wife* the flesh, iu order to contrive the means (of


1 I,«l be was sorry and ashamed that lave of the world made him for¬
getful of God,


Read


Read


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 143

gratifying its desires), is at one dm* seeking {having recourse to)
humility and at another time to domination.

The reason is really unconscious of these (worldly) thoughts:
in its brain is nothing but love of God.

Although the inner meaning of the tale is this bait and trap 1 ,
listen now' to the outward form of the tale in its entirety.

If the spiritual explanation were sufficient, the creation of the
world would have been vain and idle.

If love were (only spiritual) thought and reality, die form of j*js
your fasting and prayer would be non-existent.

The gifts of lovers to one another are, in respect of love,
naught but forms;

(But the purpose is) that the gifts may have home testimony
to feelings of love which are concealed in secrecy,

Because outward acts of kindness bear witness to feelings of
love in the heart, O dear friend.

Your witness is sometimes true, sometimes false, sometimes
drunken with wine, sometimes with sour curds.

He that has drunk sour curds makes a show of intoxication, 2639
shouts ecstatically, and behaves like one whose head is heavy
(with the fumes of wine);

That hypocrite is (assiduous) in fasting and praying, in order
that it may be supposed that he is drunken with devotion
(to God). ’

In short, external acts are different (from internal feelings),

(and their purpose is) to indicate that which is hidden.

O Lord, grant us according to our desire such discernment
that we may know the false indication from the true.

Do you know how the sense-perception becomes discerning?

In this way, that the sense-perception should be seeing by the
light of God.

And if there be no effect (outward sign), the cause too makes -63s
manifest (that which is hidden), as (for example) kinship gives
information concerning Jove (enables you to infer the presence

of love). . .

When the light of God comes into the sensonum (and be¬
comes the medium of perception), you will not be a slave to
effect or cause—

So that Love will throw a spark within, wax mighty, and
make (the illumined one) independent of effect.

He has no need for the signs of love, since Love has shot its
radiance over the sky (of his heart).

There are detailed explanations (which I could give) m order
to complete this subject; but seek them (for yourself), and (now)

farewell. .... . .

And as for him that perceived the inner meaning in this ;6 4t .

* l.c. (he temptation of ib* reason by the flesh.


144 MATHNAWft BOOK I

outward form! the form is (both) near to the meaning and far
(from it).

In regard to indication, they (the meaning and the form) are
like the sap and the tree; (but) when you turn to the quiddity,
they are very far (removed from each other)*

(Let me) take leave of quiddities and essential properties p and
relate what happened to those twain with faces ike the moon.


Haw the Arab set his heart on (complying frith) his beloved's request
and swore that in thus submitting (to her) he had no (idea of)
trickery and making trial (of her).

The man said, "Now I have ceased to oppose (thee): thou
hast authority (to do what thou wilt): draw the sword from the
shea tlx.

Whatsoever thou biddest me do 3 I will obey* I will not con¬
sider the bad or good result of it,

I will become non-existent in thy existence, because I am
thy lover: love makes blind and deaf,”

The wife said, “Oh, I wonder if thou art (really) my friend,
or whether thou art (bent on) discovering my secret "by trickery? ”
He said, “(No), by God who knows the thought most deeply
hid, who out of dust created Adam pure (chosen above all)*
Who, in the body three cubits long which He gave him, dis¬
played everything that w r as contained in the tablets (of destiny)
and the (world of) Spirits

Through his He (Uud) taught him [Adam) the Names (through
his God-given knowledge) he at the very first gave instruction
(to die angeb) concerning everything that shall come to pass
unto everlasting,

2G*r. So that the angels became beside themselves (in amazement)
at his teaching, and gained from his glorification (of God) a
holiness other (than they possessed before).

The revelation that appeared to them from Adam was not
(contained) in the amplitude of their heavens.

In comparison with the spaciousness of the range of that
pure spirit (Adam)* the expanse of the seven heavens became
narrow.

The Prophet said that God has said, f I am not contained in
the jar of "'high ” and “ low 11 (spatial dimensions);

I am not contained in earth or heaven or even in the em¬
pyrean—know this for certain* 0 noble one;

2055 (But) I am contained in the true believer's heart: oh* how
wonderful I If thou seekest Me* search in those hearts/

He (God) said (also), * Enter among My servants ? thou wilt
meet with a Paradise (consisting) ot vision of Me, O God¬
fearing one. 1


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


H5

The empyrean * notwithstanding its wide (far-extending) light,
when it beheld that (spirit of Adam), was confounded 1 .

Trulyi the magnitude of the empyrean is very great; but who
(what) is form when reality has arrived?

Then the angels were saying (to Adam), 'Before this (time)
we had a friendship (with thee) on the dust of the earth.

On the earth we were sowing the seed of service (worship) : 366a
we were marvelling at that connexion,

Marvelling what connexion we had with that dust, inasmuch
as our nature is of heaven,

(We said). Why (this) friendship in u$, who are light, with
darkness? How can light live with darkness?

O Adam, that friendship was owing to the scent of thee,
because earth was the w oof and warp of thy body.

From this place (the earth) thy earthly body was woven, in
this place thy pure light was found.

This (light) that our souls have obtained from thy spirit shone
erstwhile from the dost

We were m the earth, and heedless of the earth, heedless of
the treasure that lay buried there.

When He (God) bade us journey from that place of abode
our palates were soured (we w ere bitterly grieved) by the change,

So that we were arguing (and saying), J Q God, who will come
in our stead?

Wilt Thou sell the splendour of the praise with which we
glorify and magnify Thee for babble and palaver? 1

The decree of God spread for us the carpet (of indulgence), i&jo
(and He said), 1 Speak ve t in the way of boldness

(And) without fear, whatever comes upon your tongues * like
only children - with their father;

For what if these words (of yours) are unseemly? My mercy
likewise is prior (superior)! to My wrath.

In order to manifest this priority, O angel, I will put in thee
incitement to perplexity and doubt,

That thou mayst speak and I not take offence at thee, (so
that) none whu denies My clemency may dare to utter a
word.

Within My (infinite) clemency (the clemencies of) a hundred j&rs
fathers and a hundred mothers at every moment are bom and
vanish.

Their clemency' is (but) the foam of the sea of My clemency:
the Foam comes and goes, but the sea is (always) there.* a

What indeed shall! say? Compared with that pearl (Divine
clemency) this oyster-shell (human clemency) is naught but the
foam of the foam of the foam of foam.

1 Literally, "Vent front its place/'

* /a like an only child, who loved beyond measure.


146 MATHKAwf, BOOK I

By the truth of that foam 1 , by the truth of that pure sea,
(I swear) that these words (of mine) are not (meant to make)
trial of thee and are not vain.

They are from (inspired by) love and sincerity and humble¬
ness, (I swear) by the truth of that One to whom I turn.

2&so If this affection (which I am showing) seems to thee a trial,
do thou for one moment put the (supposed) trial (of thee) to
the test 1 .

Do not hide thy secret (but reveal it), in order that mine may
be revealed: command anything that 1 am able to do.

Do not hide thy heart (but reveal it), in order that mine may
be revealed and that I may accept whatever I am capable of
(performing).

How shall I do? What remedy is in my power? Look what
a plight my soul is in."

How the tvife specified to her husband the way to earn daily
bread and how he accepted (her proposal).

The wife said, “A sun has shone forth* a (whole) world has
received light from him—

2&15 The Vicar of the Merciful (God), the Khalifa of the Creator:
through him the city of Baghdad is (gay and happy) as the
season of Spring.

if thou gain access to that King, thou wilt become a king:
how long wilt thou go after every (kind of) misfortune? ”

Companionship with the fortunate is like the Elixir : indeed,
how is an Elixir like (to be compared with) their looks (of
favour)?

The eye of Ahmad (Mohammed) was cast upon an Abu Bakr:
he by a single act of faith became a Siddiq.

Said the husband, 44 How should I go to meet the King? How
should I go to him without a pretext?

2690 I must have some reference or device: is any handicraft right
(possible) without tools?

As (to mention a similar case) the famous Majnun, when he
heard from some one that Layla was a little unwell,

Cried, 'Ah, how shall I go (to her) without a pretext? And
if I fail to visit her when she is ill, how (wretched) shall l be!

Would that I were a skilled physician! I would have gone
on foot to Layla first of all (before any one else). 5

God said to us /Say, Come ye f * in order to signify to us the
(means of) vanquishing our feeling of shame*
ify-js If bats had sight and means (ability to bear the sunshine),
they would fly about and enjoy themselves by day.”

1 Here the Amb begin* cnee more to p]™d with hia wife.

J /.*. "‘try by e^penmem whether your suspicions are jtisi."


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 1+7


The wife said, "When the gracious King goes into the field
(maydebt} 1 , the essence of every lack of means (inability) be¬
comes a means (ability).

Because the means "(ability) is (involves) pretension and self-
existence: the (pith of the) matter lies in lack of means (in¬
ability) and non-existence.”

“ How,” said he, should I Jo business without means, unless
1 make it manifest that 1 (really) have no means?

Therefore I must needs have attestation of my want of means,
that he (die King) may pity me in want*

Do thou produce some attestation besides talk and show, so ;?«
that the beauteous King may take pin?,

For the testimony that consisted ol talk and show was (ever)
invalidated before that Supreme Judge.

He requires truth (veracity) as witness to his (the indigent
man’s) state, so tliat his (inner) light shall shine forth (and pro¬
claim his indigence) without any words of his,”

llots the A Tab carried a jug of rain-water from the midst of the
desert as a gift to the Commander of the Faithful at Baghdad ,
in the belief that in that town also there teas a scarcity of sealer.

The wife said , 14 When people with all their might (endeavour
to) rise up entirely purged of self-existence—that is veracity.

We have die rain-water in the jug: ’tis thy property and capital
and means.

Take this jug of water and depart, make it a gift and go into sjej
the presence of the King of kings.

Sav, 4 We have no means except this; in the desert there is
nothing better than this water.’

If his treasury is full of gold and jewels, (yet) he does not get
water like this:’tis rare."

What is that jug? Our confined body: within it is the briny
water of our senses.

O Lord, accept this jar and jug of mine by the grace of “ God
hath purchased (from the believers their lives and wealth in return
for Paradise),"

(’Tis) a jug with five spouts, the five senses; keep this water tjw
pure (and sate) from every filth.

That there may be from this jug a passage to the sea, and that
my jug may assume the nature of the sea,

So that when you carry it as a gift to the King, the King may
find it pure and be its purcliaser ;

(And) after that, its water will become without end: a hundred
worlds will be filled from my jug.

Stop up its spouts and keep it filled (with water) from the jar
{of Reality'); God said , 44 Close your eyes to vain desire."

1 dispJuys Kinisi'lf,


io-J


«



1+8 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

.715 His (the husband's) beard was full of wind (he was puffed
up with pride): "Who (thought he) has such a gift as this?
This, truly, is worthy of a King like him.''

The wife did not know that in that place (Baghdad) on the
thoroughfare there is the great stream (of water) sweet as sugar.

Flowing like a sea through the city, full of boats and fishing-
nets.

Go to the Sultan and behold this pomp and state! Behold
the senses of {those for whom God hath prepared gardens)
beneath which the rivers flow !

Our senses and perceptions, such as they are, are (but) a
single drop in those rivers.


Haw the Arab's wife sewed the jug of rain-water in a felt cloth
and put a seal on it because of the Arab’s utter conviction (that
it was a precious gift for the King).

~7-o "Yes," said the husband, "stop up the mouth of the jug.
Take care, for this is a gift that will bring us profit.

Sew this jug in felt, that die King may break his fast with
oui gift,

For there is no (water) like this in ail the world; no (other)
water is so pure as this.”

(This he said) because they (people like him) are always full
of infirmity and half-blind from (drinking) bitter and briny


waters.

The bird whose dwelling-place is the briny water, how r should
it know where to find in it the clear (and sweet) water?
a?*s O thou whose abode is in the briny spring, how shouldst
thou know the Shalt and the Jayhiin and the Euphrates?

O thou who hast not escaped from this fleeting earavanscray
(the material world), how shouldst thou know (die meaning of)
"self-extinction'* and (mystical) "intoxication ” and "expan¬
sion”?

And if thou knowest, 'tis (by rote. Eke the knowledge) handed
down to thee from father and grandfather: to thee these names
arc like tibjad 1 .

flow plain and evident to all children are abjad and hatewas-,
and (yet) the real meaning is far away (hard to reach).

Then the Arab man took up the jug and set out to journey,
carrying it along (with him) day and night.

He was trembling for the jug, in fear of Fortune’s mischiefs:
all die same, he conveyed it from the desert to the city (Baghdad),;

His wife unrolled the prayer-rug in supplication; she made
(the words) Rabbi sallim (Save, O Lord) her litany in prayer,


1 1 4 , like the alphabet. Abjad is,a mnemonic word cOftlpOMd of the
Arabic letters equivalent TO ABJD. .

: A ifflibr word consisting of the Arabic letters equivalent CO Hn Z*


\


*


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 1+9


Crying, “ Keep our water safe from scoundrels 1 O Lord, let
that pearl arrive at that sea!

Although my husband is shrewd and artful, yet the pearl has
thousands of enemies*

Pearl indeed 1 ! ’Tis the water of Kawthar: ’tia a drop of this
that is the origin of the pearl,"

Through the prayer? and lamentation of the wife, and aTis
through the husband's anxiety and his patience under the heavy

burden, *

He bore it without delay, safe from, robbers and unhurt by
stones, to the seat of the Caliphate (the Caliph s palace).

lie saw a bountiful Court, (where) the needy had spread


their nets; . . . ,,

Everywhere, moment by moment, some petitioner gamed (and
carried^way) from that Court a donation and robe of honour:

‘Twas like sun and rain, nay, like Paradise, for infidel and
true believer and good folk and bad,

Be beheld some people arrayed (with favour) in the sight i?i«
(of the Caliph), and others who had risen to their feet (and
were) waiting (to receive his commands).

High and low, from Solomon to the ant, they (all) had be¬
come quickened with life, like the world at the blast of the
trumpet (on the Day of Resurrection),

The followers of Form were woven (entangled) in pearls, the
followers of Reality had found the Sea of Reality.

Those without aspiratiun—how aspiring had they become!
and those of high aspiration—to what felicity had they attained!


Shotting that , as the beggar is in love with bounty and in love with
the bountiful giver, so the bounty of the bountiful giver is in lave
with the beggar: if the beggar have the greater patience, the
bountiful giver will come to his door; and if the bountiful giver
have the greater patience, the beggar will come to his door; but
the beggar's patience is a virtue in the beggar, while the patience
of the bountiful giver is in him a defect.

A loud call was coming (to his cars); “Come, O seeker!
Bounty is in need of beggars: (it is needy) like a beggar.

Bounty is seeking the beggars and the poor, just as fair ones -ro
who seek a clear mirror.

The face of the fair is made beautiful by the mirror, the race
of Beneficence is made visible by the beggar.

Therefore on this account God said in the Sura Ira q-f/ufya,

“O Mohammed, do not shout at (and drive away) the beggar."

1 laterally, "what indeed is the (ordinary) pearl (compared with this
‘pearl’ of Dun|i" Pearls were supposed to be rain-drops caUfttit by the
oVitcr-ihell.



150 MATHNAWf t BOOK I

Inasmuch as the beggar is the mirror of Bounty, take care*
Breath is hurtful to the face of the mirror.

In the one case, his (the giver’s) bounty makes the beggar
manifest (causes him to beg), while in the other case he (the
giver), (without being asked), bestows on the beggars more
(than they need).

Beggars, then, arc the mirror of God's bounty', and they that
are with God are (united with) the Absolute Bounty ;

And every one except those two (types of beggar) is truly a
dead man: he is not at this door (the Divine Court), he is
(lifeless as) a picture (embroidered) on a curtain.

The difference between one that is poor far [desirous of) God and

thirsting for Him and one that is poor of {destitute of) God and

thirsting for what is other than He .

He (that seeks other than God) is the (mere) picture of a
dervish, he is not worthy of bread (Divine bounty): do not
thrtnv bread to the picture of a dog!

lie wants a morsel of food, he does not want God: do not
set dishes before a lifeless picture!

The dervish that wants bread is a land-fish: (he has) the
form of a fish, but (he is) fleeing from the sea.

?75 j He is a domestic fowl, not the Stmurgh of the air: he swallows
sweet morsels (of food), he does not eat from God.

He loves God for the sake of gain : his soul is not in love with
(God’s) excellence and beauty.

If he conceives that he is in love with the Essence (of God),
conception of the (Divine) names and attributes is not the
Essence.

Conception is begotten of qualities and definition: God is
not begotten. He is lam y utad.

How should he that is in love with his own imagination and
conception be one of them that love the Lord of bounties?

-<-o If the lover of that (false) conception be sincere, that metaphor

(unreal judgement) will lead him tojhe reality.

The exposition of this saving demands a commentary, but I
am afraid of senile (feeble) minds.

Senile and short-sighted minds bring a hundred evil fancies
into their thoughts*

Not even- one is able to hear rightly: the fig is not a morsel
for every' little bird.

Especially a bird that is dead, putrid ; a blind, eyeless (fellow)
filled with vain fancy.

2763 To the picture or a fish what is the difference between sea
and land? To the colour of a Hindoo what is the difference
between soap and black vitriol?


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 151

If you depict the portrait on the paper as sorrowful, it has
no lesson (learns nothing) of sorrow or joy.

Its appearance is sorrowful, but it is free from that (sorrow);

(or) its appearance is smiling, but it has no (inward) impression
of that (joy).

And this (worldly) sorrow and joy which are delineated in
the heart are naught hut a picture in comparison with that
(spiritual) joy and sorrow.

The picture’s smiling appearance is for your sake, in order
that by means of that picture the reality may be established
(rightly understood by you).

The pictures (phenomena) which are in these hot baths (the a??*
world), (when viewed) from outside the undressing-room (of
self-abandonment), are like clothes.

So long as you are outside, you see only the clothes
(phenomena); put off your clothes and enter (the bath of
reality), O kindred Spirit,

Because, with your clothes, there is no way (of getting) inside:
the bndy is ignorant of the soul, the clothes (are ignorant) of
the body.

How the Caliph's officers and chamberlains came forward to
pay their respects to the Bedouin and to receive his gift.

When the Bedouin arrived from the remote desert to the
gate of the Caliph’s palace, ^

The court officers went to meet the Bedouin; they sprinkled
much rose-water of graciousness on his bosom.

Without speech (on his part) they perceived what he wanted: 17 7}
it was their practice to give before being asked.

Then they said to him, “O chief of the Arabs, whence dost
thou comer' How art thou after the journey and fatigue?”

He said, “I am a chief, if ye give me any countenance
(favour); 1 am without means (of winning respect) when ye
put me behind your backs.

O ye in whose faces are the marks of eminence, O ye whose
splendour is more pleasing than the gold of Ja'far,

O ve, one sight of whom is (worth many) sights, O yc at the
sight of whom pieces of gold are scattered (as largesse),

O ye, all of whom have become seeing by the light of God,
who have come from God for the sake of munificence,

That yc may cast the elixir of your looks upon the copper of
human individuals 1 ,

I am a stranger; I have come from the desert: I have come m
hope of (gaining) the grace of the Sultan.

1 1 . r. "'in orxtcr thm you may transmute the baie metai of human nature
and cndut it with Divine qualities/'


IJ 2 MATHNAWf» BOOK I

The scent of his grace covered (took entire possession of) the
deserts: even the grains of sand were ensouled (thereby).

I came all the way to this place for the sake of dinars:
as soon as 1 arrived, I became dmnken with sight (contem¬
plation)."

zr&s A person ran to the baker for bread: on seeing the beauty of
the baker, he gave up the ghost.

A certain man went to the rose-garden to take his pleasure,
and found it in the beauty of the gardener 1 .

Like the desert Arab who drew' water from the well and
tasted the Water of Life from the (lovely) face of Joseph-,

Moses went to fetch fire: he beheld such a Fire (the Burning
Bush) that he escaped from (searching after] fire.

Jesus sprang up, to scape from his enemies: that spring
carried him to the Fourth Heaven.

27**0 The ear of wheat 3 became a trap for Adam, so that his
existence became the wheat-ear (seed and origin) of mankind.

The falcon comes to the snare for food: it finds the fore-arm
(wrist) of the King and fortune and glory.

The child went to school eo acquire knowledge, in hope of
(getting) its father's pretty bird (as a prize);

Then, by (going to) school, that child rose to the top* paid
monthly Fees (to his teacher), and became perfect 4 (in know h -
ledge).

1 Abbia had come to war for vengeance" sake, for the purpose
of subduing Ahmad (Mohammed) and opposing the (true)
religion:

sjm He and his descendants in the Caliphate became a back and
front (complete support) to the (true) religion until the Resur¬
rection,

" I came to this court in quest of wealth: as soon as I entered
the portico I became (a spiritual) chief A

I brought water as a gilt for the sake of (getting) bread: hope
of bread led me to the highest place in Paradise.

Bread drove an Adam forth from Paradise: bread caused me
to mix (made me consort) with those u T ho belong to Paradise.

I have been freed, like the angels, from water and bread
(materiality): without (any worldly] object of desire I move
round this court, like the (revolving) sphere of heaven.”

si™ Nothing in the world is without object (disinterested) in its
movement (activity) except the bodies and the souls of fGodV)
lovers.

1 laterally, " the beauty of the gardener (not the charm of the g&rden)
turned out to be h» recreation, 11

3 Joseph is seitd to have escaped from the well by dinging to a bucket,

* It, the forbidden fruit.

* Literally, fli!! moon"

* Literally , l+ 1 became the seat of honour."


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


>53


Showing that the lover of this world is like the lover of a waff on
which the sunbeams strike, who makes no effort and exertion to
perceive that the radiance and splendour do not proceed from
the wall, but from the orb of the surt in the Fourth Heaven;
consequently he sets his whole heart on the wall, and when the
sunbeams refoin the sun (at sunset ), he is left for ever in despair:
“and a bar is placed between them and that which they
desire,”

The lovers of the Whole are not those who Jove die part:
he that longed for the part failed to attain unto die Whole.
When a part falls in love with a part, the object of its love

soon goes (returns) to its own whole.

He (the lover of the particular) became the laughing-stock
of another’s slave: he became (like a man who was) drowning
and dung to some one weak (and powerless to help him).

lie (the loved slave) possesses no authority, that he should care
for him: shall he do his own master’s business or his (the
lover’s) 1 ?


The Arabic proverb, “If you commit fornication, commit it with
a free tcoman, and if you steal, steal a pearl."

Hence (the saying)," Commit fornication with a free woman,” ;8oj
became proverbial; (and the words) “steal a pearl" were trans¬
ferred (metaphorically) to this (meaning).

The slave (the loved one) went a wav to his master: he (the
lover) was left in misery. The scent of the rose went (back) to
the rose: he was left with the thorn.

He was left far from die object of his desire -his labour lost,
his toil useless, his foot wounded.

Like the hunter who catches a shadow—how should the
shadow become his property?

The man has grasped tightly the shadow of a bird, (while)
the bird on the hranch of the tree is fallen into amazement,

(Thinking), “ I wonder who this crack-brained fellow is sSw
laughing at? Here’s folly for you, here’s a rotten cause 1 !”

And if you say that the part is connected with the whole,
(then) eat thorns': the thorn is connected with the rose.

Except from one point of view®, it (the part) is pot connected
with the whole: otherwise, indeed, the mission of the prophets
would be vain.


1 Lt. 4b he must do Kti fnaatcr's buiineu and not ftmeem himself with

the loverV 1

* Ij. d cause that cannot lead to any good result.

* RendinR dJLj


154 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Inasmuch as the prophets are (sent) in order to connect (the
part with the whole): how, then* should they (the prophets)
connect them when they arc (already) cine body?

This discourse hath no end. O lad, the day is late: conclude
the tale*

How the Arab delivered the gift, that is , the jug to the
Caliplvs servants,

2S15 He presented the jug of water p he sowed the seed of homage
in that (exalted) court.

" Bear this gift/' said he* 4S to the Sultan, redeem the King’s
suitor from indigence.

Tis sweet water and a new green jug—some of die rain¬
water that collected in the ditch/ 1

The officials smiled at that, but they accepted it (the jug) as
(though it were precious as) life.

Because the graciousness of the good and wise King had
made a mark (impressed itself) on all die courtiers*
afiao The disposition of kings settles (becomes Implanted) in their
subjects : die green sky 1 makes the earth verdant*

Regard the king as a reservoir w r ith pipes in every direction,
and water running from all (the pipes) like hoppers (in a mill).

When the water in all (the pipes) is from a pure reservoir
every single one gives $w r cet water, pleasant to taste;

But if the water in the reservoir is brackish and dirty, every
pipe brings the same to view*

Because every pipe is connected with the reservoir*. Dive*
dive into (ponder deeply) the meaning of these words.

JS25 (Consider) how the imperial grace of the homeless Spirit 2
has produced effects on the whole body;

How the grace of Reason* which is of goodly nature* of goodly
lineage, brings the entire body into discipline;

How Love* saucy, uncontrolled, and restless, throws the
whole body into madness.

The purity of the water of the Sea that is like Kawthar (is
such that) all its pebbles are pearls and gems.

For whatever science the master is renowned* the souls of
his pupils become endued with the same.
a 630 With the master-theologian the quick and industrious pupi!
reads (scholastic} theology .

With the master-jurist the student of jurisprudence reads
jurisprudence* when he (the teacher) expounds it, not theology.

Then the master who is a grammarian—'the soul of his pupil
becomes imbued by him with grammar.

Again, the master who h absorbed in the Way (of Sufism)—

1 Equivalent to our 11 blue iky. 1 *

■ /.r. this spirit, which has na fipati&l rrlatipm*


THE GRAMMARIAN AND THE BOATMAN 155
because of him the soul of his pupil is absorbed in the King

these various kinds of knowledge, on the day of death
the (best) equipment and provision for the road is the know¬
ledge of (spiritual) poverty.

The story of what passed between the grammarian
and the boatman.

A certain grammarian embarked in a boat. That self-con- 2035
ceited person turned to the boatman , ,, ,

And said, “Have you ever studied grammar? No, he
replied. The other said, " Half your life is gone to naught.

The boatman became heart-broken with grief, but at the
time he refrained from answering. ,

The wind cast the boat into a whirlpool: the boatman spoke
loud (shouted) to the grammarian, .

"Tell me, do you know how to swim? No, said he,

*' O fair-spoken 1 good-looking man!”

"0 grammarian," said he, “your whole life is naught, be- =S-io
cause me boat is sinking in these whirlpools."

Know that here maim (self-effacement) is needed, not nahw
(grammar): if vou are mahse (dead to self), plunge into the sea

without peril. , . . .

The water of the sea places the dead one on its head (causes
him to float on the surface); but if he be living, how shall he

escape from the sea? _ , ,

Inasmuch as you have died to the attributes ot the nesti, tne
Sea of (Divine) consciousness will place you on the crown of its
head (will raise you to honour).

(But) O thou who hast called the people asses, at this time
thou art left (floundering), like an ass, upon this ice.

If in the world thou art the moat learned scholar of the time, 28<s
behold the passing-awav of this world and this time!

We have stitched in (Inserted) the (story of the) grammarian,
that we might teach you the grammar (nahw) of self-effacement

(mahto). , ,

In self-loss 1 , O venerated friend, thou will find the jurispru¬
dence of jurisprudence, the grammar of grammar, and the
accidence of accidence*.

That jug of water is (an emblem of) our different sorts ot
knowledge, and the Caliph is the I igris of God s knowledge.

We are carrying jugs full (of water) to the 1 igris: it we do
not know ourselves to be asses, asses we are.


■ Literally,answering pleasantly."

* Literally, " in betominK ItM."

* Jjg. the cream and essence of these sciences.


*56 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

:85a After all, the Bedouin was excusable, for he was ignorant of
the Tigris and of the (great) river.

If he had been acquainted with the Tigris as we aj ' e »
would not have carried that jug from place to place;

Nay, had he been aware of the Tigris, he would have dashed
that jug against a stone.

Hum the Caliph accepted the gift and b&tamd largesse, notwith¬
standing that he teas entirely without need of the gift (the water)
and the jug,

Wien the Caliph saw (the gift) and heard his story, he filled
the jug with gold and added (other presents).

He delivered the Arab from penury, he bestowed donations
and special robes of honour,

23*5 Saying. " Give into his hand this jug full of gold. When he
returns (home), hike him to the Tigris.

He has come (hither) by way of the desert and by travelling
(on land): it will be nearer for him (to return) by water/ 1
When he (the Arab) embarked in the boat and beheld the
Tigris, he was prostrating himself in shame and bowing (his
head).

Saying, 11 Oh, wonderful is the kindness of that bounteous
King, and *tis (even) more wonderful that he took that water*
How did that Sea of munificence so quickly accept from me
such spurious coin as this?”

Know, 0 son, that everything in the universe is a jug which
is (filled) to the brim with wisdom and beauty.

It (everything in the universe) is a drop of the Tigris of His
beauty, which (beauty) because of its fullness is not contained
under the skin (that should enclose it) +

Twas a hidden treasure: because of its fullness it burst forth
and made the earth more shining than the heavens.

T Twas a hidden treasure: because of its fullness it surged up
and made the earth (like) a sultan robed in satin.

And if he (the Arab) had seen a branch of the Divine Tigris,
he would have destroyed that lug. destroyed it,
aWg ’They that saw h are always beside themselves: like one beside
himself, they hurled a stone at the jug (of their sdf-exist-
encejp

O thou who from jealousy hast hurled a stone at the jug,
while the jug has (only) become more perfect through being
shattered.

The jar is shattered, (but) the water is not spilled from it:
from this shattering have arisen a hundred soundnesses.

Every piece of the jar is in dance and ecstasy, (though) to the
partial (discursive) reason this seems absurd.


4


THE BEDOUIN AND 1113 WIFE


157


In this state (of ecstasv) neither the jug is manifest nor the
water. Consider well, and God knoweth best what 19 right.

When you knock at the door of Reality, it will be opened to
you: beat the pinion of thought, in order that you may be made

3 The f pSon of your thought has become mud-stained and
heavy because you are a clay-eater: day has become to you as

Bread and meat are (originally) clay: eat little thereof, that
vou mav not remain in the earth, like day,

' When you become hungry', you become a dog: you become
fierce and ill-tempered and ill-natured.

When you have eaten your fill, you have become a1 carcase:
you have' become devoid of understanding and without feet

(inert), like a wall. . . ,

So at one time you arc a carcase and at another time a dog: rSrs
how will you run well in the road of the lions (follow the saints).

Know that vour only means of hunting is the dog (the animal
soul): throw bones to the dog but seldom,

Because when the dog has eaten its fill, it becomes rebellious*
how should it run to the goodly chase and hunt?

Want of food was leading the Arab to that (exalted) court,
and (there) he found his fortune.

We have related in the (foregoing) story the kindness shown
bv the King to that needy one who had no refuge.

"Whatsoever the man in love (with God) speaks, the scent oi j 8 mj
L ove is springing from his mouth into the abode of Lo\e.

If he speak (formal) theology, it all turns to (spiritual) poverty:
the scent of poverty comes from that man of sweet and beguiling

discourse. ..... ,

And if he speak infidelity, it has the seent of (the true) re¬
ligion, and if he speak doubtfully, his doubt turns to certainty.

The perverse froth that has risen from a sea of sincerity—
that turbid (froth) has been set out by die pure source.

Know that its froth is pure and worthy: know that it 1$ like
revilement from the lips of the beloved.

Whose unsought reproaches have become sweet (to the lover) s*ss
for the sake of her cheek which he desires.

IF he (the lover of Cod) speak falsehood* it seems (likt) the
truth. O (fine) falsehood that would adorn (even) the truth!

If you cook (a confection) of sugar in the form of a loal ut
bread, it will taste of candy, not of bread, while you are

suc^inp 1 j

If a true believer find a golden idol, how should he leave it
(there) for the sake of a worshipper ? ... , ,

Nay, he will take it and cast it into the fire: he will break
(destroy) its borrowed (unreal) form,


I S S MATHNAWf, BOOK I


In order that die idol-shape may not remain on the gold,
because Form hinders and waylays (those who seek Reality).

The essence of its gold is the essence of Lordship (Divinity):
die idol-stamp on the sterling gold is borrowed (unreal).

Do not bum a blanket on account of a flea* and do not let
the day go (to waste) on account of every gnat's headache 1 .

You are an idol-worshipper when you remain in (bondage
to) forms: leave its (the idors) form and look at the reality.

If you are a man (bound) for the Pilgrimage, seek a pilgrim
(as your) companion* whether he be a Hindoo or a Turcoman
or an Arab,


Do not look at his figure and colour, look at his purpose and
intendon.

If he is black, (yet) he is in accord with you: call him white,
for {spiritually) his complexion is the same as yours.

This story has been told up and down (confusedly), like the
doings of lovers, without foot (end) or head (beginning).

It hath no head, inasmuch as it existed before eternity; it
hath no foot: it has (always) been akin to everlastingness.

Nay, it is like water: every drop thereof is both bead and foot,
and at the same time without both +

This is not a story, mark you E God forbid t This is the ready
money (presentation, here and now) of my state and yours.
Consider (it) well.

Because the Sufi is grand and glorious (in his spiritual vision):
whatever is past is not remembered (does not enter his mind).

We are both the Arab and the jug and the King; we are all:
he that has been turned away from it (the Truth) shall be turned


away.

Know that the husband is Reason, and the wife is greed and
cupidity: these twain are dark and deniers (of Reason); Reason
is the (bright) candle.

Now hear the origin of their denial, whence it arose: (it arose)
from the fact that the Whole hath various parts.

The parts of the Whole are not parts in relation to the Whole
—(they arc) not like the scent of the rose, which is a part of
the rose.

The beauty of (all) green herbs is a part of the Rose's beauty,
the coo of the turtle-dove is a part of that Nightingale.

If I become occupied w ith a difficulty {difficult question) and
the answer (explanation), how shall I be able to give water to
the thirsty ?

If you are wholly perplexed and in straits, have patience;
patience is the key to joy \


1 "cwrytrivift vnftf»n.*"

3 Fmfi is properly the feeling of relief produced by the removal of pain
or anxiety*


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


*59

Abstain from (distracting) thoughts, abstain: thought is (like)
the lion and the wild ass, and (men's) hearts arc the thickets
(which they haunt).

Acts of abstinence are superior to medicines, because scratch- 3910
mg is an increase (aggravation) of the itch.

Assuredly abstinence is the first principle of medicine: abstain,
and behold the strength of the spirit.

Receive these words, like the (open) ear, that I may make
for you an earring of gold:

(Then) you will oecome a ringin the ear of (devoted to) the Moon
that works in gold, you will ascend to the moon and the Pleiades.

First, hear (and learn) that the diverse created beings are
spiritually different, fromyvi (Y) to

Amongst the various letters there is a confusion and un- wj
certainty, though from one point of view they arc (all) ope from
head (beginning) to foot (end).

From one aspect they are opposites, and from one aspect
they are unified; from one aspect they are jest, and from one
aspect they are earnest.

Therefore the Resurrection is the day of the supreme in¬
spection: inspection is desired by him (only) who is glorious
and splendid.

Whoever is like a fraudulent Hindoo 1 , for him the day of
inspection is the time of exposure.

Inasmuch as he hath not a face like the sun, he desires nothing
but night (to cover him) like a veil.

Since his thorn hath not a single rose-leaf. Spring is the ^-q
enemy of his conscience,

While to one that is roses and lilies from head to foot Spring
is (welcome as) a pair of bright eyes.

The unspirituai thorn wishes for autumn, for autumn, in
order that it may jostle with (contend as a rival with) the
rose-garden,

And that it (autumn) may hide the beauty of that (the rose)
and the shame of this (the thorn), so that you may not see the
colour of that and the colour of this.

Therefore autumn is its (the thorn's) Spring and life, (for
then) the (worthless) stone and the pure ruby appear one.

The Gardener knows that (difference) even in autumn, but *925
the One's sight is better than the worlds sight.

Truly that One Person is (essentially) the (whole) world: he
is unaware of evil (does not know evil as such). The stars,
even- one, are all part of the Moon.

Therefore every fair form and shape (in the world) ss crying,

41 Good news I good news! Lo, here comes the Spring.”

J Literally, mi a. Hindoo who doc* bad trtde^ J.r. a reprohne whose
dealing with God result in hii perdition.


i6g MATHNAWf , BOOK I

So long as the blossom is shining like a coat of mail, how
should the fruits display their knobs?

When the blossom is shed, the fruit comes to a head; when
the body is shattered, the spirit lifts up its head.

-The fruit is the reality, the blossom is its form: the blossom
is the good news, the Fruit is the bounty (given as a reward)
for it.

When the blossom was shed, the fruit became visible; when
that diminished this began to Increase-

How should bread give strength until it is broken? How
should uncrushed dusters (of grapes) yield wine?

Unless myrobalan is pounded up with medicines, how r should
die medicines by themselves become health-increasing (act os
tonics)?

Concerning the qualities of the Pir (Spiritual Guide) and
(the duty of) obedient? to him.

O Splendour of the Truths Huaimu'ddin, take one or two
sheets of paper and add (them to the poem) in description of
the Pir.

Although dry slender body hath no strength, yet without the
sun (of thy spirit) we have no light.

Although thou hast become die lighted wick and the glass
(lamp) 1 , yet thou art the heart's leader (the Spiritual Guide);
thou art the end of the thread (which serves as a due).

Inasmuch as the end of die diread is in thy hand and will,
the heads (of spiritual knowledge) on the heart's necklace are
(derived) from thy bounty.

Write down what appertains to the Pir (Guide) who knows
the Way:— Choose the Pir and regard him a$ the essence of
the Way.

The Pfr is (like) summer, and (other) people are (like) the
autumn months (other) people are like night, and the Pir is
the moon.

2940 I have bestowed on (my) young Fortune (Husimu*ddm) the
name of Pir (old), because he is (made) old by the Truth, not
(made) old by Time.

So old is he that he hath no beginning: there is no rival to
such a unique Pearl.

Verily, old wine grows more potent; verily, old gold is more
highly prized.

Choose a Pir, for without a Pir this journey is exceeding full
of woe and affright and danger.

Without an escort you are bewildered (even) on a road you
have travelled many rimes (before):

1 /.i*. ‘ H although thou hast attained to the uttermost degree of iliiimina,-
rioiu" Cf. Qur'iSn, xxiv p 35.


THE SPIRITUAL GUTDE


i6i

Do not, then, travel alone on a Way that you have not seen
at all, do not turn your head away from the Guide,

Fool, if his shadow' {protection) be not over you, then tiie cry
of the ghoul will keep you (wandering about) with your head
in a whirl*

The ghoul will (entice you) from the Way (and) cast you into
destruction; there have been in this Way many craftier than
you (who have perished miserably).

Hear (learn) from the Qur'an the perdition of the wayfarers,
what the evil-stmled Jblis did unto them:

He carried them far—a journey of hundreds of thousands of
years — from the Highway, and made them backsliders and
naked (devoid of good works).

Behold ilieir bones and their hair! Take warning, and drive
not your ass towards them?

Seize the neck of your ass (the flesh) and lead him towards
the Way, towards the good keepers and knowers of the Way.

Beware! do not let your ass go, and do not remove your hand
from him, because his love is for the place where green herbs
are plentiful.

if you carelessly leave him free for one moment p he will go
(many) leagues in the direction of the herbage.

The ass is an enemy to the Way, (he is) madly in love with
fodder: oh* many is the attendant on him that he has brought
to min!

If you know not the Way, whatsoever the ass desires, do the j
contrary thereof: that, surely, will be the right Way*

(The Prophet said),Consult them f women), and then oppose
(them in what they advise) ■ he that disobeys them not will be
ruined/ 1 *

Be not a friend to (sensual) passion and desire, since it leads
you astray from the Way of God.

Nothing in the world will break (mortify) this passion like
the shadow (protection) of fellow-travellers.

How the Prophet r on whom he peace, enjoined 1 AH — may God
make his person honoured — toying, " If View every one seeks to
draw nigh to God by means of some kind of devotional act, do
thou seek the favour of God by associating with His wise and
chosen servant, that thou may si he the first of all to arrive {to
gain access to Him)/*

The Prophet said to "Ali, “O 'All, thou art the Lion of God,
thou art a courageous knight,

But do not even rely upon thy lion-heartednesa: come into agfa
the shade of the palm-tree of hope.

Come into the shade (protection) of the Sage whom no con¬
veyer can carry off from the Way.

n K It


*


l6z MATHNAWf, BOOK I


His shadow on the earth is like Mount Qif P his spirit is (like)
the Simurgh that circles (soars) exceedingly high.

If I should tell of his qualities until the Resurrection, do not
seek (expect) any conclusion and end to them.

The (Divine) Sun has veiled Himself in Man: apprehend
(this mystery), and God knows best what is right.

O ‘AU, above all devotional acts in the Way (of God) do thou
choose the shadow (protection) of the servant of God.

Every one took refuge in some act of devotion and discovered
for themselves some means of deliverance.

Go thou, take refuge in the shadow of the Sage, that thou
mayst escape from the Enemy that opposes (thee) in secret.

Of all acts of devotion this is the best for thee: (thereby) thou
wilt gain precedence over every one that has outstripped (the
rest)/ 1 '

When the Pir has accepted thee, take heed, surrender thyselt
(to him); go t like Moses, under the authority of Khbr.

Bear patiently whatever is done by a Khi/r who is without
hypocrisy* in order that Khrir may" not say* Begone, this is

^ Though he stave in the boat, do not speak a word; though he
kill a child, do not tear thy hair.

God has declared that his (the Fir's) hand is as His own*
since He gave out (the words) the Hand of God is abate their
hands.

The Hand of God causes him (the child) to die and (then)
brings him to life. What of life? He makes him a spirit ever¬


lasting.

If any one, by rare exception, traversed this Way alone
(without a Fir), he arrived (at his goal) through the help (and
favour) of the hearts of the Pits.

297s The hand of the Pir is not withdrawn from the absent (those
who are not under his authority): his hand is naught but the
grasp of God.

Inasmuch as they give such a robe of honour to the absent,
(what must they give their disciples?); undoubtedly the present
are better than the absent.

Since they are bestowing (spiritual) food on the absent, see
what bounties they must lav before one who is present.

Where is one that girds himself (for service) before them to
(i>. how far superior is he to) one that is outside the door?

When thou hast chosen thy Pir, be not faint-hearted, be not
weak as water and crumbly as earth.

If thou art enraged by every blow, then how wilt thou be¬
come a (clear) mirror without being polished?


THE MAN OF QAZWfN


163


H osc the man of Qaswfn was tattooing the figure of a lion in blue
on his shoulders, and (then) repenting because of the {pain of
the) needle-pricks.

Hear from the narrator this story about the way and custom
of the people of Qa^win.

They tattoo themselves in blue with the point of a
needle on body and hand and shoulders, so as to suffer no
injury.

A certain man of Qazwtn went to a barber and said* “Tattoo
me (and) do it charmingly (artistically)/"

“Q valiant sir," said he* "what figure shall I tattoo?" He
answered, 11 Prick in the figure of a furious lion.

Leo is my ascendant: tattoo the form of a lion. Exert your- 2935
self, prick in plenty of the blue dye.”

"On what place/' he asked, "shall I tattoo you?"" Said he p
“ Prick the design of the beauty 1 on my shoulder-blade/ 1
As soon as he began to stick in the needle, the pain of it
settled in the shoulder,

And the hero fell a-moaning — M G illustrious one, you have
killed me: what figure are you tattooing ? ft

tl Why/ 1 said he* “you bade me do a lion/* “What limb (of
the lion)/ 1 asked the other* “did you begin with ? n

"I have begun at the tail,” said he, “O my dear friend*, 1 ’ >99*
he cried, “leave out the tail!

My breath is stopped by the lion's tail and rump: his rump
has tightly closed (choked) my windpipe.

Let the lion be without a tail, 0 lion-maker, for my heart
is faint from the blows of the prong (the tattooer's needle)."

That person commenced to prick in (the blue) on another
part (of the man's shoulder) without fear, without favour,
without mercy.

He yelled — “Which of his members is this?” “This is his
ear, my good man/ 1 the barber replied.

“O Doctor/' said be* “let him have no ears: omit the ears 2995
and cut the frock short / 1

The barber began to insert (his needle) in another part: once
more the man of Qazwfn set out to wail.

Saying* " What is the member (you are pricking in) now on
this third spot? sp He replied* "This is the lion's belly, my dear
sir.”

* b Let the lion have no belly/' said he: “what need of a belly
for the picture that is (already) sated 3 ? iJ

The barber became distraught and remained in great be-

1 Literally, 1 1 idol. 11
* Literally, "O my two eyes,"

1 L P. +, ss has already imbibed as much of ihe blue dye as I can bear/*


164 M ATHNAWl y BOOK I

wltderment: he stood for a long time with l>is fingers in his

teeth;

loco Then the master flung the needle to the ground and said,
* g Has this happened to any one in the world?

Who (ever) saw a lion without tail and head and belly? God
himself did not create a lion like this.”

O brother, endure the pain of the lancet, that you may escape
from the poison of your miscreant self [nafs ) 7

For sky and sun and moon bow in worship to the people who
have escaped from self-existence.

Any one in whose body the miscreant self has died, sun and
cloud obey his command.

jou* Since Ills heart has learned to light the candle (of spiritual
knowledge and love)* the sun cannot burn him.

God hath made mention of the rising sun as turning aside —
like that 3 — -from their cave.

The thorn becomes entirely beautiful, like the rose, in the
sight of the particular that is going towards the Universal.

What is (the meaning of) to exalt and glorify God? To deem
yourself despicable and (worthless) as dust.

What is (the meaning of) to learn the knowledge of God’s
unity? To consume yourself in the presence of the One.
jflto If you wish to shine like day, bum up your night-like self-
existence .

Melt away your existence, as copper (melts a^yay) in the
elixir, in the being of Him who fosters (and sustains) existence*

You have fastened both your hands tight on (are determined
not to give up )1 ” and 41 we”: all tins (spiritual) ruin is caused
by dualism 2 .

How the tr off and /ox went to hunt in attendance on the lion.

A lion* wolf, and fox had gone to hunt in the mountains in
quest (of food).

That by supporting each other they might tie fast the bonds
and fetters (of captivity) on the hunted animals,

^ij And all three together might seize much and great quarry

in that deep wilderness.

Although the fierce lion was ashamed of them (the wolf and
fox), yet he did them honour and gave them his company on
the way.

To a king like this the (escort of) soldiers are an annoyance f
but he accompanied them: a united party is a mercy (from God).

A moon like this is disgraced by the stars: it is amongst the
stars for generosity’s sake.

* J.*, 11 towards the riKhl hand,” as is staled in Quj-'dn, XViil, i6_

* Literallyp "by two ejciftlmla,”


THE LION j THE WOLF, AND THE FOX 165

The (Divine) command. Consult them, came to the Prophet,
though no counsel is to be compared nidi his own.

In the scales barley has become the companion of gold 1 T ^020
(but that is) not because barley has become a substance like
gold.

The spirit has now become the body's fellow-traveller: the
dog has become for a time the guardian of the palace-gate.

When this party (the wolf and fox) went to the mountains at
the stirrup (side) of the lion majestic and grand,

They found a mountain-ox and goat and fat hare p and their
business went forward (prosperously)-

Whoever is on the heels of him that is a lion in combat,
roast-meat does not fall him by day or by night.

When they brought them (the animals which they had caught) ,1*35
from the mountains to the jungle, killed and wounded and
dragging along in (streams of) blood,

The wolf and fox hoped that a division (of the prey) would
be made according to the justice of emperors.

The reflexion of the hope of both of them struck the lion:
the lion knew (what was) the ground for those hopes.

Any one that is the lion and prince of (spiritual) mysteries,
he will know all that the conscience thinks.

Beware ! Guard thyself, O heart disposed to thinking, from
any evil thought in his presence.

He knows and keeps riding on - silently: he smiles in thy face 303a
in order to mask (his feelings).

When the lion perceived their bad ideas, he did not declare
(his knowledge), and paid (courteous) regard (to them) at the
time,

But he said to himself, 11 I wilt show you what (chastisement)
ye deserve, G beggarly villains!

Was my judgement not enough for you ? Is this your opinion
of my bounty,

O ye whose understanding and judgement are (derived) from
ittv judgement and from my world-adorning gifts?

What else (but good) should the picture think of the painter, 3035
since he bestowed thought and knowledge upon it?

Had ve such a vile opinion of me, G ye w ho arc a scandal to
the world?

I will strike off the hypocritical heads of them that think ill

0/ God.

I will deliver the Sphere (of Time) from your disgrace, so
that this talc shall remain in the world (as a warning)/ 1

While thus meditating, the Hon continued to smile visibly:
do not trust the smiles of the lion!

1 //. both are weighed.

1 Literally, “driving his


166 MATHNAWI j, BOOK I

Worldly wealth is (like) the smiles of God: it has made us
drunken and vainglorious and threadbare (deprived of the means
of salvation).

Poverty and distress arc better for thee, O lord. For (then)
that smile will remove its lure.


How fhe lion made trial of the wolf and smd y 11 Come forward,

O tcolf f and divide the prey amongst us."

The lion said , 11 0 wolf, divide this (prey); O old wolf, make
justice new (give it new life by thy example).

Be my deputy in the office of distributor, that it may be seen
of what substance thou art."

"O King," said he, "'the wild ox is thy share; he is big, and
thou art big and strong and active.

3045 The goat is mine, for the goat is middle and intermediate;
do thou, O fox, receive the hare, and no mistake! pp

The linn said, “O wolf, hovv hast thou spoken? Say I When
I am here, dost thou speak of 4 1 p and 'thou s ?

Truly, what a cur the wolf must be, that he regarded himself
in the presence of 3 lion like me who am peerless and unrivalled! pp

(Then) he said, “Come forward, O tnou self-esteeming ass l 1 "
He approached him, the lion seized him with his claws and
rent him.

Inasmuch as he (the lion) did not see in him ihe kernel of
right conduct, he tore the skin off his head as a punishment.

305c. He said, "Since the sight of me did not transport 1 thee out
of thyself, a spirit like this (thine) must needs die miserably.

Since thou wert not passing away (from thyself) in my
presence, ’twas an act of grace to smite thy neck (behead thee). Tj

Everything is perishing except His face: unless thou art in His
face (essence), do not seek to exist.

When any one has passed away (from himself) in mv face

S essence) t (the words) everything is perishing are not applicable
to him).

Because he is in except> he has transcended not (nonentity):
whosoever is in except has not passed away (perished).

3o 5 5 Whosoever is uttering b I " and 1 wc J at the door [of die Divine
Court), he is turned back from the door and is continuing in
not (nonentity)*

1 Read j^-j r


THE FRIEND WHO SAID ‘V’ 167

The story of the person who knocked at a friend's door: his friend
from tot thin asked who he seas: he said, " T»/," and the friend
answered , 14 Since thou art thou, 1 will not often the door: I knars
not any friend that is 1 1 .”*

A certain man came and knocked at a friend's door: his
friend asked him, ‘‘Who art thou, O trusty one?”

I le answered," I.” Thefriend said," Begone ,'tis not the time (for
thee to come in): at a table like this there is no place for the raw."

Save the fire of absence and separation, who (what) will cook
the raw one? Who (what) will deliver him from hypocrisy?

The wretched man went away, and for a year in travel (and)
in separation from his friend he was burned with sparks of fire.

That burned one was cooked: then he returned and again jo&o
paced to and fro beside the house of his comrade.

He knocked at the door with a hundred fears and respects,
lest any disrespectful word might escape from his lips,

1 lis friend called to him , 41 Who is at the door? ” 1 le answered,

" Tis thou art at the door, O charmer of hearts."

“Now,”said the friend, "since thou art 1 , come in, O myself:
there is not room in the house for two Ts.

The double end of thread is not for the needle: inasmuch as
thou art single, come into this needle."

Tis the thread that is connected with the needle: the eye of 3*Sj
the needle is not suitable for the camel.

How should the existence (body) of the camel be fined down
save by the shears of ascetic exercises and worts?

For that, O reader, the hand (power) of God ts necessary, for
it is the Be, and it was (bringer into existence) of every (seem-
ingly) impossible thing,

By His hand every impossible thing is made possible; by
fear of Him every unruly one is made quiet.

What of the man blind from birth and the leper? Even the
dead is made living by the spell of the Almighty,

And that non-existence which is more dead than the dead —
non-existence is compelled (to obey) when He calls it into being.

Recite (the text), Every day lie is (engaged) in some affair: do
not deem Him idle and inactive.

His least act, every day, is that He despatches three armies:
One army from the loins (of the fathers) towards the mothers,
in order that the plant may grow in die womb;

One army from the %vombs to the Earth, that the world may
be filled with male and female;

One army from the Earth (to what is) beyond death, that
every' one may behold the beauty of (good) works.

This discourse hath no end. Conte, hasten (back) to those
two sincere and devoted friends.


168


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Unification,



His friend said to him* "Come in, O thou who art entirety
myself, not different like the rose and thorn in the garden. M

The thread has become single. Do not now fall into error
if thou secst that the letters K and N are twoV

K and X are pulling like a noose, that they may draw non¬
existence into great affairs,

j&R* Hence the noose must be double in (the world of) forms,
though those two (letters) are single in effect.

Whether the feet be two or four, they traverse one road, like
the double shears (which) makes (but) one cm.

Look at those two fellow-washermen: there is apparently a
difference between that one and this:

The one has thrown the cotton garments into the W'ster,
while the other partner is drying therm

Again die former makes the dry clothes wet: h tis as though
he were spitefully thwarting his opposite;
ip *5 Yet these two opposites, who seem to be at strife,, are of one
mind and acting together in agreement.

Every' prophet and every saint hath a way (of religious
doctrine and practice), but it leads to God: all (the ways) are
(really) one.

When slumber (hecdlessness) overtook the concentration
(attention) of the listener, the water carried the mi I Is cones
away.

The course of this water is above the mill: its going into the
mill is for your sakes.

Since ye had no further need of the mill, he (die prophet or
saint) made the water flow back into the original stream,

3090 The rational spirit (the Logos) is (coming) to the mouth for
the purpose of teaching: else (it would not come* for) truly that
speech hath a channel apart:

It is moving without noise and without repetitions (of sound)
to the rose-gardens beneath which ate the rivers.


Q God, do Thou reveal to the soul that place where speech
is growing without letters,

That the pure soul may make of its head a foot (fly headlong)
towards the far-stretching expanse of non-existence—

An expanse very ample ajid spacious; and from it this
phantasy and being (of ours) is fed.

(The realm of) phantasies is narrower than non-existence
(potential existence): on that account phantasy is the cause of
pain.

(The realm of actual) existence r again, was (ever) narrower

1 Tht IcHrra K and X, when muted make up the Creative Word KtiN,

■ i n hi


Be,"


THE UNITY OF BEING 169

than {the realm of) phantasy: hence in it muons become like
the moon that has waned, w

Again, the existence of the world of sense and colour is
narrower {than this), for f ds a narrow prison.

The cause of narrowness is composition (compoundness) and
number (plurality): the senses are moving towards composition.

Know that the world of Unification lies beyond sense: if you
want Unity, march in that direction.

The {Divine) Command KuN (Be) was a single act p and the $too
(two letters) N and K occurred (only) in speech, while the
(inward) meaning was pure (uncompounded)*

This discourse hath no end. Return, that (we may see) what
happened to the wolf in combat (with the lion)*

How the Hon punished the wolf who hod shown disrespect
in dividing {the prey).

That haughty' one tore off the head of the wolf, in order that
two-headed ness (dualism) and distinction might not remain (in
being).

Tis (the meaning of) So tee took vengeance on them , O old
wolf, inasmuch as thou were not dead in the presence of the
Amir.

After that, the lion turned to the fox and said, "Divide it
(tile prey) for breakfast/'

He bowed low and said, "This fat ox will be thy food at 3105
breakfast, O excellent King,

And this goat will be a portion reserved for the victorious
King at midday.

And the hare too for supper—(to be) the repast at nightfall
of the gracious and bountiful King."

Said the lion, "O fox, thou hast made justice shine forth:
from w hom didst thou learn to divide in such a manner l

Whence didst thou learn fhb t O eminent one?" "O King of
the world," he replied , u (1 learned it) from the fate of the wolf.”

The lion said , "Inasmuch as thou hast become pledged tO jiio
love of me, pick up all the three (animals) , and take (them)
and depart.

G fox, since thou hast become entirely mine, how should I
hurt thee when thou hast become mvself?

1 am thine, and all the beasts of eftase are thine: set thy foot
on the Seventh Heaven and mount (beyond)!

Since thou hast taken warning from (the fate of) the vile wolf,
thou art not a fox: thou art my own lion.

The wise man is he that in (the hour of) the shunned tribu¬
lation 1 takes warning from the death of his friends."

1 Literally, “ihe trial or nfamily itfaimt which precautions an? taken. 11


170 MATHNAWf , BOOK I

Jiii The fox said (to himself), “A hundred thanks to the lion for
having called me up after that wolf.

If he had bidden me first, saying, ' Do thou divide this,' who
would have escaped from him with his life? 1 ’

Thanks be to Him (God), then, that He caused us to appear
(be bom) in the world after those of old.

So that we heard of the chastisements which God inflicted
upon the past generations in the preceding time,

That we, like the fox, may keep better watch over ourselves
from (considering) the Fate of those ancient wolves.

Sis* On this account he that is God's prophet and veracious in
explanation called us *" a people on which God has taken mem'. 1 "

Rehold with clear vision the bones and fur of those wolves,
and take warning, O mighty ones!

The wise man will put off from his head (lay aside) this selt-
existence and wind (of vanity), since he heard (what was) the
end of the Pharaohs and ‘Ad;

And if he do not put it off, others will take warning from
what befell him in consequence of his being misguided.


How Noak, on whom be peace, threatened his people , saying , 11 Do
not struggle with me, for / am (only) a veil; ye are really
Struggling with God (who if) within this (veil), O God-forsaken
men!"

Noah said, “O ye headstrong ones, 1 am not I: I am dead to
the (animal) soul, I am living through the Soul of souls,
juj Inasmuch as 1 am dead to the senses of the father of mankind
(human sense-perceptions), God has become my hearing and
perception and sight.

Since 1 ant not E f this breath (of mine) is from Him: in the
presence of this breath if anv one breathes (a word) he is an
infidel."

In the form of this fox there is the lion: 'tis not fitting to
advance boldly towards this fox.

Unless thou believe in him from his exterior aspect (accept
him in the form in which he appears), thou wilt not hear from
him the lions' roar.

If Noah had not been the Eternal Lion, why should he have
cast a whole world into confusion ?

,i jo He was hundreds of thousands of lions in a single body; he
was like fire, and the world (like) a stack.

Forasmuch as the stack neglected (to pay) the tithe due to
him, he launched such a flame against that stack.

Whosoever in the presence of this hidden Lion opens his
mouth disrespectfully, like the wolf,


NOAH AS THE GOD-MAW 17 1

That Lion will tear him to pieces, as (he tore) the wolf, and
will recite to him (the text) So tee took vengeance upon them .

He will suffer blows, like the wolf, from the Lion's paw :
foolish is he that waxed bold in the presence of the Lion,

Would that those blows fell upon the body, so that it might 3135
be that (the sinner’s) faith and heart would be safe l

My power is broken (fails me) on reaching this point: how
can I declare this mystery?

Make little of your bellies, Like that fox: do not play fox's
tricks in His presence.

Lay the whole of your "we" and "I" before Him: the king¬
dom is His kingdom: give the kingdom to Him.

When ye become poor (selfless) in the right Way, verily the
Lion and the Lion’s prey are yours.

Because He is holy, and Glory is His attribute: He hath no
need of good things and kernel or rind.

Every prize and every gift of grace that exists is for the sake
of the servants of that King (God)*

The King hath no desire (for anything): He hath made all
this empire for His creatures. Happy is he that knew!

Of what use should the possession of empires be to Him who
created (all) empire and the two worlds?

In the presence of His Glory keep close watch over your
hearts, lest ye be put to shame by thinking cviL

For He sees conscience and thought and quest (desire) as 11-is
(plainly) as a thread of hair in pure milk.

He whose dear breast has become devoid of (any) image (im¬
pression) has become a mirror for the impressions of the In visible.

He becomes intuitively and undoubtingly aware of our
inmost thought, because die true believer is the mirror of the
true believer*

When he rubs our (spiritual) poverty 1 on the touchstone, then
he knows the difference between faith and doubt.

When his soul becomes the touchstone of the coin, then he will
see (distinguish) the (true) heart and the false money (of hypocrisy).

How kings seat in front of them the Sufis who know 0W h in order
that their eyes may be illummal by (seeing) them.

Such is the custom of kings: you will have heard of this, if 5*50
you remember.

The paladins stand on their left hand, because die heart (the
seat of courage) is fixed on the left side (of the body) a

On the right hand are the chancellor and the secretaries,
because the science of writing and book-keeping belongs (in
practice) to this hand*

1 Cf. v. 3139. Bur LLfl j , "nur coin,” is perhaps the better rtadinsj,

IT


1-2 MATHN A WI, BOOK I

They give the Sufis the place in front of their countenance,
for they (the Sufis) are a mirror for the soul, and better than
a mirror,

(Since) they have polished their breasts (hearts) in com¬
memoration (of God) and meditation, that the heart's mirror
may receive the virgin (original) image,

3135 Whoever is bom beautiful from the loins of Creation, a
mirror must be placed before him.

The beauteous face is in love with the mirror: it (such a face)
i$ a polisher of the Soul and (a kindler) of the fear of God in
(men's) hearts.

How the guest came to Joseph y on whom be peace t and hoto Joseph

demanded of him a gift and present on his return from abroad.

The loving Friend came from the ends of the earth and
became the guest of Joseph the truthful,

For they had been well acquainted in childhood, reclining
(together) on the sofa of acquaintance.

He spoke to him (Joseph) of the injustice and envy of his
brethren: Joseph said, 41 That was (like) a chain, and I was
the lion. 4

3160 The lion is not disgraced by the chain: T do not complain
of God's destiny.

If the lion had a chain on Ids neck, (yet) he was prince over
all the chain-makers/*

1 le asked, ++ How wert thou in regard to the prison and the
well f ,s " Like the moon,” said Joseph, 11 in the interlunar period
(when she is) on the wane.”

If in that period the new moon is bent double, does not she
at last become the full moon in the sky?

Though the seed-pearl is pounded in the mortar, it becomes
the light of eye and heart and looks aloft.

They cast a grain of wheat under earth, then from its earth
they raised up ears of com;

Once more they crushed it with the mill: its value increased
and it became sou!-invigorating bread;

Again they crushed the bread under their teeth: it became
the mind and spirit and understanding of one endowed with
reason;

Again, when that spirit became lost in Love, it became (as
that which) rejoice fh the sowers after the sowing.

This discourse hath no end. Come back, that we may see
what that good man said to Joseph*
juj® After he (Joseph) had told him his story, he (Joseph) said,
14 Now, O so-and-so, what traveller's gift hast thou brought
for me?”


JOSEPH AND THE MIRROR 173

To come empty-handed to the door of friends is like going
without wheat to the mill.

God p exalted is He* will say to the people at the gathering (for
Judgcment)/* Where is your present for the Day of Resurrection?

Ye have come to Us and alone without provision, just in the
same guise as H f created you.

1 [ark, what have ye brought as an offering — a gift on home¬
coming for the Day when ye rise from the dead ?

Or had ye no hope of returning ? Did the promise of (meeting jirs
Me) to-day seem vain to you? M

Dost thou (O reader) disbelieve in the promise of being
Ilis guest ? 1 Then from the kitchen (of His bounty) thou wilt
get (only) dust and ashes.

And if thou art not disbelieving, how with such empty hands
art thou setting foot in the Court of that Friend?

Refrain thyself a little from sleep and food; bring the gift
for thy meeting with Him,

Become scant of sleep (like them that) were slumbering (hut a
small part 0/ the night) ; in the hours of dawn be of (those who)
tcere asking pardon of God

Stir a little, like the embryo, in order that thou mayst bejife
given the senses which behold the Light,

And (then) thou art outside of this womb-like world: thou
guest from the earth into a wide expanse.

Know that the saying, “God's earth is wide/' refers to that
ample region into which the saints have entered.

The heart is not oppressed by that spacious expanse: there
the fresh boughs of the palm-tree do not become dry.

At present thou art bearing (the burden of) thy senses: thou
art becoming weary and exhausted and (ready to fall) headlong.

Since, at the time of sleep, thou art borne (on high), and art jj&s
not bearing (the burden), thy fatigue is gone and thou art free
from pain and anguish.

Regard the time of sleep as a (mere) taste (sample) in com¬
parison with the state in which the saints are home (on high).

The saints are (like) the Men of the Cave, O obstinate one;
they are asleep (even) in rising up and turning to and fro.

He (God) is drawing them, without their taking trouble to
act, without consciousness (on their part), 10 the right hand and
to the left.

What is that right hand} Good deeds. What is that left hand?
The affairs of the body.

These two (kinds of) actions proceed from the saints, (while)
they are unconscious of them both, like the echo:

If the echo causes thee to hear good and evil, the mountain
itself is unconscious of either.

1 R«dm g 1-


tJ4 MATHNAWjf* BOOK 1


Hotc the guest said to Joseph h u I have brought thee the gift of tf
mirror t so that whenever thou iookest in it thou mlt see thine
own fair face and remember meJ*


Joseph said, “Come, produce the gift/ 1 He (the guest), on
account of shame (confusion) at this demand, sobbed aloud,

“How many a gift,” said he, “did I seek for thee! No
(worthy) gift came into my sight.

How should I bring a grain (of gold) to the mine? How
should 1 bring a drop (of water) to the (Sea of) 'UmanF
3195 I shall (only) bring cumin to Kirmin ? if 1 bring my heart
and soul [as a gift) to thee*

There is no Seed that is not in this barn, except thy beauty
which hath no equal.

I deemed it fitting that I should bring to thee a mirror like
the (inward) light of a (pure) breast,

That thou mayst behold thy beauteous face therein, O thou
who, like the sun, art the candle of heaven.

I have brought thee a mirror, O light (of mine eyes), so that
when thou seest thy face thou mnyst think of me/*

3*50 He drew' forth the mirror from beneath his ar mi the fair
one’s business is with a mirror.

What is the mirror of Being? Net-being. Bring not-being
(as your gift), if you are not a fooL

Being can be seen (only) in not-being: the rich bestow
(exhibit) generosity on the poor.

The clear mirror of bread is truly die hungry man; tinder,
likewise, is the mirror of that (the stick or flint) from which
fire is struck,

Not-betng and defect, wherever thev arise (appear), are the
mirror which displays the excellence of all crafts.

320s When a garment is neat and we 11-stitched, how should it
enable the tailor to exhibit his skill 1 ?

Trunks of trees must be unhewn in order that the woodcutter
may fashion the stem or the branches (and thus exercise his


craft)*

The doctor who sets broken bones goes to the place where
the person with the fractured kg is.

How shall the excellence of the art of medicine be made
manifest w hen there is no emaciated invalid?

How shall the (pow r er of the) Elixir be showm if the vileness
and baseness of coppers is not notorious?

3210 Defects are the mirror of the quality of perfection, and that
vileness is the mirror of power and glory.

Because (every) contrary is certainly made evident by its


1 Literally, ** how should il be a place for The tailor to display hia sktH in? °


i


JOSEPH AND THE MIRROK 175

contra^; because honey is perceived {to be sweet by contrast)
with vinegar.

Whoever has seen anti recognised his own deficiency has
ridden post-haste 1 (made rapid progress) in perfecting himself.

The reason why he (any one) is not flying towards the Lord
of glory is that he supposes himself to be perfect.

There is no worse malady in your soul, O haughty one p than
the conceit of perfection.

Much blood must flow from your heart and eyc T that self- 3213
complacency may go out of you*

The fault of Iblis lav in thinking M / am better (than Adam),”
and thb disease is in the soul of every (human) creature.

Though he regard himself as very broken (in spirit), know
that it is (a case of) clear water (on the surface) and dung under
the stream.

When he (the Devil) stirs you in trial, immediately the water
becomes dung-coloured.

There is dung in the bed of the stream, my man, though to
you the stream appears pure.

'Tis the Fir full of wisdom, well-acquainted with the Way, 3220
that digs a channel for (draining off) the streams of the flesh
and the body-

Can the water of the (polluted) stream clear out the dung?

Can man's knowledge sweep away the ignorance of his sensual
self?

How shall the sword fashion its own hilt? Go p entrust (the
cure of) this wound to a surgeon.

Flies gather on every wound, so that no one sees the foulness
of his wound.

Those flies are your (evil) thoughts and your (love of) pos¬
sessions: your wound is the darkness of your (spiritual) states ;

And if the Pir lays a plaster on your wound, at once the pain mu
and lamentation are stilled.

So that you fancy it (the wound) is healed, (whereas in reality)
the (healing) ray of the plaster has shone upon the (wounded)
spot.

Beware ! Do not (scornfully) turn your head away from die
plaster, O you who arc wounded in the back, but recognise
that that (healing of the wound) proceeds from the ray: do not
regard it as (proceeding) from your own constitution,

1 Literally* ,l hw gaElnptd with Twt*


176


MATHNAWf, BOOK 1


How the tenter of the {Qur'dme) Revelation felt into apostasy
because {when) the ray of the Revelation shot upon him , he
recited the (revealed) verse before the Prophet, on whom he peace ,
(had dictated it to him); then he said t " So / too am one upon
whom Revelation has descended.”

Before (die time of) ’Uthman there was a scribe who used
to be diligent in writing down the Revelation.

Whenever the Prophet dictated the Revelation, he would
write out the same (portion) on the leaf*

3330 The beams of that Revelation would shine upon him, and
he would find Wisdom within him.

The substance of that Wisdom was dictated by the Prophet:
by this (small) amount (of reflected Wisdom) that meddling
fool was led astray.

Thinking, 44 1 have in my conscience the Truth of that which
the illumined Prophet is saying*”

The ray of his thought struck the Prophet: the wrath of God
descended on his (the scribe's) $oub

He abandoned both his work as a scribe and the Religion
(Islam ): he became the malignant foe of Mustafa (Mohammed)
and the Religion.

5 2 35 Mustafa said, 14 O obstinate miscreant, if the Light was from

thee, how fihouldst thou have become black (with sin)?

I f thou hadst been the Divine fountain (whence the Revelation
issued), thou wouldst not have let out such black water as this.”

Lest his reputation should be ruined in the sight of all and
sundry 1 , this (pride) kept his mouth shut.

His (a sinner's) heart is being darkened, hence he is unable
to repent: this is wonderful.

He (the scribe) was crying “Alas p Pf but “Alas” was of no
use to him when the sword came on and took off Ids head.

3240 God has made reputation (to be like) a hundred maunds"
weight of iron: oh, many a one is bound in the unseen drain!

Pride and infidelity have barred that Way (of repentance) in
such wise that he (the sinner) cannot utter a sigh.

He (God) said, "{We have put on their necks) shackles {chin-
high) y and thereby they * are forced to lift up their heads Tl : those
shackles are not (put) on us from outside.

“(And We have put) behind them a barrier, and We have made
a covering (of darkness) over them”: the unde (old sinner) is
not seeing the barrier in front (of him) and behind.

The barrier that arose has the appearance of open country J :
he does not know that it is the barrier of the Divine destiny.

1 Literally, 41 in ihe aright of Ebia one and ihai one. 1 '

3 LctenU>\ the desert " or 11 the w ide pkin ir ; f> + the barrier ii invuihle
id the Hfnsuu] f}T*


1


THE PROPHET AND THE SCRIBE 177

Your (eanhty) beloved is a barrier to the face of the (Divine) 3215
Beloved: your (worldly) guide is 3 barrier to the words of the
(true spiritual) guide.

Oh* many are the infidels that have a passionate longing for
the Religion (Islam): his (such a one's) chain (stumbling-block)
is reputation and pride and that and this (object of desire).

The chain is hidden, hut *tis worse than iron 3 the iron chain
is cloven by the axe.

The iron chain can be removed: none knows how T to cure
the invisible chain.

If a man is stung by a wasp* he extracts the wasp's sting
from his body,

But since the stinging wound is from (indieted by) your self- 325*1
existence, the pain continues with violence and the anguish is
not relieved.

The (full) explanation of this (matter) is springing forth
(seeking to escape) from my breast * but I am afraid it may give
(you cause to) despair*

Nay, do not despair: make yourself cheerful, call for help to
Him who comes at the call.

Saying, 44 Forgive US, O 'Thou who Invest to forgive, 0 Thou
who hast a medicine for the old gangrenous disease I 11

The reflexion of Wisdom led astray that miserable one (the
Prophet h s scribe): be not self-conceited, lest it (your sell-
conceit) raise up the dust from you (utterly destroy you).

G brother p Wisdom is flowing in upon you: it comes from
the Abdt j/ 1 * and in you it is (only) a borrowed thing*

Although the house (your heart) has found a light within
it, that (light) has shone forth from a light-giving neighbour.

Render thanks, be not beguiled by vanity, do not turn up
your nose (in disdain)% hearken attentively, and do not show
any self-conceit.

Tis a hundred pities and griefs that this borrowed (unreal)
state (oi self-assertion) has put the religious communities far
from religious communion.

1 am the (devoted) slave of him who does not regard himself in
every caravanseray (at every stage in his spiritual progress) as
having attained 10 (the privilege of sitting at) the table (of union
with God).

Many is the caravanseray that must be quitted, in order that
one day the man may reach home.

Though the iron has become red, it is not red (by nature):
it (the redness) is a ray borrowed from something that strikes lire,

Jf the window or the house is full of light* do not deem aught
luminous except the sun,

1 p, note,

1 LiiernU)'. root nuke a noat." p


J78 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Every door and wall says, “1 am luminous: I do not hold
the raj's of another, I (myself) am this (light). _

Then the sun says, “O thou who art not rignt (in thy be net),
when 1 set ’twill become evident (thou wilt see what the

truth is)/’ , , ,

3 i5j The plants say, “We are green of ourselves, we are gay and
smiling (blooming) and we are tall (by nature),"

The season of summer says (to them), “O peoples, behold
yourselves when i depart!"

The body is boasting of its beauty and comeliness, (while)
the spirit, having concealed its glory and pinions and plum®.

Says to it, “O dunghill, who art thou? Through my beams
thou hast come to life for a day or two,

Thy coquetry and prideful' airs are not contained in the
world (go beyond all bounds), (but) wait till I spring up (and
escape) from thee 1

3170 They' whose love warmed thee will dig a grave for thee, they
will make thee a morsel for ants and reptiles.

That one who many a time in thy presence was dying (with
desire for thee) will hold his nose at thy stench.”

The beams of the spirit are speech and eye and ear: the
beam (effect) of fire is the bubbling in the water.

As the beam of the spirit falls on the body, so fall the beams
of the Abddl on my soul.

When the Soul of the soul withdraw® from the soul, the soul
becomes even as the soulless (lifeless) body. Know (this tor

3S7j For that reason I am laying my head (humbly) on the earth,
so that she (the earth) may be my witness on the Day of Judge-
ment.

On the Day of judgement, when she shall be made to quake
mightily, this earth will bear witness to all that passed (in and
from us);

For she will plainly declare what she knows: earth and roots
will begin to speak.

The philosopher, in hia (vain) thought and opinion, becomes
disbelieving: bid him go and dash his head against this wall!

The speech of water, the speech of earth, and the speech of
mud arc apprehended by the senses of them that have hearts

(the mystics), . „

3280 The philosopher who disbelieves in the moaning pillar 1 is a
stranger to the senses of the saints.

He says that the beam (influence) of melancholia brings many
phantasies into people's minds.

Nay, but the reflexion of his wickedness and infidelity cast
this idle fancy of scepticism upon him.

1 See p, ns-


r


THE PROPHET AND THE SCRIBE 179

The philosopher comes to deny the existence of the Devil,
and at the same time he is possessed bv a devil.

If thou hast not seen the Devil, behold thyself: without
diabolic possession there is no blueness in the forehead.

Whosoever hath doubt and perplexity in his heart, he in this i^s
world is a secret philosopher.

He is professing firm belief, but some time or other that
philosophical vein will blacken his face {bring him to shame).

Take care, O ye Faithful! for that (vein) is in you: in yon
is many an infinite world.

In thee are all the two-and-seventy sects; woe (to thee) if
one day they gain the upper hand over dice.

From fear of this, ever} 1 one who has the fortune (barg) of
(holding) this Faith (Islam) is trembling like a leaf (barg).

Thou hast laughed at lblis and the devils because thou hast ^90
regarded thyself as a good man.

When the soul shall turn its coat inside out (and be revealed
as it really is), how many a “Woe is me'* will it extort from
the followers of the (Mohammedan) Religion!

On the counter (of the shop) everything (every gilded coin)
that looks like gold is smiling, because the touchstone is out of
sight,

G Covcrer (of faults), do not lift up the veil from us, be a
protector to us in our test (on the Day of Judgement).

At night the false coin jostles (in rivalry) with the gold; the
gold is waiting for day.

With the tongue of its (inward) state the gold says 1 , “Wait, 3*9?
O tinselled one, till day rises clear.”

Hundreds of thousands of years the accursed lblis was a
saint and the prince of true believers;

On account of the pride which he had, he grappled with
Adam and was put to shame, like dung at momingtide.

Note BaNim son of fit t ur prayed (to God), saying , 0 Cause Moses

and ids people to turn back, without having gained their desire,

from this city which they have besieged.”

To Bal'am son of Ba'ur the people of the world became
subject, (for he w as) like unto the Jesus of the time.

They bowed (wurshipfully) to none but him: his spell was
(giving) health to the sick.

From pride and (conceit of) perfection he grappled with
Moses; hts plight became such as thou hast heard.

Even art mere have been in the world, manifest or hidden, a
hundred thousand like Iblis and Bal'am.

God caused these twain to be notorious, that these twain
might bear witness against the rest,

' /,*. 11 the Isold, without worth, teems to soy.”


*


t


11-1


i8o


MATHNAW1, BOOK I


These two thieves He hanged on a high gallows (to be a
warning to all); else there were many {other) thieves m (the

pa Th 2 e I S 5 ^S n hk 1 Sigged by their forelocks tu the city (lor
slaughter); (but) ’tis impossible to number (all) the victims ol

,,o. H Yot «e a favourite (of God), but within your (due) bounds.
(Fear) God, (fear) God, do not set foot beyond (those) bounds.

If you combat with one who is a greater favourite than
yourself, ’twill bring you down to the lowest depth of the

Forwhai^purpose is the tale of ‘Ad and Thamud? That you
may know that the prophets have disdain (for the wlc -c O*
These signs—the (earth's) swallowing up (sinners),the hurling
of stones (upon them), and the thunderbolts-were evidence of

the might ot the Rational Soul. ,. . c

Kill all animals for the sake of man p kill all mankind for the

, 3I . WhL^Rcason? The Universal Intelligence of the man
(prophet or saint) endowed with reason. Partial reason is

reason (too), but it is infirm, . r

All the animals that are wild (unfriendly) to man are inferior

to the human animal. . , . * ^

Their blood is free; to mankind, since they have not become

capable of human actions. . ,, _ . . „ _r

The honour of the wild animals is fallen (has come to be of

no account) because they have grown hostile to man.

What honour, then, will be thine, O marvel (of folly), since
thou hast become (like) timorous wild asses-.

Because of his usefulness, the (domesticated) ass ought not
to be killed; (but) when lie turns wild, his blood becomes

^ Although the ass had no knowledge to restrain him (from
becoming wild), the Loving One is not causing him at all.
How, then, shall man be excused, O noble friend, when he
has become wild (refractory and hostile) to that Word (the

voice of Reason)? , , , , , , _ f

Of necessity permission was given to shed the blood of the
infidels, like (that of) a wild beast before the arrows and lances.
All their wives and children are free spoil, because they are
wildly averse to the august Reason.

, Once more, a reason that flees from the Reason of reason
(Universal Reason) is transported from rationality to (the grade
of) the animals.


3jio


J Lite ml U


in thr way (of God)," i>. their slaughter is ■ religious act

:d J * J


which Gad has sanctioned and approved, , , „

1 / + * L "Mftce thou haai turned away from, the prophet* and saint*-


hAriJt and mAriJt


i 31


Hi wo I far tit and Mar tit relied upon their immaculate/iess and

desired to mix rrff/i the people of this tear id and fell into tempta¬
tion.

As (for example), because of their arrogance, the celebrated
Ha rut and Miirut were smitten by the poisoned arrow (of
Divine wrath).

They had confidence in their holiness, (but) what (use) is it
for the buffalo to have confidence in the lion?

Though he make a hundred shifts (to defend himself) with
his horn, the fierce lion will tear him to pieces limb by limb.

(Even) if he become as full of horns (prickles) as a hedgehog,
the buffalo will inevitably be killed by the lion.

(But) though the Sarsar wind uproots many trees, it makes ss*s
every 1 blade of grass glisten with beauty.

That violent wind had pity on the weakness of the grass: do
not thou, O heart, brag vainly of thv strength.

How should the axe be afraid of the thickness of the branches?

It cuts them to pieces.

But it does not beat itself against a leaf, it does not beat its
edge except against an edge (something hard and solid like

What does the flame care for the great quantity of firewood?
How should the butcher flee in terror from the multitude of

sheep? . ...

What is form in the presence of (in comparison with) reality? J 33 ®
Very feeble, *Tis the reality of the sky that keeps it upside
down (like an inverted cup).

Judge bv the analogy' ot the celestial wheel: from whom does
its motion proceed? From directive Reason.

The motion of this shield-like body is (derived) from the
veiled spirit, O son,

The motion of this wind is from its reality, like die wheel
that is captive to the water of the stream.

The ebb and flow and incoming and outgoing of this breath
—from whom does it proceed but from the spirit that is filled

with desire? _

Now it (the spirit) makes it (the breath) Jim, now hd and dal; 1333
now it makes it peace, now strife.

Even so our God had made this (Sarsar) wind like a (raging)
dragon against * Ad.

Again, He had also made that wind (to be) peace and regard-
fulness and safety for the true believers.

M The Reality'is Allah," said the Shaykh of the (Moham¬
medan) Religion, (who is) the sea of the spiritual realities of
the Lord of created beings.


I


182 MATHNAWi, BOOK I

All the tiers of earth and heaven are (but) as straws* in that
flowing sea.

3340 The rushing and tossing of the straws in the water is pro¬
duced by the water when it is agitated.

When it (the sea of Reality) w ishes to make them (the straws)
cease from struggling, it casts the straw's toward the shore.

When it draws them from the shore into the surge it does
with them that which the Sarsar (wind) does with the grass.

This topic is endless. Speed back, O youth, to (the story of)
Hi rut and Marut

The rest 0/ the story of Hdrut and Mdr 11 1 , and how on exemplary

punishment was inflicted on them* even in this world, in the pit

of Babylon s

Inasmuch as the sin and wickedness of the people of die
world was becoming clearly visible to them both from the
latticed window {of Heaven),

3345 They began to gnaw their hands in wrath, but had no eyes
for their own fault.

The ugly man saw L himself in the mirror: he turned his face
away from that (spectacle) and was enraged.

When the self-conceited person has seen any one commit a
sin, there appears in him a nre (derived) from Hell.

He calls that (hellish) pride defence of the Religion; he
regards not the soul of arrogance in himself.

Defence of the Religion has a different character, for from
that (religious) fire a (whole) world is green (verdant and
flourishing}.

333* God said to them, "If ye are enlightened 1 , (nevertheless)
look not (with scorn) upon the doers of black deeds who have
been made forgetful (of God).

Render thanks, O Host (of Heaven) and Servants (of God)!
Yc are freed from lust and sexual intercourse.

If I impose that kind of nature on you. Heaven will accept
you no more.

The preservation (from sin) which ye have in your bodies is
from the reflexion of My preservation and care (of you).

Oh, beware] Regard that as (coming) from Me, not from
yourselves, lest the accursed Devil prevail against you.”

3355 As (for example) the writer of the Revelation given to the
Prophet deemed the Wisdom and the Original Light (to be
residing) in himself.

He was reckoning himself a fellow-songster of the Birds of
God, (whereas) that (wdiich proceeded from him) was (only) a
whistle resembling an echo.

1 Literal I y, M polishers.”


1


THE DEAK MAN AND THE INVALID


iSj


If you become an exponent (imitator) of the song of birds,
how will you become acquainted with the (real) meaning of

the bird? , , ,

If you learn the note of a nightingale, how will you know

what '(feelings) it has towards a rose? t

Or if vou do know, ’twill be tram analogy and surmise, like
the conjectures formed by deaf people from those who move
their lips.

Haiti the deaf mart went to visit his sick neighbour.

One possessed of much wealth said to a deaf man, A jjf*
neighbour of thine is fallen ill. .

The deaf man said to himself, “Being hard of hearing, what
shall I understand of the words spoken by that youth?—

Especially (as) he is ill and his voice is weak; but I must go
thither, there's no escape.

When l sec his lips moving, I will form a conjecture as to
that (movement) from myself.

When 1 say, ‘ How are you, O my suffering (fnend)? he will
replv,' 1 am fine ’ or ‘ I am pretty well.*

I will say, ‘Thanks (to God)! What posset have you had to 3 J r , 5
drink? * He will reply, ‘ Some sherbet ’ or * a decoction of kidney-
beans. P

‘ (Then) I will say,' May you enjoy health! Who is the doctor
attending you?’ He will answer, ‘So-and-so.

Tie is one who brings great luck with him 1 , I will remark;

* since he has come, things will go well for you.

I have experienced (the luck of) his foot: wherever he goes,
the desired object is attained.’ ”

The good man made ready these conjectural answers, and

went to see the invalid. „

“How are you?" he asked, "1 am at the point oi death,
said he. " Thanks (to God)l" cried the deaf man. At this, the
patient became resentful and indignant, ... , ,. ,

Saving (to himaelf), “What (cause for) thanksgiving is this?

He has been my enemy.”—The deaf man made a conjecture,
and (as now appears) it has turned out to be wrong.

After that, he asked him what he had drunk, ‘‘ Poison, sake
he. “May it do you good and give you health!” said the deaf
man. His (the invalid^) wrath increased. .

Then he inquired, “ Which of the doctors is it that is coming

to attend vou?” . „ , . ^

He replied, “Aaracl (the Angel of Death) is coming, .id
you gone!” ‘‘His foot (arrival),” said the deaf man, “is very
blessed: be glad! ”

l Literally, "one whose foot is very blest.*’


1S4 MATHNAWf f BOOK I

The deaf man went forth. He add gaily, "Thanks (to God)
fur that! Kow r I will take leave/*

The invalid said^ "This is my mortal foe: I did not know he
was (such) a mine of iniquity/'

The mind of the invalid was seeking a hundred abusive terms,
that he might send him a message (filled with abuse) of every
description ,

As, when any one has eaten bad (indigestible) food, it is
turning his heart (stomach) until he vomits.

Suppression of anger is (like) this: do not vomit it, so that
you may gain sweet words in recompense.

Since he had no patience, he was tormented. "Where.” he
cried, "is this cur, mis infamous cuckold p

That 1 may pour upon him tvhat he said (make a retort in
his own style)?—far at that time the Hon of my thought was
asleep (l was too weak to contend with him).

Inasmuch as visiting the sick is for the purpose of (giving
them) tranquillity, this is not a visit to the sick: it is the satis¬
faction of an enemywt$h.

(His motive was) that he should see his enemy enfeebled
and that his wicked heart should be at peace.”

Many are they that do works of devotion and set their hearts
on being approved and rewarded for the same.

3 'Ti$ in truth a lurking sin: that which he (the pietist) thinks
pure is (really) foul.

As (in the case of) the deaf man, who fancied that he did a
kindness, but it had the opposite result.

He sits down well-pleased, saying, " 1 have paid my respects,

I have performed what was due'to my neighbour";

(But) lie has (only) kindled a fire (of resentment) against
himself in the invalid’s heart and burned himself.

Beware, then, of the fire that ye have kindled: verily ye have
increased in sin.

r ^ The Prophet said to our desert Arab, "Pray 1 , for indeed thou
hast not prayed (aright), my man.”

As a means of preventing these dangers, uj m comes -

in every (ritual) prayer,

lliat is to say, "O God, do not mingle my prayer w r ith the
prayer of the erring and the hypocrites.”

By the analogical reasoning which the deaf man adopted a
ten years' friendship was made vain.

Especially, Q master, (you must avoid) the analogy drawn by
the low senses in regard to the Revelation which is ilEimitable.

;9 5 If your sensuous ear is fit for (understanding) the letter (of
the Revelation), know that your ear that receives the occult 2
(meaning) is deaf.

1 /j. 11 perform the rituil prayer,”


3 Head


THE DANGERS OF ANALOGY


,S S


The first to bring analogical reasoning to hear against the
Revealed Text was fbM$+

The first person who produced these paltry analogies in the
presence of the Ligh ts of God 1 was I bib*

He said, "Beyond doubt fire is superior to earth: I am of
fire, and he (Adam) is of dingy earth.

Let us 3 then, judge by comparing the secondary with its
principal: he is of darkness, 1 of radiant light."

God said, " Nay, but on the contrary there shall be no re¬
lationships : asceticism and piety shall be the (sole) avenue 1 to
pre-eminence

This is not the heritage of the fleeting world, so that
thou shnuldst gain it by des of relationship: "tis a spiritual
(heritage).

Kay, these things are the heritage of the prophets; the in¬
heritors of these are the spirits of the devout.

The son of Ru Jahl became a true believer for ail to see;
the son of Noah became one of those who lost the way.

“ The child of earth (Adam) became illumined like the moon;
thou art the child of fire: get thee gone with thy face black (in
disgrace)!” "

The wise man has made (use of) such reasonings and investi¬
gation on a cloudy day or at night for the sake of (finding) the
qibla' t

But with the sun and with the Ka'ba before your face, do
not seek to reason and investigate in this manner.

Do not pretend that you cannot see the Ka'ba, do not avert
your face irom it because you have reasoned (that it is not to
be seen), God knows best what is right.

When you hear a pipe from the Bird of God, you commit its
outward (meaning) to memory, like a lesson,

And then from yourself (out of your own head) you make
some analogies; you make (what is) mere fancy into a (thing of)
substance (reality).

The Abadl have certain mystical expressions of which the
doctrines (of external religion) are ignorant.

You have learned the birds" language by the sound (alone), wo
you have kindled (invented) a hundred analogies and a hundred
caprices.

The hearts (of the saints) are wounded by you, as the invalid
(was hurt by the deaf man), (while) die tleaf man became
intoxicated (overjoyed) with the vain notion of success.

1 Le, the Word of God. ,

3 Lrtcridly, ' L the mifirdh or nkhe {of a mraque), " which shows the direction
that [he Moslem must fnc* in prayer-


lS6 MATKNAWl, BOOK I

The writer of the Revelation, from (hearing) the Bird's voice,
supposed that he was the Bird’s equal; t

The Bird flapped a wing and blinded him ; lo, it plunged him
in the abyss of death and bale.

" Beware 1 do not ye also 1 , (beguiled) by a reflexion or an
opinion, fall from the dignities of Heaven!

J4 , s Although ye are Hardt and Mariit and superior to all (the
angels) on the terrace of We are they that stand in ranks,

(Yet) take mercy on the wickednesses of the wicked; do not
cleave to egoism and self-conceit.

Beware, lest (the Divine) jealousy come from ambush and
ye fall headlong to the bottom of the earth.”

They both said, "O God. Thine is the command: without
Thy security' (protection) where indeed is any security ?"

They were saying that, but their hearts were throbbing (with
desire^— 1 “How should evil come from us? Good servants (of
God) are we 1 "

a4M The prick of desire in the two angels did not leave (them)
until it sowed the seed of self-conceit.

Then they were saying, “O ye that are composed of the
(four) elements (and are) unacquainted with the purity of the
spiritual beings,

We will draw curtains (of light) over this (terrestrial) sky,
we will come to earth and set up the canopy,

We will deal justice and perform worship and every night we
will fly up again to Heaven,

That we may become the wonder of the world, that wc may
establish safety' and security on the earth."

The analogy between the state of Heaven and (that of) the
earth is inexact; it has a concealed difference.


Explaining that one must keep one’s own ( spiritual ) slate and
(mystical) intoxication hidden from the ignorant.

Hearken to the tvords of the Sage (Hakim) who lived in
seclusion*, " Lay thy head in the same place where thou hast
drunk the wine."

When the drunken man has gone astray front a tavern, he
becomes the children’s laughing-stock and plaything.

Whatever w'av he goes®, he is falling in the mud^ (now) on
this side and (now) on that side, and every fool is laughing at him.

He (goes on) like this, while the children at his heels are
without knowledge of his intoxication and the taste of his wine.

, |JO All mankind are children except him that is intoxicated with

J Here God is adJreisinp Hirut ami Minit.

1 Literally, "the Bug* of a purdah." The poet l » meant-

* Literally* 11 on every road / 3


THE DOCTRINE OF RESERVE 187

God; none is grown-up except him that h freed from sensual
desire.

He (God) said, "This world is a play and pastime, and ye
are children' 3 ; and God speaks truth.

If you have not gone forth from (taken leave of) play, you
are a child: without purity of spirit how will you he fully in**
telligent (tike an adult)?

Know, O youth p that the lust in which men are indulging
here (in this world) is like the sexual intercourse of children.

What is the child's sexual intercourse? An idle phy p com¬
pared with the sexual intercourse of a Rustam and a brave
champion of Islam,

The wars of mankind are like children's fights—all meaning- 3435
less, pithless, and contemptible.

All their fights are (fought) with w r ooden swords* all their
purposes are (centred) in futility;

They all are riding on a reed-cane (hobby-horse), saying,
“This is our Ruriq 1 or mule that goes like DuldulV

They are (really) carrying (their hobby-horses), but in their
folly tfiey have raised themselves on high: they have fancied
themselves to be riders carried along the road.

Wait till the day w r hen those who are borne aloft by God shall
pass, galloping, beyond the nine tiers (of Heaven)!

11 The spirit and the angels shall ascend to Him at the ascen- 3+4*
sion of the spirit Heaven shall tremble.

Like children, ye all are riding on your skim- ye have taken
hold of the comer of your skirt (to serve) as a horse.

From God came (the text), 11 Verily^ opinion doth not enable
(you) to dispense (wtVA the Truth)*': when did the steed of
opinion run (mount) to the Heavens?

While preferring (in case of doubt) the stronger of the two
(alternative) opinions, do not doubt whether you see the sun
w r hen it is shining l

At that time (when the spirit returns to God) behold your
steeds 1 Ye have made a steed of your own foot.

Come, recognise that your imagination and reflection and M45
sense-perception and apprehension are like the reed-cane on
which children ride.

The sciences of the mystics 3 bear them (aloft); the sciences
of sensual men 4 are burdens to them.

When knowledge strikes on the heart (is acquired through
mvstical experience), it becomes a helper (ydrij; when know¬
ledge strikes on the body (is acquired through the senses), it
becomes a burden (bdri).

* ‘Phe animal ridden by ihe Prophet when he ascended !o Heaven.

* A mule belonging to the Pmphet. * Literally, " the men of heart."

* Literally p "the men nf body, 1


l88 MATHWAWI, BOOK I

God hath said, "(Like an ass) laden with his hooks"-, burden¬
some is the knowledge that is not from Himself.

The knowledge that is not immediately from Himself does
not endure, (it is) like the tirewoman’s paint.

34ju But when you carry this burden well, the burden wul be

removed and you will be given (spiritual) joy.

Beware! Do not carry this burden of knowledge for the sake
of selfish desire (but mortify yourself), so that you may ride on
the smooth-paced steed of knowledge.

So that vou may mount the smooth-paced steed of know¬
ledge, (and that) afterwards the burden may fall from your
shoulder.

How wilt thou be freed from selfish desires without the cup
of Hu (Him), O thou who hast become content with no more
of Hu than the name of Hu}

From attribute and name what comes to birth? Phantasy;
and that phantasy shows the way to union with Him.

mjj Hast thou ever seen a subject that shows without (the exist¬
ence of) an object that is shown: unless there is the road, there
can never be the ghoul (which entices travellers to stray from
the road).

Hast thou ever seen a name without the reality (denoted by
the name)? Or hast thou plucked a rose (gul) from the (letters)
gdf and lam of (the word) gull

Thou hast pronounced the name: go, seek the thing named.
Know that the moon is on high, not in the water of the stream.

If thou wouldst pass beyond name and letter, oh, make
thyself wholly purged of self,

Like (polished) iron, lose the ferruginous colour; become in
thy ascetic discipline (like) a mirror without rust.

34fio Make thyself pure from the attributes of self, that thou mayst
behold thine own pure untarnished essence.

And behold within thy heart (all) the sciences of the prophets,
without book and without preceptor and master.

The Prophet said, “Amongst my people are some who are
one with me in nature and aspiration:

Their spirits behold me by the same light by which I am
beholding them,”

Without the two Sahibs' and Traditions and Traditiomsts;
nay, (they behold him) in the place where they drink the Water
of Life.

34*3 Know the secret of "In the evening 1 was a Kurd"; read
the mystcrv of “In the morning I was an Arab."

And if you desire a parable of the hidden knowledge, relate
the story of the Greeks and the Chinese.

1 The title is Riven 10 two works, by BukMrt and Muslim, whitH

contain well-aulhctlticoted Tniditiutls of the Prophet.


THE GREEK AND CHINESE ARTISTS iSg


The story of the contention between the Greeks* and the Chinese
m the art of painting and picturing.

The Chinese said, "We are the better artists”; the Greeks
said, "The (superiority in) power and excellence belongs to us.

"1 will put you to the test in this matter, said the bultan,
"(and sec) which of you are approved in your claim.”

The Chinese and 'the Greeks began to debate: the Greeks

retired from the debate. .

(Then) Lite Chinese said, "Hand over to us a particular room,

and (let there be) one for you (as well)."

There were two rooms with door facing door; the Chinese

took one, the Greeks the other. . , . , ,

The Chinese requested the King to give them a hundred
colours: the King opened his treasury' that they might receive

that (which they sought). _ .

Every- morning, by (his) bounty, the colours were dispensed

from the treasury to the Chinese.

The Greeks said, "No tints and colours are proper for our
work, (nothing is needed) except to remove the rust.

They shut the door and went on burnishing: they became MW
clear and pure like the sky.

There is a wav from many-colouredness^to colourlessness:
colour is like the clouds, and colourlessness is a moon.

Whatsoever light and splendour you see in the clouds, know
that it comes from the stars and the moon and the sun.

When the Chinese had finished their work, they were beating

drums for joy. , , , .. . .

The King entered and saw the pictures there: that (sight),

as he encountered it, was robbing him of his wits.

After that, he came towards the Greeks: they removed the 3**0

intervening curtain. .

The reflexion of those (Chinese) pictures and works (of art)
struck upon these walls which had been made pure (from stain),

' All that he had seen there (in the Chinese room) seemed
more beautiful here: ’twas snatching the eye from the socket.

The Greeks, Q father, are the Stiffs: (they are) without
(independent of) study and books and erudition,

But they have burnished their breasts (and made them) pure
from greed and cupidity and avarice and hatreds.

That purity of the niirror is, beyond doubt, the heart which hSj

receives images innumerable. , .

That Moses (the perfect saint) holds in his bosom the iormless
infinite form of the Unseen (reflected) from the mirror of his

Although that form is not contained in Heaven, nor in the


lyo MATHNAWI, BOOK I

empyrean nor in the sphere of the stars, nor (in the earth which
rests) on the Fish*

Because (all) those are bounded and numbered—(yet is it
contained in the heart): know that the mirror of the heart hath
no bound.

Here the understanding becomes silent or (else) it leads into
error, because the heart is with Him (God), or indeed the heart
is He,

3490 The reflexion of every image shines unto everlasting from the
heart alone, both with plurality and without.

Unto everlasting every new image that falls on it (the heart)
is appearing therein without any imperfection l.

They that burnish (their hearts) have escaped from (mere)
scent and colour: they behold Beauty at every moment without
tarrying*

They have relinquished the form and husk of knowledge,
they have raised the banner of the eye of certainty 1 *

Thought is gone, and they have gained light: they have
gained the throat (core and essence) and the sea (ultimate source)
of gnosis,

3435 Death, of which all these (others) are sore afraid, this people
(die perfect Sufis) are holding in derision.

None gains the victory over their hearts: the hurt falls on
the oyster-shell, not on the pearL

Though they have let go grammar (nahw) and jurisprudence
(fiqh)i yet they have taken up (instead) mystical self-effacement
( nmh crj and spiritual poverty (faqr).

Ever since the forms of the Eight Paradises have shone forth,
they have found the tablets of their (the Sufis') hearts receptive,
(They receive) a hundred impressions from the empyrean and
the starry sphere and the void: what impressions? Nay, p tis the
very sight of God.

Hair the Prophet, on whom he peare, asked Zayd, “How art thou
to-day and in what state hast thou risen Y ** and how Zayd
answered him t saying y This morning / am a true believer * O
Messenger of Allah'

One morning the Prophet said to Zayd, 14 How art thou this
morning, O sincere Companion?"

He replied , 41 (This morning I am) a faithful servant of God. pp
Again he (the Prophet) said to him, 14 Where is thy token from
the garden of Faith, if it has bloomed? ”

He said, ** I have been athirst irt the daytime, at night I have
not slept because of love and burning griefs,

1 Ij. mystical imumcn.


1


THE VISION OF ZAYD 191

So that I passed through (and beyond) day and night, as the
point of the spear passes through the shield;

For beyond (the realm of contraries) nativity and continued
growth are one: hundreds of thousands of years are the same
as a single hour.

Everlastingness and eternity are unified (yonder): the under- jjuj
standing hath no wav thither by means of inquiry / 1

The Prophet said, “Where is the traveller's gift (that thou
hast brought home) from this journey ? Produce it. Where is
the token of sincerity (that thou hast brought) from yon fair
bind?”

Zayd said, “When (other) people see the sky, I behold the
Empyrean with those who dweU there.

The Eight Paradises and the Seven Hells are as visible to
me as the idol to the idolater,

I am distinguishing the people (here), one by one, like wheat
from barley in the mill,

So that who is for Paradise and who shall be a stranger (to js so
Paradise) is as clear to me as (the difference between) snake
and fish.”

The day of birth for Anatolians and Ethiopians and every
race (of mankind) is the Day taken faces shall become white or
black*.

Before this (birth), however sinful the spirit was, it w r as in
the womb (of the body) and was hidden from the people.

The damned are they that are damned in the mother a womb;
all of them are known by the marks of God.

The body, Like a mother, is big with the spirit-child: death
is the pangs and throes of birth.

All the spirits that have passed over (to the next life) are 3515
waiting to see in what state that proud spirit shall be bom.

The Ethiopians (the damned spirits) say , 41 It belongs to us”;
the Anatolians (the blessed spirits) say T “Nay, it is comely.”

As soon as it is bom into the world of spirit and (Divine)
grace, there is no further difference (of opinion) between die
whites (the blessed) and the blacks (the damned).

If it is an Ethiopian (a damned spirit), the Ethiopians carry
it off; and if it is an Anatolian (a blessed spirit), the Anatolians
lead it away.

Until it is bom (into the next life), it is a riddle for (all) the
world: few are they that know (the destiny of) the unborn.

Such a one surely is seeing by the light of God, for he has
the way (the means of know ing w hat is hidden) within the skin,

Frincipium aquae seminis candidum est et putchrum, but the
reflexion of the spirit, (whether the spirit be) Anatolian or
Ethiopian,


1 The Day of fteaurreeiitm.


19?


MATHNAWt, BOOK I


la giving colour (glory) to those (the Anatolians) who ore
most excellent in their (original) constitution , (while) it is
bearing this (other) half (i*e. the Ethiopians) down to tlie
lowest depth.

This discourse hath no end. Hasten back, that we may not
be left behind by the caravan’s file of camels.

On the Day when faces shall become while or black, by whom
shall reverence still be paid to Turk and Hindoo (alike)?

3j2j In the womb (of this world) Hindoo and Turk are not dis¬
tinguishable, (but) when each is bom (into the next world) he
(the seer) sees that each is miserable or glorious (according to
his spiritual nature),

" I am seeing them all plainly, as (they shall be) on the Day
of Resurrection, like (multitudes of) people, men and women.

Hark, shall I tell or shall I stop my breath (keep silence)?”
Mustafa (Mohammed) bit his (Zayds) lip, as though to say,
"Enough!”

"O Messenger of Allah, shall I tell the mystery of the
Gathering (on the Day of Judgement), shall I make the
Resurrection manifest in the world to-day ?

Jjet me be, that I may rend the curtains asunder, Lhat my
(spiritual) substance may shine forth like a sun;
s That the sun may be eclipsed by me, that I may show (the
difference between)' the (fruitful) date-palm and the (barren)
willow.

I will show forth the mystery of Resurrection, the sterling
coin and the coin mixed with alloy.

The people of the left 1 with their hands cut off; 1 will show
forth the colour of infidelity and the colour of the (Prophet’s) folk.

I will lay bare the seven rifts (sins) of hypocrisy in the light
of the moon that suffers no eclipse or waning.

I will display the woollen frocks of the damned, 1 will cause
the drums and kettle-drums of the prophets to be heard.
jjjj Hell and the Gardens (of Paradise) and the intermediate state
I will bring clearly before the eyes of the infidels,

I will display the pond of Kawthar heaving (with waves),
which dashes water on their (the blessed ones v ) faces, (while)
its sound (rings) in their ears;

And those who are running athirst round Kawthar I will
name one by one (and tell) who they are;

Their shoulders are rubbing against my shoulder, their cries
are piercing my ears.

Before my eyes the people of Paradise, from free choice,
clasp each other to their bosoms,

3^* Visiting one another’s high places of honour and snatching
kisses from the lip® (of the houris).

1 The damned.


THE VISION OF ZAYD


*93

This car of mine has become deafened by the cries of * Alas,
Alas! 1 (uttered) by the vile wretches (in Hell) and by the
Screams of L O sorrow! *

These are (only) hints, I would speak from the depth (of
my knowledge), but I fear to offend the Messenger (of Allah)/*

He was speaking in this wise, intoxicated and distraught: the
Prophet twitched his collar

And said/' Beware! Draw (rein), for thy horse has become hot.
(Wien) the reflexion of God is not ashamed (to speak the truth )
strikes (on the heart), shame is gone.

Thy mirror has shot out of the case: how shall mirror and ^sas
balance speak falsehood ?

flow shall mirror and balance stop their breath (suppress the
truth) for fear of hurting and shaming any one?

Mirror and balance are noble touchstones: if thou do service
(sue) to them for two hundred years,

Saying, 'Conceal the truth for my sake, display the surplus
□nd do not display the deficiency/

They will say to thee, M Do not laugh at thy beard and mous¬
tache: mirror and balance* and then deceit and trickery! 1

Since God has raised us up in order that by means of us it 355,0
mav be possible to know the truth.

if this do not happen (if we fail to display the truth), what
worth have we, O young man? How shall we become a standard
for the face of the fair? 1

But (said the Prophet) slip the mirror (back) into the cloth,
if (Divine) illumination has made thy breast a Sinai/*

He (Zayd) said, “Why* shall the Sun of the Truth and the
Sun of Eternity be contained any wise under the armpit?

It bursts asunder both armpit (haghal) and imposture (daghttl );
in its presence neither madness nor (soundness of) under¬
standing remains. 1 *

He (the Prophet) said, "When thou layest one finger on an 5535
eye, thou seest the world empty of the sun.

One finger-tip becomes a veil over the moon and this is a
symbol of God's covering

So that the (whole) world may be covered (hidden from view)
by a single point, and the sun be eclipsed by a splinter/'

Close thy lips and gaze on the depth of the sea (within thee):

God made the sea subject to man.

Even as the fountains of Salsabil and Zanjabil are under the
control of the exalted ones of Paradise,

The four rivers of Paradise are under our control; this is not jjfio
(by) our might, h tis (by) the command of God:

We keep them flowing wheresoever we will* like magic (which
takes its course) according to the desire of the magicians,

1 If. ‘"The idea that mirrar and balance should deceive U absurd/''


194


mathnawi, BOOK I


3J*i


S57°


lust as these two flowing eye-fountains (the two eyes) are
under the control of the heart and subject to the command ot

th If StfSSi* heart) will, they turn towards poison and the snake,
and if it will, they turn to (edifying) consideration.

If it will, they turn to sensuous thmp, and it it will, they
turn to things clothed (in the forms of thought and phantasy).

If it will, they advance towards universal, and if it will, they
remain turned towards particulars.

Similarly all the five senses are passing (in movement) ac¬
cording to" the will and command of the heart, like the spool

(in the hand of a weaver). . . ,. ,

All the five senses are moving and trailing their skirts (sweep
inn along) in whatever direction the heart indicates to them.
Hand and foot are plainly under command of the heart, Ukc

the staff in the hand of Musts* ( a

If the heart will, at once the foot begins to dance, or Hess

from defect towards increase. , , , c

If the heart will, the hand comes to terms with the fingers

to write a book. , . _

The hand remains in (the grasp of) a hidden hand: it (the
hidden hand) within has set the body outside (as its instrument).

If it (the hidden hand) will, it (the external hand) becomes a
snake to the enemy; and if it will,it becomes a helper tothefnend j
And if It will, a spoon in food; and if it will, a mace weighing

KI \ wonder what the heart is saying to them (the members of
the body). Tis a marvellous connexion, a marvellous hidden link.
„ Surely the heart has gotten the seal of Solomon, so that it
' has pulled the reins of (exerted control over) the hve senses.
Five external senses arc easy for it to manage, five internal
senses (faculties) are under its command,

There are ten senses and seven limbs (of the body) et cetera:
count over (to yourself) what is not mentioned (here).

O heart, since thou art a Solomon in empire, cast thy seal-
ring (powerful spell) upon peri and demon.

If in this kingdom thou art free from deceit, the three demons
will not take the seal out of thy hand ;

Affcj t hat, thy name will conquer the world: the two worlds

(will be) ruled by thee like thy body. .

And if the demon take the seal off thy hand, thy kingdom is

past, thy fortune is dead;

After' that, O servants (of God), “O sorrow is your in¬
evitable doom till the day when ye are gathered together (for

judgeme ^ art denying thy deceit, how wilt thou save thy
soul from the scales and the mirror?


LUQmAN AND HIS FELLOW-SERVANTS 195


II&zG suspicion was thrown upon Luqmdn by the staves and fellow-
servants who said that he had eaten the fresh fruit which they
were bringing (to their master ).

In the eyes of his master, amongst (Ln comparison with) the
(other) slaves p Luqman was despicable on account of his body
(outward aspect).

He (the master) used to send the slaves to the garden, that 05
fruit might come (be brought to him) for his pleasure.

Amongst the slaves Luqmin was (despised) like a parasite;

(he was) full of (spiritual) ideas, dark-complexioned as night.
Those slaves, being impelled by greed, ate the whole of the
fruit with enjoyment p

And told their master that Luqmdn had eaten it, (whereupon)
the master became bitter and sorely displeased with Luqman.

When Luqmdn inquired (and ascertained) the cause (of this),
he opened his lips to reproach his master.

M 0 sire/ 7 said Luqman, “an unfaithful servant is not ap- 351)0
proved in the sight of God.

Put us all to the test T Q noble sir: give u& our fill of hot
water (to drink).

And afterwards make us run into a great plain, thou being
mounted and we on foot.

Then behold the evil-doer, (behold) the things that are done
by Him who revealeth mysteries!”

The master gave the servants hot water to drink, and they
drank it in fear (of him).

Afterwards he was driving them into the plains, and they 5 .4 5
were running amidst the cornfields.

From distress they began to vomit: the (hot) water w r as
bringing up the fruit from them.

When Luqmiu began to vomit from his navel (belly), there
was coming up from within him (only) the pure water

Inasmuch as Luqmin's wisdom can show forth this, then
what must be the wisdom of the Lord of existence!

On the day when all the inmost thoughts shall be searched out ,
there will appear from you something latent, (the appearance
of) which is not desired.

When they shall he given hot water to drink p all the veils will j&*i
be cut asunder (tom off) from that which is abhorred.

"File fire (of Hell) is made the torment of the infidels because
fire is the (proper) test for stones.

How of 1, how oft, have we spoken gently to our stony hearts,
and they w r ould nut accept the counsel 1

For a bad wound the vein gets (requires) a bad (severe)
remedy: the teeth of the dog are suitable for the donkey's
head +


,g6 MATHNAWf, BOOK ]

The Kicked teamen to the wicked men is wisdom: the ugly is
the mate and fitting (consort) for the ugly.
rfo S Whatever, then, you wish to mate with go, become^
in ,h* t,iv<*d uihiecti. and assume its shape and qualities.



m And\i you wish (to find) a way out of this ruined prison, do
not turn your head away from the Beloved, but botn in worship
and draw nigh.

The remainder of the story of Zayd {and what he said) m
answer to the Prophet, on whom be peace.

This discourse hath no end. “Arise, O Zayd, and tie a shackle
on the Buraq (steed) of thy rational spirit.

Since the rational spirit exposes faults, it is rending the

curtains of concealment. „l.

Concealment is desired by God for awhile. Dove away this

drummer, bar the road! . , . . . . ,, .

Do not gallop, draw rein, 'tis better it (thy spirit) should be
veiled; ’tis better that every one should be gladdened by his

°*God ?s wishing that even His despairing ones should not
avert their faces (refrain) from this wurship (ut Him).

Even on the ground of a hope they become ennobled: for a
few days (a short time) they are running at its stirrup (following
Divine worship).

He wishes that that mercy should shine upon all, on the evil
and the good, because of the universality of His merev.
jfiis God is wishing that every prince and captive should be

hopeful and fearful and afraid. , , ,

This hope and fear are in the veil (separating the seen from
the unseen), that they may be fostered behind this veil.

When thou hast rent the veil, where are fear and hope ? Might
and majesty and (the power to inflict) probation belong to the

Un A Toung man on the bank of a river thought (to himself),
“Our fisherman (here) is Solomon, .......

(But) if this is he, why is he alone and disguised? And if not,
whv has he the aspect of Solomon?"

Thus thinking, he remained in two minds until bolomon
J (once more) became king and absolute ruler,

V The demon departed and fled from his (Solomon's) kingdom
and throne: the sword of his fortune shed that devil's blood.
He put the ring upon his finger, the hosts of demons and
peris assembled.


THE VISION OF ZAYD (97

The men came to look, amongst them he who had the fancy
(that the fisherman was Solomon in disguise).

When he opened his (Solomon’s) hand and saw the ring, his
pondering and seeking (to decide rightly) vanished all at once.

Anxiety occurs (only) at the time when that (object of desire) jt*i}
is hidden: this searching is after the unseen.

Whilst he was absent, fancy waxed strong in his breast : as
soon as he was present, his fancy departed.

If the radiant sky is not without rain, neither is the dark
earth without vegetation,

(Cod said), “ I want (what is signified by the words) they
believe in the unseen t on that account I have shut the window
of the fleeting world.

If I open its window as on the day of the (last) trump, how
should I say, ‘Dost thou see any clefts therein?”'

In order that in this darkness they may make endeavours (to
find the way), they are turning, everyone, their faces in some
direction.

For awhile things are reversed: the thief brings the magis¬
trate to the gallows,

So that many a sultan and man of lofty spirit becomes the
slave of his own slave for awhile.

Service (performed) in absence (through faith in the unseen)
is fair and comely; when service is demanded (bv God from us),

'tis pleasing (to Him) that the absent should be remembered
(that we should remember to perform what is due to Him,
though He is unseen). _ .....

Where (in what position) is one that praises the king in his
presence, compared with one that is shamefaced in absence
(from him)?

The governor of a fortress who, on the border of the kingdom, s&jj
far from the sultan and the shadow (protection) of the sultanate,

Guards the fortress from enemies and will not sell it for
boundless riches,

Who, though absent from the king on the outskirt of the
frontiers, keeps faith (with him) bke one who is present—

He in the king’s sight is better than the rest who are serving
in his presence and ready to devote their lives.

Therefore half an atom of regard to one’s duty in absence is
better than a hundred-thousandfold observance thereof in
presence.

Obedience (to God) and faith are praiseworthy now; after 3*40
death, when all is plainly shown, they will be spurned.

“Inasmuch as the unseen and the absent and the veil arc-
better, close thy mouth: ’tis belter for us to be silent,

O brother, refrain 1 from speech: God himself will make
* Liieratly . 11 withheld thy hand-"


igS MAfHNAWf, BOOK I

manifest the knowledge that is with Him (in His posses¬
sion).

Witness enough for the sun is its face: what thing is the
greatest witness (of all)? God.”

"‘Nay, speak I will, since both God and the angels and the
men of learning are allied in setting forth (this truth).

God and the angels and those learned in the sciences (of
divinity) bear witness that there is no Lord except Him who
endureth for ever.”

Since God hath given testimony, who are the angels, that
they should be associated in the testimony ?

(They are associated) because unsound (weak) eyes and
hearts cannot support the radiance and (clear) testimony of
the Sun,

Like a bat, which cannot bear the glow of the sun and
abandons hope.

Know, then, that the angels, as we also, are helpers (co¬
witnesses} — dbplavers of the sun in heaven —

Who say* 14 We have derived (our) light from a Sun, we have
shone upon the weak, like vicegerents (of a mighty King),”

(Whether they be like) the new moon or the moon Seven days
old or the full moon, every angel has his (particular) rank in
respect of Sight and (spiritual) worth.

Every angel, according to their (different) degrees, has (a
portion of) that radiance, consisting of three or four (pairs of)
luminous wings*

Just as the wings of human intellects, amongst which there
is great difference (in quality).

Hence the associate of every human being in good and evil
i$ that angel whose dignity is corresponding to his or hers.
j &55 'Hie stars shine, for the sake of guidance* upon the dim-
sighted man who cannot bear even (the light of) the moon.

How the Prophet^ on whom be peace, said to Zayd, “Do not tell

this mystery more plainly than this r and take care to comply

(with the religious law)."

The Prophet said, M My Companions are (like) the stars, a
candle to travellers (on the Way), and meteors to be cast at the
devils.”

If every one had the eye and the strength to receive light
from the sun of heaven,

No moon and stars would be needed to serve as witnesses to
(the existence of) a sun.

The Moon (the Prophet) is saying to earth and cloud and
shadow* “I am a man, I am one like you , (but) it is revealed to
me (that your God is one God).


THE VISION OF ZAYD


l ?9

Like you., I was dark in my mature: the Sun*s revelation gave 3&&0
me such a light as this.

I have a certain darkness in comparison with the (spiritual)
suns, (but) 1 have light for the darknesses of (human) souls.

I am Faint (Less bright than the Sun) in order that thou mayst
be able to hear (my beams), for thou art not the man for (a man
who can bear) the must radiant Sun,

I was woven (mingled) together, like honey and vinegar p that
i might find the way to (cure) sickness of heart 1 *

Since thou hast recovered from thine illness, O thou (that
w r ert) in thrall (to it), leave the vinegar and continue to cat the
honey

(If) the throne of the heart has become restored to soundness 4&G5
and purged of sensuality P thereon the Merciful God is seated on
His Throne.

After this, God controls the heart without irttermediary, since
the heart has attained to this relation (with Him).

This discourse hath no end. Where is Zayd, that I may
counsel him not to seek notoriety?


The {author 's) return to the story of Zayd.

You will not find Zayd HOW, for he has lied; he has darted
away from the shoe-row and dropped his shoes.

Who are you (that you should hope to find him)? Zayd
cannot even find himself, (he lias vanished) like the star on
which the sun shone.

You will find neither mark nor trace of him, you will not find 3G7&
a straw (star) in the straw-strewn Way (the All Iky Way).

Our senses and finite speech (reason) are obliterated in the
knowiedge and wisdom of our (Divine) King.

Their (the God-intoxicated mystics*) senses and under¬
standings within (them) are (tossed), wave on wave, in (the
sea of) they are assembled before Us.

When night comes, "tis again the time of (bearing) the burden :
the stars, which had become hidden, go (again) to work.

God gives back to the senseless ones their (lost) senses; (they
return to consciousness) troop after troop, with rings (of mystic
knowledge) in their ears.

Dancing, waving their hands in praise (of God), triumphing ^75
(and crying), "O Lord, Thou hast brought us to life,”

Those crumbled skins and bones have become (like) horsemen
and have raised the dust:

At Resurrection both the thankful and the ungrateful rush
along from non-existence towards existence.

Why do you turn away your head and pretend not to sec?

1 Literally, d *liver, 1 '


200


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Did you not rum away your head at first, (when you were) in
non-existence (and disbelieved that you would ever come into
existence)?

You had planted your foot (firmly) in non-existence., saying,
“Who will uproot me from my place?”

Are not you beholding the action of your Lord 1 f who dragged
you (into existence) by the forelock.

Until He drew you into (all) these various states (of being),
which were not in your thought or fancy?

That non-existence is always His slave: work (in His service),
O demon! Solomon is living.

The demon is making large htmls like watering-troughs : he
dare not say a word in refusal or in retort.

Look at yourself, how you are trembling with fear (of non-
existence); know that non-existence also is constantly trembling
(lest God should bring it into existence).
jfiSj And if you are grasping at (worldly) dignities, His from fear
too that you are suffering agony of spirit.

Except love of the most beauteous God everything* though
(outwardly) it is (pleasant like) eating sugar, is (in truth) agony
of spirit.

What is agony of spirit? To advance towards death and not
grasp the Water of Life.

People fix Ixith their eyes on earth and death: they have a
hundred doubts concerning the Water of Life.

Strive that the hundred doubts may become ninety (may
decrease): go (towards God) in the night (of this world), for if
you slumber, the night will go (from you).
jt9» In the dark night seek that (shining) Day: put in front (follow)
the darkness-consuming Reason.

In the evil-coloured night there is much good : the Water of
Life is the mate of darkness.

How is it possible to lift up the head from slumber, whilst
you are sowing a hundred such seeds of slothfulness?

Dead (heavy) slumber and dead (unlawful) food became
friends 2 : the merchant fell asleep and the night-thief got to
work.

Do you not know who your enemies are? Those made of
fire 3 are enemies to the existence of those made of earth 1 ,
lixtf Fire is the enemy of water and its children, even as water is
an enemy to the life of fire.

Water kills fire because it is the enemy and foe of the children
of water.

1 Literally, 11 the Divine action in regard 10 ynuJ r

* /.*. spiritual ]ctharyv is closely allied wiih sin T

■ The devils.

1 Mankind.


‘UMAR IN' THE BURNING CITY aoi

To proceed 1 , this fire is the fire of lust, wherein is the root
of sin and error.

The external fire may be quenched by some water, (but) the
fire of lust is bringing (you) to Hell*

The fire of Just is not allayed by water* because ft has the
(insatiable) nature of Hell in respect of (inflicting) torment.

What is die remedy for the fire of lust? The light of the . ^
Religion: your (the Moslems’) light is the (means of) extin¬
guishing the fire of the infidels.

What kills this fire? The Light of God. Make the light of
Abraham your teacher,

That this body of yours, which resembles wood (faggots),
may be delivered from the fire of the Nimrod-like flesh (Wr)/

Fiery lust is not diminished by indulging it: it is diminished,
without any escape (inevitably)/by leaving it (ungratified).

So long as thou art laying faggots on a fire, how will the fire
be extinguished by a carrier of faggots*?

When thou withholdcst the faggots, the fire dies out, because
fear of God carries (as it were) water to the fire.

How should the fire blacken the beauteous face (of a soul)
which lays (on itself) rose-colour (derived) from the fear of
God diat is in (men's) hearts?

Hovj a conflagration occurred in the city (Medina) in the days
of ‘Umar, may God be zcell-pfeased with him „

A conflagration occurred in the time of ‘Umar: it was de¬
vouring stones as though they were dry wood.

It fell upon buildings and "houses, until (at last) it darted at
the wings and nests of birds.

Half the city caught fire from the flames : water was afraid
of it (the fire) and amazed.

Some intelligent persons were throwing skins of water and ±710
vinegar on the fire,

(But) out of spite (obstinacy) the fire was increasing: aid was
coming to it from One who is infinite 5 .

The people came in haste to 'Umar, saying, ‘*Our fire will
not be quenched at all by water. 11

He said, “That fire is one of God's signs: H tis a flame from
the hre of your wickedness.

Discard water and deal out bread (in charity), discard avarice
if ye are my people (foliowere)."

Yhe folk said to him* 11 We have opened our doors, we have 715
been bountiful and devoted to generosity/’

1 I Mt rally * "after ihar,"

1 Or, with incorrect rhyme, “by cirryinp faggoi*."

* Of, with incorrect rhyreve, "from (the reukn of) infinity/*


202


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

He replied f " Ye have given bread by rule and habit, ye have
not opened your hands for the sake of God —

(Only) for glory and for ostentation and for pride, not be¬
cause of fear and piety and sop plication;"

Wealth is seed p anti do not lay it in every salty ground: do
not put a sword in the hand of every highwayman.

Distinguish the friends of the Religion {akl-i Dm) from the
enemies of God (ahl-i kin)* seek the man that sits with God T
and sit with him.

Every one shows favour to Ms own folk: the fool (vvho shows
favour to the foolish) thinks he has really done (good and religious)
work.

How an enemy spat in ike face of the Prince of the Faithful, *AH r

may God honour his person* and how * Ali dropped the sword

from his hand.

Learn how to act sincerely* from 4 Ali: know that the Lion of
God ('Ah) was purged of (all) deceit.

In fighting against the infidels he got the upper hand of (van¬
quished) a certain knight, and quickly drew a sword and made
haste (to slay him).

He spat on the face of 'Ali, the pride of every prophet and
every Saint ;

He spat on the countenance before which the face of the
moon bows low in the place of worship.

37 i5 ‘Ali at once threw' his sword away and relaxed (his efforts) in
fighting him.

That champion was astounded by this act and by his showing
forgiveness and mercy without occasion.

He said, 11 You lifted your keen sword against me: why have
you flung it aside and spared me?

What did you see that was better than combat with me T so
that you have become slack in hunting me down?

What did vou see h so that such anger as yours abated k and so
that such a lightning flashed and (then) recoiled?

37 What did you see, that from seeing (only) the reflexion
thereof a flame appeared in mv heart ana soul?

What did you see, beyond (material) existence and space,
that was better than life? — and (so) you gave me life.

In bravery you are the Lion of the Lord; in generosity vvho
indeed knows who (what) you are?

In generosity you are "(like) Moses 1 cloud in the desert,
whence came the dishes of food and bread incomparable. 11

The clouds give wheat which man with toil makes cooked
(easy to digest) and sweet as honey.

3735 (But) Moses 5 cloud spread the wings of mercy and gave

1 /.rf. to act for God’s sale abne, Without any rc^rd to MlfnnEtmiL.


‘ali and the INFIDEL KNIGHT 203

cocked and sweet food that was (ready to be eaten) without
trouble.

For the sake of those (beggars) who partook of its bounty,
its (the cloud's) mercy raised a banner (displayed itself) in the
world.

During forty years that ration and largesse did not fail the
hopeful people (of Israel) for a single day.

Until they too, because of their vileness p arose and demanded
leeks and green herbs and lettuce.

O people of Ahmad (Mohammed), who are of the noble, (for
you) that food is continuing till the Resurrection.

When (the Prophet's saying), "I pass the night with my ^40
Lord/' was uttered, (the words) “He gives (me) food'" and
“He gives (me) drink" referred metaphorically to (spiritual)
food (and drink).

Accept this (saying) without any (perverse) interpretation, that
it may come into your throat (as agreeably) as honey and milk.

Because interrelation (alteration of tiie meaning) is a re¬
jection of the gift, since he (the interpreter) regards that real
(original) meaning as faulty.

The view that it is faulty arises from the weakness of his
understanding: Universal Reason is the kernel, and our reason
is like the rind.

Alter yourself, not the Traditions (of the Prophet): abuse
your (dull) brain, not the rose-garden (the true sense which
you cannot apprehend).

“O * All, thou who art all mind and eye, relate a little of that
which thou hast seen!

The sword of thy forbearance hath rent my soul, the water
of ihy knowledge hath purified my earth.

Tell it forth! I know that these are His (God's) mysteries,
because 'tis His work (way) to kill without sword.

Be that works without tools and without limbs, He that
bestows these profitable gifts,

Causes the intelligence to taste myriads of wines in such wise
that eyes and ears arc unaware.

Tell it forth, O falcon of the empyrean that findest goodly :7so
prey, that (I may know) what thou hast seen at this time from
the Maker.

Thine eye has learned to perceive the Unseen> (while) the
eyes of bystanders are scaled."

One man is beholding a moon plainly, while another sees the
world dark.

And another beholds three moons together. These three
persons (beholders) are seated in one place, yea (verily).

The ey es of all three are open, and the ears of alt three are sharp
(attentive)' (they are) fastened on thee and in flight from me.


204 MJVTHNAWi, BOOK I

3755 Is this an enchantment of the eye? (Or) is it a marvellous
hidden grace? On thee is the form of the wolf, and on me U
the quality (beauty) of Joseph-

If the worlds are eighteen thousand and more, these eighteen
(thousand) are not subject (accessible) to every eye.

11 Reveal the mystery, O b Ali p thou who art approved (by
God), O thou who art good fate after evil fate.

Either do thou declare that which thy reason hath found, or
I will tell that which hath shone forth on me.

From thee it shone forth on me: how shouldst thou hide it?
Without tongue thou art darting rays of light, like the moon.

37*0 But if the moon's orb come to speech, it more quickly leads
the night-travellers into the (right) way.

They become safe from error and heedlessness: the voice of
the moon prevails over the voice of the ghoul.

Inasmuch as the moon (even) without speech is showing the
way, when it speaks it becomes light upon light.

Since thou art the gate of the city of Knowledge, since thou
art the beams of the sun of Clemency,

Be open, O Gate, to him that seeks the gate, so that by means
of thee the husks may reach the core.

37*5 Be open unto ever lasting, O Gate of Mercy* O Entrance-hall
to None is like unto Him™

Every air and mote is indeed a place for vision (of God),
(but so long as it b) unopened* who says '“Yonder is a door 1 ?

Unless the Watcher open a door, this idea never stirs within.

When a door is opened, he (on whom this idea has dawned)
becomes amazed, grows wings, and begins to fly on (the wings
of) the idea.

A careless man suddenly found the treasure in the ruin: after
that, he was hastening to (search in) every ruin.

377 * ■ Fill you gain the pearl from one dervish, how should you

seek the pearl from another dervish?

Though opinion run with its own feet for (many) years, it
will not pass beyond the cleft of its own n^trils.

Say, are you seeing aught except your nose? Say, how will
you see if you turn up your nose (in self-conceit)?

How that infidel asked i AM f may God honour his person „ saying,

" Since thou wert victorious oter such a man as l am, how didst

thou drop the sword from thy hand F"

lie said , 11 Speak, O Prince of the Faithful, that my soul may
stir within my body* like the embryo. M

How r hath the embryo the means (of stirring) during the
period when it is ruled (by the stars)? h comes (turns) from
the stars towards the sun.


‘ALI AND THE INFIDEL KNIGHT 30 5

When the time comes for the embryo to receive the (vital) ir?j
spirit, at that time the ran becomes its helper.

This embryo is brought into movement by the aun T for the
sun is quickly endowing it with spirit.

From the other stars this embryo received only an impression p
until the sun shone upon it.

By which way did it become connected in the womb with
the beauteous sun?

By the hidden way that is remote from our sense-perception.

The sun in heaven hath many ways:

The way whereby sold receives nourishment, and the way 37 so
whereby the (common) stone h made a jacinth,

And the way whereby it makes the ruby red, and the way
whereby it gives the lightning-flash to the (iron) horse-shoe.

And the way whereby it ripens the fruit, and the way whereby
St gives heart to one distraught (with fear).

“Say St forth, O falcon with shining wings who hast learned
(to be familiar) with the King and with his fore-arm.

Say it forth, O royal falcon that dost catch the *Anq4 t O thou
dial dost vanquish an army by thyself, not with (the aid of)
an army.

Thou alone art the (whole) community, thou art one and a 37S5
hundred thousand. Say it forth, O thou to whose falcon thy
slave has fallen a prey. " B

Wherefore this mercy in the place of vengeance? Whose way
is it to give the hand to a dragon ? ”

How the Print? of the Faithful made answer {and explained) what
was the reason of his dropping the sword from his hand on that
Occasion.

He said, M I am wielding the sword for Gods sake, [ am the
servant of God, I am not under the command of the body,

I am the Lion of God, 1 am not the lion of passion: mv
deed bears witness to my religion.

In war I am (manifesting the truth of) thou didst not throw
when thou tkrezeat: lam (but) a* the sword, and the wi elder is
the (Divine) Sun,

I have removed the baggage of self out of the way, I have 279Q
deemed (what Is) other thin God to be non-existence.

I am a shadow', the Sun i$ my lord; 1 am tlie chamberlain,

I am not the curtain (which prevents approach) to Him.

I am filled with the pearls of union, like a (jewelled) sword:
in battle I make (men) living, not slain.

Blood does not cover the sheen of my sword: how should the
wind sweep away my clouds?

[ am not a straw, 1 am a mountain of forbearance and patience
and justice: how should the fierce wind carry off the mountain ? ”


206 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

3795 That which is removed from its place by a wind is rubbish,
for indeed the contrary winds are many.

The wind of anger and the wind of lust and the wind of
greed swept away him chat performed not the (ritual) prayers.

lt Iama mountain, and my being is His building; and if 1
become like a straw, my wind {the w r ind that moves me) is
His wind.

My longing is not stirred save by His wind; my captain is
naught but love of the One,

Anger is king over kings, and to me it is a slaver even anger
1 have bound under the bridle.

The sword of my forbearance hath smitten the neck of my
anger; the anger of God hath come on me like mercy*

I am plunged in light although my roof is mined; ( have
become a garden although I am (styled) Btl Turib (the father
of dust).

Since (the thought of something) other than God has inter¬
vened T it behoves (me) to sheathe my sword,

That my name may be he loves far God's sake f that my desire
may be he hates for God's sake T

That my generosity may be he gives for God's sake , that my
being may be he withholds for God's sake.

3805 My stinginess is for God's sake, my bounty is for God's sake
alone: 1 belong entirely to God, I do not belong to any one
(else);

And that which I am doing for God's sake is not (done in)
conformity, it is not fancy and opinion, it is naught but intuition.

I have been freed from effort and search, l have tied my
sleeve to the skirt of God*

If I am flying, I behold the place to which I soar; and if 1
am circling, I behold the axis on which I revolve;

And if I am dragging a burden, I know whither: I am the
moon t and the Sun is in front of me as the guide. 15

j&io There is no means (possibility) of communicating more than
this to the people : in the river there is no room for the Sea,

i speak low' according to the measure of (their) understand¬
ings : *tis no fault, this is the practice of the Prophet.

41 1 am free from self-interest: hear the testimony of a freeman,
for the testimony of slaves is not worth two barleycorns.”

In the religious law the testimony of a slave has no value at
(the time of) litigation and judgement.

(Even) if thousands of slaves bear witness on thy behalf, the
law does not accept their testimony as w orth a straw.

3S15 In God's sight the slave of lust is worse than menials and
slaves brought into servitude.

For the latter becomes free at a single word from his master,
while the former lives sweet but dies sour and bitter.


*alx and the infidel KNIGHT 307

The slave of lust hath no (means of) release at all except
through the grace of God and His special favour*

He has fallen into a pit that has no bottom p and that h his
(own) sin: it is not (Divine) compulsion and injustice.

1 le has cast himself into such a pit that I find no rope capable
of (reaching) its bottom.

I will make an end. If this discourse go further, not only ^20
hearts but rocks will bleed 1 .

(If) these hearts 2 have not bJed T *tis not because of (their)
hardness, p tis (because of) perplexity and preoccupation and
ilbfatedness.

They will bleed one day when blood is no use to them: do
thou bleed at a time when (thy) blood is not rejected.

Inasmuch as the testimony of slaves is not accepted, the
approved witness is he that is not the slave of the ghoul (of
sensuality).

(The w ords) If e hale sent thee as a tritness came in the
Warning (the Qur'inV because he (the Prophet) was entirely
free 3 4 from (creaturdy) existence.

44 Since f am free. how should anger bind me? Nothing as jauj
here but Divine qualities* Come in!

Come in, for the grace of God hath made thee free, because
Bis mercy had the precedence over His wrath*

Come in now, for thou hast escaped from the peril: thou
were a (common) stone, the Elixir hath made thee a jewel.

Thou hast been delivered from unbelief and its thorn-
thicket: blossom like a rose in the cypress-garden of Hu
(God).

Thou art I and 1 am thou, O illustrious one: thou wert + Ali—
how should I kill *Ali ?

Thou hast committed a sin better than any act of piety, thou jfijo
hast traversed Heaven in a single moment.”"

Very fortunate (was) the sin which the man committed: do
not rose-leaves spring from a thorn?

Was not the sin of Umar and his attempt on (the life of) the
Prophet leading him to the gate of acceptance?

Was not Pharaoh because of the magic of the magicians
drawing them (to himself), and did not (spiritual) fortune come
to their aid?

Had it not been for their magic and denial (of Moses), who
would have brought them to rebellious Pharaoh?

How would the)' have seen the rod and the miracles? Dis- iSss
obedience (to God) became obedience, G disobedient people

1 Literally, “what of the liver? for the hard rock will become blood / 1

3 Laterally, M liversi/'

* Lixe rally F "free, the son of the free* 1 *

4 Lt I he sin of the maKickna ultimately ltd them to faith in God*


20S


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

God hath smitten the neck of despair, inasmuch as $in and
disobedience have become obedience.

Since He changes evil acts (into good) T He makes it (the
disobedience) an act of obedience in despite of slanderers (devils).

By this (mercy of God) the stoned (accursed) Devil is driven
away and bursts with envy and is cloven asunder,

fie strives to foster a sin (in us) and by means of that sin
bring us into a pit;

3 ^-i r > When he sees that the sin has become an act of obedience
(to God), there comes round For him an unblest hour.

“Come in! I open the door to thee. Thou spat test (on me)
and 1 give thee a present.

Such things I am giving to the doer of iniquity: (thou seest)
in what fashion I lay my head before the left foot 1 *

What then do I bestow on the doer of righteousness? Know
thou, (I bestow) treasures and kingdoms everlasting.


How the Prophet > on whom be peace , said in the ear of the stirrup ■*
holder of the Prince of the Faithful (*Ali) r may God honour his
person, “/ tell thee, 'AH will be slain by thy hand**

I am such a man that the honey of my kindness did nor
become poison in wrath (even) against my murderer*
fin The Prophet said in the ear of my servant that one day he
would sever this head of mine from my neck.

The Prophet by (Divine) inspiration informed my friend that
in the end my destruction would be (wrought) by his hand.

He (my friend) says, ‘Kill me first, in order that this hateful
crime may not proceed from me.'

I say, 1 Since my death is (to come) from thee, how can I
seek to evade the destiny (of God)? 1

Me tails before me, saying, f Q generous man, for God's sake
cleave me in twain,

3830 That this evil end may not come upon me, and that my soul
may not burn (with grief) for (thee who art) its (very) life.*

I say, 'Go: the Pen (of Divine ordain merit} is dry 2 ; by that
Pen many a (lofty) landmark 5 is overthrown.

There is no hatred of thee in my soul r because I do not
regard this (act) as (proceeding) from thee.

Thou art God's instrument, God's hand is the (real) agent:
how should I assail and oppose God's instrument? 5 ”

He (the knight) said, “For what reason, then, is retaliation
(sanctioned) ?” “ p Tis from God t too," said ‘Ah, M and that is a
hidden mystery*

’ /-*- " I expoae my&c 3 f to con lumcly from ihe wicked .

= Lt. ihc Divine decree is written and unalterably liked.

1 Or, " many a man of mark .* 1


1 ALI AND HIS MURDERER 209

If He takes offence at His own act, (yet) He causes gardens 3 s<j
(of good) to grow from that taking offence.

It beseems Him to take offence at His own act, inasmuch as
in vengeance and mercy He is One.

In this city of phenomena Me is the Prince; in (all) the realms
(of the world) He is the Ruler.

If He breaks His own instrument. He mends that which has
become broken.”

Recognise, O noble sir, the indication of (the text), ( Whatever)
verse We shall cancel or cause to be forgotten, followed by We shall
bring a better t

Every (religious) law that He (God) has cancelled—He has
taken away grass and brought roses in exchange.

Night cancels the business of day; behold an inanimate ness
(inertia) that enlightens the intellect!

Again, night is cancelled by the light of day, so that the
mam mate ness is consumed by that fire-kindling one.

Although that sleep and rest are darkness, is not the Water
of Life within the darkness?

Did not minds become refreshed in that darkness? Did not
a pause (in recitation) become the source of (increased beauty
in) the voice? J

li ^ are ntenifesied by means of contraries; in the -jMj

black core (of the heart) He (God) created the everlasting light
(of love). 0

The wars of the Prophet became the pivot (determining cause)
of peace: the peace of this latter age was (produced) from those
wars.

That hcart-ravishcr cut off hundreds of thousands of heads,
in order that the heads of the (whale) world’s people might win
security,

T he gardener lops the harmful hough, in order that the date-
palm may gain (tallness of) stature and goodness.

The expert (gardener) digs up the weeds from the garden, in
order that his garden and fruit may look flourishing.

'I’hc physician extracts bad teeth, in order that the beloved ttjo
(patient) may be saved from pain and sickness.

Many advantages arc (concealed) within defects: for martyrs
there is life in death.

When the (martyr's) throat has been cut that swallowed
the daily bread, (the spiritual blessings implied in the text)
receiving the {Dame) bounty , rejoicing, shall be delicious (to

mm).

When the throat of an animal is cut duly (in the manner
prescribed by law), there grows (from it) the throat of man 1 ,
and m excellence is increased (thereby}.

f Because the Slaughtered aninml h eaten and AwcmiU<ed hy man.


210 MATHNAWI j BOOK I

When a (martyred) man's throat is cut, come, consider what
the result will he! Judge of this (case) by the analogy' of that
(case).

jSrj A third throat will be bom, and care of it will be (taken by)
the sherbet of God and His lights.

The throat that has been cut drinks (the Divine) sherbet,
but (only) the throat that has been delivered from Kay and
has died in Yea.

Make an end, O pusillanimous short-fingered (infirm) one!
How long will the life of thy spirit be (sustained) by bread?

Like the willow, thou hast no fruit, because thou hast lost
thine honour for the sake of white bread.

If the sensual soul cannot refrain from this bread, take the
elixir and turn thy copper into gold.

Wouldst thou wash thy garment (clean), O so-and-so, do not
avert thy face from the bleachers' quarter.

Although the bread has broken thy fast, cling to Him that
binds what is broken, and ascend!

Inasmuch as His hand binds what is broken, it follows that
His breaking is assuredly mending.

If thou break it. He will say to thee, 11 Come, make it whole
(again)* 1 ; and thou hast neither hand nor foot (thou an
helpless).

Therefore He (alone) has the right to break. For He (alone)
can mend what has been broken.

3 &B5 He that knows how to sew (together) knows how to tear
(asunder); whatsoever He sells. He buys (sometlting) better (in
exchange).

He lays the house in ruins, upside down; then in one moment
He makes it more habitable (than it w r as before).

If He sever one head from the body. He at once raises up
hundreds of thousands of heads (for the beheaded person).

If He had not ordained a retaliation upon the guilty, or if
He had not said, "In retaliation there k (for you) a fijfr,”

Who would have the stomach (would dare) of himself (on
his own responsibility') to wield (draw) a sword against him that
is a thrall to the decree of God? —

3S9® Because every one whose eyes He (God) hath opened w r ouid
know' that the slayer was constrained (to slay) by (Divine)
predestination.

Any one on whom that predestination became a collar (any
one subjected to it) would strike a sword-blow even at the head
of his (own) child.

Go, fear (God) and do not rail at the wicked: know thine
own impotence before the snare of the (Divine) decree.


THE SELF*CONCEIT OF ADAM


211


//os* Adam, on ufi&m he peace, marvelled a! the perdition
of Ihlis and showed vanity.

One day Adam looked with contempt and scorn on Iblis
who is damned.

He behaved with self-conceit and became self-approving: he
laughed at the plight of accursed Iblis,

The jealousy of God cried out (against him)—“ Q chosen one,
thou art ignorant of the hidden mysteries (of His providence).

If He should turn the fur inside out 1 * He would tear up from
root and bottom (even) the (firmest) mountain (of faith);

At that instant He would rend the veil of (put to shame) a
hundred Adams and bring (to light) a hundred Devils newly
converted to Islam. 11

Adam said, "I repent of this look; I will not think so dis¬
respectfully again/*

6 Help of them that call for hclp^ lead us (aright)! There is
no (cause for) pride in knowledge or riches.

Do nor let a heart stray that Thou hast guided by Thv grace, jge»
and avert the evil which the Pen has written.

Let the evil of Thy ordainment pass from our souls: do
not cut us off from those who are well-pleased* (with Thee).

There is naught more bitter than separation from The*;
without Thy protection there is naught but perplexity.

Our (worldly) goods waylay (and plunder) our (spiritual)
goods: our bodies tear the garment (of spirituality) from our
souls.

Inasmuch as (the evil wrought by) our hand devours (the

! ood towards which we move) our Foot* how r shall any one save
is soul without Thy security?

And (even) it (unaided) he save his soul from these awful *505
dangers, he will (only) have saved a stock of misfortune and fear.
Because the soul, when it is not united with the Beloved, is
blind and blue (miserable) with itself for ever.

When Thou wilt not give him admission (to Thy presence)

— even suppose he has saved his soul, regard as dead the sou)
that w r ould live without The*.

Tf Thou art upbraiding Thv slaves, that is suitable to Thee,

O Thou whose every wish is fulfilled.

And if Thou say that the sun and moon are scum, and if Thou
say that the (straight) stature of the cypress is (bent) double,

And if Thou call the empyrean and the sky contemptible* and 191*
if Thou say that the mine and the sea are poor —

1 /a "if God were lo m-inifnt His uTmth instead of Hi a mercy flr His
mercy instead of His wrath. M

1 Literally, "the brethren of Acquiescence / 1


M-a


212


MATHNAWf, BOOK 1

That is proper in reference to Thy perfection: Thine is the
power of perfecting (all) mortalities f

For Thou art holy (and free) from danger and from non-
existence: Thou art He that brings the non-existent ones into
being and endows (them with existence).

He that made to grow can bum {destroy), because when He
has tom p He can sew (mend).

Every autumn fie bums (withers) the garden; (then) He
mates to grow again the rose that dyes (the garden) 1 ,

3315 Sayi ng, " Q thou who wren withered, come forth, be fresh, once
more be fair and of fair renown, I ”

The dye of the narcissus became blind: He restored it; the
throat o! the reed was cut: He himself fostered it- again (and
revived it).

Since we are made (by God) and are not makers, we are not
(entitled to be anything) but humble and content.

We all are of the flesh and busy with fleshliness; if Thou call
US not (to Thyself)> w r e all are Ahrimans (Devils).

(If) we have been delivered from Ahriman, (it is only) be^
cause Thou hast redeemed our souls from blindness P
3S2c Thou art the Guide of everv one that hath life: who {of what
account) is the blind man without staff and guide?

Excepting Thee (alone) , whatsoever is sweet or unsw'eet is
man-destroying 3 and the essence of fire.

Any one to wham fire is a refuge and support becomes both
a Magian and a Zoroaster.

Everything except Allah is vain: verily the grace of Allah is
a cloud pouring abundantly and continually*

Returning to the story of the Prince of the Faithful, 4 AH—may
God honour his person!—and koto generously he behaved to
his murderer*

Go back to *Ali and his murderer, and the kindness he showed
to the murderer, and his superiority (moral and spiritual ex¬
cellence).

mi He said, ff VDay and night I see the murderer with my eyes,
(but) I have no anger against him.

Because death has become sweet as manna to me: my death
lias laid fast hold of resurrection 1 / 1
The death of deathlcs$ne$s is lawful to us, the provision of
unprovidedness is a bounty to us.

Tis death outwardly but life inwardly: apparently ’th a

1 /j. 4t fill* the garden with colour."

* Or, "played on it (end breathed life into It),” r.f. He cut the reed
and made it t flute,

1 Literally, M man-burning, BT

* /,#* "my death holds. And possesses (ki its real nature) resurrection."


* A hi AND HIS MURDERER 213

cutting-off ^decease) 1 , in secret (in reality) T tis permanence (life
without end).

To the embryo in the womb birth is a going (to another state
of existence): in the world it (the embryo) blossoms an™ 3 .

11 Since I have intense love and longing for death* the prohi- 3930
bitten do not cast yourselves {into destruction) is (meant) for me,

Because (only) the sweet berry is prohibited \ (for) how should
it become necessary to prohibit the sour one?

The berry that has a sour kernel and rind—its very sourness
and disagreeableness are (serve as) a prohibition of it.

To me the henry of dying has become sweet: (the text) nay t
they are living has come (from God) on my account.

Slay me, my trusty friends, slay me* vile as I am: verily, in
my being slain is my life for evermore.

Verily* in my death is my life, O youth—how long shall 1 193s
be parted from my home? Until when?

1 f there were not in my staying (in this world) my separation
(from God), He would not have said, 1 Verily t we are returning
to Him * "

The returning one is he that comes back to his (native) city,
and (fleeing) from the revolution of Time approaches the Unity,


Note the stirrup-holder of 1 All, may God honour his person, came
{to Aim), saying, "For God's sake , full me and deliver me from
this doom”

“ He came back* saying,, 1 0 4 All, kill me quickly* that I may not
see that bitter moment and hour.

Shed my blood, I make it Lawful to thee, So that my eye may
not behold that resurrection 13 .

I said , 4 If every atom should become a murderer and, dagger 39+0
in hand, go to attack thee,

None (of them) could cut from thee the tip of a single Jiair h
since the Pen has written against thee such a line (of doom).

But do not grieve: I am intercessor for thee: 1 am the spirit's
master* I am not the body's slave.

This body hath no value in my sight: without my body 1 am
the noble (in spirit), the son of the noble.

Dagger and sword have become my sweet basil: my death
has become my banquet and narcissus-plot/"

He that hamstrings (mortifies) his body in this fashion* How
should he covet the Princedom and the dkliphate?

1 LLtcrnHy, " iia outward (ispect) » cut thort."

1 And, by ihe analogy, death opera t new world to the spirit.

* I *. 11 do not lei me be reiaed from the dead with this crime to answer
ter."


2 l\ MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Outwardly he strives after power and authority, (hut only)
that he may show to princes the (right) way and judgement;

That he may give another spirit to the Princedom; that he
may give fruit to the palm-tree of the Caliphate.


Explaining that the motive of the Prophet , on whom be peace , in
seeking to conquer Mecca and other (places) than Mecca was not
love of worldly dominion , inasmuch as he has said " This world
is a carcasebut that on the contrary it was by the command
{of God).

Likewise the Prophet’s struggle to conquer Mecca — how can
he be suspected of (being inspired by) love of this world?

He who on the day of trial shut his eyes and heart to the
treasury of the Seven'Heavens,

3sst> (When) the horizons of all the Seven Heavens were full of
houris and genie s (who had come) to gaze upon him.

Having arrayed themselves for his sake—how indeed should
he care for anything except the Beloved ?

He had become so filled with magnification of God, that even
those nearest to God would find no way (of intruding) there.

“ In Us (in Our unity) is no room for a prophet sent as an
apostle, nor yet for die Angels or the Spirit. Do ye, therefore,
understand1"

He (also) said, "We are md sdgh (that is, Our eye did not rote),
we are not (looking for carrion) like crows (zdgh)[ We are
intoxicated with (enraptured by) the Dyer, we are not in¬
toxicated with the garden (of flowers with their many dyes)."

39 5 s Inasmuch as to the eye of the Prophet the treasuries of the

celestial spheres and intelligences seemed (worthless) as a straw.
What, then, would Mecca and Syria and *Iriq be (worth to
him), that he should show fight and" longing (to gain possession
of them)?

That thought and opinion (of his motive) is the hypocrite’s,
who judges (the Prophet) from the analogy of his own wicked
soul.

When you make yellow glass a veil (between your eyes and
the sun), you see all the sunlight yellow.

Break those blue and yellow glasses, in order that you may-
know (distinguish) the dust and the man (who is concealed
by it).

J9*o The dust (oi the body) has lifted up its head (risen) around
the (spiritual) horseman: you have fancied the dust to be the
man of God,

Ihli’s saw (only) the dust, and said, “How should this off¬
spring of clay (Adam) be superior to me of the fiery brow?"


THE UNWORLDLINESS OF THE PROPHET Zl$

So long as thou art regarding the holy {prophets and saints)
as men, know that that view is an inheritance from Iblis.

If thou art not the child of Iblis, Q contumacious one, then
how has the inheritance of that cur come to thee?

"lam not a cur, I am the Lion of God, a worshipper of God:
the lion of God is he that has escaped from (phenomenal)
form.

The Hon of this world seeks a prey and provision; the lion
of the Lord seeks freedom and death*

Inasmuch as in death he sees a hundred existences, like the
moth he burns away (his own) existence,”

Desire for death became the badge 1 of the sincere, for this
word (declaration) was (made) a test for the Jews.

He (God) said in the QuPAn* “O people of the Jews, death
is treasure and gain to the sincere.

Even as there is desire for profit (in the hearts of the worldly)*
the desire to win death is better than that (in the eyes of the
sincere).

O Jews* for the sake of (being held in) honour by men of mto
worth, let this wish be uttered on your tongues/"

Not a single Jew had so much courage (as to respond), when
Mohammed raised this banner (gave this challenge).

He said. “If they should utter this on their tongues, truly
not one Jew would be left in the world."

Then the jews brought the property (tribute in kind) and
land-tax, saying, "Do not put us to shame* O Lamp (of the
world}.”

“There is no end in sight to this discourse: give me diy
hand 2 * * since thine eye hath seen the Friend.”


Hotx the Prince of the Faithful, 1 AU—may God honour his person!

—mid to his antagonist, 11 When thou didst spit sn my face,
my fleshly self was aroused and / could no longer act with entire
sincerity (toruards Godf: that hindered me from slaying thee'*

The Prince of the Faithful said to that youth * 41 In the hour ijtfs
of battle, O knight.

When thou didst spit m my face, my fleshly self was aroused
and my (good) disposition was corrupted.

Half (of my fighting) came to be for God's sake* and half
(for) idle passion: in God's affair partnership 4 is not allowable.

TTiou art limned by the hand of the Lord- thou art God's
(work)* thou art not made by me.

1 Literati y, "colter."

1 These wordf are addressed by 4 AM lo the infidd knight.

1 Literally, ’acttntf aiiHerely (towards God) was no more,"

4 /^. To associate the worahtp and terrier of God wiih any ether object.


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


Break Gods image, (but only) by God’s command; cast
(a atone} at the Beloved's glass, (but only) the Beloved’s
stone*

3<jSo The fire-worshipper heard this, and a light appeared in his
heart, so that he cut a girdle 1 .

He said, “I was sowing the seed of wrong: I fancied thee
(to be) otherwise (than thou art}.

Thou hast (really) been the balance (endued) with the (just)
nature of the One (God); nay, thou hast been the tongue of
every balance.

Thou hast been my race and stock and kin, thou hast been
me radiance of the candle of mv religion.

I am the (devoted) slave of dial eye-seeking Lamp from
which thy lamp received splendour,
sss* I am the slave of the billow of that Sea of Light which brings
3 pearl like this into view.

Offer me the profession of the (Moslem) Faith, for I regard
thee as the exalted one of the time.”

Near fifty persons of his kindred and tribe lovingly turned
their faces towards the Religion (of Islam). ‘ '

By the sword of clemency he (‘AH) redeemed so many throats
of such a multitude from the sword.

The sword of clemency is sharper than the sword of iron-
nay, it is more productive of victory than a hundred armies.
i iejo Oh, alas, two mouthfuls were eaten, and thereby the ferment
of thought was frozen up.

A grain of wheat eclipsed the sun of Adam, as the descending
node is (the cause of) eclipse to the brilliance of the fulf-
moon.


Behold the beauty of the heart, how its moon scatters the
Pieiades (how its light is broken and disordered) by a single
handful of day. s

When the bread was spirit, it was beneficial; since it became
form, it rouses disbelief.

As (for example) the green thistles which a camel eats, and
gams from eating them a hundred benefits and pleasures:

*991 W the camel from the desert eats those same thistles*
after their greenness is gone and they have become dry,

, T'hcj rend his palate and cheek—oh, alas that such a nourish¬
ing rose became a sword I

When the bread was spirit, it was (like) the green thistles-
since it became form, it is now- dry and gross.

According as thou hadst formerly been in the habit of eatim;
itj O gracious being* *

In the same hope thou (still) art eating this dry stuff, after the
spirit has become mingled with clay.

/.r. the «dcred thread (kushli) which ZoftMitrLaiu wear on their waists*


* AL1 AND THE INFIDEL KNIGHT 2 lj

It has become mixed with earth and dry and flesh-cutting: 4000
abstain now from that herbage, O camel!

The words are coming (forth) very earth-soiled; the water
has become turbid: stop up the mouth of the well.

That God may again make it pure and sweet, that He who
made it turbid may likewise make it pure.

Patience brings the object of desire, not haste. Have
patience — and God knoweth best what is right.


VOOi^U


I


In the Kami of God the Merciful the Compassionate

Touching this Second Book (of the Mathnawf)* part of the
reason of its postponement is (here) set forth, namely* that If
all the Divine Wisdom (shown in any particular act) bo made
known to Bis slave, the slave (absorbed) in (contemplation of)
the benefits of that act will be left without the power to perform
it; and the infinite Wisdom of God will destroy his under¬
standing, (50 that) he will not engage in that act. Therefore the
High God makes a small portion of that infinite Wisdom (to
be as) a toggle m his nose and leads him towards that act; for
if He give mm no information about those benefits, he will not
move at all, inasmuch as the motive (of human actions) arises
from advantages to ourselves or others 1 , for the sake of w hich
we act accordingly; while (on the other hand), if He should
pour down upon fum the (whole) wisdom of that (act), he will
also be unable to move; just as a camel will not go (forward)
unless there be a toggle in his nose, and if the toggle be (too)
big he will likewise lie down (and refuse to go on). And there
is nothing but We haze the storehouses thereof, and We do not send
it dawn but in a certain measure. Without water, earth docs not
become a brick, nor (again) docs it become a brick when there
is (too) much water. And the heaven+ He raised it and set up
the scales. He giveth every thing 1 by the scale, not without
calculation and balance, save (only) to those w r ho have been
transmuted from the creaturely state of existence and have
become (like those described in the text) And He bestaweth on
whom He pleaseth without calculation y albeit whoso hath not
tasted (experienced) doth not know.

Some one asked, "What is love ? 31 I answered, “Thou wilt
know when thou becomest (lost in) me . 11

Love is uncalculated affection* For that reason it has been
said to be in reality the attribute of God and unreal in relation
to (man who is) Bis slave. He (God) loveth them (yuhihbuhum)
i$ the entire sum. Which (of them) is (really the subject of the
word yahibbunaku) they love Him?


1 Literally. 11 to human being*/ f


222


MATHNAW1, BOOK II


In the Name of God the Merciful the Compassionate

This Mmhnmsi has been delayed for a while: an interval was
needed in order that the blood might turn to milk.

Blood does not become sweet milk until thy fortune gives
birth to a new babe, Hearken well (to mv words).

When the Light of God p Hustimu’ddin, drew the reins (of
his spirit) back from the scenith of Heaven—

(For) after he had gone in the ascension to (spiritual) realities,
without his (life-giving) springtide the buds (of mystic know¬
ledge) were unburst (in my heart)—

3 When (1 say) he returned from the Sea towards the shore,
the Lyre of the poesy of the Matkna&rf became attuned (again).

The Mathnmri, which was the burnisher (purifier) of spirits
-his return was the day of (my) seeking (an auspicious) com¬
mencement (for it).

The date of beginning 1 this gainful (spiritual) traffic- was in
the year six hundred and sixty-two.

A nightingale went hence and returned: it became a falcon
for hunting these spiritual truths.

May this falcon's resting-place be the fore arm or the Kine 1
May this gate (to the Truth) be open to (all) the people unto
everlasting!

I < The bane of this gate is sensuality and lust; else, draught on
draught (of spiritual knowledge) is (to be found) here.

Gullet and mouth are the eye-bandage (which makes you blind)
to yonder world: close this mouth, that you may see (it) plain.

O mouth, verily thou art the mouth of Hell? and, O world,
thou art like the intermediate stated

The everlasting Light is beside this low world, the pure milk
sa beside rivers of blood.

When you take one step in it (the world) without precaution h
your ini Ik will be turned to blood through commixture.

13 tCKJ ^ cmc s * e P * n sensual pleasure: separation from his

high place in Paradise became a collar on the neck of his
(fleshly) soul.

1 he angels were fleeing from him as from a devil: how many
tears <lid he shed for the sake of a single loaf I

Although the sin which he had compassed was (but) a hair,
yet that hair had grown in his eyes.

Adam was the eye of the Eternal Light : a hair in the eve is
a great mountain.

: V 3 tcm !l> * " dsiny-point of the date {of composition)/'

Literally, trading and profit, 1 '

\Jhc spirit «me from God and will rettm to God. The present life b
its mUrrmcdtate state.


THE FRIEND OF COD


Z23

If Adam had taken counsel in that (matter), he would not
have uttered excuses in penitence,

Because when one intellect is joined with another intellect, it :
prevents evil action and evil speech;

(Bile) when the fleshly soul is associated with another flesh I v
soul, the partial (individual) intellect becomes idle and useless.

When because of loneliness you fall into despair^ you become
(bright as) a sun (if you go) under the shadow (protection) of
the friend.

Go* seek at once the friend of God: when you have done so,
Cod is your friend.

He who has fixed his gaze upon seclusion (and made it his
object), after all "tis from the friend (of God) that he has
learned that (lesson).

One muse seclude one’s self from strangers, (but) not from 2$
the friend: the fur-coat is for winter, not for spring,

(If) the intellect is paired with another intellect, light increases
and the way becomes plain;

(But if) the fleshly soul makes merry 1 with another fleshly
soul, darkness increases t the way becomes hidden.

The friend is thine eve* O huntsman; keep him pure from
(unsoiled by) sticks and straws.

Beware! Du not make a dust with thy tongue's broom* do
not make a present of rubbish to thine eye.

Since the true believer is a mirror for the true believer, Ins 30
face is safe from defilement 2 .

The friend is a mirror for the soul in sorrow: breathe not on
the face of the mirror* Q my soul 1

Lest it cover its face on account of thy breath, thou must
swallow (suppress) thy breath at every moment.

Art thou Jess than earth? When a plot of earth finds a friend,
that is T a springtide, it finds (gains) a hundred thousand flowers.

I he tree that is united with a friend* that the sweet air
(of spring), blossoms from head to foot;

In autumn, when it sees (meets with) a repugnant com- jj
panion, it withdraws its face and head under the coverlet

And says. “A bad comrade is (the means of) stirring tip
trouble: since he has come, my (best) course is to sleep.

Therefore 1 will sleep, l will be (like) one of the Men of the
Cave (the Seven Sleepers): that prisoner of woe (that sorely
distressed one) is better than Decianus.”

Their time of waking was expended by (was at the disposal of)
Decianus; their sleep was the capital (fundamental source) of
their renown.

* Literally, "becomes laughing," i.t. friendly and familiar.

Is he, being entirely pure, reflect* ihy spiritual slate and show* 'her
what thou really an.


224 MATHNAWf t BOOK II

Sleep, when it is accompanied by wisdom* is (spiritual)
wakefulness; (but) alas for the man awake who consorts with
the ignorant (

4 ■ When the crows pitch their tents on Bali man (January), the
nightingales hide themselves and are mute,

Because the nightingale is silent without the rose-garden: the
absence of the sun kills (the nightingale's) wakefulness.

O sun, thou takes t leave of this rose-garden (the earth) in
order to illumine (the region) below the earth;

(But) the Sun of Divine knowledge has no motion: its place
of rising is naught but the spirit and the intellect;

Especially the perfect Sun which is of yonder (world of
Reality): day and night its action is (giving) illumination.

45 If thou art an Alexander, come to the Sun T s rising-place:
after that, wheresoever thou goest, thou art possessed of goodly
splendour*

After that, wheresoever thou goest, 'twill become the place
of sunrise: (all) the places of sunrise will be in love with thy
place of sunset.

Thy bat-like senses are running towards the sunset i thy
pearl-scattering senses are faring towards the sunrise*

I he way of (physical) sense-perception is the way of asses*
O rider: have shame* O thou that art jostling (vying) with asses!

Besides these five (physical) senses there are five (spiritual)
senses: those (latter) are like red gold, while these (physical)
senses are like copper.

so In the bazaar where they (the buyers) are expert* how should
they buy the copper sense like (as though it w ere) the sense
of gold?

The bodily sense is eating the food of darkness; the spiritual
sense is feeding from a Sum

_ O thou that hast borne the baggage of thy senses to the
Unseen, put forth thy hand, like Moses ? from thy bosom.

O thou whose attributes are (those of) the Sun of Divine
knowledge, tvhile the sun in heaven is confined to a single
attribute,

Now thou becomest the Sun, and now the Sea; now r the
mountain of Qtf, and notv the 1 Anqa.

55 In thine essence thou art neither this nor that* O thou that
art greater than (all) imaginations and more than (all) more!

I he Spirit is associated (endued) with knowledge and reason :
what has the Spirit to do with Arabic and Turkish?

Both the mun-nkhid (who asserts the transcendence of God)
and the wtushtibhth (who asserts His immanence) are bewildered
by thee, Q thou who* being without image (external appearance),
art (appearing) in so many forms.

Sometimes the muwahhad (God regarded as the only real Being)


THE FBIENP OF GOD


3*5

is destroying the muskabirih (who asserts that Gad is immanent in
terms); sometimes (these) forms arc waylaying the mutvahhid (so
that he cannot gain access to God who transcends all forms) T

Sometimes Abu r ]-Hasan in drunkenness (ecstasy) savs to
thee p **O thou whose teeth are small (whose years arc few),

0 thou whose body is tender! pp

Sometimes he is laying waste {ruining and defacing) his own fa
image: he is destroying (it) in order to assert the transcendence
of the Beloved (God).

The doctrine held by the ey e of sense is Mu c tazUum» whereas
the eye of Reason is Sunnite "(orthodox) in respect of (its) union
(vision of God).

Those in thrall to sense-perception are Mu'tazilites, (though)
from misguiciedness they represent themselves as Sunnites.

Any one who remains in (bondage to) sense-percept!cm is a
Mu’taziOte; though he may say he is a Sunnite, T tia from
ignorance.

Any one who has escaped from (the bondage of) sense-
perception is a Sunnite: the man endowed with (spiritual)
vision is the eye of sweet-paced (harmonious) Reason.

If the animal sense could see the King (God) p then the ox ^
and the ass would behold Allah.

If* besides the animal sense, thou hadst not another sense
outside of (unconditioned by) the desire of the flesh.

Then how should the sons of Adam have been honoured?
How by means of the common sense 1 should they have become
privileged (to know* these mysteries)?

Your calling (God) “formless” (transcending forms) or
"formed” (immanent in forms) is vain, without your liberation
from form (unless you yourself are freed from sense-perception).

(^Vh ether God is) “formless 18 or “formed/’ He is with him
that is all kernel and has gone forth from the husk P

If you arc blind, 'tu no aimr in the Mind ; (but) if not, go 70
(persevere in purifying yourself), for patience is the key to
success.

The medicine of patience will burn the veils over your eye
and will also effect the opening of Your breast (to Divine know¬
ledge).

When the mirror of your heart becomes clear and pure, you
will behold images (which are) outside of (the world of) water
and earth.

^oy will behold both the image and the image-Maker* both
the carpet of (spiritual) empire and the carpel-Spreader.

The phantom (seen in mystical vision) of my Friend seemed
(to me) like Khalil (Abraham)—its form an Idol, its reality a
breaker of idols,

1 Ij. the Knscs w hich Man hu in cafTimon mih Other animalg.


J¥ H


<3


226


MATHNAWf, BOOK II

75 Thanks he to God that when he appeared my spirit beheld
in his phantom its own phantom (reflected image).

The dust of thy threshold was bewitching my heart: dust
(woe) on him that was patient without thy dust [

1 said, 11 If I am beautiful, I shall receive this (dust of Divine
grace and love) from him; and if not. he has indeed laughed at
ugly me.

The (best) plan is this, that I look at myself (to sec whether
I am worthy of him); otherwise (if I am not worthy), he will
laugh at me: how shall I buy (gain his !ove)? t+

He is beautiful and a lover of beauty: how should a fresh
young man choose a decrepit old woman?

so " The Beautiful attracts the beautiful 1 (to itself): know this (for
sure). Recite thereon (the text) the good women for the gum! men .

In tills world everything attracts something: the hot draws
the hot (to itsdf) and the cold the cold.

The worthless sort attract the worthless; the lasting (those of
tasting worth) are rejoiced by the lasting.

Those of the Fire attract those of the Fire, those of the Light
seek those of the Light.

When you shut your eye, you felt uncomfortable 3 : how could
the light of the eye do without the light of the window?

Sj Your discomfort wa$ (caused by) the light in your eye straining
to be joined speedily with the daylight. ^

If you feel distress (within) while your eyes are unclosed,
know that you have shut the eye of your heart, (and) open it.

Recognise that that (distress) is the craving of the eyes of
your heart which is seeking the immeasurable Light,

Inasmuch as reparation from those two impermanent lights
brought you discomfort, (so that) you opened your eyes.
Separation, then, from Those two steadfast (everlasting) Lights
will bring you discomfort: guard them (well) t

Since He is calling me, I will look to see whether I am worthy
to be drawn (to Him) or whether 1 am ill-favoured.

If a charming person makes an ugly one (follow) at his heels,
*tis (but) a mockery that he makes of him.

How, I wonder, shall 1 behold my own face* so as to see
what complexion I have and whether I am like day or like night?

For a long while I was seeking the image of my soul, (but)
my image was not displayed (reflected) by any one.

“After all, 11 I said, “what is a mirror for? (The u$c of it is
this), that every one may know what and who he b. pp

<33 The mirror of iron is (only) for husks (external forms); the
mirror that shows the aspect of the heart is of great price.

The souFs mirror is naught but the face of the friend, the

* htieraJty, ' L beauty * 1 or beautify] Oslr- 1 *

* Literally, “discomfort overtook you."


the friend OF GOD zzy

face of that friend who is of vender country (the spiritual
land).

I said , fi O heart, $eek the Universal Mirror, go to die Sea:
the business will not succeed (be successfully accomplished) bv
means of the river/ 1

In this quest thy slave (at last) arrived at thy dwdling-place,
(as) the pains (of childbirth) drew Maty to the palm-tree.

When thine eye became an eye for my heart, my blind heart
went and became drowned in vision,

I saw that thou art die Universal Mirror unto everlasting: in
I saw my own image in thine eye +

I said, “At last I have found myself: in his eyes I have found
the shining Way."

My false instinct said. “Beware! That (image) is (only) thy
phantom: distinguish thy essence from thy phantom 1 ;

(But) my image gave voice (spoke) from thine eve (and said),

<s I am thou and thou art I in (perfect) oneness;

For how should a phantom find the way into this illumined
eye which never ceases from (contemplating) the (Divine)
realities? M

( Thou saidst), "If you behold your image in the eyes of anv *5
other than me, know that Tis a phantom and reprobate.

Because he (every one except me) is applying (to Ids eye) the
collyrium of non-existence (unreality) and is imbibing the wine
of Satan's illusion- making.

Their eye is the home of phantasy and non-existence:
necessarily it sees as existent the things which are non-existent;

(But) since my eye saw (got) collyrium from the Glorious
(God), it is the home of (real) existence, not the home of
phantasy.”

So long as a single hair of you is before your eye, in your
phantasy a pearl will be as jasper.

You will know jasper from pearls (only) at the time when n*
you pass away from (abandon) your phantasy entirely.

(J connoisseur of pearls, listers to a story T that you may dis¬
tinguish actual seeing from (mere) inference.

Hozc in the time of L Umar t may Cod be mtl-pkwed with him, ti
certain person imagined that what he sate was the new moon.

Fasting-month (Ramadan) came round in * Umars time.
Some people ran to the top of a lull.

In order to take (the appearance of) the new moon as a good
omen, and one of them said, M Look, Q ‘Umar, here is the n^w
moon!

As 'Umar did not sec the moon in the sky, he said, "This
moon has risen from thy phantasy.

U-3


k


%ZS MATHNAWf* BOOK II

Otherwise, (since) 1 am a better seer of the heavens (than
thou), how is it that L do not see the pure crescent?

Wet thy hand*” said he p 14 and rub it on thine eyebrow, and
then look up towards the new moon/'

When he wetted his eyebrow* he did not see the moon,
“O King,” he said, “there is no moon; it has disappeared / 1

M Yes/* said 'Umar, “ the hair of thine eyebrow had become
(curved) like a how and shot at thee an arrow of opinion.”

When one hair became crooked, it waylaid him (hindered
him from seeing truly), so that, making a false claim, he boasted
to have seen the moon.

no Inasmuch as a crooked hair veils the sky, how will it be when
all your members arc crooked?

Straighten your members by (the help of) the straight (the
righteous), O you who (would) go straight* turn not your head
aside from that threshold (where the righteous dwell).

Balance makes balance correct; balance also makes balance
defective 1 -

Whoever weighs the same (adopts the same standard) as the
unrighteous falls into deficiency* and his understanding becomes
dazed.

Go, be hard on the infidel f, sprinkle dust on (renounce)
fondness for the strangers.

135 Be as a sword upon the heads of the strangers: come, do not
play foxy tricks, be a lion*

In order that the friends (of God)* moved by (righteous)
jealousy, may not break with you* because those thorns (the
wicked) are the enemies of this rose (the friend of God),

Set nre to the wolves as (to) rue-seed, because those wolves
are the enemies of Joseph*

Iblis calls you “father's soul” (darling son)— beware (of
him)! The accursed Devil (does that) in order that he may
beguile you with (vain) words.

He practised the like imposture on your father: this black-
faced one checkmated an Adam.

iso This crow is busy on the chessboard; look not you upon hi$
game with an eye that is half-asleep*

Because he knows many formidable moves which will stick
in your throat like a atraw.

His straw will stay in your throat for years. What is that
straw? Love of rank and wealth.

Wealth b the straw, since in your throat* O infirm one* it is
an obstacle (barrier) to the Water of Life.

If an artful enemy carry off your wealth* a robber will have
carried off a robber,

1 /,*, a true standard eerrects a false one, and a false standard corrupts
m true one.


THE MAN WHO THOUGHT HE SAW THE MOON 22Q

Him,' a snake-catcher it oh a wake from another make-catcher*

A petty thief carried off a snake from a snake-catcher and in
his folly was accounting it a prize.

The snake-catcher escaped from the snake T s bite; the man
who had robbed him was miserably killed by the snake.

The snake-catcher saw him (dead); then he recognised him
and said, "My snake has emptied him of life.

My soul was desiring of Him (God) in prayer that l might
find him and take the snake from him.

Thanks to God that that prayer was rejected: I thought *twas
loss, but it has turned out to be gain."

Many are the prayers which are loss and destruction, and no
from kindness the Holy God is not hearing them.


How the companion of Jesus, an wham be peace , entreated
Jesus T o7i wham be peace r to give life to the bones .

A certain foolish person accompanied Jesus (on his way),
lie espied some bones in a deep-dug hole.

He said, M G companion t (teach me) that exalted Name by
which thou makest the dead to live;

Teach (it) me* that 1 may do good and by means of it endow
the bones with life , 11

Jesus said, “Be silent, for that is not thy work: p tis not meet
for thy breath and speech,

For it wants breath purer than rain and more piercing in 145
action than the angels.

(Many) lifetimes were needed that the breath might be
purified, so that he (its owner) was entrusted with die treasury
of the Heavens.

(Suppose that) thou hast grasped this rod firmly m thy hand:
whence will accrue to thv hand the cunning of Moses ? 11

He said, "If I am not one to pronounce {$uch sacred)
mysteries, do thou pronounce the Name over the bones/*

Jesus cried, £ *G Lord, what are these hidden purposes (of
Thine)? What is (the meaning of) this fool's inclination (to
engage) in this fruitless work?

How has this sick man no care for himself? How has this 15*
corpse no care for (spiritual) life?

He has left (uncared for) his own dead (soul) and seeks to
mend (revive) the dead (bones) of a stranger.”

God (answered and) said, " The backslider seeks backsliding 1 :
the thistle that has grown (in him) is the retribution for (conse¬
quence of) his sowing / 1


1 /.e. "ihrwc who are doomed to perdition seek their own perdition."


MATKNAWfp BOOK II

He that sows the seed of thistles in the world, be warned not
to look for him in the rose-garden.

If he take a rose in his hand, it becomes a thistle; and if he
go to a friend, he (the friend) becomes a snake.

]*< The damned wretch is an elixir which transmutes into poison
and snakes; (his elixir is) contrary to the elixir of the God¬
fearing man*

How the Sufi enjoined the servant to take care of Ms beast
and hots the servant said r i£ Ld hawl v . 1

A Sufi was wandering round the world till one night he
became a guest at a monastery (for Sufis),

He ha <?4 beast (ass): he tied it in the stable, (while) he
(himself) sat at the top of the dais with his friends.

Then he engaged with his friends in (mystical) meditation:
the presence of die friend (of God) is a book, (and) more.

The Stiffs book is not (composed of) ink and letters: it is
naught but a heart white as snow,
if. The scholar's provision is (consists of) pen-marks (written
letters and words). What is the Sufi's provision? Footmarks,

He (the Sufi) stalks the game, like a hunter: he sees the
musk-deer + s track and follows the footprints.

For $ome while the track of the deer is (the) proper (clue)
for him, (but) afterwards : tis the navel (musk-gland) of the
deer that is his guide.

When he has given thanks for (having been favoured with
knowledge of) the track and has traversed the way, of necessity'
by means of that track he arrives at a goal %

To go one stage (guided) by the scent of the musk-gLand La
hotter than a hundred stages of (following) the track and
rooming about.

16$ The heart that is the rising-place of the moonbeams (of
Divine light) i$ the opening of the doors (of Reality) for the
gnostic.

To you it is a wall, to them it is a door; to you a stone, to
(those) venerated ones a pearl.

What you see plainly in the mirror — the Par sees more than
that in die brick.

The Pars are they whose spirits, before this world existed,
were in the Sea of (Divine) bounty.

Before (the creation of) this body they passed (many) life¬
times; before the sowing they took up (harvested) the \vfreat.
w They have received the spirit before (the creation of) the
form; they have bored the pearls before (the creation of) the sea,

3 EquiraCent to H h Good precious, t ’ p
= LiterelJy, “an object of desire/*


THE SUFI AND THE UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 231

(Whilst) consultation was going on as to bringing mankind into
existence, their spirits were in the Sea of (Divine) Omnipotence
up to the throat h

When the angels were opposing that (creation of man), they
(the Firs) were secretly clapping their hands (in derision) at the
angels.

He (the Pir) was made acquainted with the (material) form
of even - existent being, before this Universal Soul became
fettered (by materiality).

Before the (creation of the) heavens they have seen Saturn,
before the (existence of) seeds they have seen the bread. ^

Without brain and mind they were full of thought, without a75
army and battle they gained victory,

That immediate intuition (Intuitive knowledge) in relation to
them is thought; else, indeed, in relation to those who are far
(from God) it is vision.

Thought is of the past and future; when it is emancipated
from these two, the difficulty is solved,

The spirit has beheld the wine in the grape, the spirit has
beheld thing (entity) in nothing (nonentity);

It has beheld everv conditioned thing as unconditioned, it
has beheld the genuine coin and the alloyed before (the ex¬
istence of) the mine;

Before the creation of grapes it has quailed wines and shown itto
the excitements (of intoxication).

In hot July they (the Pars) see December; in the sunbeams
they see the shade.

lit the heart of the grape they have seen the wine; in absolute
fend (privation of objectivity) they have seen the object.

The sky is draining draughts from their circling cup, the
sun is clad in cloth of gold by their bounty.

When you see two of them met together as friends, they are
one, and at the same time (they are) six hundred thousand.

Their numbers are in the likeness of waves: the wind will efij
have brought them into number (into plurality from unity).

The Sun, which is the spirits, became separated (broken into
rays) in the windows, which are bodies.

When von gaze on the Sun's disk, it is itself but he that
is screened by (his perception of) the bodies is in some doubt*

Separation (plurality) is in the animal spirit; the human spirit
is one essence.

Inasmuch as God sprinkled His light upon them (mankind) w
(they are essentially one); His light never becomes separated (in
reality),

G my comrade on the way p dismiss thy weariness for a 1^
moment, that I may describe a single mole (grain) of that
Beauty.


MATHNAwl, BOOK II

'The beauty of His state cannot be set forth: what are both
tlie worlds (temporal and spiritual)? The reflexion of His mole.

When I breathe a word concerning His beauteous mole p my
speech would fain burst my body.

Like an ant, I am so happv in this granary that 1 am dragEfiriE
a burden too great For rue. T

How the explanation of the {inner) meaning of the tale was stopped

because of the hearer's desire to hear the superficial form of if,

Vyhen will He who is envied by Light allow me to tell that
which is obligatory and ought to be told?

*« The sea casts foam in front (of it) and makes a barrier: it
draws back and after drawing back flows in (again).

Hear what has interfered {hindered my exposition) at the
present time: mediinks the hearer's mind has wandered else¬
where.

His thoughts have turned to the Sufi guest: he is sunk up
to the neck (wholly absorbed) in that business 1 ,

(Therefore) it behoves me to go back from this discourse to
that story in order to describe what happened (to him),

O dear friend, do not fancy the Sufi is the (external) form
(which you behold): how long, like children, (will you be
content) with walnuts and raisins?

Our body is (as) walnuts and raisins, Q son; if you are a man,
relinquish these two things;

And (even) if you do not relinquish them (by your own act),
the grace of God will enable you to pass beyond the nine tiers
(of Heaven),

Xow listen to the outward form of the tale, but take heed to
separate the grain from the chaff.

How the people of the caravan supposed the Sufi's beast was ill ,

When at last (the meditation of) that circle of Sufis who were
seeking (spiritual) profit came to an end (culminated) in ecstasy
and enthusiasm.

They brought dishes of food for the guest, and he then be-
thought him of his beast.

He said to the famulus ( the servant of the Sufis), fi Go into the
stable and make the Straw and barley all right for the animal/'
Good gracious■! he replied p H why this saving overmuch^
These things have been my care since long ago."

The Sufi said, First wet his barley, for ’us an old a*s and
his teeth are shaky ; 1 * '

1 Qr priori {m hear the HOry).”

1 Ld hmd f lit r 11 (here is no power (except in God )/ 1


THE SUFI AND THE UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 233

"Good gracious!" said hc p “why are you telling (me) this,
Sir? They are taught by me (to make) these arrangements/*

The Siifi said, “ First of all take off 1 his Saddle and (then) put
the salve of manhal on his sore back,”

" Good gracious r T exclaimed the servant. “Why, O purveyor 210
of wisdom, I have had a thousand guests of your sort,

And ah have departed from us well-pleased: the guest is
(dear to us as) our life and our kinsman/'

The Sufi said, “Give him water, but (let it be) luke¬
warm/' “Good gracious! 1 " cried the other, “I am ashamed
of you/*

The Sufi said, “Fui (only) a little straw in his barley/'

“ Good gracious! Cut short this speech / 1 he replied.

The Sufi said, “Sweep his place (clear) of stones and dung,
and if it is wet, sprinkle dry' earth on it/"

“Good gracious!" cried he, "implore God*s grace-, G 215
father, and say little (give few instructions) to a messenger who
knows his business/'

The Sufi said, “ Take the comb and curry the ass s back/'
“Good gracious! do have some shame, O father / 1 said he.

The servant said this and briskly girded up his loins. “ I go,”
said he; “first I will fetch the straw and barley / 3

Off he went and never thought of the stable at all: he gave
that Sufi (a pretence like) the sleep of the hare 3 .

The servant went off to (Join) some rascals and made a
mockery' of the Stiffs admonition.

The Sufi was fatigued by his journey and stretched his limbs m
(lav down to sleep): with his eyes closed he was dreaming
That his ass was left (helpless) in the clutch of a wolf* (which)
was tearing pieces (of flesh) from its back and thighs.

“Good gracious!" he exclaimed, "what sort of melancholy
(madness) is this? Oh, where is that kindly servant?’"

Again he would see his ass going along the road and fading
now into a well and now into a ditch.

He was dreaming various unpleasant dreams; he was reciting
the Fdtiha and the Qdna.

He said (to himself), “ What can be done to help? My friends ±1$
have hurried out: they have departed and made all the doors
fast. 1 ’

Again he would say," Oh, i wonder—that wretched servant!

Did not he partake of bread and salt with us ?

I showed him nothing but courtesy and mildness: why should
he ou the contrary show hatred towards me?

t Lilerally, "put down (autie)/’

\ Literally, "say Id ftawL"

/.*. he caused him w believe in hia vigilance, while he m really
negligent.


234 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Every enmity must rest on some cause; otherwise, nut
common humanity 1 would dictate faithfulness {in friendship).**

Then he would say again h H< When had Adam, the kind and
generous, done an injury to Iblis?

230 What was done by man to snake and scorpion that they wish
(to inflict) death and pain upon him?

To rend is the instinct of the wolf: after all, this envy is
conspicuous in mankind." p

Again he would say, * + lt is wrong thus to think evil: why
have I such thoughts against my brother? "

Then he would say„ 41 Prudence consists in your thinking evil:
how shad he that thinks no evil remain unhurt?”

The Stiff was in (this) anxiety t and (meanwhile) the ass was in
such a plight that — may it befall our enemies- !

235 Thai poor ass was amidst earth and stones p with his saddle
crooked and his halter tom ,

Killed (exhausted) by the journey p without fodder all the
night long, now at the last gasp and now perishing.

All night the ass was repeating, “O God h l give up the barley;
(but am 1 to have) less than one handful of straw?”

With mute eloquence he was saying, M 0 Shaykhs, {have)
some pity, for I am consumed (with anguish) because of this
raw impudent rogue,”

What that ass suffered of pain and torment, the land-bird
suffers (the same) in a flood of water.

240 Then (all) that night till dawn the wretched ass, from ex¬
ceeding hunger , rolled on his side.

Day rose. The servant came at mom and quickly looked for
the saddle and laid it on the ass’s back.

After the fashion of ass-dealers he gave him two or three blows
(with a goad) t he did to the ass what is befitting from such a cur
(as he was).

1 he sharpness of the sting set the a$$ jumping; where is the
tongue (has an ass such a tongue) that he may describe his own
state (feelings)?

When the Sufi mounted and got going, he (the ass) began to
fall on his face every time,

(An 11 ) rime the people (the travellers) lifted him up:

they all thought he was ill.

One would twist his ears hard, while another sought for the
(laceraied) part under his palate.

And another searched for the stone in his shoe, and another
looked at the dirt in his eye.

Also they were saying^ O Shavkh. what is thecause of this? Were
not you saying yesterday, 1 Thanks {to God}, this ass is strong *? ”

\ Literal tv,, LJ our being con^cnera/*

3 Laterally, '"may it be the retribution of enemies L p


THE Stfff AND THE UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 235

He replied, “The ass that ate Ld fyaxd* during the night
cannot get along except in this manner*

Inasmuch as the ass's food by night was Ld kawl f he was 35*
glorifying God by night and (is engaged) in prostrating himself
by day,”

Most people arc man-eaters: put no trust* in their saying,

11 Peace to you.”

The hearts of all are the Devil's house: do not accept (listen
to) the palaver of devilish men.

He that swallows Ld hotel from the breath (mouth) of the
Devil, like that ass falls headlong in the fight.

Whoever swallows the Devil's imposture in this world and
(swallows) veneration and deceit from the foe that has the face
(semblance) of a friend,

In the Way of Islam and on the bridge Sirat he will fall upon -ss
his head from giddiness, like that ass.

Beware! Do not hearken to the blandishments of the bad
friend: espy the snare, do not walk securely on the earth.

Sec the hundred thousand devils who utter Ld howll O Adam,
in the serpent behold IbHsl

He gives (you) vain words, he says to you, u O my soul and
beloved,” that he may strip the skin off his beloved, like a
butcher.

He gives vain words that he may strip off your skin: woe to
him that tastes opium from (the mouth of) enemies.

He lays his head at your feet (in flattery) and butcher- 1 ike 260
gives (you ) vain (wheedling) words, that he may shed your
blood miserably.

Like a Hon, hunt your prey yourself : leave (pay no heed to)
the blandishment of stranger or kinsman.

Know that the regard of the hase is like that servant; + tis
better to have nobody (as your friend) than (to accept) the
flattery of nobodies (worthless people).

Do not make your home in (other) men's land: do your owm
work* don't do the work of a stranger.

Who is the stranger? Your earthen body, for the sake of
which is (all) your sorrow.

So long as you are giving your body greasy (rich) and sw T eet 163
(food), you will not see fatness in your (spiritual) essence.

If the body be set in the midst of musk, (yet) on the day of
death its stench will become manifest.

Do not put musk on your body, rub it on your heart. What
is musk? The holy name of the Glorious (God).

The hypocrite puts musk on his body and puts his spirit at
the bottom of the ash-pit*

1 I-f> “ implored Gad lu help him.'"

* Literally* “do net seek Mfety/'


236 MATHNAWt, BOOK 11


On his tongue the name of God, and in his soul stenches
(arising) from his infidel thought.

37s In relation to him praise of God is (like) the herbage of the
ash-pit: it is roses and lilies (growing) upon a dunghill.

Those plants are certainly there on loan (and belong to some¬
where else); the proper place for those flowers is the symposium
and (the scene of) festivity.

■ 1 he good 1comen come to the good men; there is (also the test)
to the wicked men the wicked women. Mark!

Do not bear malice: they that are led astray by malice, their
graves are placed beside the malicious.

The origjn of malice is Hell, and your malice is a part of that
whole and is the enemy of ynur religion.

375 Since you are a part of Hell, take care! The part gravitates
towards its whole.


He that is bitter will assured!)' be attached to those who arc
bitter : how should vain breath (false words) be joined with the
truth?

O brother, you are that same thought (of vours); as for the
rest (of you), you are (only) bone and fibre.

It your thought is a rose, you are a rose-garden; and if it is
a thorn, you are fuel for the bath-stove.

If you are rose-water, you are sprinkled on head and bosom-
and it you are (stinking) like urine, you are cast out

Look at the trays in front of druggists ^each kind put beside
its own kind, r


Things of each sort mixed with things of the same sort, and
a certain elegance produced by this homogeneity;

If his (the druggist's) aloes-wood and sugar get mixed, he
picks them out from, each other, piece by piece.

The trays were broken and the souls were spilled: good and
evil ones were mingled with each other,

God sent the prophets with scrolls (of Revelation), that He
might pick out (and sort) these grains on the dish

*35 Before this 1 we were one community-, none knew whether we
were good or bad.

False coin and fine (both) were current in the world, since
all was night, and we were as night-travellers.

Until the sun of the prophets rose and said, “ Begone, O alloy !
Come, O thou that art pure!"

The eye can distinguish colours, the eve knows ruby and
(common) stone. J

The eye knows the jewel and the rubbish; hence bits of
rubbish sting the eye.

390 These vile counterfeiters are enemies of dav, those pieces of
gold from the mine are lovers of day, ' P '

1 /.e. before iht prophets wne tent.


THE SUFI AND THE UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 237

Because dav is the mirror that makes it (the fine gold) known,
so that the askrafi (the coin of sterling gold) may see (receive)
its (dav*s) gift of honour.

Hence God bestowed the title of il Day” on the Resurrection,
(for) day displays the beauty of red and yellow.

In reality, then, day is the inmost consciousness of the saints,
(though) beside their moon day is (dim) as shadows.

Know that day is the reflexion of the mystery (the illumined
consciousness} of the man of God g while eye-sealing night is
the reflexion of his occupation 1 .

For that reason God said. By the mom; by the morn is (refers 2^
to) the light of the hidden mind of Mustafa (Mohammed).

The other view, that the Beloved (God) meant this morn
(in the literal sense), is (held) just for the reason that this too
is the reflexion of him ;

Else it is w rong to swear by a transient thing: how indeed is
transiency proper to the speech of God?

That Friend (Abraham) said, 11 / tote not them that set ": how
should the glorious Lord mean transiency by this (oath)?

Again, antt by the night is (refers to) his occultation and his
earthen rust-dark body.

When his sun rose from that sky s it said to the night of the 300
body, 41 Lo t He hath not forsaken thee”

Union was made manifest out of the essence of affliction:
that sweetness (of union) was expressed by (the words) He hath
not hated (thee).

In fatfl, every' expression is the symbol of a state: the state
is as a hand, while the expression is a tool.

The goldsmith's tool in the hand of a shoemaker is like a
seed sown in sand;

And the cobbler's tool (put) before the husbandman is (as)
straw before a dog (or) bones before an ass.

M I am God" on the Sips of Mansur 3 was the light (of truth); ^5
fl I am Allah p ' on the lips of Pharaoh was a lie.

In the hand of Moses the rod became a witness (to the truth);
in the hand of the magician the rod became (worthless as) motes
In the air.

On this account Jesus did not teach his fellow-traveller that
Name of the Lord,

For he would not know (its proper use) and would attribute
imperfection to the tool (which he misused)* Strike stone on
clay, and how should fire leap forth?

Hand and tool are as stone and iron; there must be a pair:
(the existence of) a pair is the condition (necessary) for bringing
to birth.

1 I. Cm die siaie in which the Mintconscioysno# ii not illumined by God.

* Hjiiaj.


%


2j8 MATHNAWf* BOOK 11

3 io The One is Me who hath no consort and no tool; in number
there is doubt, and that One is beyond doubt.

Those >vho say “two" or “three 11, or more than these
(numbers) are certainly agreed in (affirming the existence of) One.

When squinting has been put aside (so that they see correctly),
they become alike: the assertors of two or three become assertors
of tl nity.

If you are a ball 1 in His polo-fidd, keep spinning round from
(the blows of) His polo-stick.

The ball becomes right and flawless (only) at the time when
it is made to dance by the stroke of the King's hand,

:a$ Give ear heedfully to these (sayings), O squinting one: apply
the eye-salve by way of the ear.

Holy words, then, do not abide in blind hearts, (but) go to
the Light whence they came.

While the (guileful) spell of the Devil goes into crooked
(prrvci be) hearts as a crooked shoe on to a crooked foot.

Though you may learn Wisdom by rote, it becomes quit of
you when you are unworthy (to receive it);

And though you w rite it and note it (down), and though you
brag (about it) and expound it,

3^0 It withdraws its face from you, O disputatious one: it snaps
its bonds and (takes) flight from you.

(But) if you read not and it sees your ardour (of love). Know¬
ledge will be a bird docile (and obedient) to your hand.

It does not abide with every unskilled tiro: (it is) like a
peacock (which docs not stay) in the house of a peasant.

How the King found his falcon in the house of a
decrepit old woman.

It is not like die falcon that fled from the King to the old
crone who was sifting flour

That she might cook tutmdj for her children. (When) she
saw the beautiful well-born falcon,

32 5 She tied its little foot and clipped its wings; she cut its talons
and fed it with straw .

“Unworthy folk,” said she, “have not kept thee in (good)
trim; thy wings are overgrown and thy talons have become long.

Every unworthy ones hand makes thee ill: come to thv
mother that she may take care of thee.”

Know, O friend, that such is the affection of the fool: the fool
ever walks crookedly on the way.

The King's day became late (far-spent) in searching (for the
falcon): he went (at last) to the old woman and the tent (where
she lived),

1 The words translated M if you are a ball" may also Sicmifv 11
an aaaertor of Unity."


if you arc


THE KING AND THE FALCON 2jg

Suddenly he espied the falcon amidst smoke and dust; the 333
King wept sorely over it and made lament.

He said, "Albeit this is the retribution for thy deed, in that
thou art not firm in keeping faith with me,

(Yet) how shouldst thou make Hell thv abode after Paradise,
heedless u£ (the text) the people of the Fire (and those of Paradise)
are not equal}

This is the fitting reward for one that unconscionably flees
from the King who knows (him) well to the house of an old hag/'
(Meanwhile) the falcon was rubbing its wings against the
King's hand: without tongue it was sayings * l * I have sinned / 1
Where then should the vile (sinner) plead piteously, where 333
should he moan, if Thou wilt accept naught but good, O
bountiful (King)?

The King's grace makes the soul sin-seeking, because the
King makes every foul thing fair.

Go, do not commit foulness, for (even) our fair deeds appear
foul in the sight of our beauteous (Loved One),

You deemed your service worthy: thereby you raised the
banner of sin.

Forasmuch as praise and prayer were vouchsafed to you,
through making that prayer your heart became vainglorious.

You regarded yourself as speaking (confidentially) with God. 4^
Gh r (there is) many a one that becomes separated (from God)
by this opinion.

Although the King sit with you on the ground, know yourself
and sit better (with more decorum and reverence)*

The falcon said, "O King, I am penitent, I am converted,
lam embracing Islam anew.

He whom Thou makest drunken and pot-valiant 1 — if from
drunkenness he walk crookedly, do Thou accept his excuse*
Though my talons are gone, when thou art mine I tear off the
forelock of the sun;

And though my wings arc gone, when Thou art kind to 343
me the heavenly sphere lessens its play (slackens the speed of
its revolution in amazement) at my play (swift and sportive
flight).

If Thou bestow a belt on me, I will uproot the mountain ; if
Thou give me a pen, I will break the banners*.

After all, my body is not inferior to (that of) a gnat: with my
w ings I confound the kingdom of Nimrod.

Suppose me to be (as) the flocks of (small) birds 3 4 in weakness,
suppose every one of my enemies to be as the elephant 1 ,

1 Literally, "lidD^tching."

= J.e. the lanm Co which flags art attached.

31 Referring to Qur'in, cv, 3,

4 Qur'in ev F * +


2^0 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

{Yet if) I cast a baked (day) pellet the size of a hazel-nut, my
pellet in its effect is like (equal to) a hundred mangonels
(balkstas)."

3 y} Moses came to battle with his one rod and made an onset
against Pharaoh and (all) his swords.

Ever)' Prophet who by himself has knocked at that door (and
besought God to help him) has alone (single-handed) fought
(victoriously) against the whole world.

When Noah begged of Him (God) a sword, through Him (at
His command) the waves of the Flood became of sword-like
temper.

G Ahmad (Mohammed)* who (what) indeed are the armies
of the earth? Behold the moon in heaven (and) split her brow 1 .

In order that the ignorant astronomer 2 may know that this
cycle is thy cycle, not the cycle of the moon.

It is thy cycle, because (even) Moses, he who spoke (with
God), was constantly yearning after this cycle of thine.

When Moses beheld the splendour of thy cycle, in which the
dawn of Revelation was arising,

He said, h O Lord, what cycle of mercy is that? It is beyond
mercy i there (in that cycle) is vision (of Thee).

Plunge Thy Moses in the seas (of Time) and bring him up
(to the surface) from the midst of the cycle of Ahmad (Moham¬
med)- 1 *

God said, 1 O Moses, on that account 3 I have shown (it) to
thee; on that account I have opened to thee the way to that
(spiritual) communion (with Mohammed),

16a Because in this (present) cycle, D KaJim J , thou art far from
that (cycle of Mohammed and canst not attain to it): draw back
thy foot, for this blanket is (too) long (for thee).

I am kind, I show My servant bread in order that desire (for
it) may cause that living one to weep.

A mother rubs the nose of her babe, that it may wake and
seek some food—

For it may have fallen asleep hungry unawares.; and (on
waking) it prods her two breasts for the sake of (getting)
milk,

1 was a treasure, a hidden mercy, so I sent forth a rightly
guided Imim”

5 Every (Divine) grace that you are seeking with (all) your soul.
He showed it to you that you might desire it.

How many idols did Ahmad (Mohammed) break in the world,
that the (religious) communities might cry “G Lord"*!

1 Referring (o liv, i.

1 Literally, “tihe observer ot) the atom which brin^good or bad luck."

1 /.. r. "in order that ihe sigh* of it may cause thee 10 desire it (apirituaJlyh
1 hough it is out of thy reach {tempOndly}. 1 *

1 Interlocutor. Moses b jo called, bcdUie he conversed with God r


THE KING AND THE FALCON 241

Had it not been for the efforts of Ahmad, you also, like your
ancestors, would be worshipping idols.

This head of yours has been delivered from bowing to idols,
in order that you may acknowledge his rightful claim upon the
(gratitude of the religious) communities.

If you speak, speak thanks for this deliverance, that he may
also deliver you from the idol within.

Since he has delivered your head from idols, do you deliver 370
your heart also by means of that strength (which you have gained
from him}.

You have neglected 1 to give thanks for the Religion because
you got it for nothing as an inheritance from your father.

How should a man who inherits know the’ value of wealth?

A Rustam tore his soul (suffered agonies in acquiring it),
(whereas) Zil got it cost'free.

'* When I cause (any one) to weep. My mercy is aroused: that
wailer drinks of (enjoys) My bounty,

if I do not wish to give, (then) indeed I do not show him (the
desired gift), (but) when 1 have closed (contracted) his heart
(with grief), 1 open (expand) it (with joy).

My mercy is dependent on that goodly weeping: when he 373
weeps, waves rise from the sea of (My) mercy.”

floor by Divine inspiration Shayfth Ahmad son 0/ Khizntya,
may God sanctify his revered spirit, bought liaised
{sweetmeat) for his creditors.

There was a Shuykh who was continually in debt because of
the generosity which that illustrious one had (in his nature).

He used to make myriads of debts (by borrowing) from the
great, and spend (all the money) upon the poor (dervishes) of
the world.

He had also built a monastery (for Sufis) by (running into)
debt; he had devoted life and wealth arid monastery (to God).

God was paying his debts from every quarter: God made
flour out of sand for the Friend’s (Abraham’s) sake.

The prophet said that two angels are (always) praying here
in the markets, (saying),

"O God, do Thou give the prodigal a boon in return, and
O God do Thou give the miserly a bane (in return).”

Especially (does this apply to) the prodigal who has freely spent
his soul (life) and made his throat a sacrifice to the Creator.

He offers his throat, like Ismi'il (Ishmael): die knife cannot
do anything to (hurt) his throat.

On this account, then, the martyrs are living in joy: do not,
infidel-like, look at the body (alone),

1 Literally, "turned your head aside."


2+2 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

jS5 Since God hath given them in return the spirit of everlasting-
ness — a spirit safe from grief and pain and misery.

The debtor Shaykh acted in this fashion for years, taking
and giving like a steward.

He was sowing seeds till the day of death, that on the day of
death he might be a most glorious prince.

When the Shaykh r s life reached its end and he saw in his
(bodily) existence the signs of death h

The creditors were seated together around him T (while) the
Shaykh was gently melting on himself, like a candle.

The creditors had become despairing and sour-faced i the
pain in (their) hearts was accompanied by pain in (their) lungs 1 .

44 Look at diese evil-thinking men" said the Shaykh. “Hath
not God four hundred gold dinars?”

A boy outside shouted "Hake&V* and bragged of (the
excellence of) the hated in hope of (getting) some dongs-.

The Shaykh with (a nod of) his head directed the famulus
to go and buy the whole of the halted ¥

(Saying to himself), “ so that the creditors, when they eat the
halted, for a (short) while may not look bitterly on me”
m The famulus at once went out through the doorway to buy
with gold the halted entire.

lie said to the boy, u How r much is the halted in the lump?”
llie boy said, JI Half a dinar and some small change."

“Nay/* he replied; "don't ask too much from Sufis: I will
give you half a dinar. Say no more."

The boy put the tray before the Shaykh. Behold (now) the
mysterious secret thoughts of the Shaykh 1

He made a sign to the creditors (as though to say), “Look,
this gift (of sweetmeat) is a present (to you) : eat this gladly, it is
lawful (food)."

400 When the tray was emptied, die boy took it and said," Give
me the gold* G Sage,”

The Shaykh said, 14 From where shall I get the money? I am
in debt and going towards non-existence."

The hoy in (his) grief dashed the tray upon the ground; he
raised (his voice in) lamentation and weeping and moaning*

The boy w as weeping with loud sobs because of the swindle,
(and crying), “Would that both my legs had been broken (ere
1 came hither)!

Would that I had loitered round the bath-stove and had not
passed by the door of this monastery 1
4 d S Lickspittle gluttonous 3 Sufis, dogs at heart and washing their
faces like cats I ”

1 I,* r thetr anguish of mind caused them to breathe hard and painfully.

3 The ddng is the sixth pan of a dirhem.

1 Literally, "sacking (dainty) morsels. 1 *


the SHAYKH and THE CONFECTIONER’S boy 243

At the boy’s Clamour all and sundry 1 gathered there and
crowded round the boy.

He came to the Shaykh and said, " O cm el Shaykh, know
for sure that my master will kill me (with blows).

Ifl go (back) to him empty-handed, he will kill me: wilt thou
give (him) leave (to do that)? ”

And those creditors too turned to the Shaykh with disbelief
and denial, saying, "What game was this?

Thou hast devoured our property and art carrying off thy no
iniquities (to the next world): for what reason was this other
injustice (put) on the top (of all the rest)?”

Till afternoon prayers the boy wept; the Shaykh closed his
eyes and did not look at him.

The Shakyh, unconcerned with abuse and opposition, had
withdrawn his moon-like face under the coverlet.

Pleased with eternity, pleased with death, joyous, unconcerned
with revilement and the talk of high or low.

lie in whose face the Beloved smiles sweetly 2 , what harm can
befall him from the sour looks of (other) people?

He on whose eye the Beloved bestows a kiss, how should he +15
grieve at Heaven and its anger?

On a moonlight night what cares the moon in (the mansion
of) Simiik for dogs and their barking?

The dog is performing his task; the moon is smoothly fulfilling
her task by means of her (bright) countenance.

Every one is executing his little business: water does not lose
purity because of a bit of weed (rubbish).

The weeds float weedily (contemptibly) on the surface of the
water: the pure water flows on undisturbed.

(Mohammed) splits the moon at midnight; Abu 420
Lahab from hatred talks drivel*.

The Messiah (Jesus) brings the dead to life, and the Jew tears
his moustache in wrath.

Does the dog’s bark ever reach the moon’s ear, especially
tha( Moon who Is the chosen of God?

The king drinks wine on the bank of the stream till dawn,
and in listening to the music is unaware of the croaking of the
frogs.

The division of (the money due to) the bov (amongst the
creditors) would have been (only) a few ddngs (for each to pay);
(but) the Shavkh’s (spiritual) influence stopped that generosity.

So that no one should give the boy anything: the power of 414
the Pirs is even greater than this,

(When) it was (time for) afternoon prayers, a servant came
with a tray in his hand from one like mum,

! ['jWmJU','* jjood and bad/ 1 1 Li [crally, “like Candy."

1 Literally, "chews thistles." '


I6-?


244 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

A man of property anti condition: he sent it as a present to
the P(r (Shavkh), for he knew about him.

(There were) four hundred dinars, and in a corner of the tray
another half-dinar in a piece of paper*

The servant advanced and did honour to the Shaykh, and
laid the trav before the peerless Shaykh.

43 o When he (the Shaykh) uncovered the face of the tray, the
people beheld the miracle (manifested) from him.

immediately cries of sorrow and lamentation arose from all
— “O head of the Shaykhs and (spiritual) kings, what was (the
meaning of) this ?

What secret is this? Once more, what sovereignty is this, O
lord of the lords of mystery?

We knew not. Pardon us. Very deranged were the words
that went out from us.

We who blindly brandish staffs cannot help breaking lamps.

43S We, like deaf men, without haring heard a single thing spoken
(to us), are answering idly from our own surmise.

We have not taken warning from Moses, who was made
shamefaced 1 by disbelief in a Khixr,

Notwithstanding (that he had) an eye that sped aloft, and
the light of his eye was piercing heaven.

O Moses (of this age), through foolishness the eye of a mill-
mouse has fanatically set itself against thine eye.”

The Shaykh said, U I forgive all that talk and palaver; it is
lawful to you*.

44d The secret of this (matter) was that 1 besought God; con¬
sequently He showed me the right way.

And said, ‘Though that dinar i$ little, yet (the payment of)
it is dependent on the boy’s outcry.

Until the Weed-selling boy weeps, the sea of (My) mercy is
not aroused V*

O brother, the child (boy) is the child (pupil) of your eye:
know surely that (the gaining of) your desire is dependent on
(tears of) distress.

If you wish that that robe of honour (which you desire)
should come (to you), then make the child (pupil) of your eye
weep over your body,

Hotc & certain perron frightened an ascetic, saying,

" Weep little , lest thou become blind*'

44j A comrade in the work (of religion) said to an ascetic, " Weep
little, lest thine eye conxe to harm.”

The ascetic said, "The case is not outside of (admits only)

« Lilt rally, " ycilow-factd.”

* l.t. “I acquit you of responsibility for it,"


THE; SHAYKH AND THE CONFECTIONER^ BOY 245

two (alternatives)* the eye will see, or it will not see, that
(Divine) Beauty,

If it see the Light of God + what is there to grieve about?
How little are two eyes (to him that is) in union with God!

And if it $hall not see God t let it go! Let such a miserable eye
become blind ! 11

Do not grieve for your eye when that Jesus is yours; do not
go to the left (but to the right), that he may give you two right
(sound) eyes.

The Jesus of your spirit is present with you: beg aid from s ■
him, for he is a goodly aider;

But do not every moment lay on the heart of (that) Jesus the
unprofitable work of (providing for) a body full of bones,

Like the fool whom we mentioned in the story 7 for the sake
of the righteous.

Seek not you from your Jesus the life of the body> ask not
from your Moses the wish of a Pharaoh.

Burden not your heart with thoughts of livelihood; Livelihood
will not fail: be (constant in attendance) at the (Divine)
Court.

This body is a tent for the spirit, or like an ark for Noah. 455

When the Turco man is there, he will find a tent, especially
when he is one held in honour at the Court (of God).

Conclusion of the story of the coming to life of the hones at the

prayer of Jesus, on whom be peace!

Jesus pronounced the Name of God over the bones on account
of the young man's entreaty.

For the sake of that foolish man the decree of God gave life
to the form which those bones had possessed.

A black lion sprang forth, smote once with its paw* and
destroyed his (bodily) image.

It tore up Ins skull: his brain was scattered on the spot—the -pfio
brain (kernel) of a nut* for in him was no brain.

If he had had a brain, his being broken to pieces would have
been no injury at all except to his body.

Jesus $aid (to the lion), 11 How did you maul him so quickly?"
The lion said, " Because thou wert troubled by him/ 1

Jesus asked, "How did not you drink the man's blood? M
“In the (Divine) dispensation *t\vas not granted to rue to drink
(it),” replied the Jion.

Oh n many a one that like that raging lion has departed from
the world without having eaten his prey!

His (ordained) portion is not (even) a straw, while his greed 4*5
is as (great as) a mountain; he hath no means (of sati Jying hk
desires), though he has gotten the (material) means*


246 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

O Thou who hast made it easy for us to do unrewarded and
fruitless labour in the world* deliver us!

To us it seems a (tempting) bait and J tis (really) a hook: show
it to us even as it is.

The lion said, " O Messiah* (my killing) this prey was merely
for the purpose that warning might be taken (dy others).

Had there (still) been for me in the world an allotted portion
(of food) p what business indeed should I have had with the
dead?”*

47* This is the punishment deserved by him that finds pure
water, and like an ass stales impertinently in the stream.

If the ass know the value of that stream, instead of his foot
he will put his head in it.

He (the fool) finds a prophet like that p a lord of the (life-
giving) Water p a cherisher or life:

llow does not he die before him, saying “O lord of the
Water* make me living by the command Be *} 11

Take heed! do not wish your currish (fleshly) soul alive* for
it is the enemy of your spirit since long ago.

47$ Dust be on the head of the bones that hinder this cur from
hunting the spirit 2 !

(If) you are not a cur p how are you in love with bones? Why
are you in love with blood, like a leech?

What (sort of) eye is that that hath no sight, and gets nothing
but disgrace from the tests (to which it is put)?

Opinions are sometimes erroneous, (but) what (sort of)
opinion is this that is blind to the (right) road?

O eye, thou makest lament for others: sit down awhile and
weep for thyself!

-iKln The bough is made green and fresh by the weeping cloud,
for the (same) reason that the candle is made brighter bv (its)
weeping.

Wheresoever people are lamenting, sit you there (and lament),
because you have a better right to moan (than they have),

Inasmuch as they are (concerned) with parting from that
which passes away, and are forgetful of the ruby of everlasting¬
ness that belongs to the mine (of Reality);

Inasmuch as the stamp of" blind imitation is (as) a lock upon
the heart;—go, scrape off (dissolve) its lock with tears—;

Inasmuch as imitation is the bane of every good quality;
imitation is (but) a sttaw, (even) if it is a mighty mountain, '

If ^ blind man is big and choleric, deem him (only) a piece of
flesh, since he has no eye (eye-sight).

Though he (the blind imitator) speak words finer than a hair
his heart has no knowledge of those words.

s I^ m ‘‘how should I have died?"

1 /,*, from seeking to became spiritualised.


THE FOOL’S PRAYER GRANTED BY JESUS 247

He has a certain intoxication from his own words, but there
is a good way (distance) between him and the Wine*

He is like a river-bed: it does not drink any water; the water
passes through St to the water-drinkers.

The water does not settle in the river-bed because the river¬
bed is not thirsty and water-drinking.

Like a reed-flute, he makes a piteous lament, but he (only) * 9 °
seeks a purchaser (admirer).

The imitator in bb discourse is (like) a professional mourner:
that wicked man has no motive except cupidity.

The professional mourner utters burning words (of grief), hut
where is the glow of heart (heartfelt sorrow) and the rent skirt?

Between the true knower and the blind Imitator there are
(great) differences, for the former is like David, while the other
is (but) an echo*

The source of the former's words is a glow (of feeling),
whereas the imitator is one w r ho learns old things (by rote).

Beware! be not duped by those sorrowful words: the ox -195
bears the load, but it is the cart that moans (creaks) 1 .

Even the imitator is not disappointed of the (Divine) recom¬
pense: the professional mourner gets his wages at the (time of)
reckoning.

(Both) in Adel and true believer say "God,” but there is a
good difference between the two*

The beggar says “God” for the sake of bread; the devout
man says “God ss from his very souL

If the beggar distinguished (God as He really is) from his
own saying (the name of God), neither less nor more would
remain before his eye 2 .

For years that bread-seeker says “God”; like the ass, he Joo
carries the Qur'an for the sake of (being fed with) stravv.

Had the word on his lips shone forth in his heart, bis body
would have been shivered to atoms.

In sorcery the name of a demon finds the way (to success);;
you are earning a petty coin by means of the Name of God,


How a peasant stroked a lion in the dark, because he
thought it was his ox.

A peasant tied an ox in the stable; a Hon ate his ox and sat in
its place.

The peasant went into the stable to (see) the ox: the man,
groping into comers* was seeking the ox at night.

He was rubbing his hand on the limbs of the lion p back and 505
side, now above* now below.

1 Literal! j* " the load Is on the ox and the moaning on the cart . 11

1 lx. he would lose all consciousnesd of self-in ceres t.


24S MATHNAWf, BOOK II

The lion said, “If the light were to become greater, his gall¬
bladder would burst and his heart would turn to blood.

He i$ stroking me like this so boldly because In this (dark)
night he thinks I am the ox.”

God is saying, “O blind dupe, did not Tiir (Sinai) fall in
pieces at My Name?

For if li t had sent dozen (revealed) a Book to the mountain,
it would have been riven asunder, then cut to pieces, and then
it would have departed (disappeared),
sto If Mount Uhud had been acquainted with Me, blood would

have gushed in jets from the mountain.”

You have heard this from your father and mother; in con¬
sequence you have embraced it thoughtlessly.

If you become acquainted with Him without blind imitation,
by (His) grace you will become immaterial*, like a voice from
Heaven,

Hear this (following) story as a deterrent, in order that you
may know the banefulness of blind imitation.

Hate the $uf{s sold the traveller’s beast {to pay ) for
the {expenses of the) mystic dance .

A Sufi, after journeying, arrived at a monastery (for Sufis),
he took his mount and led it to the stable,
sis With his own hand he gave it a little water and some fodder;
(he was) not such a Sufi as the one we told of before.

He took precaution for it against neglect and craziness, (hut)
when the (Divine) destiny comes to pass, of what avail is pre¬
caution?

The Sufis were destitute and poor: poverty- almost comprises
an infidelity that brings (the soul) to perdition,

O thou rich man who art full fed, beware of laughing at the
unrighteousness of the suffering poor.

On account of their destitution that Sufi flock, all of then;,
adopted (the expedient of) selling the ass,

Saying, “(In case) of necessity a carcase is lawful (food);
(there is) many a vicious act that necessity made a virtuous

They instantly sold the little ass; they fetched dainty viands
and lit candles

Jubilation arose in the monastery: (they cried}* “To-night
there are dainties and music and dancing and voracity.

How much (more) of this {earning the) wallet and this
beggary? How much (more) of this patience and of this
three-day fasting?


1 Litera%. *' without trace (of BdT-antentt}.»


THE SUFIS WHO SOLD THE TRAVELLER^ ASS 249

We also are of (God's) creatures, we have soul. Good luck
(is ours) tO-night; we have the guest (to entertain). 11

Thereby they were sowing Hie seed of falsehood p for they 52 j
deemed soul that which is not soul.

And the traveller, too, was tired by the long journey and
(gladly) saw that favour and fondness (with which they regarded
him).

The Sufis, one by one, caressed him: they were playing the
game of (bestowing) pleasant attentions (on him).

When he saw their affection towards him, he said, 41 If 1 don't
make merry' to-night, w r hen (shall I do so)?"

They ate the viands and began 1 the sam& (musical dance);
the monastery was filled with smoke and dust up to the roof—

The smoke of the kitchen, the dust of (raised by) beating the 510
feet (dancing), the tumult of soul (caused) by longing and
ecstasy.,

Now, waving their hands„ they would beat (the ground with)
their feet; now, in (religious) prostration, they would, sweep the
dais (with their foreheads).

(Only) after long (waiting) does the Sufi gain his desire (the
satisfaction of his appetite) from Fortune? for that reason the
Sufi is a great eater;

Fxcept, to be sure, the Sufi who has eaten his fill of the Light
of God; he is free from the shame of beggary;

(But) of these Sufis there are (only) a few among thousands;
the rest are living in (under the protection of) his (the perfect
Sufi's spiritual) empire.

When the sunuT had come (run its course) from beginning to j,js
end, the minstrel struck up a heavy (deep-sounding) strain.

He commenced (to sing) T "The ass is gone, and the ass is
gone he made the whole (company) sharers in this en¬
thusiasm.

From thb enthusiasm (they continued) beating their feet
(dancing) till dawn, clapping their hands (and singing), "The
ass is gone, the ass is gone, U son! M

By way of imitation that Suft began (to sing) in (tones of)
impassioned feeling this same (phrase), "The ass is gone/ 1

When the pleasure and excitement and music and dancing
were over, day dawned and they all said,Farewell!"

The monastery' was de$erted, and the Sufi remained (alone) ; u*
that traveller set about shaking the dust from his baggage.

He brought out the baggage from his cell, in order that he
might tie it on the ass, (forhe was) desirous of (finding) people
to travel with.

1 Thi* archaic construction occurs several rimes in the.

XJaihmnri*.


250 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

He was burning that he might overtake his fellow-travellers;
he went into the stable but did not find the ass.

He said T "The servant has taken it (the ass) to water, because
it drank little water last night* 33

The servant came, and the Sufi said to him, M Where is the
ass?” "Look at your beard," 1 replied the servant, and a
quarrel arose.

sis He (the Sufi) said, “I have entrusted the ass to you, I have
put you in charge of the ass.

Discuss (the matter) with propriety, don't argue: deliver
back to me what I delivered to you,

I demand from you what 1 gave to you: return that which
I sent to you.

The Prophet said that whatever your hand has taken must in
the end be restored (to its owner)*

And if you, from insolence, are not content with this, look
here, let us (go) to the house of the Cadi of (our) religion.”

55& The servant said, "I was overpowered: the Sufis rushed (on
me), and I was in fear for my life.

Do you throw a liver with the parts next it amongst cats, and
(then) seek the trace of it ?

One cake of bread amongst a hundred hungry people, one
wasted (starved) cat before a hundred dogs?”

"I suppose/ 3 said the Sufi, "that they took it (the ass) from
you by violence, (and thereby) aimed at the life of wretched me;

{And seeing this) you would not come and say to me, l They
are taking away your ass, O poor man! *

ass So that 1 might buy back the ass from (the purchaser)
whoever he is t or else they might divide my money (amongst
themselves and return the ass to me).

There were a hundred ways of mending (the injury) when
they (the Sufis) were present, (but) now each one is gone to a
(different) clime.

Whom should I seize? Whom should I take to the Cadi ? s Tis
from you in sooth that this judgement has come upon me*

How wouldn't you come and say [to me), ‘O stranger, such
a terrible outrage has occurred'? 31

" By God,” said he, “I came several times to inform you of
these doings,

5 r «* (But) you were always saying, ‘The ass is gone, O son/ with
more gusto than all (the others) who said it.

(So) I was (always) going back, (thinking), 'He himself is
aware; he is satisfied with this (Divine) judgements he is a man
that knows (God) 7 '

The Stiff said, "They all w r ere saying (it) merrilv, (so) 1 also
took delight in saying it.

1 J.e. 0 recollect how old you are (and don't ask such a foolish question}/*


i


f


THE StfFIS WHO SOLD THE TRAVELLER'S ASS 2JI

Blind imitation of them has brought me to ruin : two hundred
curses he on that imitation!

Especially (on) imitation of such good-for-nothing rascals-—
the wrath of Abraham be on them that sink !

The delight of that company (of Sufis) was casting a re- $&$
flexion, and this heart of mine was becoming delighted by that
reflexion/"

The reflexion (cast) from goodly friends is necessary until
you become, without (the aid of any) reflexion, a drawer of
water from the Sea.

Know that the reflexion first cast is (only) imitation ¥ (but)
when it has become successive (continually recurrent) it turns
into (direct) realisation (of the truth).

Until it has become realisation, do not part from the friends
(by whom you are guided); do not break away from the shell:
the rain-drop has not (yet) become a pearl.

If you wish eye and understanding and hearing to be pure,
tear in pieces the curtains of selfish desire.

Because the Sufi’s imitation, (w'hich arose) from desire, j?®
debarred his understanding from the light and radiance.

Desire for the viands and desire for that delight (showm by
the Sufis) and for the f am£ hindered his understanding from
(gaining) knowledge (of what had happened).

If desire were to arise in the mirror, that mirror would
be like us in (respect of) hypocrisy.

If the balance had desire for riches„ how 1 would the balance
give a true description of the case?

Every prophet has said in sincerity' to his people, “I ask not
from you the wages for mv message.

I am (only) a guide; God is your purchaser: God has appointed *75
me to act as broker on both sides.

What are the wages for my work? The sight of the Friend
(God), even though Abu Bakr give me forty thousand (dirhems).

My wages arc not his forty thousand (dirhems): how T should
glass beads be like the pearls of Aden ? 11

I will tell you a story: listen to it attentively, that you may
know that selfish desire is a plug in the ear.

Whosoever hath (such) desire becomes a stammerer (morally
confused); with desire (present), how should the (spiritual) eye
and the heart become bright?

The fancy of power and wealth before his eye is just as a hair 3&0
in the eye,

Except, to be sure, (in the case of) the intoxicated (saint)
who is filled with God: though you give (him) treasures (vast
riches), he is free;

(For) when any one enjoys vision (of God), this world becomes
Carrion in his eves.


2$2 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Rut that Sufi was far removed from (spiritual) intoxication;
consequently he was night-blind (purblind) in (his) greed.

The man dazed by greed may hear a hundred stories, (but)
not a single point comes into the ear of greed.


Horn the triers of the Cadi advertised an insolvent round the town.

There was an insolvent person without house or home, who
remained in prison and pitiless bondage.

He would unconscionably eat the rations of the prisoners; on
account of (his) appetite he was (a burden) like Mount Gif on
the hearts of the people (in the gaol).

No one had the pluck to eat a mouthful of bread, because that
snatcher of portions would carry off his entire meal 1 .

Any one who is far from the feast of the Merciful (God) has
the eye of a (low) beggar, though he be a sultan.

He (the insolvent) had trodden virtue underfoot; the prison
had become a hell on account of that robber of bread,

590 If you flee in hope of some relief, on that side also a calamity
comes to meet von.

No corner is without wild beasts; there is no rest but in the
place where you are alone with God.

The comer (narrow cell) of this world's inevitable prison is
not exempt from the charges for visitors and (the cost of) house-
warming.

By God, if you go into a mouse-hole, you will be afflicted by
some one who has the claws of a cat.

Man has fatness from (thrives on) fancy, if his fancies are
beautiful;

595 And if his fancies show anything unlovely he melts away as
wax (is melted) by a fire,

II amidst snakes and scorpions God keep you with the fancies
o± them that arc (spiritually) fair.

The snakes and scorpions will be friendly to you, because
tliat fancy is the elixir which transmutes your copper (into
gold).

Patience is sweetened by fair fancy, since (in that case) the
fancies of relief (from pain) have come before (the mind).

That relief comes into the heart from faith; w eakness of faith
is despair and torment.

to Fati ence gains a crown from faith: wh t re on e hath no patience p
he hath no faith.

The Prophet said* “God has not given faith to any one in
whose nature there is no patience.**

4 Liienily. " would carry off hi» ox. lh The ^reedv insolvent is compared ta
a bon.


/


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT 253

That same one (who) in your eyes is like a snake i$ a picture
(of beauty) in the eyes of another,

Because in your eyes is the fancy of hi$ being an infidel, while
in the eyes of his friend is the fancy of lus being a (true) believer;

For both the effects (belief and unbelief) exist in this one
person: now he is a fish and now a hook.

Half of him is believer, half of him infidel ; half of him &05
cupidity, half of him patience (and abstinence).

Your God has said, "(Some) of you (are) believing"; (and)
again, "(Some) of you (are) unbelieving * 7 (as) an old fire-wor¬
shipper.

(He is) like an ox> his left half black, the other half white as
the moon*

Whoever sees the Former half spurns (him); whoever sees the
latter half seeks (after him),

Joseph was tike a beast of burden in the eyes of his brethren;
at the same time in the eyes of a Jacob he was like a hourL

Through evil fancy the (bodily) derivative eye and the original om
unseen eye (of the mind) regarded him (Joseph) as ugly.

Know that the outward eye is the shadow of that (inward)
eye: whatever that (inward) eye may see, this (outward) eye
turns to that (eye) P

You arc of where 1 , (but) your origin is in Nowhere 3 : shut up
this shop and open that shop*

Do not flee to the (world of the) six directions, because in
directions there is the shnshdard*, and the shashdara is mate*
mate.


How the prisoners laid a complaint of the insohen i s -high¬
handedness before the agent of the Cadi .

The prisoners came to complain to the Cadi’s agent, (who
was) possessed of discernment.

Saying, “Take now our salutations to the Cadi and relate $15
(to him) the sufferings indicted on us by this vile man;

For he has remained in this prison continuously, and he is an
idle gad-about, a lickspittle, and a nuisance.

Like a fly P he impudently appears at every meal without
invitation and without salaam.

To him the food of sixty persons is nothing; he feigns himself
deaf if you say to him* 1 Enough ! 3

No morsel reaches the (ordinary') man in prison, or if by
means of a hundred contrivances he discover some food,

That hell-throat at once comes forward (with) this (as) his tea
argument, that God has said , 1 Eat ye.'

1 Literally, “place* Literally, ^not-plK*."

1 A certain disMtrfiUt position in the game of nurd.


3J4 MATHS A wt, BOOK II

justice, justice against such a three years' famine! May the
shadow of our lord endure for ever!

Either let this buffalo go from prison, or make him a regular
allowance of food from a trust-fund,

O thou by whom both males and females are (made) happy,
do justice! Thy help is invoked and besought."

The courteous agent went to the Cadi and related the com¬
plaint to him point by point.

6 =i The Cadi called him (the insolvent) from the prison into his
presence, and (then) inquired (about him) from his own officers.

All the complaints which that flock (of prisoners) had set
forth were proved to the Cadi,

The Cadi said (to him), “Get up and depart from this prison:
go to the house which is your inherited property."

fie replied, “My house and home consist in thy beneficence;
as (in the case of) an infidel, thy prison is my Paradise,

If thou wilt drive me from the prison and turn me out 1 , verily
1 shall die of destitution and beggary."

* 3 “ (He pleaded) like the Devil, who was saying, “O Preserver,
O my Lord, grant me a respite till the day of Resurrection ;

For 1 am happy (to be) in the prison of this world, in order
that I may be slaying the children of mine enemy,

(And), if any one have some food of faith and a single loaf as
provision for the journey (to the life hereafter),

I may seize it, now by plot and now by guile, so that in re¬
pentance they may raise an outcry (of lamentation);

(And in order that) sometimes I may threaten them with
poverty, sometimes bind their eyes with (the spell of) tress and
mole,”

6 j S in this prison (the world) the food of faith is scarce, and that
which exists is in (danger of being caught in) the noose (of
destruction) through the attack of this cur,

(If) from prayer and fasting and a hundred helplessnesses
(utter self-abnegations) the food of spiritual feeling come (to
any one), he (the Devil) at once carries it off.

1 seek refuge with God from His Satan: we have perished,
alas, through his overweening disobedience.

He is (but) one cur, and he goes into thousands (of people)-
into whomsoever he goes, he (that person) becomes he (Satan)
Whoever makes you cold (damps your spiritual ardour) know
that he (Satan) is in him: the Devil has become hidden beneath
his skin.

hi« When he finds no (bodily) form, he comes into (vour) fancy
in order that that fancy may lead you into woe: ' J ’

Now the fancy of recreation, now of the shop; now the fancy
of knowledge, and now of house and home.

1 Literally, “drive me with repulsion,”


r


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT 255

*

Beware! say at once “God help me! n again and again 1 , not
with tongue alone but from your very $ou I.

The Cadi said,“ Show plainly that you are insolvent/* “ Here
are the prisoners/* he replied, "as thy witnesses/ 1

"They,” said the Cadi, “are suspect, because they are fleeing
from you and weeping blood (on account of your ill-treatment
of them);

Also, they are suing to be delivered from you: by reason of '45
this self-interest the testimony they give is worthless/*

All the people belonging to the court of justice said, “We
bear witness both to his insolvency and to his (moral) de¬
generacy/ 1

Every one whom the Cadi questioned about his condition
said* “My lord, wash thy hands of this insolvent/ 1

The Cadi said, “March him round the city for all to see, (and
cry), 'This man is an insolvent and a great rogue/

Make proclamations concerning him, street by street; beat
the drum (as an advertisement) of his insolvency eve it where
in open view*

Let no one sell to him on credit, let no one lend him a "j*
farthing.

Whosoever may bring here a claim against him for fraud, I
will not put him in prison any more.

His insolvency has been proven to me: he has nothing in his
possession, (neither) money nor goods/*

Man is in the prison of this world in order that pe rad venture
his insolvency may be proven.

Our God has also proclaimed in our Qur'an the insolvency of
Iblis*

Saying, “He is a swindler and insolvent and liar 2 * : do not653
make any partnership or (play any) game with him/*

And if you do so (and) bring (vain) pretexts to him 4 * , he is
insolvent: how r will you get profit from him?

When the trouble started 1 * they brought on the scene the
camel of a Kurd who sold firewood*

The helpless Kurd made a great outcry; he also gladdened the
officer (appointed to seize the camel) with (the gift of) a ddng;

(But) they took away his camel from the time of forenoon
until nightfall, and his lamentation was of no use.

Upon the camel sat that sore famine (the insolvent), while the e&a
owner of the camel was running at its heels.

1 Literally, “bj many limes (the litany which begin* with the word*)

L4 Aral/'

1 Literally, "one whose word* are evil, 1 *

* I "if you become hi* partner and then plead with him to *ave you
from the consequence* of your folly . 11

4 Literally, lf wa* kindled / 1 The "trouble * 1 ttfera to the business of

parading the insolvent.


2$b


MATHNAWI s BOOK II


They sped from quarter to quarter and from street to street,
till the whole town knew him by sight.

Before every bath and market-place all the people ga2ed on
his (features and) figure,

(There were) ten loud-voiced criers, Turks and Kurds and
Anatolians and Arabs s (proclaiming),

“This man is insolvent and has nothing: let no one lend him
a single brass farthings

He does not possess a single mite, patent or latent: he is a
bankrupt, a piece of falsehood 1 , a cunning knave, an oil-bag*.

Beware and beware! Have no dealings with him; when he
brings the ox (to sell), make fast the knot;

And if ye bring this decayed fellow to judgement, I will not
put a corpse in prison.

He is fair-spoken and his throat is very wide 3 ; (he is clad)
with a new inner garment (of plausibility) and a tattered outer
garment.

If he puts on that (inner) garment for the purpose of deceiving,
it is borrowed in order that he may beguile the common folk/*

Know, O simple man, that words of wisdom on the tongue of
the unwise are (as) borrowed robes.

Although a thief has put on a (fine) robe, how should he whose
hand is cut ofH take your hand (lend you a helping hand)?

When at nightfall be (the insolvent) came down from the
camel, the Kurd said to him t <4 My abode is far (from here) and
a long way off.

You haVe ridden on my camel since early morning: I (will)
let the barley go, (but I will not take) less than the cost of (some)
straw/*

"Why, then," he rejoined, “have we been going round (the
city) until now? Where are your wits? Is nobody at home?

675 The (sound of the) drum (giving notice) of my insolvency
reached the Seventh 1 leaven, and you have not heard the bad
news!

Your ear has been filled with foolish hope; (such) hope, then,
makes (one) deaf (and) blind, my lad/'

Even clods and stones heard this advertisement — "he is
insolvent, he is insolvent, this scoundrel/ 1

They (the criers) said it till nightfall, and it made no impres¬
sion on the owner of the camel, because he was full of (idle)
hope, full,

God's seal lies upon the hearing and sight: within the veils
is many a form and many a sound.


1 Literally, com/'

; /.*. smooth-tanjfLied and deceitful* 41 a wix
1 /.*. he pours forth hue words in abimdan
* The usual penalty for theft.


windbag / 1
Janet .


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT 257

He communicates to the eye that which He wills of beauty 68a
and of perfection and of amorous looks;

And He communicates to the ear that which He wills of music
and glad tidings and cries (of rapture).

The world is full of remedies, but you have no remedy till
God opens a window far you.

Though you are unaware of that (remedy) just now, God will
make it plain in the hour of need.

1 he Prophet said that the glorious God has created a remedy
for every pain; '

But of that remedy for your pain you will not see (even) the 685
colour or scent without His command.

Come, O you that seek the remedy, set your eye on non-
spatiality 1 , as the eye of one (about to be) killed (turns) towards
the spirit.

This (spatial) world has been produced from that which is
without spatial relations, for the world has received (the relation
of) place - from placelessness.

Turn back from existence towards non-existence, (if) you
seek the Lord and belong to the Lord.

This non-existence is the place of income: do not flee from
it; this existence of more and less is the place of expenditure.

Since God’s workshop is non-existence, outside of the work- 690
shop there is (only) worthlessness.

Put into our heart subtle words which may move Thee to
mercy, O Gracious One!

From Thee (come) both the prayer and the answer ;from Thee
safety, from Thee also dread.

If we have spoken faultily, do Thou correct it: Thou art the
Corrector, Q Thou (who art the) Sultan of speech.

Fhou hast the alchemy whereby Thou mavst transmute it,
and though it be a river of blood, mayst make'it a Nile.

Such alchemical operations are Thy work, such elixirs are Thy
secrets. J

Thou didst beat water and earth together: from water and
clay Thou didst mould the body of Adam.

I hou gavest him (Man) lineage and wife and uncles, maternal
and paternal, with a thousand thoughts and joys and griefs.

Again, to some Thou hast given deliverance; Tnou hast
parted them from this grief and joy;

I hou hast home them away from kindred and relatives and
(their own) nature, Thou hast made every fair thing foul in his
(such a one’s) eves.

He spurns all that is perceived by the senses, and leans for 700
support on that which is invisible.

1 /.e H ih® Davi_nc consciousness which trsnsccncta space,

1 LitenJly* " has become place "


2^8 MATHKAWf* BOOK II

His love is manifest and his Beloved is hidden: the Friend is
outside (of the world), (but) His fascination is in the world.

Give up this (belief) 1 . Loves (felt) for what is endued with
form have not as their object the (outward) form or the lady's
face.

That which is the object of love is not the form, whether it he
love for (the things of) this world or yonder world.

That w r hich you have come to love for its form — why have
you abandoned it after the spirit has fled?

Its form is still there: whence (then) this satiety (disgust)?
O lover, inquire who jour beloved (really) is.

If die beloved is that which the senses perceive, every one
that has senses would be in love (with it).

Inasmuch as constancy is increased by that (spiritual) love,
how is constancy altered (impaired) by the (decay of the material)
form ?

The sunbeam shone upon the wall: the wall received a
borrowed splendour.

Why set your heart on a piece of turf, O simple man? Seek
out the source which shines perpetually.

You who are in love with your intellect, deeming yourself
superior to w orshippers of form.

That (intellect) is a beam of (Universal) Intellect (cast) on your
sense-perception; regard it as borrowed gold on your copper.

Beauty in humankind is like gilding; else, how did your
sweetheart become (as ugly as) an old ass ?

She was like an angel, she became like a demon, for that
loveliness in her was a borrowed (transient) thing*

Little by little He (God) takes away that beauty: little by
little the sapling withers.

m Go* recite (the text) to whomso We grant length of days, him
We cause to decline. Seek the heart (spirit), set not thy heart on
bones;

For that beauty' of the heart is the lasting beauty: its lips give
to drink of the Water of Life.

Truly it is both the water and the giver of drink and the
drunken: all three become one when your talisman is shattered.

That oneness you cannot know by reasoning* Do service (to
God) and refrain from foolish gabble * O undisceming man!

Your reality is the form and that which is borrowed: you
rejoice In what is relative and (secondary like) rhyme,

710 Reality' is that which seizes (enraptures) you and makes you
independent of form.

Reality is not that w'hich makes blind and deaf and causes a
man to be more in love with form.

The portion of the blind is the fancy that increases pain; the

1 /rtf. the belief in phenomena.


THE NATURE OF TRUE LOVE


*59


share of the (spiritual) eye is these fancies (ideas) of dying to
self (fand).

The blind are a mine (full) of the letter of the Qur'an; they
do not see the as, and (only) cling to the pack-saddle.

Since you have sight, go after the ass which has jumped (away
from you): how long (will you persist in) stitching the saddle,

O saddle-worshipper?

When the ass is there, the saddle will certainly be yours: bread ?ij
does not fail when you have the (vital) spirit.

(On) the back of the ass is shop and wealth and gain; the pearl
of your heart is the stock (which provides wealth) for a hundred
bodies.

Mount the ass bare-backed. O busybody: did not the Prophet
ride the ass bare-backed?

The Prophet rode (his beast) bare-backed; and the Prophet,
it is said, journeyed on foot.

The ass, your fleshly soul, has gone off; tie it to a peg. How
long will it run away from work and burden, how long?

It must bear the burden of patience and thanksgiving, whether 7$a
for a hundred years or for thirty or twenty.

Xone that is laden supported another’s load; none reaped
until he sowed something.

Tis a raw (absurd) hope; eat not what is raw, O son: eating
raw brings illness to men,

(Do not say to yourself), "So-and-so suddenly found a trea¬
sure; I would like the same: neither work nor shop (for me)!"

That (discovery of treasure) is Fortune’s doing (a piece of
luck), and moreover it is rare: one must cam a living so lone as
the body is able.

How docs earning a livelihood prevent the (discovery of)
treasure? Do not retire from work: that (treasure), indeed, is
(following) behind (the work).

See that you are not made captive bv "if," saving, “ If I had
done this or the other (thing),’*

For the sincere Prophet forbade (people) to sav “if,” and
said, "That is from hypocrisy”;

For the hypocrite died in saying "if," and from saving "if"
he won nothing but remorse.


Parable.

certain stranger was hastily seeking a house: a friend took
him to a house in ruins.

He said (to the stranger)," If this (house) had a roof, it would 74 *
be a home for you beside me.

Your family too would be comfortable, if it had another room
in it."


U-:


2 5a MATHNAWf, BOOK II

"Yes/ 1 said he, “ £ it is nice (to be) beside friends, but my dear

soul, one cannot lodge in "ifV F

All the world are seekers of happiness, and on account or a
false happiness they are in the fire.

Old and young 1 have become gold-seekers., but the common
eye does not distinguish alloy from gold-

The pure (gold) shot a beam on the alloy: see that you
choose not the gold on the ground of (mere) opinion f without
a touchstone.

If you have a touchstone, choose; otherwise, go, devote your¬
self to 2 him that knows (the difference).

Either you must have a touchstone within your own soul , or
if you know not the Way, do not go forward alone.

The cry of the ghouls is the cry of an acquaintance—an
acquaintance who would lure you to perdition.

She (the ghoul) keeps on crying, “Hark, O caravan people!
Come towards me, here is the track and the landmarks/' ^

7 VJ The ghoul mentions the name of each, saying in O $o-and-&o,
in order that she may make that persanage one of those who sink.

When he reaches the spot, he sees wolves and lions, his life
lost, the road far off, and the day late.

Prithee say, what is the ghoul’s cry like? (It is) “ 1 desire
riches, I desire position and renown/ 1

Prevent these voices from (entering) your heart, so that
(spiritual) mysteries may be revealed.

Repeat (in prayer) the name of God, drown 5 the cry of the
ghouls, close your narcissus-eye to this vulture,

755 Know the difference between the false dawn and the true,
distinguish the colour of the wine from the colour of the cup,
That, perchance, from the eyes which see the seven colours
patience and waiting may produce a (spiritual) eye,

(With which) you may behold colours other than these, and
may behold pearls instead of stones.

What pearl? Nay, you will become an ocean, you will become
a sun traversing the sky;

The Worker is hidden in the workshop: go you and in the
workshop see Him plain,

7 *o Inasmuch as the work has w oven a veil over the Worker, you
cannot see Him outside of that work.

Since the workshop is the dwelling-place of the Worker, he that
is outside is unaware of Him,

Come t then, into the workshop, that is to say, non-existence,
that you may see the work and the Worker together.

As the workshop is the place of clairvoyance, then outside of
the workshop there is (only) blindfoldness.

1 Literally^ M raw.*'

1 Literally* “pot yauTwf in pmvn ». a Literally, bum,"


THE QUEST FOR REALITY 261

The rebellious Pharaoh kept his face towards existence,
consequently he was blind to His (God’s) workshop.

Consequently he was wishing to alter the (Divine) pre~
destination, that he might turn back the (Divine) destiny from
his door.

Truly the (Divine) destiny every moment was laughing
derisively under its lip at the moustache (arrogance) of that
cunning plotter.

He killed hundreds of thousands of innocent babes, in order
that the ordainmentand predestination of God might be averted.

In order that the prophet Moses might not come forth, he
laid on his neck (made himself responsible for) thousands of
iniquities and murders.

He wrought all that bloodshed, and (yet) Moses was born and
was made ready for his chastisement

Had he seen the workshop of the Everlasting (God), he would 7 jq
have ceased to move hand or foot 1 in plotting.

Moses (lay) safe* within his (Pharaoh’s) house, while outside
he was killing the infants in vain.

Even as the sensual man who pampers his body and suspects
some one else of a bitter hatred (against him),

Saying, “This one is a foe, and that one is envious and an
enemy," (though) in truth his envier and enemy is that body
(of his).

He is like Pharaoh, and his body is his Moses: he keeps
running (to and fro) outside, asking, “Where is my enemy?"

His fleshly soul (is) luxuriating in the house, which is his hotly,
(while) he gnaws his hand in rancour against some one else.


I lots men blamed a person who hilled his mother because he
suspected her {of adultery).

A certain man killed his mother in wrath, with blows of a
dagger and also with blows of his fist.

Some one said to him, “From evil nature you have not borne
in mind what is due to motherhood.

Hey, tell (me) why you killed vour mother, W hat did she
do ? Prav, tell (me), O foul villain! ”* .

He said, “She did a deed that is a disgrace to her; l killed
her because that earth (her grave) is her coverer (hides her
shame).”

The other said, “Q honoured sir, kill that one (who was her 7 *>
partner in guilt).” “Then,” he replied, "1 should kill a man
every day.

1 Literally ,"hh Knud and fwi would have become dry (paralysed)."

* Literal!v, ^ preserved from km (bp God).’

a Literally, "O man of wicked disposition, 1 '


262


MATH N A W I ? BOOK II

1 killed her, I was saved from shedding die blood of a multi-
tudc: p tis better that I cut her throat than the throats of {so
many) people.' 1

That mother of bad character p whose wickedness is in every
quarters is your fleshly souL

Come, kill ii t for on account of that vile (creature) you are
every moment assailing one who is venerable.

Through it this fair world is narrow (distressful) to you, for
its sake (you are at) war with Cod and man.

?85 (If) you have killed the fleshly soul, you arc delivered from
(the necessity of) excusing yourself: nobody in the world remains
your enemy.

If any one should raise □ difficulty about my words in regard
to 1 the prophets and saints,

(And should say), £b Had not the prophets a killed (mortified)
fleshly soul? Why, then, had they enemies and enviers? 1 '—

Give ear t Q seeker of truth, and hear the answer to this
difficulty (born) of doubt.

Those unbelievers were (really) enemies to themselves: they
were striking at themselves such blows (as they struck).

7 /a An enemy is one who attempts (another T s) life; he that is
himself destroying his own life is not an enemy {to others).

The little bat is not an enemy to the sun: it is an enemy to
itself in the veil (of its own blindness).

The glow of the sun kills it; how should the sun ever suffer
annoyance from it?

An enemy is one from whom torment proceeds, (one who)
hinders the ruby from (receiving the rays of) the sun.

All the infidels hinder themselves from (receiving) the rays
of the prophets 1 (spiritual) jewel.

How should (unbelieving) people veil the eyes of that peerless
one (the prophet or saint)? The people have (only) blinded and
distorted their own eyes.

(They are) like the Indian stave who bears a grudge and kills
himself to spite his master:

fie falls headlong from the roof of the house (in the hope)
that he may have done some harm to his master.

If the sick man become an enemy to die physician, or if the
boy show hostility to the teacher*

In truth they act as brigands against themselves: they them¬
selves way la y their own mind and spirit.

If a fuller take offence at the $un, if a fish is taking offence at
the water,

just once consider whom that (anger) injures, and whose siar
is eclipsed 2 by it in the end,

L f.f, L, Aa rejbfards their being applicable to. pF

1 Literally* H whtf t» bkcfc-itArrcd .' 3


THE MORTIFICATION OF THE FLESHLY SOUL 263


If God create you with ugly features, take care lest you
become both ugly-featured and ugly-natured;

And if your shoes are ripped, do not go into stony ground;
and if you have two spikes, don't become four-spiked 1 .

You are envious, sayings 11 1 am inferior to so-and-so: he (by
his superior position) is increasing my inferiority in fortune/ 1

(But) indeed envy is another defect and fault; nay, it is worse -05
than all inferiorities.

That Devil (Satan)* through the shame and disgrace of
inferiority (to Adam), east himself into a hundred damna¬
tions®.

Because of envy* he wished to be at the top. At the top,
forsooth [ Nay, (he wished) to be a hlood-shcdder.

Abu Jahl was pux to shame by Mohammed, and because of
enw was raising himself to the top.

His name was Abu THakam* and he became Abu Jahl 3 : oh,
many a worthy has become unworthy because of envy.

I "have not seen in the world of search and seeking (trial and, Sto
probation) any worthiness better than a good disposition.

God made the prophets the medium (between Him and His
creatures) in order that feelings of envy should be displayed in
the agitation (produced by something that rankles in the mind).

Inasmuch as no one was disgraced by (inferiority to) God,
no one was (ever) envious of God;

(But) the person whom he deemed like himself—he would
bear enw against him for that reason.

(Now), as the grandeur of the Prophet has become established,
none feels enw (of him), since he is accepted (by all the Faith¬
ful);

Therefore in every' epoch (after Mohammed) a saint arises 015
(to act as his vicegerent): the probation (of the people) lasts
until the Resurrection.

Whosoever has a good disposition is saved; whosoever is of
frail heart 4 is broken.

That saint, then, is the living Imim who arises (in every age),
whether he be a descendant at ‘Umar or of ‘All,

He is the Nahdi (the God-guided one) and the Hddi (the
Guide), O seeker of the (right) way: he is both hidden (from
you) and seated before your face.

He is as the Light (of Mohammed), and (Universal) Reason
is his Gabriel; the saint that is lesser than he is his lamp (and
receives illumination from him).


1 lx, fcl if yOU etc being tortured with a twMplkHl collar,, do not put on
one whh Four spikes."

* Literally. 11 deprivation (of spiritual bl-aauig*h

* Abu '1-VUktm means ,H Father of ihe (wik) jud^e. The nickname Abu
Jahl, mnnH Father of ignorance/

* Literally, " Rlra-heufred/ U weak and vicious.


264


MATHNAWI, HOOK II


&ZS


That (saint) who is lesser than this lamp is our lamp-niche:
the Light has gradations in degree,

Because the Light of God has seven hundred veils: regard
the veils of the Light as so many tiers.

Behind each veil a certain cfass (of saints) has its place of
aliode: these veils of theirs are (in ascending order), rank by rank,
up to the Imam.

Those in the last (lowest) rank, through their weakness, (arc
such that) their eyes cannot endure the light in front (of
them);

And that front rank, from weakness of sight* cannot support
the light that is more advanced.

'J he light that is the life of the first (highest rank) is heartache
and tribulation to this squlnter;

(But) the squintnesses t little by liulc p grow less, and when he
passes beyond the seven hundred (veils)' he becomes the Sea.

The fire that does good to iron or gold—how is it good for
fresh quinces and apples?

The apple and quince have (only) a slight crudity: unlike
iron, they want a gentle heat;

But those flames are (too) gentle fur the iron, for it is (eagerly)
drawing to (itself) the heat of that (fiery) dragon.

* lD , That i™ ^ the dervish who beans hardship (selLmortifica-
tion): under the hammer and the fire he is red and happy.

lie is the chamberlain of the fire (and) in immediate touch
(with it): he goes into the heart of the fire without (anv) link
(between the fire and him)*

Without some screen, water and water’s children get no
cooking or conversation from the fire.

The medium is a pot or a pan—as (the medium) for the foot
in walking (is) a sock (shoe) —

Or a space between, so that the air becomes burning hot and
brings (the fire) to the water,

1 he dervish, then, is he that has no intermediary: the Dames
have (direct) connexion with his being.

Therefore he is the heart of the world, because bv means of
this heart the body attains to (its proper) art (function).

< lf ) th . c hejirt not th™. how can the body talk and speak ?

^ 1C heart seek not, how can the bodv seek and search ?

I hcrefore the theatre of the (Divine) rays is that iron; there¬
to re the theatre of God is the heart, not the body.

Again, these partial (individual) hearts are as the body in
relation to the heart of the man of heart (the perfect saint)
which is the original source. f

Thb argument wants much illustration and exposition, but

/ tear lcs * the opinion of the vulgar should stumble (and fail
into error), V


S + q


THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SAINTS 265

(And) lest my goodness should be turned (by iliem) to
badness;—even this that 1 have spoken was (from) naught bur
selflessness 1 ,

The crooked shoe is better for the crooked foot; the beggar
power reaches only as far as the door-.

How iht Kfrig made trial 0/ the two slaves whom he had
recently purchased.

A King bought two slaves cheap, and conversed with one of
the twain.

He found him quack-wittcd and answering sweetly; what
issues from the sugar-lip? Sugar-water.

Man is concealed underneath his tongue: this tongue is the ^
curtain over the gate of the soul.

When a gust of wind has rolled up the curtain, the secret of
the interior of the house is disclosed to us,

(And we sec) whether in that house there are pearls or (grains
of) wheat, a treasure of gold or whether all is snakes and
scorpions;

Or whether a treasure is there and a serpent beside it, since
a treasure of gold is not without some one to keep watch.

Without premeditation he (that slave) would speak in such
wise as others after five hundred premeditations.

\ on would have said that in his inward part there was a sea, 350
and that the whole sea was pearls of eloquence,

(And that) the light that shone from every pear! became a
criterion for distinguishing between truth ana falsehood*

(So) would the light of the Criterion (Universal Reason), (if it
shone Into our hearts), distinguish for us truth and falsehood and
separate them mote by mote;

I he light u i the (Divine) Pearl would become the light of
our eyes: both the question and the answer would be (would
Come) from us,

(But) you have made your eves awry' and seen the moon's
disk double: this gazing in perplexity is like the question.

Make your eyes straight in the moonshine, so that vou mav -.55
see the moon as one. Lo, (that is) the answer.

dell your thought not to see aw rv and to look well (rightlv):
that thought is the radiance of that Pearl.

Whenever an answer comes to the heart through the ear, the
eye says, "Hear it from me; let that (answer given through the
car) alone ! tT

The ear is a go-between, while the eye is possessed of union

1 /,#. spoken under the influence of ecstasy.

Literally, “the befitf-ir has power over the door (Only),” ***- he PUlnot
penesniEe to the interior of the house.


a66


MAT HN A Wit BOOK II

(immediate vision); the eye has direct experience (of reality),
while the Kir has (only) words (doctrine).

In the ear’s hearing there is a transformation of qualities;
in the eyes’ seeing there is a transformation of essence.

If your knowledge of fire has been turned to certainty by
words (alone)* seek to be cooked (by the fire itself), and do not
abide in the certainly (of knowledge derived from others).
There is no intuitive (actual) certainty until you bum; (if)
you desire this certainty t sit down in the fire.

When the ear is penetrating, it becomes an eye; otherwise*
the word (of God) becomes entangled in the ear (and does not
reach the heart).

This discourse hath no end. Turn back, that (we may see)
what the King did to those slaves of his.


Hate the King sent away one of the two staves amt in ter rotated

the other.

When he saw that that laddie 1 was possessed of keen intelli¬
gence* he made a sign to the other to come (to him),

(If) I have called him by (a word which has) the suffix of pity
{tenderness) 2 , P tfe not to belittle him - if a grandfather say "my
sonny,” it is not (in) contempt.

When the second (slave) came before the King, he had a
stinking mouth and black teeth.

Although the King w .is displeased by his speech 3 , still he made
some inquiry concerning bis hidden thoughts.

He said* "With this aspect and this stinking mouth, sit at a
distance, but do not move too far off 1 *—

For (hitherto) you have been (with regard to me in the posi¬
tion of) a writer of letters and notes; you have not been a
companion and friend and comrade—
h : That we may treat (and cure) that mouth of yours: you are

(now) the beloved (patient)* and we are ihe skilful physician.

Tis not fitting to burn a new blanket on account of one flea;
(nor would it become me) to shut my eyes to (turn my back on)
you (because of superficial faults} +

Notwithstanding all (this)* sit dow n and talk on a few topics 5 ,
that I may well see the form of your mind.”

Then he sent that keen-witted one away to do (his behest):
(he sent him) to a bath-house, saying, "Go* scrub yourself.”

3 Literally. J ' Uttle slave 1 K _ (ghuldmak ),

' Literally* iH the kdf of pity,” i t. the diminutive suffix aJt r used to express
affection.

1 /.f. because of his foul breath,

* Literally* "more to that side." 1

* Utenlly. M tell two or three stories/ 1


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 267

And to this other one he said, “GoodI you are a clever lad:
m truth you are a hundred slaves, not one!

\ 011 are not such as your fellow-servant declared: that envious
one would (fain) have made me cold to (disgusted with) you,

(For) he said that you are 1 thievish and dishonest and ill-
behaved, immoral and infamous and so forth/'

'The slave said, “He (my fellow-servant) has always been
veracious; [ have not seen any one so truthful as he is.

Veracity is inborn in his nature- whatever he says, I do not
say it is void (of truth),

1 deem not that good-minded one malicious: I (rather)
suspect my own person.

Maybe, he sees in me faults I do not see in my self, G King/ 1 jbo

Any one who saw his own faults before (seeing those of others)
—how indeed should he he unconcerned with correcting himself?

These people {of the world) take no heed of themselves, O
father: consequently they blame one another.

O idolater (dualist), (if) I do not behold my own face (reality),

1 behold thy face and thou beholdest mine.

He that beholds his own face (reality)—his light is greater
than the light of the creatures (of God).

Though he die, his sight is everlasting, because his sight is s&j
the sight of the Creator.

That light by which he sensibly beholds his own face (reality)
before him, is not the light of sense.

I he King said, "Now tell his (your fellow-servant's) faults*
just as he spoke of yours,

That I may know whether you are solicitous for me and a
(good) house-steward of my property and business/ 1

He replied, " 0 King, I will tdf his faults, though he is to me
a pleasing fellow-servant.

His faults are affection and loyalty and humanity; his faults a.jo
are sincerity and kcen-wittedness and cordial comradeship.

His least fault is generosity and bounty—the generosity- that
even gives up Life/ P

God has brought to view myriads of lives (in return for the
life given up): what generosity would there be (in him) that saw
not those?

And if he saw them, how should he grudge his life? How
should lie become so grieved for the sake of one life?

On the river-bank* water is grudged by him (alone) that is
blind to the stream of water.

The Prophet said/* Whosoever knows for sure his recompense
on the day of Resurrection—

That his compensation will be ten for one—at every moment
a different (act of) munificence will issue from him,”

1 Lltrralhv "he is / 1


268


MATHNAwf , BOOK II

All munificence is from seeing compensations; therefore
seeing the compensation is opposed to fearing (and shrinking
from the act of munificence).

Miserliness consists in not seeing compensations : the prospect
of pearls keeps the diver glad.

Hence no one in the world is miserly, since no one hazards
anything without (seeing) what is to be received in exchange.

Generosity, then, comes from the eye, not from the hand:
"iis seeing that matters; none but the seer is saved.

“Another fault (of his is) that he is not self-conceited; he is
anxious to find fault with his self-existence.

He has (always) been one who speaks in blame of himself and
seeks to blame himself; he has (always) been good (kind) to all
and bad (unkind) to himself.”

The King said, “Do not show (such) eagerness in praising
your friend, do not introduce praise of yourself in the mask of
(your) praise of him;

Because I will bring him to the test, and shame will befall
you in the upshot.”


Haze tke state, from ike purity of Ms thought, swore to ike
truth and loyalty of his friend.

9*3 He said, M Nay, by Allah, and by the great God, the possessor
of kingdom, and by the Merciful and Compassionate One;

By the God who sent the prophets, not in (His) need (of them),
but in grace and majesty;

By the Lord who from the lowly earth created (those)
glorious princely riders 3 ,

(And) purified them from the temperament of earthly beings,
and caused them to outrun the celestials;

(By Him) who took up from the Fire and fashioned into pure
Light—and then it outstripped all (the other) lights—

910 lliat splendour of lightning which shone over the spirits,
so that Adam gained from that Light (his) knowledge (of
God).

The hand of Seth gathered that which grew from Adam:
therefore Adam, when he saw that (Light in him), made him
his vicar.

Since Noah had enjoyment of that Jewel* he showered pearls
(of Divine wisdom) in the air of the Sea of Soul.

From (possession of) that mighty radiance the spirit of
Abraham went fearlessly into the names of the fire.

When Isma'i! (IshmaeJ) fell into the stream thereof, he bid
his head before his (Abraham's) flashing knife.


1 J.ff. riders df supreme dejclerity.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 269

The soul of David was heated by its rays; iron became soft 91 j
in his hand-loom 1 .

When Solomon was suckled on (the milk of) union with it,
the demon became a thrall to his command and obedient.

When Jacob bowed his head (in submission) to the (Divine)
destiny, it (the Light) illumined (gladdened) his eye with the
scent of his (lost) son.

When the moon-faced Joseph beheld that Sun, he became so
wide-awake (wise) in the interpretation of dreams.

When the rod drank water (was imbued with the influence of
the Light) from the hand of Moses, it made one mouthful of
Pharaoh's empire.

V\ hen Jesus, the son of Mary, found its ladder, he sped to the <i;a
topmost height of the Fourth Dome (of Heaven),

When Mohammed gained that Kingdom and Felicity, he in a
moment clave the disk of the moon in two halves.

When Abu Bakr became a signal example of (God’s) favour,
he became the Companion of such a King (as Mohammed) and
(received the name) Siddiq *.

When ‘Umar became distraught w T ith that Beloved, he
became a Fdriiq (discerner) 3 , like the heart, between truth and
falsehood.

When 1 Uthm&n became the fountain of that clear (Essence),
he was light overflowing and became Dku ’l-Nurayn (Lord of
the Two Lights} 4 .

When at (the sight of) its countenance Murtazi (‘Ali) began
to scatter pearls (of spiritual truth), he became the Lion of God
in the pasture of the soul.

When junayd received that support (which he received)
from its army, his muqamdt (stages of progress in the mystical
life) became innumerable,,

B&yazid saw the way into its superabundance, and heard
from God (heard God bestow upon him) the name, ,+ Pole of
die Gnostics. 11

When Karkhi became the guard of its city, he became die
vicar of (Divine) love and inspired by the Divine breath.

The son of Adham joyously rode his steed towards it T and
became the supreme sovereign of justice.

And that (famous) Shaqiq by cleaving (traversing) that verier-
able Way became a sun oi (clear) judgement and keen-sighted,

Hundreds of thousands of hidden (spiritual) kings are holding
their heads high (in the region) beyond this world;

, 1 For i/ffj tbdf cf. I. 433 and IK *651, mid for the meCuphor Kft’b b. Zuhflyr
™ Detetw, p. i44 F v, 55, God c-uo^hc. David the an of making

coutb nf mail (Qur’it), 3EicJ h tio).

3 /.tf. 1 * exceeding !j veracious. 1F

1 FdrQq m a title jfiven to "Umar.

4 He was *0 named became he had married I Wo thiu^hters of the Prophet.


tyo


MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Because of God's jealousy their names remained hidden;
every beggar did not pronounce their names.

By the truth of that Light and by the truth of those Olumined
ones who are as fishes in that Sea—

Tis not fitting if 1 call it the Sea of the Soul and the Soul of
the Sea: I am seeking a new name for it;-—

9is By the truth of that That from which this and that are
(derived), and in relation to which (all) kernels are as rinds,

(1 swear) that the (good) qualities of my fellow-servant and
friend exceed my description (of them) a hundredfold.

That which 1 know of the (spiritual) endowments of that
comrade (of mine) would not be believed by thee: what shall
I sav t O noble (king)?"

1 he King said, “Now speak of your own (case); how r long
will you speak of what concerns this or that one?

What do you possess and what have you gained? What
pearls have you fetched from the bottom of the Sea?

940 On the day of death this sense-perception of yours will
vanish: have you the spiritual light that should be the com¬
panion of your heart?

When dust shall fill these eyes in the tomb, have you that
which will make the grave bright?

At the time when your hands and feet shall be tom in sltreds,
have you wings and plumes that your spirit may By aloft?

At the time when this animal soul is no more, it "behoves you
to set the everlasting spirit in its place.

The stipulation of (implied in) /ie that comts with goad (shall
bt rexuardtd tenfold) does not consist in doing (good); it consists
in bringing this good to the presence of God +

945 You have a substance (essence) human or asinine (bestial) ^
(bring that to God): how can you bring (to Him) these accidents
(of word or deed) which have passed away?

As regards these accidents of prayer and fasting—since (that
which) does not endure for tw r o moments becomes naught—
Tis impossible to carry over the accidents (in to another state);
but they (may) take away diseases (defects) from the substance*
So that the substance becomes changed by means of this
accident, as when disease is removed by abstinence.

By exertion abstinence, (which Is) the accident, becomes the
substance; through abstinence the acrid mouth becomes (sweet
as) honey,

950 Land ."through sowing, is turned into ears of corn; remedies
for the hair turn the hair into chains (make it long and eurlvh
Conjugal intercourse was the accident; it passed away, and
the substance, (which is) the child, was produced from us"

The mating of horse or camel is the accident; the object is
the birth of the cult, (which is) the substance.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 271

Similarly, the planting of the garden is the accident; the
produce of the garden became the substance—behold the object
(for which the garden was planted)!

Regard h also p the practice of alchemy as the accident; if 3
substance is produced by that alchemy, bring (it into view).

burnishing is the accident, 0 prince; from this accident is935
born die substance, purity.

R° not Sa ^ +T then, 'I have done deedsshow the income
(fruit) of those accidents „ do not evade (my request).

I ms attribution of qualities is (only) an accident. Be silent:
do not kill for sacrifice the goat's shadow ! H

I he slave said, Bl O King, the mind cannot but despair 1 if you
say that accidents are not carried over,

O King, there is nothing but despair for the servant (of God),
if the accident that has gone is not coming back.

It there were no carry ing over and resurrection of accidents* goo
action would be vain and words (mere) babble.

1 hese accidents are carried over in another guise; the
resurrection ol everything mortal is another (mode of) existence.

The carry ing over of everything is just as befits it*; what befits
the herd is its drover.

At the time of the Resurrection every accident has a (particular)
form* and the form of every accident has a turn (of appearing
before God). V ™ S

Look on thyself. Wert not thou an accident—the movement
of copulation* and copulation with a purpose?

Look on houses and edifices: thev were as tales in the (mind yfi*
of) the architect.

Such-and-such a house, which seemed to us beautiful, of
which the hall* roof, and door were well-proport toned —

( Twas) the accident (design) and ideas (proceeding) from the
architect (that) brought the tools and pillars (into existence)
trom (their respective) handicrafts.

What but some fancy and accident and idea is the origin and
source of every handicraft ?

Look disinterestedly on all the (various) parts of the world:
they are not the result of (anything) except accident.

I he beginning, which is thought, comes to an end in action; 97a
knotv that in such wise was the construction of the world in
eternity.

. The fruits are first in the mind's thought* (but only) at the
last do they become manifest actually:

W hen you have done work (and) planted the tree — at the end
(when the fruit appears) you read the first words,

. Literacy; “k is not wtihoui despair of the understanding, 1 h

t,. everything 15 carried over into the form of existence that ie suitable
to Uft nature. ■*


ZJZ MATHNAWf , BOOK II

Although its boughs. Leaves, and roots are first, (yet) all those
are sent for the sake of the fruit*

Hence that hidden Thought which was the brain (core) of
those (nine) heavens was in the end the lord of Imvldk 1 ,

97S This discussion and talk are (involve) the carrying over of
accidents; this lion and jackal are (examples of) the carrying
over of accidents.

Indeed, all created beings were accidents (once) t so that in
this sense (die text) was revealed — Did there not come... ?

Whence arise those accidents? From ideas. And whence
arise these ideas? From thoughts.

This world is one thought (emanating) from the Universal
Intellect* the Intellect is like a king, and the ideas (are his)
envoys.

Tm first world is the world of probation; the second world
is the (world of) recompense for this and that.
gSo Thy servant, O King, commits a sin: that accident becomes
(a substance, namely) chains and prison.

When thy slave performed goodly service, did not that
accident become a robe of honour in the battle (between the
flesh and the spirit)?

This accident with the substance (belonging to it) is egg and
bird: this is produced by that, and that hy this, in succes¬
sion.”

The King said, "Take the meaning (to be) so: (why then)
have these accidents of yours not produced any substance?”

"(Divine) Wisdom/' replied the slave," has kept it concealed,
in order that this world of good and evil may be a mystery,

3S5 Because, if the (substantial) forms of thought were to become
manifest, infidel and believer (alike) would speak naught but
praise (of God).

Then, were this clearly seen, O King, not hidden, and were
the mark of religion or infidelity (visible) on the forehead.

How would there be idol and idolater in this world? How
w r ould any one have the stomach 3 to mock (at holy things)?

Then tliis world of ours would be (like) the Resurrection:
who commits sjn and wrong at the Resurrection?”

The King said, ,A God has veiled the retribution of evil, but
(only) from the vulgar, not from His own elect.

W If 1 entrap one Amir* 1 keep it hidden from the (other)
Amirs, (but) not from the Vheiej,

God, then, has shown to me the retribution of work and
myriads of the (substantial) forms of actions,

1 /.e, ihc Prophet Mohammed regarded el§ the final cause of the Creation,
Ijmltik t ,H hut for (he** 1 ) refer* to CckTs words, "But for thee I should not
bve created the heaven*. 1 1

1 Lsterailv, 11 gall-bladder." #


THE KING AND H[S TWO SLAVES 273

Give a sign (outwardly), for ] know all: the cloud does not
veil the moon from me.

The slave said, “ Then what is the object of mv speaking, since
thou knowcst what is (the real nature of) that which has been? ”

The King said, I he wisdom (of God) in making the world
manifest (was) that the (thing) known should come forth (to be
seen) plainly.

Until He made visible that which He knew. He did not ]ay 95S
upon the world the pain of parturition and the throes (thereof).

You cannot sit inactive for one moment: (you cannot rest)
till some badness ur goodness has issued from you.

These demands (cravings) for action were appointed in order
that your inward consciousness should come clearly into (out¬
ward) view.

IIow, then, should the reel, which is the body, become still,
when the thread’s end, which is the mind, is pulling it?

The sign of that pulling is your anguish: to be inactive is to
you like the death-agony.

This world and that world are for ever giving birth: every 1000
Cause is a mother, the effect is bam (from it as) a child.

When the effect was bom, that too became a cause, so that it
might give birth to wondrous effects.

These causes are generation on generation, but it needs a
very well illumined eye (to see all the links in their chain).”

I he King, in conversation with him, arrived at this point,
that he saw from him a sign (which was) not apparent.

If that searching King saw (such a sign), ’tis not strange; but
we arc not permitted to mention it.

When that (other) slave came from the warm bath, that King
and lofty personage called him to his presence,

(And) said, “ Health (to you)! Lasting happiness be ynurs! 1
l ou are very fine and elegant and good-looking.

Oh, alasf If there were not in you that which so-and-so savs
about you.

Whoever beheld your face would become glad; the sight of
you would be worth the empire of the world.”

He said, “O King, utter some hint of what that miscreant 3
said about me."

I he King said, “In the first place he described vou as double- 1010
faced, saying that you are ostensibly a remedv (but) secret!v a
disease.” ' '

When he heard from the King the malice of his companion,
at once the sea of his anger surged up.

That slave foamed and reddened, so that the billows of his
vituperation exceeded (all) bounds.


1 P r P c **‘hly. '■ May (the Wish) 1 lasting happiness ’ entne true for you! ’
he whose religion is corrupt . af


274 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

He said, "From the first moment that he was associated with
me* he was a great eater of duftg 1 , like a dog in (time of)
famine/'

As he satirised trim moment after moment (continuously)«
like a bell, the King put his hand on his (the slave's) lips, saving,
M Enough! "

1015 He said, "I know you from him by that (which you have
spoken): in you the spirit is foul, and in your companion (only)

the mouth.

Therefore do you sit far off, G foul-spirited one, that he may
be the commander and you under his command.”

It is (said) in the Hadfth (Traditions of the Prophet): ,+ Knu w,
sire, that glorification (of God) from hypocrisy is like the verdure
on a midden/"

Know, then, that a fair and goodly form with bad qualities
(within) is not worth a farthing;

And though the form be despicable and impleasing, (yet)
when his (that person's) disposition is good, die at his feet!
ioio Know that the outward form passes away, (but) the world of
reality remains for ever.

How long will you play at loving the shape of the jug ? Leave
the shape of the jug; go, seek the water.

You have seen its (outward) form, you are unaware of the
reality” pick out from the shell a pearl, if you are wise.

These shells of bodies in the w orld, though they all are living
by (grace of) the Sea of Soul —

Yet there is not a pearl in every shell; open your eyes and look
into the heart of each one,

1025 And pick out what that one has and what this, because that
costly pearl is seldom found.

If you go (turn your attention) to the form, by external
appearance a mountain is a hundred 2 times as much as a ruby
in bigness;

Also, in respect of form, your hands and feet and hair are a
hundred times as much as the contour of the eye;

But this (fact) is not hidden from you, that the two eyes are
the choicest of all (your) members.

By one thought that comes into the mind a hundred worlds
are overturned in a single moment.
io]o If the body of the Sultan is, in form (appearance), one (only),
(yet) hundreds of thousands of soldiers run behind (it).

Again, the figure and form of the excellent King are ruled by
one invisible thought.

Behold people without end who, moved by one though i T
have gone over the earth like a flood;

1 /j.''vtry icurril[ji». ,h

5 "Hundred / 1 of is, not to be tdktn in tw iiriet numerical ktGJe.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 375

Small is that thought in the people’s eyes, but like a flood it
swallowed and swept away the world.

So, when you see that from a thought cverv craft in the world
(arises and) subsists —

(That) houses and palaces and cities, mountains and plains iojj
and rivers,

Earth and ocean as well as sun and sky, arc living (derive their
life) from it as fishes from the sea —

Then why in your foolishness, O blind one, docs the body
seem to you a Solomon, and thought (only) as an antr

To your eye the mountain appears great: (to you) thought is
JJke ii mouse, and the mountain (like) □ wolf.

The (material) world in your eyes is awful and sublime: vou
tremble and are frightened at the clouds and the thunder and
the sky.

While in regard to the world of thought, O less (lower) than i^g
the ass, you are secure and indifferent as a witless stone,
because you are a (mere) shape and have no portion of in¬
telligence; you are not of human nature, you are an ass's colt.

From ignorance you deem the shadow' to be the substance:
hence to you the substance has become a plaything and of slight
account.

Wait till the Day w hen that thought and phantasy unfolds its
wings and pinions without any veil (encumbrance)"

\ou will see that the mountains have become like soft wool,

(and that) this hartli of hot and cold has become naught;

You will see neither the sky nor the stars nor (any) existence io* s
hut God, the One, the Living, the Loving.

Here is a tale, (be it) true or false, to illustrate (these) truths.

//aw the (King’s) retainers envied the favourite slave.

A King had, of his grace, preferred a certain slave above all his
retinue.

allowance was the stipend of forty Amirs; a hundred
Viziers would not see (receive) a tenth of its amount.

Through the perfection off his) natal star and prosperity and for¬
tune he was an Avaz, w hile the King was the Mahmud of the time.

His spirit in its origin, before (the creation of) this body, was n>j 0
near-related and akin to the King’s spirit.

(Only) that matters which has existed before the body; leave
(behind you) these things which have newly sprung into being,

That which matters belongs to the knower (of God), for he
is not squinting: his eye is (fixed) upon the things first sown.

That w hich was sown as wheat (good) or as barley (relatively
evil) — day and night his eye is fastened on that place 1 (where it
was sow'n).

1 Literally, " (deposited •*) t pledge in that place.”


mathnaw i , book n

Night gave birth to nothing but what she w as pregnant withal:
designs and plots are wind, (empty) wind.

How should he please his heart with fair designs who sees the
design of God (prevailing) over them?

He (who trusts in his own devices) is laying a snare within
the snare (of God): by your Ufe T neither this (snare) will escape
(destruction) nor will that (man).

Though (in the meanwhile) a hundred herbs grow and fade*
there will grow up at last that which God has sown.

He (the cunning man) sowed new seed over the first seed;
(but) this second (seed) is passing away, and (only) the first is
sound (and enduring).

The first seed is perfect and choice; the second seed i$ corrupt
and rotten.

iota Cast away this contrivance of yours before the Beloved—
though your contrivance indeed is of His contriving*

That which God has raised (and that alone) has use: what lie
has at first sown at last grows.

Whatever you sow r , sow for His sake, inasmuch as you arc
the Beloved's captive, O lover.

Do not hang about the thievish fleshly soul and its work:
whatsoever is not God’s work is naught, naught.

(Sow the good seed) ere the Day of Resurrection shall appear
and the night-thief be shamed before Him whose is the Kingdom,

With the goods stolen by his contrivance and craft (still)
remaining on his neck at the Day of Judgement.

Hundreds of thousands of minds may jump together (conspire)
to lay a snare other than His snare;

(But) they only find their snare more grievous (to themselves),
(for) how can straws show arty power (of resistance) against the
wind ?

If you say, “What was the profit of (our created) being? ” (I
reply), “There is profit in your question, O contumacious
one.

If this question of yours has no profit, why should I listen to
it in vain and fruitlessly?

1070 And if there are many profits in your question, then why,
pray, is the world unprofitable?

And (again), if from one standpoint the world is unprofitable*
from other standpoints it is advantageous.

If your profit is no profit to me, (yet) since it is a profit to
you, do not withdraw from it.”

The beauty of Joseph profited a (whole) world (of people),
though to his brethren it was a vain superfluity.

The melodies of David were so dear (to the faithful), but to the
interdicted (unbeliever) they were (no more than) the noise of
wood.


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS


277


The water of the Nile was superior to the Water of Life, but 1075
to the interdicted and unbelieving it was blood.

To the true believer martyrdom is life; to the hypocrite it is
death and corruption.

Tell (me), what single blessing is there in the world, from
w hich some group of people is not excluded?

What profit have the ox and the ass in sugar? Every soul has
a different food;

But if that food is accidental to it (and not according to its
real nature), then admonition is the (proper) correction for it.

As (in die case of) one who from disease has become fond of io*a
(eating) day—though he may suppose that that (day) is indeed
his (natural) food,

He has (in reality) forgotten his original food and has betaken
himself 1 to the food of disease.

Having given up honey, he has eaten poison; he has made the
food of disease (to be his nourishment) as (though it were) fat.

Man's original food is the Light of God: animal food is im¬
proper For him;

But, in consequence of disease, his mind has fallen into this
(delusion)„ that day and night he should eat of this water and clay,

(He is) pale-faced, weak-footed, faint-hearted—where is die 1055
food of by Heaven which hath {starry) tracks}

That is the food of the chosen ones of the (Divine) sovereignty;
the eating thereof is (dime) without throat or instrument.

The food of the (spiritual) sun is (derived) from the light of
the (celestial) Throne; (the food that belongs) to the envious
and devilish is (derived) from the smoke of the (terrestrial)
c



God said concerning the martyrs, they are (alive with their
Lard] receiving sustenance . For that food there was neither
mouth nor dish.

The heart is eating a (particular) food from every single
companion; the heart is getting a (particular) excellence from
every single (piece of) knowledge.

Every human being's (outer) form is like a cup; (only) the io**
(spiritual) eye is a percipient of his (or her) reality.

You eat (receive) something from meeting with any one, and
you carry away something from conjunction with any associate.

When planet comes into conjunction with planet, the effect
appropriate to diem both is assuredly preduced>

As (for example) the conjunction of man and woman brings
to birth the human being, and (a$) sparks arise from the con¬
junction of stone and iron;

And (as) from the conjunction of earth with rains (there are
produced) fruits and greenery' and sweet herbs;


Literally, IE haa turned his ficc/'


MATHNAWfj BOOK II

1P95 And (as) from the conjunction of green things (plants and
verdant spots) with man (there is produced) joy of heart and
carelessness and happiness;

And (as) from the conjunction of happiness with our souls
are bom our goodness and beneficence.

Our bodies become capable of eating and drinking when our
desire for recreation {in the open air) is satisfied.

Redness of countenance is {derived) from the conjunction of
blood (with the face); blood is (derived) from the beautiful
rose-coloured sun.

Redness is the best of (all) colours, and that is (bom) of the
sun and is arriving (to us) from it,
iEt» Every land that has been conjoined with Saturn has become
nitrous and is not the place for sowing.

Through concurrence power comes into action 3 * as fin the
case of) the conjunction of the Devil with hypocrites.

These spiritual truths without (possessing) any (worldly)
pomp and grandeur, have pomp and grandeur from the Ninth
Heaven,

The pomp and grandeur belonging to (the world of) creation
is a borrowed (adventitious) thing- the pomp and grandeur
belonging to the (world of) Command 8 is an essential thing.

For the sake of (earthly) pomp and grandeur they endure
abasement; in the hope of glory they are happy in (their) abase¬
ment,

nos In the hope of a ten days* (transient) glory (full) of annoyance,
they have made their necks, from anxiety, (thin) as a spindle.

How do not they come to this place w here I am?—for in this
(spiritual) glory' I am the shining Sun.

The rising-place of the sun is the pitch-coloured tower (of
heaven), (but) my Sun is beyond (all) rising-places.

His rising-place” (is only) in relation to His motes: His
essence neither rose nor set,

I who am left behind (surpassed in eminence) by His mcites
am (nevertheless) in both worlds a sun without shadow- r
11 jo Still, I am revolving round the Sun—"tis wonderful; the cause
of this is the majesty' of the Sun.

The Sun is acquainted with (all secondary) causes- at the
same time the cord of (all secondary') causes is severed from
Him 5 .

Hundreds of thousands of times have I cut off (abandoned)
hope—of whom? Of the Sun? Do vou believe this?

Do not believe of me that 1 can endure to be without the Sun*
or the fish to be without water;

1 Ij. what is pclentLaJ becomes actual.

* Tht a-uptrwnaihfe Warid,

1 I,t . He is mdependtat of them.


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS 279

And if I become despairing, my despair is the objective mani¬
festation of the Son’s work, O goodly (friend).

How should the objective manifestation of the work he cut off ms
from the verv self of the Worker? I low should any object of
(contingent) being pasture on (derive existence from) aught
but (Absolute) Being?

All (contingent) beings pasture on this Meadow, whether
they be Buriq or Arab horses or even asses;

And he that has not regarded (all) becomings (movements
and changes) as (proceeding) from that Sea, at every instant
turns his Face towards a new r point of orientation.

He has drunk salt water from the sweet Sea, so that the salt
water has made him blind.

The Sea is saying, +t Drink of my water with the right hand,

O blind one, that thou mayst gain sight.”

Here “the right hand"* is right opinion, which knows coil- mo
cerning (both) good and evil whence they are.

O lance, there is a Lancer 1 , so that sometimes thou becomest
straight, sometimes (bent) double.

Through love of Shatnsd Dan (the Sun of the Religion) I am
without daws (powerless); else would not 1 make this blind one
see?

Hark, O Light of the Truth, Husamu/ddin, do thou speedily
heal him, to the con fusion of the eye of the envious;

(Heal him with) the quick-acting tutty of majesty, the dark¬
ness-killing remedy of the recalcitrant,

Which„ if it strike on the eye of the blind man, will dispel 1115
from him a hundred years" darkness.

Heal all the blind ones except the envious man who from
envy is bringing denial against thee.

To thy envier, though it be I, do not give life, (but let me
alone) so that I may be suffering the agony of (spiritual) death
even as he is,

(I mean) him that is envious of the Sun and him Lhat is
fretting at the existence of the Sun.

Look you, this is the incurable disease which he has, alas;
look you 1 this is one fallen for ever to the bottom of the pit.

What he wants is the extinction of the Sun of eternity. Tell njo
(me), how r should this desire of his come to pass?

The falcon (seeker of God) is he that comes back to the King;
he that has lost the way is the blind falcon.

It lost the way and fell into the wilderness; then in the wilder¬
ness it fell amongst 3 owls.

It (the falcon j is wholly light (derived) from the Light of
(Divine) approval, but the marshal, Fate 3 , blinded it-

1 Literally, H OfW who Ullfu or wields the lance/*

1 Literally, “ betide/’ * Literaily, <b the (Divine) destiny. p


2So


MATHNAWf, BOOK II

lie threw dust in its eyes and took it (far) away from the
(right) road; he left it amidst owls and (in) the wilderness*
iris To crown all 1 , the owls attack it and tear its lovely wing-
feathers and plumes,

A clamour arose amongst the owls — "Ha! the falcon has
come to seize our dwelling-place,”

(Twas) as (when) the street-dog^, wrathful and terrifying,
have fallen upon the frock of a (dervish) stranger.

^ How am 1 fit/' says the falcon t " for (consorting with} owls?
1 give up to the owls a hundred wildernesses like this.

I do not wish to stay here, I am going, 1 will return to the
King of kings,

ju> Do not kill yourselves (with agitation), O owls, for I am not
settling (here): 1 am j|oing home.

This ruin i$ a thriving abode In your eyes; for me, however,
the King's fore-arm is the place whither one returns.”

The owl (that was warning the others) said, “The falcon is
plotting to uproot you from house and home.

He will seize our houses by cunning, he will tear us out of
our nests by (his) hypocrisy. '

This devotee of guile pretends to be perfectly satisfied (with
what he has); by God p he is worse than all the greedy together.
*i43 From greediness he eats day a$ (if it were) date-syrup:
Q friends, do not entrust the sheep's tail to the bear.

He is boasting of the King and the King's band, in order that
he may lead us astraysimple-minded as we are.

How, indeed, should a petty bird be the congener of the King?
Do not listen to him, if you nave (even) a little understanding.

Is he the King's or the Viziers congener? Is garlic at all
suitable to sweetmeat made with walnut kernels?

(As for) his saying, from deceit and feint and artifice. 'The
King with his retinue is searching after me/

MiG Here's an absurd 3 in ad fancy for you, here's a vain boast and
a snare to catch blockheads E

Any one who believes this - f tis because of (his) foolishness:
how is a slender little bird fit for (friendship with) royalty?

If the smallest owl should strike at his brain, where is succour
for him from the King? 1 '

The falcon said. "If a single feather of mine be broken, the
King of kings will uproot the (whole) nwlery.

What is an owl? Even if a falcon vex mv heart and maltreat

me,

1159 The King will heap up in every lowland and highland hundreds
of thousands of stacks of falcons J heads.

J Literally, “any small thin*? pm on fhe top of a load," <s a last itnw."

■ Literally , 41 lake us from [he (right) rad/*

* Literally, “unacceptable.”


THE FALCON AMONGST THE OWLS 2S1

His favours keep watch over me; wherever I go, the King is
(following) behind.

The phantasy of me is abiding in the King’s heart: sick
(would be) the King's heart without the phantasy of me.

When the King bids me fly in His Way I fly up to the heart's
zenith, like Ui$ beams.

I fly as a moon and sun, I rend the curtains of the skies.

The light of intellects is from my thought; the bursting forth a
of heaven (into existence) is from my original nature.

1 am a falcon, and (yet) the humd becomes lost in amaze¬
ment at me: who is an owl, that it should know my secret?

For mv sake the King bethought him of the prison (this world},
and set free hundreds of thousands of those in bondage.

He made me familiar with the owls for a moment, and by
means of my breath (words) he made the owls (to be) falcons.

Oh* happy (is) the owl that in my (soaring) flight (towards
God) had the good fortune to apprehend 1 my mystery,

Cling to me t that ye may become exultant (enjoying bliss)* na*
(and that) ye may become royal falcons, although ye are owls.

He that is dear to such a King—wheresoever he light, why
should he be a stranger?

Any one for w F hose pain the King is the remedy—though he
wail like the reed (flute), be is not without plenty,

I am the owner of the (spiritual) kingdom, 1 am not a lick¬
spittle: the King is beating the falcon-drum for me from the
shore-.

My falcon-drum is the calf ‘ Return!' God is my witness in
despite of adversary.

I am not a congener of the King of kings—far be it from n?e
Him!—but I have light from Him in (His) self-manifestation.

Homogeneity is not in respect of form and essence: water
becomes homogeneous with earth in the plant.

Wind (air) becomes homogeneous with tire in consistency; wine
at last 3 becomes homogeneous with the constitution (of the body).

Since my genus is not the genus of my King* my ego has passed
away ( fund) for the sake of His ego.

Inasmuch as my ego passed away. He remained alone: ] roll
at the feet of His horse, like dust.

The (individual) soul (self) became dust, and the (only) signs itw
of it are the mark of His feet on its dust.

Become dust at His feet for the sake of this mark, in order
that you may become the crown on the head of the lofty.

Let not my form beguile you : partake of my dessert before
my departure/'

1 Literally* "from good fortune apprehended/'

1 Literacy, "from ihe farther aide, t jp. from the world beyond.

* J> after tt twts been digested and assimilated.


Z&Z MATHNAWf, BOOK II

01 i h (there is) many a one whom the form waylaid: he aimed
at the form (of the holy man) and (in reality) struck at God,

After all, this soul is joined to the body, (but) has this soul
any likeness to the body?

The sparkle of the eye's light is paired with the fat 3 ; the light
of the heart is hidden in a drop of blood;

Joy (has its seat) in the kidneys, grief in the liver; intellect,
(bright) as a candle, inside the brain in the head.

These connexions tire not without a how and a why, (but) as
regards knowledge of the why (our) minds are impotent.

The Universal Soul came into contact with the partial (in¬
dividual) soul, and the (latter) soul received from it a pearl and
put it into its bosom.

Through that touch on its bosom the (individual) soul
became pregnant, like Mary* with a heart-beguiling Messiah,

Jis* Not the Messiah who is (a traveller) on land and water, (but)
the Messiah who is beyond (the limitation of) measuring (space).

So when the soul has been impregnated by the Boul oi soul,
by such a soul the world is impregnatedL

Then the world gives birth to another world, and displays to
this congregated people a place of congregation (for the realities
which are raised to life).

Though I should speak and recount till the Resurrection,
1 lack the power to describe this (spiritual) resurrection.

These sayings (of mine), indeed, are really an “O Lord”
(a prayer addressed to God); the words are the lure for the
breath of a sweet-lipped One 2 ,

ii'jo How, then, should he (that seeks the answer) fail (to pray)?
How should he be silent, inasmuch as "Here am 1 11 is (always)
coming in response to his ' l O Lord pp ?

It is a ‘Tiere am i 8P that you cannot hear, hut can taste (feel
and enjoy) from head to foot 3 .

How the thirsty man threte bricks from the fop of the wait
into the stream of water.

Ot\ the bank of the stream there was a high wall, and on the
top of the wall a sorrowful thirsty man.

The wall hindered him from (reaching) the water; he was in
distress for the water, like a fish.

Suddenly he threw a brick into the water: the noise of the
water came to his ear like spoken words,
ii95 Like words spoken by a sweet and delicious friend: the noise

of the water made him drunken as (though it were) wine.

1 Jj + the white of the eye.

1 I.e. they seek to Capture the DHine answer to prayer.

1 / It u a mystical experience absorbing every sense and faeullv.


THE THIRSTY MAN WHO THREW BRICKS 283

From the pleasure of (hearing) the noise of the water, that
sorely tried man began to hurl and tear off bricks from that
place.

The water vvas making a noist% that is to say, (it was crying),
*‘Hev, what is the advantage to vou of this hurling a brick at
me? Sh

The thirsty man saidO water, l have two advantages: l will
nowise refrain from this w r ork.

The first advantage is (my) hearing the noise of the water,
which to thirsty men is (melodious) as a rebeck.

The noise thereof has become (to me) like the noise of (the noo
trumpet of) [srafil: by this (noise) life has been transferred
(restored) to one (that was) dead;

Or (it is) like the noise of thunder in days of spring—from it
(the thunder) the garden obtains so many (lovely) ornaments;

Or like the days of alms to a poor man, or like the message of
deliverance tn a prisoner.

n Tis like the breath of the Merciful (God) which, without
mouth, comes to Mohammed from Yemen;

Or T tis like the scent of Ahmad (Mohammed), the Apostle
(of God ), which in intercession comes to the sinner;

Or like the scent of beauteous, graceful Joseph, (which) uoi
strikes upon the soul of lean Jacob.

The other advantage is that, (with) every brick I tear off this
(wall), I come (nearer) to running water,

Since by diminution of the bricks the high w all becomes lower
every time that one is removed 1 .

The lowness (destruction) of the wall becomes a means of
access (to the water); separation from it is the remedy bringing
about a union (with the water). 11

The tearing away of the adhesive (firmly joined) bricks is
(analogous to) prostration (in prayer); (it ia) the cause of near¬
ness (to God), for (God hassaid)/^n*/prortrtffr thyself and drate
near (to Me}**

So long as this wall is high-necked (lofty and proud), it is an 1210
obstacle to this bowing of the head (in prayer).

Tis impossible to perform the prostration on the Water of
Life, until I gain deliverance from this earthly body.

The more thirsty anv one on the ton of the wall is, the more
quickly does he tear oil the bricks and turfs.

The more any one is in love with the noise of the water, the
bigger clods does he tear away from the barrier.

He, at the noise of the water, is filled with wine (ecstasy) up
to the neck, (while) the stranger (to love) hears nothing but the
sound of the splash .


1 Uienilly p J1 every time that he [the d \ lapida tor) tore off (a bridt).*'


284 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

i2i,'. Oh, blest is he that deems his early days an opportunity to
be seized, and pays his debt —

In the dap when he has the power, (when) he has health and
strength of bean and vigour*

And (when) that season of youth, like a garden green and
fresh, is bringing (to ripeness) produce and fruit without any
stint ■

(When) the fountains of strength and lust (are) flowing, (so
that) thereby the soil of the body is made verdant;

(When he is still like) a well-kept house, with its roof very
lofty, its sides (walls) symmetrical, without buttressing 1 and
clamps—

1220 Ere the days of eld arrive and bind your neck with a halter of
palm-fibres;

(Ere) the soil becomes nitrous (barren), crumbling, and poor
— never did good herbage grow from nitrous soil;

(When) the water of strength and the water of lust (is) cut off,
and he has no profit from himself or others:

The eyebrows fallen down like a crupper-strap; the eyes
grown moist and dim;

The face, from wrinkling, like the back of a Lizard; speech
and taste and teeth gone out of use;

izaj The day late, the ass lame, and the way Long; the shop ruined
and the business in disorder 2 ;

The roots of bad habit firmly set, and the power to tear them
up decreased.


Hove the Governor commanded a certain man, saying*

*' Root up the thornbush which you hate planted on the road”

As (for example) that callous fair-spoken person planted a
thornbush in the middle of the road.

The wayfarers reproached him and oftentimes told him to
dig it up: he dug it not up.

Every moment ihe i horn bush was growi ng bi gger: the people's
feet were streaming with 3 blood from its pricks.

12a* The people's clothes were being rent by the thorns: the feet
of the poor were being wounded pitiably/

When the Governor said to him with earnestness, “Dig this
up/* he replied, “Yes, ] will dig it up some day. 11

For a long while he promised (to dig it up) to-morrow and
to-morrow; (meantime) his thornbush became robust in con¬
stitution,

1 LiteraLLv, the "mixture" caused bv the necessity af

rrpainiiK and supporting the original framework.

Literally, 1,1 geme out of order."

* Literal I v. “full of."


THE MAN WHO LET HIS THOKNBUSH GROW 285

One day the Governor said to him, "O false promisor, go
forward with my affair, do not creep back.”

He replied, "O unde, the day$ are between us 1 .” “Make
haste," said he, " do not put {iff payment of my debt.”

You who say 11 To-morrow;” be aware of this, that with even 1 1235
day that time is coming (and going),

That evil tree is grow ing younger, while This, digger is waxing
old and sorely distressed.

The thornbush (is) in (process of gaming) strength and (in)
ascent; its digger (is) in (process of) aging and decline.

The thornbush even" day and every moment is green and
fresh; its digger is every day more sickly and withered.

It is growing younger, you older: be quick and do not waste
your time!

Know that every single bad habit of yours is a thornbush; 124s
many a time, after all, have its thorns pierced your foot.

Many a time have you been wounded bv your own (evil)
habits- you have no sense, you are very senseless.

If to the wounding of other persons, which comes to pass
from vour evil nature.

You arc indifferent, at any rate you are not (indifferent) to
your own wounds: you are the torment of yourself and of every
stranger.

Either take up the axe and strike like a man— like 'All, destroy
this gate of Khaybar —

Or unite the^e thorns with the rosebush: unite the light of i^s
the friend (of God) with the (sensual) fire.

In order that his light may extinguish your fire, (and that)
union with him may make your thorns roses.

You are like Hell, he is a true,believer: the extinction of the
fire (of Hell) by means of a true believer is possible.

Mustafa (Mohammed) said concerning the speech of Hell, that
on account of fear it begins humbly to entreat the true believer,

And says to him, " Pass quickly away from me, O king: hark,
for thy light has taken away the burning of my fire*”

Therefore the true believer's light is the death of the fire, u*o
because without an opposite the removal of the (other) opposite
is impossible.

On the Day of Justice (Judgement) the fire wall be the
opponent of the light, since the former was aroused by (God's)
wrath, the latter by (His) grace.

If you arc wishing to remove the evil of the fire, direct the
water of (Divine) mercy against the heart of the fire.

The true believer is the fountain of that water of mercy: the
pure spirit of the well-doer is the Water of Life.

1 L#. “there » still some lime before ihe Account between us need be
HtiJed. fcp


z86


MATHNAWi, BOOK IJ

Hence your fleshly soul is fleeing from him, because you art
of fire, {while) he (is) the water of the stream,
uji Fire becomes fleeing from water for the reason that its fire
(flame and heat) is ruined by water.

Your sense and thought are wholly of the lirt; the sense of
the Shayidt (spiritual guide) and his thought are the beauteous
Light,

When the water of his light trickles on the fire, chak chak (a
gnashing sound) rises from the fire, and it leaps up (in fury').

When it makes (the sound) chak chak, sav vou to it, "Death
and woe (to thee)," in order that this hell' (which is) your
fleshly soul, may become cold (quenched).

So that it may not burn your rose-garden, so that it may not
hum your justice and w ell-doing.

After that, anything that you sow will vield fruit {or flowers);
it will yield anemones and wild roses and thyme.

Once more we are going wide of the straight way ■ turn back,
Q master—where is our way?

We were (engaged) in showing, O envious one, that your ass
is lame and the place of alighting (journey’s end) far off, (so you
must be) quick.

The year has turned late; it is not sowing-time, (and you have
produced) nothing except black shame 1 and foul deeds'.

The worm has entered the root of the body’s tree; it must be
dug up and put in the fire.

1 IarEi antl hstfk (again), O wayfarer! Mis late, life's sun is
gone towards the pit (is about to set),

(During) these (one or) two brief days when you have (some)
strength, (be) quick, flap your wings generously*.

Devote this (small) amount of seed that you have remaining,
in order that long life may grow from these (one or) two
moments, '

.Whilst this jewelled lamp is not (yet) extinguished, see vou
trim its wick and (supply it with) oil immediately.

Beware! Do not say " To-morrow ’’—for (many) tomorrows
iKttc pusst [j, Let not the days of sowing pass away alto¬
gether.

J3ra Listen to my admonition that the body is a strong bond: put
off the old, if you have desire for newness.

Shut the lips and open the palm filled with gold: leave off
being a miser with the body, exhibit munificence.

Munificence is the abandonment of lusts and pleasures ■ no
one who is sunken in lust rises up (again).

This munificence is a branch of the cypress of Paradise: woe
to him that lets such a branch go from his hand!

1 11 bEuekneag of free."

Irt-r CIMtf JiUUrscIf onsparing! y eh doin£ g^ood works.


THE EVILS OF PROCRASTINATION 287


This abandon mem of sensuality is the firmest handle : this
branch draws the spirit up to Heaven,

(Su act) that the branch of munificence, O righteous man 1 .
drawing you aloft may bear you to its origin.

You arc Joseph (full) of beauty, and this world is as the well >
and this rope (to draw you forth) h patience with (submission
to) the command of God.

O Joseph, the rope is come: put your two hands upon it.
Do not neglect the rope, (for) it has grown late.

Praise he to God, that this rope has been dangled, (and that)
grace and mercy have been blended together.

So that you may behold the world of the new spirit, a world
very manifest, (though) invisible.

This (phenomenal) world of non-existence has become tike
(real) existence while that world uf (real) existence has become
very hidden.

The dust is on the wind: it is playing, it is making a false
show and lorming a veil.

This, which is busy (in appearance), is (really) idle and
(superheial, Jtke) a husk; and that which is hidden is its core
and origin.

1 he dust is as a tool in the hand of the wind: deem the wind
high and of high descent.

1 he gaze ol the eye of dust falls on the dust; an eye that sees
the wind is of another sort.


A horse knows a horse, because it (one horse) is associated
(homogeneous with other horses); likewise (only) a rider knows
the things appertaining to a rider.

The sensuous eye is the horse, and the Light of God is the
rider: without the rider the horse itself is useless.

Therefore train the horse (so as to cure it) of bad habits; else
the horse will be rejected before the King.

1 he horse's eye finds the way from the King's eye: without
the King's eye its eye is in desperate plight.

The eye of horses, whithersoever you call it except to grass
and pasture, says, "Nay, why (should we go)?'*

The Light of God mounts (as a rider) on the sensuous eye +
and then the soul yearns after God,

^ How should the riderless horse know the marks of the road?
The King is needed (to ride it) in order that it may know the
Kings road.

Go towards a sense on which the Light is riding: that Light
is a good companion for the sense.

Lhe Light of God is an ornament 10 the light of sense: this
is the meaning of light upon light.


1 Literally, "O man of good religion/ b


2&B MATHNAWIj book n

The light of sense draws (a man) towards earth; the Light of
God bears him aloft,

a >5 Because sensible things are a lower world: the Light of God
is (as) the sea, and the sense as a dew-drop.

But that which rides on it (on the sense) is not manifested
save by good effects and words.

The sensuous light, which is gross and heavy, is hidden m
the black of the eyes.

Inasmuch as you are not seeing the light of sense with (your)
eye, how should you see the light of that religious one (the saint)
with (your) eye?

The light of sense is hidden notwithstanding this grossness:
how (then) should not that radiance be hidden which is pure
(and subtle)?

3*0 This world, like straw s in the hand (sway) of the wind, (which
is) the (world) unseen, has adopted helplessness as its (only)
resource 1 ; and the dispensation of the Unseen

Makes it now lofty, now low ; makes it now sound (and whole),
now broken;

Now carries it to the right, now to the left; now makes it
roses, now thorns.

See (how T ) the Hand (is) hidden, while the pen is writing; the
horse careering, while the Rider is invisible.

See the arrow flying, and the Bow not in sight; the (individual)
souls manifest, and the Soul of souls hidden.

Do not break the arrow, for it is the arrow of a King; it is not
shot at long range (at random), it is from the thumb-stall of
One who knows (how to hit the target).

God said, “Thou didst not thr&to when thou thretcest* r : the
action of God has precedence over (our) actions.

Break your own anger, do not break the arrow: the eye of
your anger reckons milk (to be) blood*

Give the arrow a kiss and bring it to the King—the blood¬
stained arrow, wet with your blood.

That which is seen is "helpless and confined and feeble; and
that which is unseen is so fierce and uncontrollable.

We are the (hunted) prey: to whom belongs such a (fearful)
snare? We are the ball (for the blows) of the polo-bat—and
where is the Batsman ?

He tears, He sews: where is this Tailor ? He blows, He burns:
where is this Fire-kindler 2 ?

At one hour He makes the true saint an unbeliever; at another
hour He makes the (impious) deist an (orthodox) ascetic;

For the mukhih (sincere worshipper) is in danger of the snare
until he becomes entirely purged of self,

1 Literally, ,J trade "or " practice. 1 *

1 Literally* " one who throws naphtha/*


THE LIGHT OF GOD

Because he is (still) on the Way, and the brigands are number¬
less: (only) he escapes who is under God's safeguard,

(If) he has not become (selfless, like) a pure mirror, he is (no mi
more than) ttmkhlis: (if) he has not caught the bird, he is (still)
hunting; * *

(But) when the mukhlis has become mukhlaf\ he is delivered:
he has reached the place of safety and has won the victor}'.

No mirror (ever) became iron again; no bread (ever) became
the wheat in the stacks

No full-grown grape (ever) became a young grape; no mature
Jrmt (ever) became premature fruit.

Become mature and be far from {the possibility of) change
tor the worse: go. become the Light, like Burhan-t Mu-
haqqiq.

When you have escaped from self, you have become wholly ij#>
the proof (of God): when the slave (in you) has become naught
you have become the King.

[And if you wish to behold (this mystery) plainly, Salih u’d din
has shown it forth: he has made the eves to see aiul has opened
(them), ' r

f™ 1 * h? eyes and mien every eye that hath the Light of
flu (God) has discerned (mystical) poverty.

_ fhe Shaykh (Salahu ddfn) is one who, like God, acts without
instrument, giving lessons to his disciples without anything
said.] 2 &

In his hand the heart is submissive like soft was: his seal
makes (the impression) noiv (of) shame, now (of) fame.

The seal impressed on his wax is telling of the seal-ring; of 13*5
whom, again, does the device tell, (which is) graven on the stone
of the ring?

It tells of the thought of the Goldsmith—(all this) is a chain,
every link (inserted) in another.

Whose voice is this echo in the mountains of (our) hearts?
Sometimes this mountain is full of the voice, sometimes it is
empty'.

Wheresoever he is, he is the Sage, the Master—may his
voice not forsake 3 this mountain!

I here is a mountain that (only) doubles the voice; there is
a mountain that makes it hundredfold.

At thatvoice and speech the mountain lets gush forth hundreds 1350
of thousands of springs of clear water.


1 The mtMdif if he Who worships devotedly, hui regards his delation «
his nvm, while the muM/Oaf, whom God has purged of Self, attributes all bis
ictiorw it? God.

e.?,? V >'aP * J? the , tw ? old “* MSS. As they refer to

$aJ4!>U ddm Znrkijb (tbe GoJdbetttr), Their murtieil here waa probahJv
•HKBcsted by a mumterpreiatHm of v. 1326.

1 Ljtent!])'p '"not be quit of/*


X M


l 9


290 MATHNAWf „ BOOK II

Inasmuch as that grace emanates (even) from the mountain (
the waters in the springs become blood.

5 Twas oh account of that monarch of auspicious gait 1 that
Mount Sinai was (turned to) rubies from end to end,

(All) the parts ot the mountain received life and intelligence—
alter all, are we inferior to stone, O people?

Neither is there gushing from the soul a single spring, nor is
the body becoming one of those dad in green;

*335 Neither is there in it the echo of the cry of longing, nur the
purity (bom) of the draught of (wine bestowed by) the Cup¬
bearer.

Whore is (so great) zeal* that they should entirely dig up such
a mountain as this with axe and with pick?—

(In the hope that) maybe a Moon will shine upon its particles,
(that) maybe the radiance of the Moon will find a way into it.

Inasmuch as the (temporal) Resurrection shall dig up the
mountains, how shall it cast the shadow (of protection) over us?

How is this (spiritual) Resurrection inferior to that (temporal)
Resurrection? That (temporal) Resurrection is the wound, and
this (spiritual) Resurrection is as the plaster.

1S40 Ever) r one that has seen (experienced) this plaster is safe from
the wound: every evil one that has seen this good is a well-doer.

Oh, happy is the ugly one to whom the beauteous one has
become a companion; alas for one of rosy countenance with
whom autumn has consorted!

When lifeless bread is companioned with life, the bread
becomes living and is turned into the substance of that (life).

Dark faggots become the companions of fire: the darkness
departed, and all was turned into light.

When the dead ass fell into the salt-mine, it put aside asininity
and mortality,

i 1+5 The baptism of Allah is the dyeing-vat of Hu (the Absolute
God): therein (all) piebald things become of one colour.

When he (the mystic) falls into the vat + and you say to him*
“Arise / 1 he says in rapture, " I am the vat: do not blame (me) ”

That 4i I am the vat” is the (same as) saying “I am God”:
he has the colour of the fire, albeit he is iron.

The colour of the iron is naughted in the colour of the fire:
it (the iron) boasts of (its) fieriness, though (actually) it is like
one who keeps silence.

When it has become like gold of the mine in redness, then
without tongue its boast is 41 1 am the fire.”

ij 5 <? It has become glorified by the colour and nature of the fire:
it says, “ I am the fire, I am the fire,

I am the fire; if thou have doubt and suspicion, make trial,
put thy hand upon me*


1 Moses*


THE UN1TIVE STATE


391


I am the fire; if it seem dubious to thee, lav thv face upon
my face for one moment/'

When Man receives light from God, he is worshipped by
the angds because of his being chosen (by God).

Abo (he is) worshipped by that one whose spirit, like the
angd* has been freed from contumacy and doubt.

What fire? What iron? Close your lips: do not laugh at the i
beard of the assimilator’s simile 1 .

Do not set foot in the Sea 2 , speak not of It: on the shore of
the Sea keep siknce, biting your lips (in amazement).

I hough (one equal to) a hundred like me would not have the
strength to bear the Sea, yet 1 cannot refrain from the drowning
waters of the Sea. &


May my soul and mind be a sacrifice to the Sea: this Sea has
paid the blood-price of mind and soul.

I will march in It as long as my feet move: when feet remain
not, I am (plunged) in It, like ducks.

An unrespectful person present is better than one absent: 1360
though the ring be crooked, is it not on the door?

O defiled in body, frequent 3 the tank: outside of the tank,
how shall a man be cleansed?

.The p u re one who has been banished from the tank becomes
far also from his purity.

The purity of this tank is infinite; the purity of bodies is of
little weightj

Because the heart (though it) is a tank, vet in ambush (out of
sight) it has a hidden channel to the Sea.

our finite purity wants reinforcement; otherwise, number is lidj
diminished in (the course of) expenditure.

The water said to the defiled one, “Hasten (to come) into
me* rhe -defiled one said, "I feel shame before the water,"

„,p“ d the water, "Without me how shall this shame go?
Without me how shall this defilement be removed?"

livery defiled one who hides from the water is (an example of
the saying that) "Shame hinders Faith."

The heart Is muddied by the steps of the body's tank; the
body is cleansed by the water of the heart’s tanks.

Haunt the steps of the hearts tank T O son; take heed and ijjo
always beware of the steps of the body's tank*

1 he sea of the body is dashing against the sea of the hearty
(but) between them h a harrier which they shall not cross .

Whether you be straight (righteous) or crooked* always creep
forwards to Him; do not creep backwards.

thv ralitsf r¥QI mwlt thc mt np*ri*on by 4U£ge3rjng that It corresponds ttich

k;tvr the Sen of Divine Unity untouched and an profaned by vour
comparisons J 7

1 LilrraHy, "move round about. M


292 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

If in the presence of kings there be danger to life* yet they
that aspire cannot refrain from (presence with) Him.

Since the King is sweeter than sugar, T tis better that life
should go (as a sacrifice) to (that) sweetness.

ii 75 O blamer (of lovers)* safety be thine! O seeker of safety*
thou art infirm 1 .

My soul is a furnace: it is happy with the fire: *tis enough for
the furnace that it is the fire's nouse.

For Love, as (for) the furnace p there is something to be
burned*: any one that is blind to this is not a furnace.

When the provision of unprovided ness has become your
provision, you have gained life everlasting* and death is gone.

When the pain (of love) has begun to increase your (spiritual)
joy* roses and lilies have taken possession of the garden of your
soul.

i y6* That which is the dread of others is your safety (safeguard) :
the duck is (made) strong by the river* the domestic fowl weak.

Once more have 1 become mad, O Physician! Once more
have I become frenzied* O Beloved!

The rings (links) of Thy chain are multi form: every single
ring gives a different madness,

The gift of every ring is (consists in) different forms: there¬
fore I have a different madness at every moment.

So “Madness is of different forms” — this has become a
proverb; especially (is it true) as regards the chain of this most
glorious Prince.

n*s Such a madness has broken the bonds (of my reason) that all
madmen would give me admonition,

Jfoc? friends came to tht madhouse for Dhu J l-Nvn — may

* God sanctify his honoured spiritI

It so happened to Dhu ’1-Nun the Egyptian that a new
agitation and madness was bom within him/

His agitation became so great that salt (bitterness) from it
was reaching (all) hearts up to above the sky.

Beware* O (thou of) salty soil, do not put thy agitation beside
(in comparison with) the agitation of the holy lords (saints).

The people could not endure his madness: his fire was
carry ing off their beards 3 ,

i y/o When (that) fire fell on the beards of the vulgar, they bound
him and put him in a prison.

There is no possibility of pulling back this rein * though the
vulgar be distressed by this w r ay 4 ,

1 Literal]?. " having weak vdp or handles / 1

1 /h*. the dross of sensual qualities.

1 /^r in liis ecstaay he had no regard for their formal religion.

1 I*, the way of mystical transport and cCfttwiy-


DHU f L-NtiN AND HIS FRIENDS 393

These (spiritual) kings have seen (themselves in) danger of
their lives from the vulgar ; for this multitude are blind, and
the kings (are) without (a visible) mark.

When authority is in the hands of profligates, (a) Dhu P l-Nun
is inevitably in prison.

The great king rides alone! Such a unique pearl in the hands
of children!

What pearl? (Nay)* the Sea hidden in n drop, a Sun concealed 1 ^
in a mote.

A Sun showed itself as a mote, and little by little uncovered
its face.

All motes vanished in it; the (whole) world became intoxicated
by it and (then) became sober.

When me pen (of authority) is in the hand of a traitor, un¬
questionably Mansur 1 is on a gibbet.

When this affair (dominion) belongs to the foolish, the
necessary consequence is (that) they kill the prophets.

Through folly the people who had lost the (right) way said 1400
to the prophets* " Lu, tee augur ill from you™

See the ignorance of the Christian appealing for protection
to the Lord who was suspended (on the Cross)!

Since according to his (the Christianas) belief * He was crucified
by the Jews, how then can He protect him?

Inasmuch as the heart of that King (Jesus) bleeds on account
of them (the Christians)* how r should there be (for them) the
inviolable defence of tehibt thou art amongst them?

To the pure gold and to the goldsmith the danger from the
false counterfeiter is greater (than from any one else).

Josephs are concealed on account of the jealousy of the ugly t for n 05
because of enemies the beautiful live in the fire (of tribulation).

Josephs are in the pit through the guile of (their) brethren,
who from envy give Joseph to the wolves.

What happened to Joseph of Egy pt on account of envy? This
envy is a big wolf in covert.

Of necessity* kind Jacob always had fear and dread for
Joseph because of this wolf.

Tne outward (visible) wolf, indeed* did not prowl about

! approach) Joseph; (but) this envy has actually surpassed wolves
in malignity).

Tins wolf dealt its wound, and by way of specious excuse M
came (the words) s 1 Lo+ tee went to compete with one another”
Hundreds of thousands of waives have not this cunning;
(but) this wolf will at last be put to shame — stop (and see)! —
Because on the Day of Bale the envious will without doubt
be (raised from the dead and) brought together (to Judgement)
in the shape of wolves.

. 1 ww*


294 MATHNAWf, BOOK IT

The resurrection of the greedy vile eater of carrion (unlawful
food) will be in the shape of a hog on the Day of Reckon!ng +

Adulterb (erit) factor membn latentis; wine-drinkers will
have stinking mouths.

ms The hidden stench that was reaching (only) to (people’s)
hearts will become sensible and manifest at the Resurrection.

The being of Man is a jungles be on your guard against this
being, if you are of that (Divine) Breath.

In our being there are thousands of wolves and hogs ; (there
is) goodly and ungtxnlly and fair and foul*

To the disposition that is preponderant belongs the decision
(as to what you are); when the gold is more than the copper* it
(the mixture) is gold.

I he manner of acting that preponderates in your nature- — in
that same form you must needs rise (from the dead).
r, * M At one hour a w F oll enters into Man, ac another hour a moon-
like beauty with the face of Joseph.

Good and hateful qualities pass from bosoms into bosoms by
a hidden way;

Nay t indeed, wisdom and knowledge and excellence pass
from Man into the ox and the ass.

The stumbling (restive) horse becomes smooth-paced and
docile; the bear dances, the goat also salaams.

Volition has passed from human beings into the dog, so that
he has become a shepherd or a hunter or a guardian (of the
house)*

Into the dog of the Companions (of the Cave) there passed
from those Sleepers a (moral) disposition, so that he had become
a seeker of God*

At every- moment a (different) species bursts up in the breast:
now a devil, and now an ange| t now r wild beasts.

h torn that iMpellous Jungle with which every lion is
acquainted, there is a hidden way to the breasts which ensnare
(trie spiritual prey) 1 ,

O you who are less than a dog, steal the spiritual pearl from
within—from within (the breasts of) them that know God.

As you (must) steal, at any rate (let it be) that lovely pearl;
as you arc going to bear a burden, at any rate (let it be)"a noble
one.


How the dimples understood that Dhu 'l-Nim had not
become mad f {but} had acted with intention .

1430 The friends w ent to the prison (to inquire) about the story of
Dhu 1 -Nun, and expressed an opinion concerning it,

Saying, 11 Perchance he does this purposely # or there is some

* Literally, “ to the snare of the brtaata/'


DHU *L-NTJn AND HIS FRIENDS Zq$

(deep) wisdom (in it): he is an exemplar 1 and a shining light 3
in this religion.

Far, far be it from his sea-like (profound) intelligence that
madness should prompt him to folly 1

God forbid, in view of the perfection of his (spiritual) attain¬
ments, that the cloud of sickness should cover his moonl
He has gone into the house (and taken refuge) from the
wickedness of the vulgar: he has become mad on account of
the infamy of the sane.

From (feeling) the disgrace of the dull body-serving intellect* mjs
he has purposely gone and become mad,

Saying, 4 Bind me fast and with the tail 5 of a cow smite me
on head and back, and do not dispute this (matter),

That from the stroke of the part (of the cow) I may gain life,
as the murdered man (gained life) from the cow of Moses*

O trusty ones;

That I may be made happy by the stroke of a part of the cow ;
(that I may) become weli (whole), like the murdered man (by
means) of the cow of Moses 1 / 1
The murdered man was revived by the stroke of the cow's
tail: lie became pure gold (in spirit), even as copper (is trans¬
muted) by the elixir.

The murdered man sprang up and told the secrets: he
revealed that bloodthirsty gang.

He said plainly, “I was killed by these people who arc now
disturbed (with anger) an contending against me/

When this gross body is killed, the essence that knows
(spiritual) secrets is brought to life.

Its spirit beholds Paradise and Hell-fire and discerns all the
mysteries.

ft reveals the devilish murderers, it reveals die snare of deceit
and guile.

To kill the cow (the fleshly soul) is the stipulation of (imposed 1415
by) the (Sufi) Path, in order that the spirit may be restored to
consciousness by the stroke of her tail

Kill most quickly the cow, your fleshly soul, so that the hidden
spirit may become alive and conscious.

Resumption of the story of Dim 7 -A wit, may God sanctify his spirit I

When those persons arrived near him, he shouted, "Hey,
who are ye? Take care!”

They said respectfully, “We are some of thy friends: we
have come hither in devotion to ask after thee,

1 Literally, 18 One to whom all turn,"

5 Literally, 11 i. sij^n or evidence / 1
’ Literally, ** instrument / 1


MATHNAWf „ BOOK II

How art thou , 0 Sea of manifold intelligence? What aspersion
on thy intelligence is this (alleged) madness?

1450 How should the smoke of the bath-stove attain unto the Sun?
How should the "Anaa be crushed by the crow?

Do not withhold (the truth) from us: explain this matter- we
are lovers (of thee): do not behave to us in this fashion.

One ought not to drive lovers away or dupe them by mask
and false pretence.

Communicate the secret, O King; do not hide 1 thy face in
the cloud, Q Moon!

We are loving and true and with wounded (bleeding) hearts:
in the two worlds we have fixed our hearts on thee (alone). p *

He began (to use) foul words and bad names recklessly : he
spoke gibberish- like madmen.

He jumped up and let fly stones and sticks; the whole party
fled for fear of blows.

He laughed loudly and tossed his head (in scorn), "Look,”
said he t "at the vain bluster 3 of these friends!

See the friends! Where is the sign of (true) friends? To
(true) friends pain is as (dear as) life.”

How should a friend turn aside from the pain inflicted bv
his friend? Pain is the kernel, and friendship is fonlv) as the
husk to it. r x

M<kl nq * i°y ’ n tribulation and calamity- and suffering become

the sign of (true) friendship?

A friend is like gold, tribulation is like the fire: the pure gold
is glad in the heart of the fire.


Hots Lttqmdn's master tested his sagacity.

(Was it) not (the case) that (this happened) to Luqman, who
was a pure (unselfish) slave, and day and night was brisk in
service?

His master used to prefer him (to all ethers) in the work (of
service) and deem him better than his own sons.

Because Luqmdn, though he was slave-born, was the master
(ot himself) and was free from sensual desire
nsj A certain king said to the Shaykh (spiritual Director) in
conversatioiij Ask me to bestow some bounty upon thee.**

He answered, O King, are nol you ashamed to say such a
thing to me? Come higher! J

I have two slaves, and they are vile, and those two are ruler*
and lords over you/


1 Literally, "put covertly™
l Literally, "(l he IsctenO i/ and vdj.’
Literally, ihc wind of the brand.”


THE SAGACITY OF LUQMAX


297


Said the King," What are those two ? That is a mistake," He
replied,, “The one is anger and the other is lust.”

Regard as a king him that is unconcerned with kingship, him
whose light shines forth without moon or sun.

(Only) that one whose essence is the treasury (of spiritual -.470
truths) possesses the treasury: (only) he that is an enemy to (his
own) existence possesses (real) existence.

Luqmin's master (was) like a master outwardly: in reality
his (Luqmin’s) master (was) Luq man's slave 1 .

In the topsy-turvy world there is many a one of this (kind);
a pearl is less than a straw* in their sight.

Every desert has been named iriajasa (place of safety): a name
and specious form has ensnared their understanding'

In the case of one class of people, the dress makes (a man)
known: (if he is dressed) in a qubci, they say that he belongs to
the vulgar.

I n the case of one class of people (the distinguishing mark is) M75
the hypocritical appearance of asceticism; (but) light is needed,
that (any one) may be a spy on asceticism (and detect its true
character).

Light is needed, (a light) purged of cant and noxiousness,
that he may know* a man without (the evidence of) deed or word.

And enter into his heart by way of the intellect, and behold
his real state and not be confined to tradition*.

The chosen servants of (God) the Knower of things unseen
are, in the spiritual world, the spies on hearts.

He (such a one) enters within the heart like a fancy: the
mystery' of the (real) state is unveiled to him.

In the body of the sparrow what power and faculty is there nfco
that is hidden from the intellect of the falcon r


He who has become acquainted with the secrets of Hu (God),
what to him is the secret (inmost consciousness) of created
beings?

He whose walk is on the spheres, how should it lie hard for
him to walk on the earth?

Since iron became wax in the hand of David, what should
wax be in his hand, O man of iniquity ?

J.tiqmin was a slave in appearance, a master (in reality):
servitude was (only) a frontispiece* on his outside.

When the master goes to a place where he Is not known*, he j 4 >j
puts (his own) clothes on his slave.

He (himself) puts on the slave’s doilies and makes his slave
the leader.


1 Or, " he was a (and) Luqmin was his master,"

* derived, u opposed to immediate, knowledge.

1 Literally,*'a coloured title-page and protate’’; it. his external aspect was
that of a utave, in contrast with what lay underneath.

‘ And where he does not wish to be recognised.


MATHNAWi, BOOK II


He goes behind him on the road, as slaves do, lest any one
should recognise him (as the master).

"O slave . 15 says he, “go you and sit in the place of honour:
1 will take (your) shoes, like the meanest slave.

Treat (me) roughly and revile me; do not bestow any respect
on me.

h'/o 1 hold neglect of sendee to be your (proper) service t since 1
have sown the seed of contrivance by dwelling In a foreign land 1 . 1 *

Masters have performed these slavish offices in order that it
might be thought that they were staves.

They saw their till of imstcrdom and were sated (with it):
(hence) they have made ready for (doing) the work (of slaves).

On the contrary * these slaves of sensuality' have represented
themselves as masters of intellect and spirit/

from the master (the spiritual man) comes the practice of
self-abasement; from the slave (the sensual man) comes naught
but slavishness.

So topsy-turvy, then, are the arrangements between that
world and this world. Know this (for sure),

Luqman's master was aware of this hidden state (of Luqman);
he had seen signs (thereof) in him.

That traveller (Luqman 5 s master) knew the secret, (but)
quietly pursued his way* for the sake of the good (which he had
in view)*

He would have set him free at the first, but he sought to
content (comply with the wish of) Luqman,

Because it was Luq min's desire (to remain a slave) t in order
that none might know the secret of that brave 3 and generous
youth.

i 5 w What wonder (is it) that you should hide your secret from the
evil (one)? The wonder is this, that you should hide the secret
from yourself.

Hide your work Irom your own eyes, that your work may be
safe from the evil eye.

Yield yourself up to the snare of the (Divine) reward, and
then, (being) beside yourself, steal something from yourself.

They give opium to the wounded man, in order that they
may extract the point (of a spear or arrow) from his body.

At the hour oi death lie is torn with pain; he becomes pre¬
occupied with that, and (meanwhile) his spirit (life) is taken away.

1545 Inasmuch as, to whatsoever thought you give up vour mind,
something will secretly be taken away from you.

(And inasmuch as) whatsoever you may cogitate and
(whatsoever) acquisition you may ntkke, the thief will enter
from the side where you feci safe,


! V* " a broad for the Sake of caning out a Secret <

* drove ^ ■ Ltiera]Jy/- that bon


THE SAGACITY OF LUQMAN 399

Become occupied, therefore, with that which is better, in
order that the thief may take away from you something that b
Jess (in worth),

W hen the trader $ bales fa]] into the water, he lays his hands
upon the better merchandise.

Since something will (certainly) be lost in the water, take
leave of the less (worse) and gain (possession of) the better.


Ufw the excellent# and Sagacity of Luqmdn became manifest
to those teho made trial {of him).

Whatever food they brought to him {Luqman's master), he 1510
would send some one to Luqimn after (receiving it),

1 hat Luqmdn might put hb hand to (partake of) it T on purpose
that the master might eat his (Luqman's) leavings.

He would eat his remnants and be enraptured 3 ; any food
that he (Luqmitt) did not taste, he (the master) would throw
away;

Or if he ate (of it), ('twould be) without heart am! without
appetite: this is (the sign of) an affinity without end.
t rh«Y had brought a melon a^ a present. "Go," said he*

calf (hither) my son, Luqmin . 11

W hen he cut it and gave him a slice, he ate it as if it were sugar 1515
and honey.

On account of the pleasure with which he ate (it), he gave
him a second (slice), (and went on) till the slices (given him)
reached the seventeenth.

One slice remained* He said, "I will cat this (myself), so
that I may see what a sweet melon this is.

He (Luqman) cats it with such pleasure that from hb delight
(all) natures have become eager and craving the morsel."

As soon as he (the master) ate it, by its sourness there was
kmdled fire (which) blistered his tongue and burnt his throat.

He became beside himself for a while on account of its sour- i^jq
ness; after that* he said to him, m O (you who are) sou] and
world.

How did you make all this poison an antidote? Bow did you
deem this cruelty to be kindness?

What patience is this? For what reason is this great fortitude?

Or, perchance, in your opinion this life of yours is an enemy
(which you would fain destroy).

UhY did not you cunningly bring (forward) a plea, saving*

* I have an excuse (for declining to eat): desist for a while ."

Luq man said, ,£ From thy munificent hand 1 have eaten so
much that I am (bent) double with shame.

1 Literally* “he would raise (a feeling df) enthusiasm,”


3 °°


MATHNAWI, HOOK II

*3-Ji t was ashamed not to eat one bitter thing from thy hand, Q
thou who art possessed of knowledge.

Since all parts of me have grown from thy bounty and are
plunged in thy bait and snare—

If I make outcry and complaint because of one bitter thing,
may the dust of a hundred roads be on (all) parts of me!

It (the melon) had the enjoyment of thy sugar-bestowing
hand: huw could it (such enjoyment) leave* any bitterness in
this melon?”

By love bitter things become sweet; by love pieces of cooper
become golden; *

«Sjo By love dregs become clear; by love pains become healing;

By love the dead is made living; by love the king is made a slave.

This love, moreover, is the result of knowledge; ivho (ever)
sat in foolishness 1 on such a throne?

On what occasion did deficient knowledge give birth to this
love? Deficient (knowledge) gives birth to love, but (onlv love)
for that which is (really) lifeless.

When it secs in a lifeless being the colour (appearance) of
a desired one, (*tis as though) it heard the voice of a beloved
in a whistle.

Deficient knowledge cannot discriminate: of necessity It
deems the lightning to be the sun.

When the Prophet called the 'deficient” (man) accursed,
(his meamng) as interpreted was "deficiency of mind,”

Because one whose body is deficient is tfie object of (Divine)
mercy: cursing and repulse (directed) against the object of
(Divine) mercy are improper.

Tis deficiency of mind that is the bad disease: k is the cause
of (God’s) curse and merits banishment (from His presence),

Forasmuch as the perfecting of minds is not remote (im-
possible), but the perfecting of the body is not within our power,

1 he miscreancc and Pharaoh-like pride of every infidel who
is far (from God) have all been produced by deficiency of mind.

,, 1 v >r . bodily deficiency has come in the (words of the)
Qur an— it u no crime in the Mind man.

Lightning is transient and very faithless: without clearness
(of mind) you will not know the transient from the permanent
1 he lightning laughs: say, at whom is it laughing? At him that
Sets his heart upon its light.

The lights of the sky arc hamstrung (feeble and imperfect):
how are they like (that Light which is) neither of the east nor
of the west?

iJ43 Regard the lightning as (what) taketh aaay the sight; regard

1 Reading tf (*$>=■ ** retained, truncate: “When did he the

foot) in h« vanity lix on such a throne?"


THE SAGACITY OF LUQMAn jot

the everlasting Light as entirely Helpers 1 (to the attainment of
vision).

To ride (your) horse upon the foam of the sea, to read a letter
in a flash of li ghtning .

Is, to fail, because of covetousness, to see the end; it is, to
laugh at your own mind and intellect.

Intellect, by its proper nature, U a seer of the end (conse¬
quence); "tis the fleshly soul that does not see the end.

The intellect that is vanquished by the flesh becomes the
flesh: J upitcris checkmated by Saturn and becomes inauspicious.

Still, turn this gaze (of yours) upon this inauspicious ness, look 155&
on that One who made you ill-starred.

The gaze (of him) that surveys this ebb and flow pierces frum
the inauspicious influence to the auspicious.

He (God) continually turns you from one state (of feeling) to
another, manifesting opposite by means of opposite in the
change,

For the purpose that fear of the left hand side may bring to
birth in you the delight of “the (blessed) men'are led to hope
for the right hastd side;”

So that you may have two wings (fear and hope) ; for the bird
that has (only) one wing is unable to fly* O excellent (reader),

(O God), either let me not come to speech (at all), or give me tsss
leave to tell (the whole) to the end.

But if Thou wiliest neither this nor that, "tis Thine to com¬
mand : how should any one know what Thou mtcndest 2 ?

One must needs have the spirit of Abraham to see in the fire
Paradise and its palaces by the light (of mystic know ledge);

And mount step by step above the moon and the sun, lest he
remain like the door-ring fastened on the door;

And* like the Friend 3 , pass beyond the Seventh Heaven,
saying, “/ love not them that set™

This bodily world is deceptive, save to him that has escaped iso*
from lust.

Conclusion 0/ {the story) how the (other) retainers envied
the King's favourite slave.

The story of the King and the amirs and their envy of the
favourite slave and lord of w isdom

Has been left far (behind) on account of the powerful attrac¬
tion of the discourse, (Now) we must turn back and conclude it.

The happy and fortunate gardener of the (Divine) kingdom
How should not he know one tree from another?

\ hl Helpers Pf iAnfiir) is the name given to die people of Medina who
as%mt4 Mohammed after he had quitted Mecca.

1 Literally, 11 where k Thy de&Emation/ 3

1 Abraham.


302


MATHSiAWf, BOOK II


The tree that is bitter and reprobate, and the tree whose one
b (as) seven hundred (of the other)—

1565 How, in rearing (them), should he deem (them) equal, when
he beholds them with the eye (that is conscious) of the end,

(And knows) what (different) fruit those trees will ultimately
bear, though at this moment they are alike In appearance 1 ?

The Shaykh who has become seeing by the li^ht of God has
become acquainted with the end and the beginning. ,

He has snot for God’s sake the eye that sees the stable (the
world); he has opened, in priority, the eye that sees the end.

Those envious ones were bad trees; they were ill-fortuned
ones of bitter stock.

They were boiling and foaming with envy, and were starting
plots in secret,

That they might behead the favourite slave and tear up his
root from the world;

(But) how p should he perish, since the King was his soul, and
his root was under the protection of God ?

The King had become aware of those secret thoughts, (but)
like Bti Bakr-i Rababi he kept silence.

In (viewing) the spectacle of the hearts of (those) evil-
natured ones he was clapping his hands (derisively) at those
potters (schemers),

1575 Some cunning people devise stratagems to get the King into
a beer-jug-;

(But) a King (so) exceedingly grand and illimitable—how
should He be contained in a beer-jug, O asses?

They knitted a net for the King; (yet) after all, they (had)
learned this contrivance from Him.

Ill-starred is the pupil that begins rivalry' with his master
and comes forward (to contend with him).

With what master? The master of the world, to whom the
manifest and the occuh are alike;

Whose eyes have become seeing by the light of God and have
rent the veils of ignorance.

(Making) a veil of (his) heart, (which is as) full of holes as an
old blanket* he (the disciple) puts it on i n t he presence of tha t Sage.

The veil laughs at him with a hundred mouths, every mouth
having become a slit (open) to that (master)* 3

The master says to the disciple, 41 G you w ho are less than a
dog, have you no faithfulness to me?

Even suppose I am not a master and an iron-breaker 1 , suppose
I am a disciple like yourself and blind of heart.


1 Literally, "alike in the sight.” 3 entrap and deceive him p+

1 Pottiblr the (rue remding is Oltf “(vdut) rimn in femofe " (cf.

every nwiith exposes the dncipWm folly and py* him to ihamc.
* one endowed With great Spiritual power.”


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS 303

Haw not you help in spirit and mind from me? Without me 1^3
no water is set flowing for von.

Therefore my heart is die factory of your fortune: why would
you break this factory', Q unrighteous one? ”

\ou may say that you kindle the flame 1 (of rivalry ) against
him in secret (not openly); but is there not a window between
heart and heart ?

After all, he sees your thought through the window: your
heart gives testimony as to what you are meditating.

Suppose that, from kindness, he does not rebuke you to your
face, (and that) whatever you say, he smiles and says +l Yes”—

He does not smile from pleasure at your stroking (flattering 15^
him); he smiles at that (concealed) thought of yours.

So a deceit is paid with a deceit: strike with a cup p (and you)
get struck with a jug—serve you right!

W ere his smile at you one of approval, hundreds of thousands
of flowers would blossom for you*

When his heart works (for you) in approval, deem it (to be)
a sun entering Aries,

Because of whom- both the day and the spring smile p and
blossoms and gTeen Adds are mingled together,

, And myriads of nightingales and ringdoves pour their song jv.<
into the unplenished world.

When you see the leaves of your spirit yellow and black, how
know you not the anger of the King?

1 he King's $un t in the (zodiacal) sign of reproach, makes faces
black as a piece of roasted meat.

Our souls are leaves for that Mercury (to write on): that white
and black (writing) is our standard (criterion)*

Amin, he writes a patent in red and green, that (our) spirits
may be delivered from melancholy and despair.

Red and green are Spring’s cancellation (of winter); in regard 1™
(to their significance they are) like the (coloured) lines of the
rainbow*


Ucnc reverence for the message of Solomon ± on ichom he peai'Cj teas
refected in the heart of Bitqisfrom the despicable form of the hoopoe.

+ Hundredfold mercy be on that Bilqis to whom God gave the
intellect of a hundred men!

A hoopoe brought the fetter with the (royal) sign-manual
from Solomon—a few eloquent words.

(When) she read those pregnant sayings, she did not look
with contempt on the messenger.


1 Literally* "strike the firebrick."
1 Literally, " from ii. >p


304 MATHNAWf j BOOK II

Her eve saw him as a hoopoe, (hut) her spirit saw him as the
‘Aiiua; her senses saw him as a fleck of foam, (hut) her heart
saw him as the sea*

ifcqs Because of these two-coloured (diverse) talismans (appear¬
ance and reality) the intellect is at war with the senses, as
Mohammed with, the likes of Abu JahL

The infidels regarded Ahmad (Mohammed) as (only) a man,
since they did not see in him (the Prophetic nature which was
manifested by the miracle) the moon was deft asunder r

Throw dust on your sense-perceiving eye: the sensuous eye
is the enemy of intellect and religion,

God has called the sensuous eye blind; lie has said that it is
an idolater and our foe*

Because it saw the foam and not the sea, because it saw the
present and not to-morrow.

1610 The master of to-morrow and of the present (is) before it;
(yet) of a (w r hole) treasure it sees not (even) a groat 1 .

(If) a mo ec bring a message from yonder Sun, the sun would
become a slave to that mote.

The drop that has become an envoy from the Sea of Unity -
the seven seas would be captive to that drop.

If a handful of earth become His courier^ His heavens will
lay their heads (in homage) before His earth.

When the earth of Adam became God's courier* God's angels
laid their heads (in worship) before His earth*

1*is Wherefore (was it), pray, that heaven teas rent asunder?
Because of one (spiritual) eye that an earthly creature opened.

Earth, from its grossness, settles beneath water; (but) sec
how earth has sped beyond the empyrean!

Know, then, that the subtlety (of water) is not (derived) from
the water: T tis only the gift of the Bounteous Originator,

If He make air and fire low (in place)* and if He let the thorn
surpass the rose,

He is the Ruler and (the One who said) God doetk what He
wilkth: from the very self of pain He raises the remedy*
ibio If He make air and fire low (in place), and make (them
assume the qualities of) darkness and grqssness and heaviness,
And if He make earth and w*ater high (in place), and make
the path of heaven (to be) traversed by foot—

Then it has become certain that Them exaltest whomso Thau
wilt : He (God)$ajd to an earthly creature,Unfold thy wings/"
To the creature of fire He s^id* "Go, become IbUs: begone
under the Seventh Earth with (thy) imposture!

Q earthly Adam, go thou above'(the star) SuhA; Q fiery Iblk,
go to (the bottom of) the Earth,


1 Lite rally > 11 H tatu (equivalent 10 two Of fuUr bade}'-CDms)/ p


HOW BILQIS RECEIVED SOLOMON’S MESSAGE 305

1 am not the four temperaments or the first cause, I am ever i6jj
remaining in (absolute) control.

My action is uncaused and upright (independent) : 1 have (the
power of) pre-determination, (I have) no cause, O infirm one.

1 alter My custom at the time (I choose): at the time (1 will)

I lay the dust (that rises) in front.

1 say to the sea, ‘Hark, be full of fire !’ I say to the fire, ‘Go,
be a rose-garden! ’

I say to the mountain, ‘Be light as wool!’ 1 sav to heaven,

‘Be rent asunder before the eye!*

I say, * O sun, he joined to the moon P 1 make them both like
two black clouds.

We make dry the fountain of the sun: by Our art We turn into
musk the fountain of blood."

Run and moon (shall be) like two black oxen: God will fasten
a yoke upon their necks.


How a philosopher showed disbelief at the recitation of {the text),

“if vour water shall have sunk into the ground.’*

A teacher of Qur’an-recitation was reading from the page of
the Book, 11 {if) your water [shall have ) sunk into the ground 1
(that is, it) I stop the water from (reaching) the spring,'

And hide the water in the depths, and make the springs dry
and a place of drought, J

Who shall bring the water to the spring again except Me who m*
have no like, the Gracious, the Glorious?"

A contemptible philosopher and logician was passing beside
the school at that moment.

When he heard the verse (of the Qur’an), he said in dis-
approva 1 , “We bring the water (back) with a mattock;

With strokes of the spade and (with) the sharpness of the axe
we bring the water up from below."

At night he ictJ asleep and saw (in dream) a lion-hearted man
(who) gave (him) a blow on the face and blinded both his eyes.

And said, *' Q wretch, if you are speaking the truth, bring up
some light with an axe from these two springs of vision,”

At (dawn of) day he jumped up and found (he had) two blind
eyes: from both his eyes the overflowing light had vanished.

If he had moaned and asked pardon (of God), the departed
light would have appeared (again) through (God’s) kindness;

But (the power of) asking pardon, also, is not in (our) hands:
the savour oi repentance is not the dessert of every inebriate.

The wickedness of (his) actions and the disastrousness of
(his) denial (of the I ruth) had barred the way of repentance to
his heart.


306 MATHNAWf, BOOK ll

164s His heart became in. hardness as the face of a rock: how should
repentance cleave it for sowing?

Where is one like Shu'ay b, that by prayer he may make the
mountain earth (fit) for sowing?

Through the supplication and (firm) belief of that Friend
(Abraham) the thing that was hard and impossible became
possible,

Or > (to give another example), through the Muqawqls*
begging the Prophet a stony ground became a goodly 1 cornfield,

So h contrariwise* a man’s disbelief turns gold into copper and
peace into war.

it*50 This falseness draws after it 2 an evil transformation; it turns
ground capable (of tillage) into stones and pebbles.

Nor is it granted to every heart to fall down in prayer: the
wages of (Divine) mercy are not the (allotted) portion of every
hireling.

Beware! Do not commit crime and sin in reliance on fthe
thought), " 1 will repent and come to (take) refuge (with God).”

For (true) repentance, there must needs be a glow (of inward
feeling) and a Hood (of tears): (such) lightning and clouds are
the condition indispensable la repentance.

There must needs be fire and water (rain) for the fruit \
clouds and lightning are necessary for this accomplishment.

i&ss Until there is the lightning of the heart and the rain-clouds
of the two eyes, how shall the fire of (Divine) menace and wrath
be allayed?

I low shall the herbage grow, (the herbage) of the delight of
union (with God)? How shall the fountains of dear water gush
forth? 6

How shall the rose-beds tell their secret to the garden? How
shall the violet make an engagement with the jasmine?

How shall a plane-tree open its hands (spread its leaves) in
prayer? How shall any tree toss its head in the air (of love-
desire)?

How shall the blossoms begin to shake out their sleeves full
of largesse in the days of Spring?

teed How shall the cheeks of the anemone flame like blood? How
shall the rose bring gold out of its purse?

How shall the nightingale come and smell the rose? How
shall the dove say “coo* coo 3 / 1 as one that seeks?

How shall the stork utter with (all) its soul the erv lak t iaki
What is (the mea m ng of) fak ? (I t means) 44 Th ine* is the kingd om t
G Thou whose help is invoked/*

1 Lilrrnlly h "with capital qiuiljrb / 1

1 Lkecally, “becomes the amber attracting/' j.,, “become* the mean* of
producing.

1 Kii h hi in Persian means " where, where?"

* This if (he meaning of hik in Arabic,


THE STUBBORN PHILOSOPHER


3<>7


u haM ??. C L artl ' S ; ow 1 forth thc secr(!ts °f inmost

mind. How shall the garden become radiant as the sky 5

Whence have they fetched those garments (fair qualities)?

and Me h rdful denVed “ ^ f ™ n ° nC "' h ' J is

Those graces are the signs of a Witness": they are the foot¬
prints of a man devoted to (God's) sen-ice.

(None but) that person that has seen the King is gladdened
by the sign; when one has not seen Him, there is no recognition.

IJie spirit of that one who at the time of Am not i (your
Aorrf) .-saw his Lord and became beside himself and intoxicated
He (that spirit) knows the scent of the wine because he drank
1 e? 1$' w ien i" c ^as not drunk it, he cannot scent it

for Wisdom ts like a stray came!: like a go-between, it guides
(those tvlio find and recognise it) to (the presence of) kings.

\ ou behold m dream a person of pleasing countenance, who 1670
gi\ cs you a promise and a sign

That your desire will come to pass; here is the sign-such
and such a person will meet you to-morrow.

you to hifbTeast! *“ *** dd ' ng; °" e **" is ,hat he clas P

I 1 ?/ k ht ‘ wiI1 sm ' le bcforc y™: one sign is that he
told his hands m your presence;

One sign is that when the morrow' comes you will not tell this
dream to any one, though you would fain do so*

?S.fl“ t “P*“ ti0 ®®d) si ?"- H « (God) said to the is 7i
father of )iM (John thc Baptist), “Thou shah not begin to
speak at all till three days (have passed).

. F Z !!?"*.{”'? h v &***"“ “ to % good and ill*; this will

be the s!gn that \ ahya will come (be bom) to thee.

rki do breathe a word*, for this silence is

the sign nf (the fulfilment) of thy purpose

Utah.* CS? 1 Sp<ak “ f lh,s »8"-■"<« k “P **• -«er

He (the person dreamed of) will sweetly* tell these signs to
him (the dreamer . Witt are these signs (alone)? (He will tell
him) a hundred signs besides.

This (which foNows) is the sign that you will gain from God ,<*<,

* h_( s P intua 0 kingdom anJ power that you arc seeking—

That you weep continually in the long nights, and that you
ttettways ardcnt ,n supplication at the hour of dawn;

That, in the absence of that (which you seek), your dav has
become dark; (that) your neck has become thin as a spindle;

! f f- * “in* w-bo is the representative Q f Cod,
p / desirr tcil this dltUll/ 1


— happens i(i ihtc.

Literally , "do not breathe in srhcakinfu"

Literally, 41 brin ff to ape*ch, lp * Litcfnlty I 11 like


sugar.


308 MATHNAWJj BOOK II

And what you have given in alms (is) all that you possess,
(so that) your belongings (are entirely bestowed in chanty) like
the alms of those who gamble all away 1 ;

(That) you have given up your belongings and sleep and the
(healthy) colour of your face, and sacrificed your head (life) and
become as (thin as) a hair;

it *3 (That) you have sat — how often!- in the fire, like aloes-wood;

that you have gone— how often I — to meet the sword T like a
helmet.

A hundred thousand such acts of helplessness are habitual
to lovers (of God), and (their number) cannot be reckoned+

After you have had this dream at night, the day breaks;
through hope thereof- your day becomes triumphant.

You have turned your eye to left and right, (wondering) where
is that sign and those tokens.

You are trembling like a leaf (and saying)„ "Alas, if the day
depart and the sign come not to pass!”
a You are running in street and market and into houses, like
one that should lose a calf.

(Somebody asks)* “Is it good (news), Sir? Why are you
running to and fro? M ho belonging to you is it that you have
lost here?”

"It is good (news)/' you tell him* Ai but none may know my
good (news) except myself.

If I tell it, b, my sign is missed, and when the sign is missed,
the hour of death Is come."

You peer into die face of even' rider: he says to you, * s Do not
look at me like a madman /’

1*53 You say to him," I have lost a friend; 1 have set out* to seek
him*

May thy fortune be lasting, O rider! Have pity on lovers
and excuse (them)*”

When you have made search (and your) looking has been in
earnest—earnest endeavour does not "fail; so the Tradition has
come down (from the Prophet)—

Suddenly comes a blessed rider; then he clasps you very
closely to his breast.

You become senseless and fall to vaunting (ecstatically); the
ignorant (uninitiated) man says, 14 Here is fraud and hypocrisy,"
i How does he see what this enthusiasm in him (the enraptured
person) is? He knows not (who it is) with w hom that is the sign
of union .

This sign concerns (only) him that has seen (before): how
should the sign appear to the other one?

1 j .€. the f* who sacrifice everything for Go<Ta alike,

1 /.*. of Meins the Signs announced in the dream,

1 Literally, ” J have i-et mv face.”


THE SIGNS GIVEN TO SEEKERS 309

Every moment that a sign was coming from Him, a (new)
spirit was coming into that person's spirit.

Water has reached the helpless fish. These signs are (those
mentioned in the text) those are the sigm 0/ the Book.

Hence the signs which are in the prophets are peculiar to
(known exclusively by) him who is a friend (knower and lover
of God).

This discourse remains imperfect and unsettled " T have no ms
heart (understanding), I am out of my mind 1 : excuse me.

How can any one number the motes T especially that one
whose understanding has been transported by Love?

Shall I number the leaves of the garden ? Shall I number the
cries of the partridge and the crow?

They come not into computation, but I enumerate them for
the guidance of him that is put to trial.

The sinister influence of Saturn and the auspicious influ¬
ence of Jupiter come nut into computation, though you may
enumerate ;

But still f some of these two (diverse) effects must be ex- ™
plained —that is, the benefit and injury (which they involve)—

In order that some little part of the effects of the (Divine)
decree may be made known to the good-fortuned and the
ill-starred.

He whose ascendant (ruling planet) is Jupiter will be rejoiced
by vivacity (of disposition) and eminence;

And it wall be necessary for him whose ascendant is Saturn
to take precautions against every (kind of) mischief in his affairs.

If I should speak to one whose (ruling) planet is Saturn of his
(Saturn's) fire, it (my discourse) would bum (torment) that
hapless man.

Our King (God) has given permission, (saying), ^Comment- mi
orate Allah”: He saw us in the fire and gave us light.

He has said t "Although I far transcend - your commemora¬
tion (of Me), (and although) the pictorial ideas (of human
speech) are not suitable to Me*

Yet he that is intoxicated with (pictorial) imagination and
fancy will never apprehend My essence without (the help of)
similitude. st

Bodily commemoration 3 is an imperfect fancy: the Kingly
attributes are remote from those (forms of speech).

If any one say of a king, "He is not a weaver / 1 what praise
is this? He (that person) is surely ignorant.

Literally, " I am without heart (mind )/ 1
* Literally, " [ am exempt from,"

1 /_e* praise and prayer uttered by the tongue.


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


310


How Moses , on whom be peace, took offence at the prayer
of the shepherd.

1720 Moses saw a shepherd nn the way, who was saying, ■' Q God
who chooses! (whom Thou wilt).

Where art Thou, that I may become Thy servant md sew
Thy shoes and comb Thy head?

That 1 may wash Thy clothes and kill Thy lice and bring
milk to Thee, G worshipful One;

That I may kiss Thy little hand and mb Thy little foot, (and
when) bedtime comes ] may sweep Thy little room,

O ihou to whom all my goats be a sacrifice, O Thou in
remembrance of whom arc my cries of ay and ah ! ”

1725 The shepherd was speaking foolish w ords in this wise, Moses
said* "Man* to whom is this (addressed)? IS

He answered T l o that One w’ho created 11s ; by whom this
earth and sky were brought to sight,”

Hark I said Moses, H 1 you have become very backsliding
(depraved); indeed you have not become a Moslem, you have
become an Infidel.

What babble is this? what blasphemy and raving? Stuff
some cotton into your mouth!

The stench of your blasphemy has made the (w hole) w orld
stinking: your blasphemy has turned the silk robe of religion
into rags.

' 7 io Shoes and socks are fining for vou, (but) how are such
things right for (One who is) a Sun?

If you do not stop your throat from (uttering) these words,
a fire will come and bum up the people.

If a fire has not come, (then) what is this smoke? Why has
your soul become black and your spirit rejected (by God)?

If you know that God is the judge, how is it right for you (to

indulge in) this doting talk and familiarity?

Truly, the friendship of a witless man is enmity: the high
God is nut m want of suchlike service.

17J 1 To whom are you saving this? To your paternal and maternal
uncles? Are the body and (its) needs among the attributes of
the Lord of glory?

(Only) he that is waxing and growing drinks milk : (only) he
that has need of feet puts on shoes.

And if these words (of yours) are (meant) for His servant,
of whom God said, ' He is I and I myself am he";

(For him) of whom He (God) said, ‘Verily, I ’was sick and
thou didst not visit Me,’ (that is), 1 1 became ill, not he (the
sick man) alone *; v

(For him) who has become seeing by Me and hearing bv Me—


MOSES A^D THE SHEPHERD 311

this (talk of your$) is foolish nonsense even in regard to that
servant.

To speak irreverently to one chosen of God causes the heart
(spirit) to perish and keeps the page (record) black.

If you should call a man * Fatima *—though men and women
are ail of one kind—

He will seek to murder you t so far as it is possible {for him),
albeit he is good-natured and forbearing and quiet.

(The name) Fatima is {a term of) praise in regard to women p
(hut) if you address it to a man, 'tis (like) the blow of a Spear-

Hand and foot are (terms of) praise in relation to us; in
relation to the holiness of God they are pollution.

(The words) lie begat not, He was not begotten are appropriate 17+5
to Him: He is the Creator of begetter and begotten.

Birth is the attribute of everything that is (a) body : whatever
is bom is on this side of the river.

Because it is of (the world of) becoming and decay and (is)
contemptible: it is originated and certainly requires an Origi¬
nator*”

He (the shepherd) said, #l O Moses, thou hast dosed my
mouth and thou hast burned my Soul with repentance. 1 '

He rent his garment and heaved a sigh, and hastily turned
his head towards the desert and went (his way).

How the high God rebuked Moses, on whom be peace, on
account of the shepherd.

A revelation came to Moses from God—“ Thou hast parted 175*
My servant from Me.

Didst thou come (as □ prophet) to unite, or didst thou come
to sever?

So far as thou canst, do not set foot in separation: of (all)
things the most hateful to Me is divorce.

I have bestowed on every one a (special) way of acting: I have
given to every one a (peculiar) form of expression.

In regard to him it is (worthy of) praise, and in regard to thee
it is (worthy of) blame: in regard to him honey, and in regard
to thee poison,

I am independent of all purity and impurity* of all slothful- 1?$$
ness and alacrity (in worshipping Me).

I did not ordain (Divine worship) that I might make any profit;
nay, but that 1 might do a kindness to (My) servants.

In the Hindoos the idiom 1 of Hind (India) is praiseworthy;
in the Si ndians the idiom of Sind is praisew orthy *

5 the local and traditional form* of speech fcised in the practice of
religion.


312 MATH-NAWf, BOOK II

I am not sanctified by their glorification (of Me); J tis they
that become sanctified and pearl-scattering (pure and radiant).

I look not at the tongue and the speech; £ look at the inward
(spirit) and the state (of feeling).

I gaze into the heart (to see) whether it be lowly, though the
words uttered be not lowly,

Because the heart is the substance, speech (only) the accident;
so the accident is subservient, the substance is the (real) object.

How much (more) of these phrases and conceptions and
metaphors? 1 want burning, burning: become friendly with
that burning!

Light up a fire of love in thy soul, bum thought and expression
entirely (away)!

O Moses, they that know the conventions are of one sort,
they whose souls and spirits bum are of another sort ." 1
*76* To lovers there is a burning (which consumes them) at every
moment: tax and tithe are not (imposed) on a ruined village.

If he (the lover) speak faultily, do not call him faulty; and if
he be bathed in blood, do nut wash (those who are) martyrs.

Fur martyrs, blood is better than water: this fault (committed
by him} is better than a hundred right actions (of another)*

Within the Ka 4 ba the rule of the qibla does not exist: what
matter if the diver has no snow-shoes?

Do not seek guidance from the drunken: why dost thou order
those whose garments are rent in pieces to mend them?
mn The religion of Love is apart from all religions: for lovers,
the (only) religion and creed is—God.

If the ruby have not a seal (graven on it), tis no harm: Love
in the sea of sorrow is not sorrowful*


How the (iJfCTM) revelation came to Moses 7 on wham he
peace, excusing that shepherd.

After that, God hid in the inmost heart of Moses mysteries
which cannot be spoken.

Words were poured upon his heart: vision and speech were
mingled together.

How oft did he become beside himself and how T oft return
to himself I How oft did he fly from eternity to cverlastingness <
i 77 * If I should unfold (his tale) after this, + tis foolishness (in me)’
because the explanation of this b beyond (our) understanding-

And if I should speak (thereof), twould root up (men’s)
minds; and if I should write (thereof), 'twould shatter many
pens. J

When Moses heard these reproaches from God p he ran into
the desert in quest of the shepherd*


MOSES AND THE SHEPHERD 313

He pushed on over the footprints of the bewildered man, he
scattered dust from the skirt of the desert 1 .

The footstep of a man distraught is, in truth, distinct from
the footsteps of others:

(At) one step, (he moves) like the rook (straight) from top to tj9o
bottom (of the chessboard); (at) one step he goes crossways, like
the bishop;

Now litring his crest like a wave; now going on his belly like
a fish;

Now writing (a description of) his state on some dust, like a
geomancer who takes an omen bv drawing lines (on earth or
sand).

At last he (Moses) overtook and beheld him; the giver of
glad news said, “ Permission has come (from God).

Do not seek any rules or method (of worship); say whatsoever
your distressful heart desires,

A our blasphemy is (the true) religion, and your religion is tjaj
the light of the spirit : you are saved, and through you a (whole)
world is in salvation.

O you who are made secure by God doath zeiutiso Fh wiileth,
go, loose your tongue without regard (for what you say),”

He said, “0 Moses, I have passed beyond that: f am now
bathed in (my) heart's blood.

I have passed beyond the Late-tree of the farthest bourn, I
have gone a hundred thousand years’ journey on the other side.

Thou didst ply the lash, and my horse shied, made a bound,
and passed beyond the sky.

May the Divine Nature be intimate with my human nature — , 7 &,
blessings be on thy hand and on thine arm!

Now my state is beyond telling: this which I am telling is not
my (real) state,”

You behold the image which is in a mirror: it is your (own)
image, it is not the image of the mirror.

The breath which the flute-player puts into the flute — docs
it belong to the flute? No, it belongs to the man (the flute-
player).

Take good heed! Whether you speak praise (of God) or
thanksgiving, know that it is even as the unseemly (words) of
that shepherd.

Though your praise is better in comparison with that, yet in
relation to God it too is maimed (feeble).

How often will you say, when the lid has been raised 3 , “This
was not what they w*ere thinking (it was)!”

This acceptance (by God) of your praise is from (His) mercy:
it is an indulgence (which He grants), like (the indulgence

1 ht nude Rrrat haste,

1 lx. ‘w - hen you shall see things 05 they really are.


JH MATHNAWf, BOOK II

granted in the case of) the prayers of a woman .suffering from
menorrhagia.

Iter prayers are stained with blood 1 ; your praise is stained
with assimilation and qualification.

Blond is foul, and (yet) it goes (is washed away) by a (little)
water; hut the inward part (the inner man) hath impurities
i h-lhj Which fail not (are not removed) from the interior (the heart)
of the man of works except by the water of the grace of the
Maker.

\\ odd that in your bowing low in prayer you w ould turn
your face (to attentive consideration) and apprehend the meaning
of ** Glory* 10 my Lord! |T

Saying p M Oh fc my prostration (in prayer) t like my existence,
is unworthy (oi 'I hee): do Thou give good in return for evil!”

! his earth has the mark of Gnd*s clemency P in that it got
hkh and gave flowers as the produce;

In that it covers our pollutions, (and that) buds grow up from
it in exchange.

tnoj Therefore t when the infidel saw that in giving and lavishing

he was meaner and tin wealthier than the earth ?

(That) fiowers and fruit did not grow from his being, (and
that) he sought (and achieved) nothing but the corruption of
all purities*

He said, 11 ] have gone backw ards in (my) course, Alas I
would that I had (still) been earth!

Would that I had not chosen to travel away from earthiness,
(and that) like a clod of earth I had gathered some grain!

When I travelled* tile Way tried me: what was the present I
brought (home) From this travelling? *’
i#h* Tts from all that propensity of his towards earth that he
sees before him no profit in the journey.

His turning his face back is that greed and cupidity (of his);
his turning his face to the Way is sincerity and supplication.

E 1 ! cry herb that has a propensity 1 for (moving) upwards is in
(the state of) increase and life and growth;

When it has turned its head towards the earth, (it is) in (the
^ CreaSe Atl ^ dryness and failure and disappointment,
hen the propensity of your spirit is upwards, (you are) in
(the state of) increase, and that (lofty) place i s the place to which
you will return;

*'» B “ t > >ou a « upside down, (with) your head towards the
earth, (then) you are one that sinks: God loves not them that
sink,

* Literally, “with hex prayers blood is mixed so as to 5 udn * cm .-


MOSES AND THE SHEPHERD


3*5


//pfi? Moses , on whom he peace T arfad rAr high Gad [to
explain) the secret of the predominance of the unjust.

Moses said* O Bounteous Disposer, Q Thou whom to com¬
memorate for one moment is (worth) a long life,,

I have seen the crooked, misshapen image in (the mould of) water
and clay, and like the ange!s f my heart has raised an objection T
As to what is the purpose of making an image and casting
therein the seed of corruption.

To kindle the fire of iniquity and corruption; to burn the
mosque and those who bend low in prayer;

To set boiling the source of bloody tears 1 for the sake of i*»
(receiving) humble entreaties (from the suffering and oppressed)-
I know for certain that it is the essence of wisdom (on Thy
part), but my aim is (to know this by) actual seeing and vision.

That certainty (of mine} says to me, 4 keep silence*; the
craving for vision says to me t 4 Make a stir (and outcry)/

Thou hast shown Thy secret to the angels* (namely) that
such honey as this is worth the sting.

Thou hast displayed the Light of Adam manifestly to the
“gJ-K (st> that all) the difficulties were explained.

Thy Resurrection declares what is the secret of death: the ■$35
fruits declare what is the secret of the leaves/ 1
The secret of blood and seed is the excellence of Man; after
all, inferiority is antecedent to every superiority.

The ignorant (child) first washes the tablet" then he writes
the letters upon it.

(So) He (God) turns the heart into blood and abject tears,
then l ie writes the (spiritual) mysteries upon it.

At the time of washing the tablet fibf the heart) one must
recognise that it will be made into a book (of mysteries),

W hen they lay the foundation of a house (to rebuild it), they
dig up the first foundation.

(Also), people first fetch up clay from the depths of the earth
in order that at last you may draw up ftoteiiig tenter.

Children weep piteously at cupping* for they know not the
secret of the matter;

(But) a man, in sooth* gives the cupper gold and fondles the
blood-drinking lancet,

I he porter runs to the heavy load: he snatches the load from
others.

Behold the struggle of the porters for the load] Such is the 1835
endeavour of him that sees (the truth of) things,

Inasmuch as burdens are the foundation of ease, and bitter
things* too* are the forerunners of enjoyment.

3 Literally, 11 blood-stained and yellow waier/’ Til* utlrda may ala* be
rendered « ■■serum and pmP i*. festering wounds.


3*6 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Paradise is compassed about with the things we dislike (to
do); the fires (of Hell) arc compassed about with our lusts.

The seed (source) of the substance of your fire (of torment)
is the fresh bough (of lust) ; (but) he that is burned by the fire
(of renunciation) is the comrade of Kawthar 1 .

Whosoever is the comrade of affliction in prison— that is the
retribution for a mouthful (of unlawful food) and a lust.

J'bo Whosoever is the comrade of a high fortune in a palace—
that is the reward for some battle-field and sore trial.

Whomsoever you have seen unrivalled in (his store of) gold
and silver — -know that he has been patient in earning.

When the (spiritual) eye has become piercing, he (the owner)
sees without causes. You who are in (the bondage of) sense-
perception, pay you heed to causes!

lie whose spirit is beyond (the world of) natural properties —
to him belongs the position of power to rive (the chain of)
Causes.

The (spiritual) eye regards the fountain of the miracles of the
prophets as (being) without cause, not as (arising) from water
and herbage*.

is« These causes are (linked together) like the physician and the
sick: these causes are like the lamp and the w ink

Twist a new wick for your night-lamp, (but) know that the
lamp of the sun transcends these things.

Go you and make plaster for the roof of your house, (but)
know that the roof of the sky is undefiled by "plaster.

Alas that, after our Sweetheart had burned (utterly destroyed)
our pain, the night-time of being alone (with Him) passed awav
and became day 1

Except at night there is no unveiling of the moon: except
through heartache do not seek your heart’s desire.

isjo Forsaking Jesus, you have fostered the ass: of necessity, like
the ass, you are outside of the curtain, 7

Knowledge and gnosis arc the fortune of Jesus; they are not
the fortune of the ass, O you asinine one!

\ou listen to the moaning of the ass, and pity comes over you;
then, you kiiou riot (that) the ass commands you to be asinine.

Have pity on Jesus and have no pity on the ass: do not make
the (carnal) nature lord over yotir intellect.

Let the (carnal) nature weep sore and bitterly; do you take
from it and pay the debt of the (rational) soul. '

For years you have been the ass’s slave. It is enough, for the
ass s slave is behind (even) the ass.

The thing meant by (the Prophet's words) “put them (the
women) behind 1 is jour fleshly soul; for it must be last, and your
intellect (must be) first*

1 A river In Parade,


Mt dependent on ftimterinl causes.


THE SECftET OF PAIN AND TRIBULATION 317

This bast intellect has become of the same temperament as
the ass: its (only) thought is how it shall get hold of fodder.

The ass of Jesus took (to itself) the temperament of the
(rational) spirit: it took its abode in the place of the intelligent*
Because (in Jesus) intellect was ruling* and the ass (was) weak
—the ass is made Jean by a strong rider —

While from the weakness of your intellect* O you who have e* 6 o
( no more than) the value of an ass* this worn-out ass has become
a dragon.

If through Jesus (the spiritual guide) you have become heart¬
sick, (yet) health too comes from him: do not leave him.

How art thou as to affliction, O thou Jesus who hast the
(healing) breath of Jesus? for there never was in the world a
treasure without a snake.

How art thou, O Jesus* at the sight of the jews? How art
thou, O Joseph, in respect of the envious plotter?

Night and day for the sake of this foolish people thou ? like
night and day, art a replcnisher of life.

Alas for those bilious ones who are without excellence! What is*j
excellence is bom from bile? Headache.

Do thou the same thing that the sun of the east does with
(our) hypocrisy and craft and thieving and dissimulation.

Thou art honey, we are vinegar in (the affairs of) this world
and in religion; the (means of) removing this bile is oxymeL
We folk w r ho suffer from colic have added more and more
vinegar; do thou add more and more honey* withhold not thy
bounty'.

This was meet in us; such (acts naturally) issued from us:
what is increased by sand in the eye? Blindness.

(But) r tis meet in thee, Q precious collyrium, that even’ rR;o
nothing should gain from thee something.

Thy heart is roasted by the fire of these unrighteous men,
(yet) all thy appeal (to God) has been, * s Guide my people!”

Thou art a mine of aloes-wood: if they set thee afire* they will
fill this world with otto of roses and sweet basil.

Thou art not that abes-wood that is minished by the fire:
thou art not that spirit that is made captive by grief.

Aloes-wood burns, (but) the mine of aloes-wood is far from
burning: how should the wind (of evil word*) assail the source
of (spiritual) light?

Oh* 'tis from thee the heavens have (their) purity; oh t thy is^s
unkind ness is better than kindness.

Because if an unkind ness come from the wise it is better than
the kindness of the ignorant.

The Prophet said, 41 Enmity (proceeding) from wisdom is
better than the love that comes from a fool.


MATHNAWf, BOOK N


3‘S


How an Amir harassed a sleeping man into whose mouth a
make had gone,

A wise man was riding along (at the moment when) a snake
waa going into the mouth of a man asleep.

The rider saw that, and was hurrying to scare away the snake,
(but) he got no chance (of doing so),
isao Since he had an abundant supply of intelligence, he struck
the sleeper several powerful blows with a mace.

The strokes of the hard mace drove him in flight from him
(the rider) to beneath a tree.

There were many rotten apples which had dropped (from the
tree): he said, “Eat of these, O vou in the grip of pain!”

He gave the man so many apples to eat that thev were falling
out of his mouth again.

He was crying, “O Amir, pray, why have you set on me?
What have l done to you?

*ssj If you have an inveterate and mortal feud with me 1 , strike
with your sword and shed my blood at once.

Ill-omened (was) the hour I came into your sight: oh, happv
hc- that never saw your face!

Without guilt, without sin, without (having done) anything
gTeat or small 3 —(even) the heretics hold not such oppression
allowable.

Blood gushes from my mouth together with (my) words,
O God, 1 beseech Thee, give him the retribution (which he
deserves)!"

Every' instant he was uttering a new curse, (while) he (the
rider) kept beating him and saying, “ Run in this plain,”

rtf wh AAA a a J jlIL _ _: 1_if _ B r_i m - . •> _ -


,390 Blows of the mace, and the rider (swift) as the wii,Ht M<»



became (covered with) a hundred thousand wounds.

rill nightfall he (the rider) drove (him) to and fro 1 , until
vomiting caused by bile overtook him.

All the things he had eaten, bad or good, came up from him;
the snake shot forth from him along with what he had eaten.

When he saw the snake outside of him, he fell on his knees
before that beneficent man.

,a 9} As soon as he saw the horror of that black, ugly, bin snake
those griefs departed from him.

: ESS:: ls&?£5& ^ ini . „ d

M Literally, "without time Or Ic 3 $,“

1 Literally, 11 drew him in and let him out . 11


the man who swallowed a SNAKE 319

Iruly t said he, ''you are the Gabriel of (Divine) mercy T
or you are God, for you are the lord of bounty.

Oh, blest {is) the hour that you saw me: I was dead* you have
given me new life.

You (were) seeking me like mothers (in search of their
children); 1 (was) fleeing from you like asses.

The ass flees from his master because of asininitv; his owner
(runs) after (him) because of good-nature.

He seeks him, not on account of profit or loss, but in order i-wo
that a wolf or (other) wild beast may not tear him.

Oh, happy he that espies your face or suddenly lights upon
your abode.

O you whom the pure spirit hath praised, how many foolish
and idle words have I spoken to you [

O lord and emperor and amir, I spoke not, my folly spoke:
do not punish that (offence).

If 1 had known a tittle of this matter* how could l have spoken
foolish words?

I should have spoken much praise of you, Q man of good wf
qualities, if you had given me a single hint as to the (actual) ease;

But you, keeping silence, showed perturbation and silently
continued to beat me on the head.

My head became dizzy, the wits flew out of mv head—
especially as this head has (but) little brain.

Pardon, Q man of goodly countenance and goodly behaviour:
let pass that which I said in frenzy.”

He answered, '* If 1 had uttered a hint of it, your gall would
instantly have turned to water.

Had I told you the qualities of the snake } terror would have
made you give up the ghost 1 .”

Mustafa (Mohammed) said, *IF I should tell aright the
description of the enemy w hich is in your souls*

The gall-bladders even of courageous men would burst: he
(such a one) w ould neither go his way nor care for any work.

Neither Avould there remain to his heart endurance in suppli¬
cation* nor to his body strength for fasting and (ritual) prayer.

Me would become (good for) nothing as a mouse before a
cat; he would be distraught as a lamb before a wolf.

No power to plan or move w r ould remain in him: therefore i-us
I tend you without speaking.

I am mute* like Bii Bakr-i Rab^bi; I handle the iron a like
David,

So that by my hand the (seemingly) impossible is brought to
pass a p and wings are restored to the bird whose plumes were
tom away,

3 Literally. M would have fetched up the breath from ytm soaI. ,p

B Literally, “ becomes n ffcat* (of actuality),"


320 MATHNAWfj BOOK II

Since there h (the text) the hand of God is above their lumds t
the One (God) has declared our hand to be Mis hand.

Therefore mine is surely a long hand that has passed beyond
the Seventh Heaven,

*9™ My hand showed (its) cunning upon the sky: O teacher of
the Qur'an, recite the moon hath been cleft asunderS

This characteristic 1 , moreover, is on account of the weakness
of (men's) understandings: how is it possible to explain the
(Divine) omnipotence to the weak?

You will surely know when you lift your head from (this
sensuous) sleep. Tis the end (of my discourse), and God knows
best what is right.

14 (If 1 had tdd you about the snake), you w r ould not have
been able to eat, nor would you have been capable of vomiting
or cared (to do so) = .

I heard (your) abuse and went on with my work 9 ; I kept
repeating under my lip (breath), 'O Lord, make (It) easy ! *

I had not permission to speak of the cause, and I bad not
power to abandon you*

From the grief in my heart I was saying continually, 'Guide
my people; verily, they know not

The man that had been delivered from woe was falling on
his knees and saying, +i G (thou who art) my bliss, O my fortune
and treasure *

Thou wilt get rewards from God, O noble one; this weakling
has not the power to thank thee.

God will say thanks to thee p O leader; I have not the lips and
the chin and the voice for that.**

*93° Of this fashion is the enmity of the wise: their poison is
gladness to the souL

1 he friendship of the fool is woe and perdition: hear this tale
as a parable.


On putting trust in the fmmhtgness and good faith of the bear.

A dragon was pulling a bear (into its jaws) ; a valiant man
went and succoured it.

The valiant (holy) men are a help in the world when the wail
of the oppressed reaches (them).

From every quarter they hear the cry of the oppressed and
run in that direction, like the mercy of God.

**» . Those buttresses for the breaches of the world, those phvsl-
cians for hidden maladies p '

Arc pu re love and ju stiee and mercy; even, as God * they are
flawless (incorruptible) and unbribed*


1 Silence.

* UKrtUjr. "nor would you hat* had the way (mean,) or care to Vomit.
1 Literal] " I whs driving my jlh along. 1 "


THE POOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR 32 !

(If you ask one of them), “Why dost thou give him this aid
all at once?” he says, “On account of his grief and helplessness.”

Lovingkindness is fallen a prey to the valiant (holv) man, (for)
medicine seeks naught in the world but the pain (which it should
cure).

Wherever a pain is, the remedy goes there: wherever a
lowland is, the water runs there.

If thou want the water of mercy, go, become lowly, and then 1^0
drink the wine of mercy and become drunken.

Mercy upon mercy comes (and rises like a flood) up to the
head; do not thou come down to (and dwell upon) a single
mercy, O son!

Bring the sky under thy feet, O brave one! Hear from above
the firmament the noise of the (celestial) music!

Put out of thine car the cotton of evil suggestion, that the
cries from heaven may come into thine ear.



Do not leave (in thyself) any trace of fever and bile, that thou
mayst get from the world the taste of sugar.

Remedium viniitatis adhibe neu viriliiate carens cucurreris,
that a hundred kinds of fair ones may come forth.

Tear die fetter, which is the body, from the foot of thy soul,
so that it may race round the arena’.

Take off the shackle of avarice from thy hands and neck:
seize (and enjoy) a new fortune in the old heaven.

And if thou art unable (to do that), fly to the Ka‘ba of (Divine) t 9 jo
grace: lay thy helplessness before the Helper.

Lamentation and weeping are a mighty stock-in-trade (re¬
source) ; the Universal Mercy is the mightiest nurse (to comfort
and cherish).

The nurse and mother seeks a pretext (for giving relief):

(she waits to see) when her child wi ll begin to weep.

He (God) created the child, (namely) your wants, in order that
it might moan and that milk might (then) be produced for it.

He said , %i Call ye upon God! Refrain not thou from lamen¬
tation, in order that the milk of His lovingkindnesses may
flow.

The howling of the wind and the pouring forth of (rain like) 1935
milk from the cloud are for care of us: (have) patience one
moment!

Hast not thou heard (the text) “hi the sky is your daily bread 1 1
Wherefore hast thou stuck to this low place?

^ e . em *^y f ear und despair to be the voice of the ghoul
drawing thine car (down) to the abyss of degradation.

* M


21



322 MATHN'AWf, BOOK II

Every call that draws thee upward—know that that call has
come from on high.

Every call that excites cupidity in thee—-know that it is the
howl of the wolf which tears men (to pieces).

ip6o This (afore-mentioned) height is not (high) in respect of
position i these “heights'" are towards (refer to) mind and
spirit.

Every' cause is higher than the effect: the stone and iron (from
which fire is struck) are superior to the sparks.

Such and such a person is (really) seated above that one who
lifts up his head so haughtily„ though in appearance he is seated
beside him.

The superiority of that (person's) place is in respect of (his
a pi ritual) nobility; the place (that is) far from the (spiritual)
seat of honour is held in slight regard.

Forasmuch as the stone and iron are prior in action, the
superiority of these twain is proper;

1565 But those sparks, in respect of their being the final cause 1 ,
are from this point of view far in front of (superior to) the iron
and stone.

The stone and iron are first, and the sparks last; but these
twain are the body, and the sparks are the souL

If those sparks are posterior in time, (yet) in quality they are
higher than the stone and iron.

The bough b prior to the fruit in time, (but) it (the fruit) is
superior to the bough in excellence.

Since the fruit b the final cause of the tree, it follows that the
fruit is (really) first, the tree last.

irj?o When the bear cried out for help against the dragon, a valiant
man rescued it from the (dragon's) daws.

Cunning and courage gave support to each other: by this
strength he slew 1 the dragon.

The dragon has strength, (but) it has not cunning; again,
there is a cunning above your cunning.

When you have regarded your own cunning, go back (and
see) whence it came: go to the origin.

Whatever is below has come from above: come on, turn your
eye towards the height.

197s Looking aloft gives light, though at first it produces dazzle-
ment as a trial.

Accustom your eye to the light; if you are not a bat, look in
that direction.

Vision of the end is the sign of your (having the) light ; the
lust of the moment b in truth your (dark) grave.

The man with vision of the end, who has seen a hundred
artifices, is not like him that has (only) heard of one artifice,

1 Literally, ,4 tfoe object nimed u.%*'


THE FOOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR


3-3


{And who) has been so befooled by that one artifice that in
his pride he has become alienated from the masters.

Like Samiri, when he has seen in himself that (little) skill, ieSo
through pride he has rebelled against (a) Moses,

He has learned that skill from (a) Moses and (then) dosed his
eyes to his teacher.

Moses, of course, exhibited another artifice, so that it swept
away (both) that artifice (of Samiri) and his life.

Oh, many is the knowledge (talent) that runs in the head (and
urges) that he (the owner) should become eminent—in truth,
through that (knowledge) nfe head goes (he loses his life).

If you wish not your head to be lost, be (lowly as) a foot: be
under the protection of the Qutb who is possessed of discern¬
ment.

Though you be a king, deem not yourself above him; though n$s
you be honey, gather naught but his sugar-cane.

Your thought is the outward form, and his thought is the
soul: your com is false, and his coin is (pure as) the mine.

You are (really) he : seek yourself in his “he pl (personality).

Say coo, coo 1 : become a dove (flying) towards him.

And if you are unwilling to serve the (holy) men of (human)
kind, you a it in the dragon's mouth, like the bear.

It may be that a Master will deliver you and pull you out of
danger.

As you have no strength, keep making a lamentation; since 1990
you are blind, take care, dp not turn your head away from him
that sees the road.

You are less (worse) than the bear, (for) you are not wailing
at the pain. The bear was freed from pain when it made an
outcry.

O God, make our stony hearts ($qft as) wax; make our w ailing
sweet (to Thee) and an object of (Thy) mercy!


How a sightless beggar said, u I have lisa blindnesses,**

There was a blind man who used to say, “Pity ! 1 have two
blindnesses, O people of the time.

Therefore, hark ye, show unto me twice as much compassion,
since I have two blindnesses, and I (live) between (them.)"

(Somebody) said, M We ace one blindness of yours: w hat may 1955
the other blindness be? Explain.’"

He answered, “I have an ugly voice and unpleasing tones:
ugliness of voice and blindness arc double (blindness).

My ugly cry becomes the source of annoyance: the people's
love is lessened by my cry,

1 Kd kill the cry of iht dove, also means "where? where? fcp


a 1-3


3 2 4


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


Whithersoever my uglv voice goes, it becomes the source of
anger and annoyance and hatred.

Double your compassion for (these) two blindnesses: make
room (in your hearts) for one who gets so Little room 1 ."

.-«k» The ugliness of (his) voice was diminished by this plaint:
the people became of one mind in (showing) compassion for
him.

When he had told the secret (and explained his meaning), his
voice was made beautiful by the graciousness of the voice of his
heart;

But that one whose heart’s voice also is bad—(for him) those
three blindnesses are banishment everlasting (from the favour of
God);

Yet it may be that the bounteous (saints), who give without
cause, will lay a hand (of blessing) upon his ugly head.

Since his (the blind beggar’s) voice became sweet and
pitiable 3 , the hearts of the stony-hearted were made (soft) as
wax thereby,

ioos Inasmuch as the infidel’s lament is uglv and (like) braying,
for that (reason) it meets with no (favourable) response 3 .

Be silent" has come down (has been revealed in the Qur’an)
against the ugly-voiced (infidel), for he was drunken with the
people's blood, like a dog.

Inasmuch as the lament of the bear attracts compassion,
(while) your lament is not like this, (but) is unpleasing.

Know that you have behaved with wolfishness to (a) Joseph,
or have drunk of the blood of an innocent.

Repent, and empty yourself of what you have drunk; and if
your wound is old (and unhealed), go, cauterise (it).


Continuation * of the story of the bear and of the foot who
had put trust in its good faith.

i«io The bear, too, when it was delivered from the dragon and
received such kindness from that brave man—

Like the dog of the Men of the Gave, that poor bear became
an attendant at the heels of him that bore the burden (of the
fight with the dragon).

That Moslem, from fatigue, laid down his head (to rest); the
bear, from devotion (to him), became (his) guard.

A certain man passed by and said tu him," What has happened ?
O brother, who is this bear (in relation) to you?”

1 Literally, "cause one who is so UnCuntuined (in your hurls) to be con¬
tained (in them)-”

i Literally, " wronged." and hence apt to excite compassion,

1 Literally, "it does not become the companion of acceptance,"

* Literally, 14 completion "■ but see the section beginning with v. 2124.


THE FOOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR 325

He recounted the adventure, and the story of the dragon.

The other said, "Do not set your heart on a fciear, O fool!

The friendship of a fool is worse than (his) enmity: it (the 3015
bear) ought to be driven away by every means you know/ 1

He (the man with the bear) said (to himself), 14 By God, he
has said this from envy; otherwise/' (he said aloud), "why do
you look at the bearishness (of the bear)? Behold this affection
(which it has for me)!’ 1

'"The affection of fools/' said the other, “is beguiling; this
envy of mine is better than its (the bear's) affection.

Hey t come with me and drive away this bear: do not choose
the bear (as your friend), do not forsake one of your own kind!"

“Go, go,, said he, "mind your own business, O envious
man!" Said the other, "This was my business, and it was not
your fortune (to follow^ my advice) 1 ,

I am not less than a bear, O noble sir: abandon it, in order zo*0
that I may be your comrade.

My heart is trembling with anxiety for you: do not go into
a forest with a bear like this.

This heart of mine has never trembled in vain; this is the
Light of God, not pretence or idle brag.

I am the true believer w ho has become seeing by the light of
God. Beware and beware I Flee from this fire-temple!"

He said all this, and it entered not his car : suspicion is a thick
barrier to a man.

He took his hand, and he (the man with the bear) withdrew zojs
his hand from him. The other said, iS I will go, since you are
not a well-guided friend/'

" Go/' cried he; " be not troubled for me; don't carve (retail)
so much wisdom, O meddlesome one!"

He answered him, (saying), "I am not your enemy: it would
be a kindness if you would come after mc. Pl

"I am sleepy/' said he; "let me alone t go!" He replied,
“Pray, give in to your friend.

So that you may sleep under the safeguard of a sage, under
the protection of one loved (by God), a man of heart (spiritual

imtght)/*

The man was thrown by his (the other's) earnestness into a 2^0
(groundless) fancy: he became angry and quickly averted hb
face,

Thinking, "Mayhap this man has come to attack me—he b
a murderer; or he has hope (of gain)—he is a beggar and a tout;

Or he has wagered with his friends that he will make me
afraid of this companion."

From the wickedness of his heart, not (even) one good surmise
came into his thoughts at alL

1 Literally. “ft was net your fore-ordained portion (rug)/ 1


3*6 MATHNAWf, BOOK 11

His good opinions were wholly for the bear: to be sure, he
was of the same kind as the bear.

*035 Through cumshness, he suspected a sage and deemed a bear
affectionate and just.


How Closes, on whom be peace t said to one who worshipped the
{golden) calf., “ Where is (what has become of) thy vain
scepticism and precaution 1 }’ 7

Moses said to one drunken with (deluding) fancy, "O thou
who thinkest evil because of (thy) unblessedness and perdition,
Thou hast had a hundred suspicions concerning my prophet-
hood, notwithstanding these proofs and this noble nature
(which I have shown).

Thou hast seen from me hundreds of thousands of miracles,
(and all the time) a hundred fancies and doubts and (vain)
opinions were growing in thee.

Thou wert sorely pressed by fancy and devilish suggestion,
thou wert sneering at my prophethood.

2040 I raised up dust from the sea 3 before your eyes, so that ye
might be delivered from the wickedness of the people of
Pharaoh.

During forty years the platter and tray (of food) came (to
you) from heaven, and at my prayer the river ran from a rock.

These (miracles) and a hundred times as many, and all these
diverse 3 (evidences), did not make that vain imagination fade
away from thee, O cold (hard-hearted) man I
'1 hrough sorcery a calf lowed; (then) thou didst fall to
worship, saying, ‘Thou art my God.’

(Ihen) those imaginations were swept away (as) bv a flood,
and thy silly shrewdness went to sleep.

How wert not thou suspicious in regard to him (Sdmiri)?
Why didst thou lay thy head (on the ground) like that, O ugly
oner

How did no idea come to thee of his imposition and of the
corruptness of his fool-catching magic?

Who, indeed, is a Simiri, 0 ye curs, that he should hew up
a God* in the world?

How didst thou become of one mind (with him) as to this
imposture of his, and become devoid of all perplexities?

Is a cow (calf) worthy to be deified on (the strength of) a

‘ You rewarded me u a false prophet and obstinately refused to

'!?, God 1 *; h >; flrc > au no " 10 credulous as to worship an idol, 1 "
s " l caused the sea to vanish.**

1 Literally, yi ho% and cold.”

* Ac. set up a graven image as God.


THE WORSHIPPER OF THE GOLDEN CALF 327

vain boast, (while there are) a hundred disputes as to the
prophetic mission of one like me ?

1 hrough asinine dullness thou didst cast thyself down in =050
worship before a cow (calf); thy understanding fell a prey to
Simirrs made.

Thou didst steal thine eye away from the Light of the
Glorious (God): here is plenteous folly for thee and the essence
of perdition!

Fie upon such an understanding and (faculty of) choice as
thou hast! TTwere fitting to kill a mine of folly like thee.

The golden calf uttered a cry; prithee* what did it aay p that
all this desire (for it) blofi$omed in the fools?

Ye have seen from me many a thing more w r onderful than
that, but how should every rascal accept God? p>

Whai carries away (enraptures) worthless folk? Worthless- ^55
ness. What pleases futile folk? Futility,

Because every kind is carried away (enraptured) by its own
kind: how should the os turn its face towards the fierce lion?

How should the wolf bear love for Joseph, unless, perchance,
through cunning* in order to devour him?

When it is delivered from wolfishness, it will become familiar
(with him); like the dog of the Cave, It will become one of the
sons of Adam.

When Abu Bakr smelt (made his first acquaintance with)
Mohammed, he said, “This is not a face that lies; ”

(But) since Bu Jahl was not of those in sympathy (with
Mohammed), he saw a hundred cleavings of the muon 1 * and
believed not.

The sorrowful (lover of God), whose bowl has fallen from
the roof 1 —w p e (would) hide the Truth from him* (but) it dots
not become hits;

While he that is ignorant (of God) and a stranger to His
sorrow (love)—how often has it been shown, and he has not
seen it I

The mirror of the heart must be clear, in order that you may
know therein the ugly form from the beautiful.


Hote the man of sincere counsel^ after having done his utmost in
(the tcay of) admonition , took leave of him who teas deluded by
(Air confidence in) the bear.

That Moslem left the foolish man and quickly, saying Ld howl
under his lip (breath), went back (to his abode).

He said, “Inasmuch as from my earnestness in admonition

1 Le, a huntlrtd miracles like the famous miracle of the deaving of the


328


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


and from (my) disputing (with him), (the only result is that)
vain fancies arc being bom in his mind more (and more).

Therefore the road of admonition and counsel has become
barred: the command, ' Turn aside from them,' has arrived."

When your remedy increases the disease, then (leave him
who will not be cured, and) tell your story to one that seeks (to
hear the 1 ruth). Read (the chapter of the Qur'an, which begins
with the word) 'Abasa (he frowned):

“As the blind man has come seeking the Truth 1 , 'tis not meet
to wound his breast (by turning aside from him) on account of
his poverty.

*1 hou (Mohammed) art eager for the great ones to take the
right way, in order that the common folk may learn from the
rulers.

O Ahmad (Mohammed), thou hast seen that a company of
princes have become ready to listen (to thee), and thou art
pleased (with the hope) that, maybe,

these chieftains will become good friends of the Religion
(Islam), (for) they are lords over the Arabs and the Abyssinians,

(And that) the fame of this will pass beyond Ba^ra and Tabiik,
since ' people follow the religion of their kings."

For this cause thou hast averted thy face from the blind man
that was led into the right way, and hast become vexed,

Saying (to him), 'This gathering (of strangers) seldom falls
out so opportunely, (whereas) you arc one of my friends, and
your time is ample.

Yo “ ^ urgent with me at an inconvenient time. I give you
this admonition, (but) not in anger and strife . 1

G Ahmad, in the sight of God this one blind man is better
than a hundred emperors and a hundred viziers.

I ake heed, remember (the adage),' Men are mines': one mine
ruav be more than a hundred thousand.

1 he mine oflurking ruby and cornelian is better than myriads
or mines of copper.

O Ahmad, here riches have no use; a breast is wanted, full
ot love and pain and sighs.

io$o The blind man of enlightened heart is come: do not shut the
door; give him counsel, for counsel is his right.

If two or three fools have disbelieved in thee, how shouidst
thou be soured when thou art a mine of candy?

If two or three fools impute falsehood to thee, God is giving
testimony on thy behalf," 6 s

He (Mohammed) said, “I am unconcerned with the
acknowledgment of the world: what care (for the world) hath
he whose witness is God? 7


1 Verses zobS-zoSz


0 Tree paraphrase of Qur*£n F iwr 1-10.


MOHAMMED AND THE BLIND MAN 329

If a bat receives anything agreeable (to it) from a sun, 'tia a
proof that that (sun) is not the (real) sun.

The disgust of the wretched bats is a proof that I am the scSj
shining glorious sun.

If the beetle feels a desire for some (particular) rose-water,
that constitutes a proof of its not being rose-water*

If any false coin is eager for the touchstone, uncertainty and
doubt enter into (the fact of) its being a touchstone.

The thief wants night, not day—mark this t I am not night,

I am day* for I shine throughout the world,

lam discerning, I am exceedingEy discriminating and sieve¬
like, so that the chaff finds no passage through me.

I make the flour distinct from the bran, in order to show that zoy*
this is the (external) forms T and that the (inward) souls (essences) P
I am as the scales of God in the world: I reveal (the difference
of) every" light thing from the heavy.

A calf deems the cow God; the ass (deems God) one who is
fond (of it) and that which accords with its desires 1 .

I am not a cow* chat the calf should be fond of me; I am not
thistles, that a camel should browse on me.

He (the unbeliever) supposes that he has done me an injury;
nay, he has wiped away the dust from my mirror.”


How the madman sought to ingratiate himself with jfdllnus
(Galen), and how JdHnui wm afraid,

Jilinus said to his companions, “Let (one of you) give me
such-and-such a medicine.”

Then said that person to him, “ O master of (many) sciences,
this medicine is sought (as a cure) for madness.

Far be this from thy intellect! Say no more (about it). H He
replied / 11 A madman turned his face to me,

Looked pleasantly on my face for a while, made little eyes at
me, and plucked my sleeve.

Had there not been in me congeniality with him f how would
that ill-favoured man have turned his face towards me?

Had he not seen (in me) one of his own kind, how should heu»
have approached? How should he have thrown himself upon
(attached himself to) one of another kind ? ”

When two persons come into touch with each other, without
any doubt there is something in common between them.

How should a bird fly except with its own kind? The society
of the uncongenial is the grave and the tomb.


* LiCeniJIy* “auitabEe


33 °


MATHNAWf, BOOK H


2105


a i ip


2 J


aiip


The came of a bird's flying and feeding with a bird that is
noi of its own kind*


Said a certain sage , 11 1 saw a crow running about with a stork.

I marvelled long 1 , and I investigated their case, in order that
I might find the clue (as to) what it was that they had in common'.

When, amazed and bewildered, I approached them, (then)
indeed I saw that both of them were lame/'

In particular, (how should) a royal falcon, which is of the
highest heaven, (consort) with an owl, which is of the low earth?

That one is the sun of TlKyyun, while the other is a bat which
belongs to Sijjfn*

That one is a luminary, free from every defect, while this
(other) one is a blind man begging at every door.

That one is a moon that strikes (its beams) upon the Pleiades,
while this (other) one is a worm that cleaves to dung.

That one has the face of a Joseph, the breath of a Jesus> while
this (other) one is a wolf or an ass with a bell.

That one has flown to Spacelessness, w r hile this (other) one
is in the straw-bam> like the dogs.

With the tongue of (unspoken) meaning the rose is saying to
the beetle this—“G stinking (creature) 3 *

If thou art fleeing from the rose-bed p doubtless that aversion
(shown by thee) is (a sign of) the perfection of the rose-garden.

My jealousy (sense of dignity) smites thee on the head with a
baton* (warning thee to) keep far away from here, G vile one;

For if, base wretch, thou shouldst mix with me, it will be
thought that thou art of my stock 1 .

For nightingales the garden is the proper place; for the
beetle the best home is in ordure."

Since God has kept me pure from filth, how were it seemly
to appoint a foul one for (companionship with) me?

I had (in me) a vein of them (of their nature). He (God) cut
it out - how (then) will he with the vein of evil attain unto me?

One mark of Adam from eternity was this, that the angels
should lay their heads (on the ground) before him, because it
was his place (proper to his dignity).

Another mark was that Iblis, saying, “I am the king and
chief,” should not lay down his head before him.

But inbib too had become a worshipper (of Adam), he (Adam)
would not have been Adam: he would have been another.

At once the worship of every angd is the tesP of him, and
the denial (of him) by that enemy (tblis) b the proof of him*


1 Ltrerally, " t remained in utQntjhmmt "
s Literally, "whai (wa*) the common quantity.**

• UtenUy, " with «mkwis «nu.pits," ‘ Literally, “of my mine."

* Literally, ‘the balance (in which he b weighed), M


SPIRITUAL AFFINITY


331


At once the acknowledgment (made) by the angels Is witness
for him, and the disbelief of that petty cur (Iblis) is witness for
him*

Conclusion of the (story concerning the) trust of that deluded
man in the faummgness of the bear.

The man fell asleep, and the bear kept driving the Hies away,
but in spite of him they soon came back again.

Several times he drove them Irom the youth s face, but soon ? |a s
they came hurrying back once more.

The bear was enraged with the flies and went off* He picked
up a very big stone from the mountain-side*

He fetched the stone, and saw the flies again settled comfort¬
ably 1 * * 4 on the face of the sleeper.

He took up that millstone and struck at the flies, m order that
they might retire, #

The stone made powder' of the sleeping man s face, and
published to the whole world this adage—-

l( The love of □ fool is for sure the love of a bear: his hate ]&
love and his love is hate."

His promise is Infirm and corrupt and feeble; his word stout
and his performance lean.

Do not believe him, even if he take an oath: the man whose
speech is false will break his oath.

Inasmuch as, without the oath, his word was a lie, do not be
entrapped 5 by his deceit and oath. ^

His fleshly soul is in command* and his intellect captive; even
suppose that he has sworn on a hundred thousand Qur ins,

(Vet), since without (taking) an oath he will break ins pact'— 2l J 5
if he take an oath, he will break that too;

Because the fleshly soul becomes (all) the more infuriated by
your binding it with a heavy oath.

When a captive* puts bonds upon a governor 5 p the governor

will burst them and leap out; . T . ,

He will bang those bonds on his (the captive s) head in vraUi*

dashing the oath in his face. . t r _. .

Wash your hands (give up hope) of his (obeying the pi vine
command), *'Fulfil your promises” \ do not say to him* Keep

your oaths ” *

But he that knows to w hom he (really) makes the promise w ill 2144
make his body (thin) as a thread and wind (himsell) about Him*

1 Lircrallv, "having 1akeii a place of comfort- 1 '

■ Utemlly. ^ 1MPPF-****" ... „

1 Literally. “Jo not fall into buttermilk.

4 The intellect,

1 The fleshly souk


MATHNAWf p BOOK II


33 2

H&m Mustafa (Mohammed), on whom be peace, went to visit the sick
Companion; and an exposition of the profit of visiting the sick.

A notable amongst the Companions (of Mohammed) fell ill,
and in that illness of his became (thin) as a thread.

Mustafa went to visit him, since his (Mustafa's) nature was
all kindness and generosity.

There is profit in your visiting the sick: the profit thereof is
returning to you again.

The first profit is that the sick person may perchance be a
Qutb and a glorious (spiritual) king;

an* And if he be not a Gufb* he may be a friend of the (Sufi) Way;
if he be not the king, he may be the cavalier of the host.

Deem it, then, incumbent (on you) to attach yourselves to
the friends of the Way* whosoever it may be T and whether (he
be) footman or rider.

And if he be a foe (to you), still this kindness is good, for by
kindness many a foe hath been made a friend;

And though he do not become a friend, his enmity is lessened,
because kindness becomes the balm for enmity.

There are many profits besides these p but I am afraid of being
tedious, good friend.

its® The gist (of the matter) is this: be the friend of the whole
community (of Sufis): like the idol-maker* carve a friend out of
the stone,

Because the throng and multitude of a caravan will break the
backs and spears of the highwaymen.

Inasmuch as you have not the heart's two eyes, Q contu¬
macious man* so that you cannot distinguish firewood from
aloes-wood,

(You may despair of finding the true friend of God; but)
since there "exists a treasure in the worlds do not grieve: deem
no ruined place empty of treasure.

Betake yourself to every dervish at random, and when you
find the mark (of the true saint), frequent (him) assiduously.

2i5s As the inward-seeing eye was not (granted) to vou p think
always (that) the treasure (may be) in everybody.

How the high God revealed to Moses, on whom he peace , (the
words), u Wherefore didst not thou visit Me in sickness

To Moses there came from God this reproach; “O thou who
hast seen the rising of the moon from thy bosom.

Thou whom I have illumined with the Divine Light! I am
God, I fell sick, thou earnest not. ?r

y loses said t * 1 0 Thou transcen dent in Thy glory' , Thou artclear
of loss (defect). What mystery is this? Explain this, O Lord V 7


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 333

God said unto him again, “Wherefore in My sickness didst
not thou kindly ask after Me?”

He answered, “O Lord, Thou hast no imperfection. (My) atfio
understanding is lost: unfold (the meaning of) these words.”

God said, “Yea; a favourite and chosen slave (of Mine) fell
sick, I am he. Consider well!

His excusabiHty (infirmity) is My e.xcusabilitv, his sickness is
My sickness.”

Whoever wishes to sit with God, let him sit in the presence
of the saints.

If you are broken off (divided) from the presence of the
saints', you are in perdition, because you are a part without the
whole.

Whomsoever the Devil cuts off from the noble (saints), he nfij
finds him without any one (to help him), and he devours his
head.

To go for one moment a single span apart from the
community' (of saints) is (a result of) the Devil’s guile. Hearken,
and know (it) well 1 .

How the gardener isolated the Sufi, the jurist, and the
descendant of‘Alt'from one another,

A gardener, when he looked into the orchard, saw three men
in his orchard, as (though they' were) thieves;

A jurist and a Sharif and a $ufi: each one an impudent,
knavish and perfidious rogue.

He said, “I have a hundred arguments against these fellows,
but they are united, and a united party is (a source of) strength,

I cannot cope singly with three persons, so first I will sunder **?o
them from one another.

I will isolate each one from the others, and when each is alone,

I will tear out his moustache.”

He employed a ruse and got the Suff away, that he might
poison* (the minds of) his friends against him!

He said to the Siifi, " Go to the house and fetch a rug for
these companions (of yours).”

(As soon as) the Stiff departed, he (the gardener} said in
private to the two friends, “Thou art a jurist, and this (other)
is a renowned Sharif.

Tis according to thy legal decision that we eat a loaf (of 3175
bread): 'tis by the wings of thy knowledge that we fly.

And this other is our prince and sovereign; he is a Sayyid,
he i$ of the House of Mustafa (Mohammed).

1 Reading with A. D. Sul. JJ J jiV Cf, the Introduction to
Vtl. i. p. 9, now 1, where the number of the verse (T 11 T) been aeci*
dentally omitted. * Uteiwlljr, “ corrupt."


334 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Who a this gluttonous vile Sufi, that he should associate
with kings like you?

When he comes (back), drive him away 1 and take possession
of 2 my orchard and field for a week.

What is (it to offer you) my orchard? My life is yours, O ye
who have (always) been (as dear to me) as my right eye.”
ii€o He made evil' suggestions and beguiled them. Ah, one must
not patiently suffer the loss of friends.

When they had turned the Sufi away and he was gone, the
enemy went after him with a stout cudgel,

“O dog,” he cried, “is it Sufism* that of a sudden you come
into my orchard in spite (of me)?

Did Junayd or Bayazid direct you to behave in this way?
From what Shaykh and Pir did this (instruction) reach you?”

He beat the Sufi when he found him alone; he half killed
him and cracked his head.

aifij Said the Sufi, “Mine is over, but O comrades, take good
care of yourselves!

Ye regarded me as an alien. Look out! I am not more alien
than this scoundrel.

That (cup) which I have drunk must be drunk by you, and
such a draught as this is the due of every cad.”

This world is (like) the mountain, and (all) thy words come
back to thee from the echo.

After the gardener had finished with the Sufi, he invented a
pretext of the same kind as the former,

3190 Saying, "Q my Sharif, go to the house, for I have baked
(some) thin takes of bread for breakfast.

At the house-door tell Qaymaz to fetch these cakes and the
goose.”

Having sent him off, he said (to the other), “O keen-sighted
one, thou art a jurist; this is manifest and sure.

(But) he (thy friend) a Sharif 1 ’Tis an absurd claim he is
making. Who knows who committed adultery with his mother ?

Will ye set your hearts (rely) on woman and the deeds of
woman?' (Will ye acknowledge her to be of) weak mind, and
then (put) trust "(in her)?

3155 He has tacked himself on to ‘Ali and to the Prophet—and
there is many a fool in the world (who will believe him).”

W hoever is (born) of adultery and (is one) of the adulterous
will think this concerning the men of God,

Any one whose head is made giddy by (his own) gyrations
sees tne house turning round like himself.

What that vain talker, the gardener, said was (indicative of)

1 Literalty„ “make cotton of him/* “comb him OUl / 1

* Literally, “strike upon/' "lay (hands j «a. M

# Read .


THE GARDENER AND THE THREE FRIENDS 335

his (own) condition; (it was) far from (being applicable to) the
descendants of the Prophet,

If he had not been the issue of apostates, how should he have
spoken thus as regards (the Prophet’s) House?

He used spells (guileful words), and the jurist hearkened to 1:00
them. (Then) that insolent bully went after him (the Sharif).

He said, “0 ass, who invited you into this orchard? Has
robbery been left to you as an inheritance by the Prophet?

The lion’s cub resembles him (the lion): in what do you
resemble the Prophet? Tell (me that)! "

The man (the gardener) who had sought refuge (in craft) did
to the Sharif that which a Kharijitc would do to the Family of
Va-fl'n (Mohammed).

(I marvel) what hatred devils and ghouls like Yazfd and
Shimr always have towards the Prophet’s Family.

The Sharif was devastated by the blows of that ruffian. He a=nj
said to the jurist, 11 1 have jumped out of the water.

Do thou stand fast, now that thou art left alone and deprived
(of our support). Be as a drum, suffer blows on the belly!

If I am not a Sharif and worthy (of thee) and a (true) bosom-
friend, (at any rate) I am no w r orse for thee than such a ruffian
as this."

He (the gardener) finished with him (the Sharif), and came
up, saying, “O jurist, what (sort of) jurist are you, O you
disgrace to every fool ?

Is it your legal opinion, O convicted thief 1 , that you may
come (into rav orchard) without asking leave*?

Have you read such a license in the Wasif, or has this question
been (so decided) in the MuMfi "

"You are right," he replied; “beat (me): you have got the
upper hand. This is the fit penalty for him that parts from
friends."

Returning to the story of the sick man and the visit paid (to him) by
the Prophet, God bless him and grant him peace!

This visiting of the sick is for the sake of this (spiritual)
attachment 3 , and this attachment i$ pregnant with a hundred
Lovingkindnessea.

The peerless Prophet went to visit the sick man; he found that
Companion at the last gasp.

When you become far from the presence of the saints, you
have in reality become far from God.

Inasmuch as the result of parting from fellow-travellers is urj

t Literally, “one who** haml fwi been cut nff."

* Literally, “ without Hying, * It it the command?""

1 Sec V. *145.


336 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

sorrow s how is separation from the countenance of the kings
(saints) less (grievous) than that ?

Hasten every moment to seek the shadow (protection) of
(those) kings, that by means of that shadow you may become
superior to the sun +

If you have a journey (to make), go with this intention; and
if it be (that you stay) at home, neglect not this.


Hate a certain Shaykh said to Rayasid Y * 4 / ffln the Kcfba:
perform a cirtuM<mbidati(m round trie”

Bayazid, the Shaykh of the community, was hurrying to
Mecca for the greater pilgrimage (hajj) and the lesser (Wa) f

In every city to which ne went he would at first make search
after the venerable (saints),

2220 He would roam about, asking, ** Who is there in the city that
is relying on 1 (spiritual) insight?”

God has said, **'Whithersoever thou gocst in thy travels, thou
must first seek after a (holy) man/'

Go in quest of a treasure, for (worldly) profit and loss come
second: regard them as the branch (not as the root).

Whoever sows is in quest of wheat; the chaff comes to him.
indeed, (but only) secondarily.

If you sow chaff, no wheat will come up: seek a man, seek a
man, a man!

1225 When it is the season of pilgrimage, go in quest of the Ka'ba;
when you have gone (with that purpose), Mecca also will be seen.

In the Mi raj (Ascension of the Prophet) the quest was (for)
vision of the Beloved; *twas but secondarily that the empyrean
and the angels were also shown.


Story.

A novice one day built a new house; the Fir came (and) saw
his house.

The Shaykh said to his new disciple—he put to the teat him
that had good thoughts—

"Wherefore hast thou made a window, O comrade?Said
he, iS In order that light may come in by this way.”

2i jo He (the Shaykh) said, "That is (only) the branch (secondary

object); (thy)want (desire) must be this, (namely) that through
this channel thou may at hear the call to prayer.”

Bdyazfd, on his journey (to the Ka H ba), sought much to find
some one that was the Khizr of his time.

He espied an old man with a stature (bent) like the new moon;
he saw in him the majesty and (lofty) speech of (holy) men;

* Literally, “supporting htin&elf tm the pillar* of. ih


bAyazid and the shay eh 337

His eyes sightless, and his heart (illumined) a$ the sun: like
an elephant dreaming of Hindustan.

With closed eyes, asleep, he beholds a hundred delights;
when he opens (his eyes), he sees not those (delights) —oh t
( S tis) wonderful 1

Many a wonder is made manifest in sleep: in sleep the heart
becomes a window.

One that is awake and dreams fair dreams, he is the knower
(of God) : smear your eyes with 1 his dust.

He {Bayazid) sat down before him and asked about his
condition; he found him to be a dervish and also a family man.

He (the old man) said," Whither art thou bound, O Bayazid?

To what place wouldst thou take the baggage of travel in a
strange land? h *

Bayazid answered, "I start for the Ka'ba at daybreak/ 1
41 Eh/* cried the other, “what hast thou as provisions for the
road?”

"I have two hundred silver dirhems," said he; “Took, (they
are) tied fast in the comer of my cloak.

He said, "Make a circuit round me seven times, and reckon
this (to be) better than the circumamhulation (of the Ka‘ba) in
the pilgrimage;

And lay those dirhems before me, O generous one. Know
that thou "hast made the greater pilgrimage and that thy desire
has been achieved;

(That) thou hast (also) performed the lesser pilgrimage and
gained the life everlasting; (that) thou hast become pure (sdf)
and sped up (the Hill of) Purity (S^/d)*

By the truth of the Truth (God) whom thy Soul hath seen,

(I swear) that He hath chosen me above His House.

Albeit the Ka'ba is the House of His religious service, my 2245
form too, in which I was created, is the House of His inmost
consciousness.

Never since God made the Ka'ba hath He gone into it h and
none but the Living (God) hath ever gone into this House (of
mine).

When thou hast seen me, thou hast seen God; thou hast
circled round the Ka'ba of Sincerity,

To serve me is to obey and glorify God : beware thou think
not that God is separate from me.

Open thine eyes well and look on me, that thou mays! behold
die Light of God in man."

Bayazid gave heed to those mystic sayings* and put them in
his ear as a golden ring.

Through him (the old man), Bayazid came into an increase
(of spiritual endowment): the adept at last attained unto the end.

1 Literally, '"draw intv your cyea* Fi


338


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


Hot the Prophet— God bless and save Itim!—perceived that the
cause of that person’s sickness teas irreverence in prayer.

When the Prophet saw the sick man, he dealt sweetly and
tenderlv with that familiar friend 1 .

He became alive when he Saw the Prophet: you might say,
that moment created him.

He said, " Sickness has given me this good fortune, that this
Sultan has come to my side at mom,
i2js So that health and well-being have accrued to me from the
arrival of this King who is without retinue.

O happy pain and sickness and fever I O blessed anguish and
wakefulness in the night 1

Lo, in (my) old age God of His grace and bounty hath
bestowed on me such a sickness and malady !

He too hath given me pain in the back, so that every midnight
I cannot help springing up quickly from sleep.

In order that I may not slumber all night like a buffalo, God
of Ills grace hath given rue pains.

,,60 Through this infirmity the mercy of Kings has been aroused,
and Hell’s threatening of me has been silenced.”

Pain is a treasure, for there are mercies in it: the kernel
becomes fresh when you scrape off the rind.

O brother, (to dwxll in) a dark and cold place, to endure
patiently sorrow and weakness and pain,

Is the Fountain of Life and the cup of (spiritual) intoxication,
for those heights arc all in lowliness.

That Spring is implied in autumn, and that autumn is
(fulfilled) in the Spring: do not flee from it.
ais Be a fellow-traveller with grief, agree with desolation, seek
long (lasting) life in thy death (to self).

Do not listen to what thy fleshly soul says, that this place (of
self- mort ideation ) is bad, inasmuch as her doings are contrary
(to thy spiritual advancement).

Do* thou oppose her, for such (is the) injunction (that) has
come from the prophets in the world.

It becomes necessary to take counsel concerning things to be
done, so that there may not be repentance in the end.

The community' said, "With whom shall we take counsel?’*
'The prophets answered, “W'ith intellect, (which is) the Imam
(leader).

227* He (the questioner) said, "(But) if a child should come in, or
a woman who has no judgement or dear understanding.”

"Take counsel with her,” said he (the prophet), “and do
the contrary of what she bids (thee), and go thy wav.”

1 Literally," the friend of the Cave."


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 339


Know that your fleshly soul is woman and worse than woman,
because woman is a part (of evil), hut your fleshly soul is evil
entire.

If you take counsel with your fleshly soul p oppose that vile
one (in) whatsoever she may say.

If she bid you pray and fast — the fleshly soul is a great
plotter, she will bring some plot against you 10 birth.

(When you take) counsel with your fleshly soul concerning =175
(your) actions — whatsoever she tells (you to do), the reverse
of that is perfectly right.

(IfJ you cannot cope with her and her contumacy, go to a
friend and mix with him.

Mind gains strength from another mind: the sugar-cane is
made perfect by the sugar-cane.

I have seen (wondrous) things (arising) from the deceit fulness
of the fleshly soul, for by her magic she takes away the faculties
of discernment

She will proffer afresh to you promises that she has broken
thousands of times.

If vour life be prolonged 1 even for a hundred years, she will
lay before you a new pretext every day.

She utters cold (vain) promises (as though) warm (from
the heart); (she is) a witch, she ties up the manhood of a

man r

0 (thou who art the) radiance of God, Husarnu'ddm, come!
for without thee no herbs will grow from the brackish soil.

A curtain has been let down from heaven because of the
curse of one whose heart is sorely vexed.

This destiny only the (Divine) destiny can cure: the under¬
standing of His creatures is stunned at His destiny * stunned.

The black serpent that was (as) a w T orm fallen on the road 2^5
has become a dragon;

(Bui) in thy hand, O thou with (love for) whom the soul of
Moses is intoxicated, the dragon or serpent became (as) the rod
(in the hand of Moses).

God gave thee command, saying, Take it; /ear not, so that
the dragon may become a rod in thy hand/'

Hark, show the white hand, O King: out of the bLack nights
reveal a new r dawm!

A hell hath blazed forth; breathe (thy) enchantment over it,

0 thou whose breath is more (excellent) than the breath of the


sea.


She (the fleshly soul) is the guileful sea that shows (but) a 2290
(little) foam; she Is the hell that from guile shows (but) a (little)
neat.

She appears exiguous in your eyes, to the end that you may

1 Ltundly, “grant a reapiir.”


21-2


34°


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


regard her as feeble and that your wrath may be stirred (against

Even as there was a dense host (of infidels), (but) to the
Prophet’s eye it seemed small,

So that the Prophet set upon them without {tear of) the danger;
but if he had deemed (them) more (in number), he would have
acted cautiously in that (affair).

That was the Divine favour, and thou wert worthy of it, U
Ahmad (Mohammed); else, thou wouldst have become faint¬
hearted.

2zij 3 God caused the outward and inward wart are to seem little
to him and his Companions,

In order that He might make it easy for him to gam ease
(success), and that he might not tuna away his face from
difficulty.

For him, (God’s) causing (the warfare) to seem little was
victory, since God was his friend and taught him the way.

(But) he that hath not God for his victorious support, alas
if the fierce lion seem to him a cat. ,

Alas if from afar he see a hundred as one, so that in vain
confidence he enters on the fray.

i;oa He (God) causes a Prophet’s sword to seem a dart and makes
the fierce lion appear as a cat,

To the end that the fool may fall boldly to fighting, and that
He may catch them by this device;

(And besides He is acting thus), in order that those dolts may
have come towards the fire-temple by means of their own feet
(bv their own free will).

He is showing (w hat seems to you) a blade of straw, in order
that you may quickly give a puff so as to make it vanish out of
existence.

Beware! for that straw has uprooted mountains: through it
the world is weeping, while it (the straw) is in laughter.

He makes this river-water seem (only) up to the ankle, (but)
a hundred such as ’Aj son of ’Anaq have been drowned
therein.

He makes the wave of blood seem to him a mound of musk:
He makes the bottom of the sea seem dry land.

Blind Pharaoh deemed that sea dry, so that in (the pride of
his) manhood and strength he drave into it.

When he enters (it), he is at the bottom of the sea: how should
the eye of Pharaoh be seeing?

THc eye is made seeing by meeting with God : how should
God become the confidant of every fool?

He (the fool) sees (what he thinks is) candy: it is, in sooth,
deadly poison; he secs (what he thinks is) the road: it is, in
sooth, the cry of the ghoul (luring him to destruction).


130s


JjlO


THE DEVICES OE GOD


34 *

art


O sky, in the tribulation of (these) latter days thou
revolving swiftly; pray, give (us) time (respite and rebel).

Thou art a keen dagger to assail us; thou art a poisoned lancet
to bleed us.

O sky, I earn mercy from the Mercy of God: do not, luce a
snake, inflict wounds on the hearts of ants. ...

By the truth of Him who hath set the wheel of thy sphere
turning above this (earthly) abode,

(We beseech thee to) revolve in another wise and show mercy, =s*s

ere thou uproot us. , , . . . . . . , ,

(We beseech thee by) the truth of thy having fostered us at
first, so that our (young) shoot grew up from (the nurture given

by) water and earth; , ,

By the truth of that King who created thee pure and displayed

so many cressets in thee, , ....

Who hath kept thee so flourishing and lasting that the
materialist hath thought thee (existent) from eternity.

Thanks (to God), we have come to know thy beginning: the

prophets have told that secret ol thine, _

A man knows that a house is made (at some time or <>t wr), -j-°
the spider which plays idly in it (knows) not (this).

How should the gnat know of what date this garden is?— for
*twas born in spring, and its death is in the (following) winter
The worm that is born miserably Kl (dry) wood—how should
it know the wood at the time when it was a (sappv) shoot.

And if the worm should know (this), it would be intellect in
its essential substance; the worm would be (only) its (ou war )

f j Intellect shows itself (in many) guises, (but) like the Jmn u
leagues removed from them (in its real nature).

It is above the angels—what occasion is there for (comparing
it with) the Jinn? (But) you have the wings of a gnat, you are

flying downwards, w . c

’ Although your intellect is flying upward, the bird of your

conventional notions is feeding below. , , .

Conventional knowledge i$ the bane of our soula; it ts a
borrowed thing, but we rest (at ease m the behef) that it £0«rs-
It behoves iis to become ignorant of this (worldly) wisdom,

(rather) must we dutch at madness. „ . A

Always flee from whatever you deem profitable to your (lower)
self; drink poison and spill the water of life.

Revile any one that praises you: lend (both) interest and 4 j 3 o

capital to the destitute. t

Let safety go, and dwell in the place of fear (danger): leave

reputation behind and be disgraced and notorious.

I have tried far-thinking (provident) intellect; henceforth t
will make myself madL


342


MATH XAWf, BOOK II


How Daiqak excused himself to the Sayyid-i Ajall (who asked
him) why he had married a harlot *

One night the Sayyid-i Ajall said to Daiqak, “You have
married a harlot in haste.

You ought to have disclosed this (matter) to me T so that we
might have made a chaste (woman) your wife.”

3335 Daiqak replied, li l have (already) married nine chaste and
virtuous women: they became harlots, and I wasted away with
grief.

I married this harlot without (previous) acquaintance (with
her), in order to see how this one (also) would turn out in die
end.

Often have I tried (sound) intelligence; henceforth I will
seek a nursery for insanity*”

Hose an inquirer managed to draw into conversation an
eminent (saintly) man who had feigned to be mad .

A certain man was saying, “I want some one of intelligence!
(that) I may Consult him about a difficulty.”

One said to him, “ In our city there is nobody of intelligence
except yonder man who appears to be mad.
ana Look, there is (one named) so-and-so: mounted on a cane,
he rides (it as a cock-horse) amongst the children.

He is possessed of judgement and (keen as) a spark of fire;
he is as the sky in dignity, and as the stars in high estate.

His glory has become the (rational) soul of the Cherubim;
he has become concealed in this (feigned) madness.”

But you must not account every madman a (rational) soul:
do not, like Simiri, lay down your head (in worship) to a calf.

When a manifest saint has declared unto you Hundreds of
thousands of unseen things and hidden mysteries*

3345 And you have not had the (proper) understanding and
knowledge, (so that) you have not distinguished dung from
aloes-wood—

How, when the saint has made for himself a veil of madness,
will you recognise him, G blind one?

If your eve of intuitive certainty is open, behold a (spiritual)
captain under every stone.

To the eye that is open and (as) a guide, every dervish-cloak
hath a Moses in its embrace.

Tis only the saint (himself) that makes the saint known and
makes fortunate whomsoever he will.

No one can recognise him by means of wisdom when he has
feigned to be mad.


THE SAINT WHO RODE A COCK-HORSE 3+3

When a seeing thief steals from, a blind man, can he at all
detect (the identity of) die thief (who is) in the act of passing?

The blind man does not know who it was that robbed him,
even though the wicked thief may knock against him.

When a dog bites a blind ragged mendicant, how should he
recognise that ferocious dog?


flow the dog attacked the mendicant who teas blind.

A dog was attacking, as (though it were) a warlike lion, a
blind mendicant in a certain street.

The dog rushes angrily at dervishes ; the moon smears her ^sss
eyes with dust of (the feet of) dervishes.

The blind man was made helpless by the dog s barking and
by (his) fear of the dog; the blind man began to pay honour to

Saying, “O prince of the chase, and O lion of the hunt, thine
is the (upper) hand: refrain thv hand from me!" —

For, (moved) by necessity, that (renowned) philosopher paid
honour to (one vile as) the tail of an ass, and gave him the tic e
of 11 noble **

He (the blind man) too, of necessity, said, “G lion, what
(good) will come to thee from such a meagre prey as 1 am.

"Thy friends are catching onagers in the desert; thou art ji<®
catching a blind man in the street: this is bad.

Thy friends seek onagers by hunting (them); thou in (mere)
malice seekesta blind man in the street. . ,,

The knowing dog has made the onager ins prey, while this
worthless dog lias attacked a blind man. t .

When the dog has learned the knowledge (imparted to turn),
he has escaped from error: he hunts lawful prey m t e

JU \Vhen the dog has become knowing ('dlim), he marches
briskly; when the dog has become a knower of God ( art/ ), he
becomes (as) the Men of the Cave. . .

The dog has come to know who is the Master ol the hunt,

O God, what is that knowing light?

(If) the blind man knows it not, tis not from (his) having
no eve (to see); nay, f tis because he is drunken with ignorance.

Truly, the blind man is not more eyeless than the earth , and
this earth, by the grace of God, has become a seer of (God s)

It saw the Light of Moses and showed kindness to Moses;
(but) Qirun it engulfed, (for) it knew Qirun. .

It quaked for the destruction of every Ulse pretender, it
understood (the ivords that came) from God, O earth, swallow
(thy water)! ”


344


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


Jtjjo Earth and water and air and sparking lire are unacquainted
with us, but acquainted with God.

Contrariwise, we are aware of (things) other than God, (but)
unaware (heedless) of God and of so many warners (prophets).

As a necessary consequence, they (the elements) all shrank
from (accepting) it (the trust offered to them): (the edge of) their
impulse to partake of life was blunted.

They said, “We all are averse to this life, (namely), that one
should be living in relation to created beings and dead in rela¬
tion to God.”

When he (any one) remains away from created beings, he is
orphaned (single): for intimacy with God, the heart must be
free {from relations with aught besides).

When a thief steals some article of property from a blind
man, the blind man i$ blindly lamenting.

Until the thief say to him t ,|n Tis I that stole from thee, for
I am an artful thief/'

How should the blind man know his thief, since he hath not
the eye's light and that radiance (of vision)?

When he (the thief) speaks (and confesses! at once take tight
hold of him, that he may tell the marks (descriptive) of the
(stolen) goods.

The Greater Jihad (Holy War), then, consists in squeezing
(him) to the dregs, in order that he may tell what he has stolen
and what he has carried off.

ajSc First, he has stolen your eye-salve; when you take it (from
him), you will regain (your) insight.

The goods of wisdom, which have been lost by (your) heart,
are certainly to be found with the man of heart (the saint).

The blind of heart, notwithstanding (his possession of) life
and hearing and sight, is never knowing the devilish thief bv
the traces (which he leaves).

Seek (that knowledge) from the man of heart; do not seek
it from the inanimate, for (all other) people are inanimate
beside (in comparison with) him.

The seeker of counsel approached him (the saint who was
feigning madness), saying, “G father who hast become (as) a
child, tell (me) a secret/"

23S5 He answered, “Begone from this door-ring, for this door is
not open. Turn back: to-day is noi the day for secrets.

If the spatial had (any) access to the non spatial, I should be
(seated) on the bench, T (giving instruction) like the Shaykhs
(spiritual directors)/"


THE POLICE INSPECTOR AND THE DRUNKARD 345


//<«o the Polite Inspector summoned the man who had fallen
dead-drunk {on the ground) to {go to) prison.

The Inspector came at midnight to a certain place: he saw a
man lying at the bottom of a wail.

He cried, "Hey, you are drunk: tell (me), what have you
been drinking?” Said the man, “I have drunk «f this which is
in the jar.”

“Pray,” said he, “explain what is in the jar.” He replied,
“Some'of what I have drunk,” “(But),” said the Inspector,
“this is hidden (from sight),”

He asked (again), “What is it that you have drunk?” He 3390
rejoined, “That which is hidden in the jar,"

These questions and answers were becoming a (vicious)
circle. The Inspector was left (stuck) in the mud, like an ass.

The Inspector said to him, “Come now, say 'Ah’”; {but)
the drunken naan, at the moment of utterance, said “ Hu , Hu."

“I told vou to say 'Ah’,” said he; “you art saying ‘Hu’.”
“(Because) I am glad,” he replied, “while you are bent with
grief. ...

1 Ah * is (uttered) on account of pain and griet and injustice;
the ‘Hu, I Id* of the wine-drinkers is from jov,”

The Inspector said, “I know nothing about this. Get up, ay»i
get up! Don’t retail mystic lore, and leave off this wrangling.

“Go away,” said the man; “what have you to do with me?”
“You are drunk,” the Inspector said. “Get up and come to
prison,”

Said the drunken man, “Q Inspector, let me alone and go
away. How is it possible to carry off pledges from one that is
naked?

If indeed I had had the power to walk, I should have gone to
my house—and (then) how would this (affair between us) have
occurred ?

Were I (still) possessed of understanding and of contingent
(unreal) existence, I should be on the bench, (giving instruction)
like the Shaykhs.”

Hare the inquirer, far the second time, drew that eminent (saint)
into conversation, m order that his condition might he made
better knoren (to the inquirer).

That seeker said, “O thou mounted on the cane, pray, ride nco
thy horse this way for one moment.”

He rode towards him, crying, “Hark, say as quick as you can
(what vou want), for my horse is very restive and fiercc-tempered.

Be quick, lest he kick you: explain clearly what you are
asking about.”


34 & MATHNAwf j BOOK II

He (the inquirer) saw no opportunity to tell his heart's secret:
he at once made an evasion and drew him into jesting talk.

He said, 14 1 wish to marry a woman in this streets who is
suitable for one like me?”

3405 “There are three kinds of women in the world/* said he;
“ two of those are a sorrow, and one is the souPs treasure.

The first, when you marry her, is wholly yours; and the
second is half yours and half separate (from you);

And the third, know she is not yours at all. You have heard
this. Away (with you)!—I start in a trice—

Lest my horse let fly a kick at you, so that you fall and never
rise up ( again),”

The Shaykh rode off amongst die children, (but) the young
man shouted to him once more,

-410 “Come, prithee declare the exposition of this. Thou hast
said that these women arc of three kinds: pick {them) out”

He rode towards him and said to him, 11 The virgin of your
choice will be wholly yours, and you will gain freedom from
sorrow;

And she that is half yours is the (childless) widow; and she
that is nothing (to you) is the married woman with a child:

When she has a child by her first husband, her love and
whole heart will go there.

(Now) get away, lest my horse launch a kick, and the hoof of
my restive horse land upon you. 1 *

** The Shaykh gave a loud cry of jubilation and rode back: he
again called the children to him.

That inquirer shouted to him once more, “ Come (hither),
1 have one question left, G sovereign king,”

He rode back in this direction. “Say what it is,” he cried,
as quick as you can, for yonder child has enraptured my
hearty*

Said the other, 44 0 king, with such intelligence and erudition
(as thou hast), what dissimulation; is this? What acting is this?
Oh! T tb a marvel!

Thou transcendest the Universal Intellect in (thy power of)
elucidation. Thou art a sum how art thou hid in madness?* 3

He replied. These rascals are proposing to make me Cadi
m this their dty,

1 raised objections, (but) they said to me, ‘Nay, there is none
so learned and accomplished as thou.

Whilst thou art in existence, it is unlawful and wicked that
any one inferior to thee should cite Prophetic Traditions in the
office of Cadi.

Permission is not (given) in the Law, that we should appoint
one less than thee as (our) prince and leader. 1

1 Lite rally, " has carried fcff my pole-ball from ihfi field/*


THE SAINT WHO RODE A COCK-HORSE 347

By this necessity I was made distraught and mad (in appear¬
ance), but inwardly I am just the same as I was.

My intelligence is the (hidden) treasure, and I am the ruin : 4 :j
(which covers it); if I display the treasure, (then) 1 am mad
(indeed).

The (real) madman is he that has not gone mad, he that has
seen this night-patrol and has not gone home.

My knowledge is substantial, not accidental; and this precious
(thing) is not for (the purpose of gaining) every (worldly)
interest.

I am a mine of candy, l am a plantation of sugar-canes: it is
growing from me, and at the same time 1 am eating (of it).

Knowledge is conventional and acquired (not real), when he
(its owner) laments because the hearer is averse to (hearing) it.

Since it is (learned) as a bait (for popularity), not for the sake »4ja
of (spiritual) enlightenment, he (the seeker of religious know¬
ledge) is just as (bad) as the seeker of vile worldly knowledge;

(For) he is seeking knowledge on account of the vulgar and
the noble, not in order that he may win release from this

world. _ ......

Like a mouse, he has burrowed in every direction, since the
light drove him (back) from the door (the entrance to the hole)
and said, ‘Away!’

Inasmuch as he had no wav (of getting out) to the open
country' and the light, he continued to make (such) an exertion
even in that darkness.

If God give him wings, the wings of Wisdom, he will escape
from mousiness and will fly like the birds; ,

But if he seek not wings, he will remain underground with
no hope of traversing the path to Simik 1 ,

Dialectic knowledge, which is soulless, is in love with (eager
for) the countenance of customers; ...

(But) though it is robust at the time of disputation, it is dead

and gone when it has no customer. ,

My purchaser is God: He is drawing me aloft, for God hath

^ My bloodwit (the reward of my self-sacrifice) is the beauty of
the Glorious One: I enjoy my bloodwit (as) lawful cam mgs.

Abandon these insolvent customers: what purchase can be :ko
made bv a handful of (worthless) day?

Do not eat clay, do not buy clay, do not seek clay, because
the eater of clav is always pale-faced.

Eat your heart (in love of God), that you maybe young
always, (and that) your visage (may be rosy) with Divine ulu-
mination, like the arghaKrin,”

O Lord, this gift is not (within) the compass of our work
J Tht name of a *tar.


348 MATHNAWf* BOOK II

(achievement); verily, (the gift of) Thy grace is (not according
to our work, but) according to Thy mysterious grace.

Take our hands (help us); buy (redeem) ns from our hands
(self-existence); lift the veil (between Thee and us), and do not
tear our veil (do not expose us to shame),
a *4 S Redeem us from this filthy self (nafs): its knife has reached
our bones.

Who will loose these strong chains from helpless ones like us,
O king uncrowned and unthroned?

Who except (Thee in) Thy bounty t O Loving One, can loose
such a heavy lock?

Let us turn our heads from ourselves towards Thee, inasmuch
as Thou art Higher unto us than we (unto ourselves) -

Even this prayer is Thy gift and lesson (to us); else* wherefore
has a rose-bed grown in an ash-pit?

2450 Save through Thy munificence, Ms impossible to convey
understanding and reason into the midst of blood and entrails-
This flowing light (proceeds) from two pieces of fat (the two
eyeballs): their waves of light reach up to the sky.

" The piece of flesh which is the tongue—from it the flood of
Wisdom is flowing, like a stream,

Towards a cavity, whereof the name is ‘'ears/* up to the
orchard of the (rational) Soul, whereof the fruit is intellect ions.

Its main course is the highway of the orchard of souls; the
orchards and gardens of the world are its branches.

2455 That, that, i$ the source and fountainhead of joy: quick,
recite (the text), (gardens) beneath which flow the rivers.


Conclusion of the admonishment given by the Prophet, God
bless (tad save him, to the sick man .

The Prophet said to the sick man, when he visited (his)
suffering friend,

"Maybe you have made a prayer of some (peculiar) sort, and
from ignorance have (as it were) eaten some poisoned food.

Bring to mind what (sort of) a prayer you said when you were
being vexed by the guile of the fleshly soul.”

He answered, "I do not remember; but direct a (spiritual)
influence towards me, and it (the prayer) will come to my
memory in a moment.”

2460 Through the lif*ht-giving presence of Mus|afi (Mohammed),
that prayer came into his mind;

(From) the aspiration of the Prophet who dwells in light
there came into his mind that which had been lost;

Through the window which is between heart and heart
flashed the light that separates truth and fabehood*


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 349

He said, “Look now, 1 have remembered, O Prophet, the *
prayer which I t impertinent fool, spoke*

When i was being caught in (the toils of) sin, and drowning
(therein) was clutching at straws —

(Whilst) there was coming from thee to sinners a threat and 2**5
menace of punishment exceedingly severe—

(And) 1 was becoming agitated, and there was no help (for
me), (since) there were chains made fast and a lock not (to be)
opened:

Neither room for patience nor means of flight, neither hope
of repenting nor opportunity for rebelling—

I, like Harut and Mjrut, was crying in sorrow, s Alas! P and
saying , 1 0 mv Creator ! 1 ”

Because of the dangers (of the Last judgement) Harut and
Minit openly chose the pit of Babylon,

So that they might suffer here (in this world) the punishment 2470
of the world to come; and they are cunning and intelligent and
magician-like.

They acted well, and h twa$ fitly done: the pain of smoke is
lighter than (that of) fire.

The pain of that (future) world is beyond description; light
is the pain of this world beside it.

Oh t happy he that wages a holy war (of self-mortification), and
puts a restraint upon the body and deals justice (against it).

And, in order that he may be delivered from the pain of that
world, lavs upon himself this pain of serving God,

S+ I was saying, *0 Lord, quickly inflict on me in Uus world 2475
that punishment, +

So that l may have exemption (from it) in yonder world . 1
About such-like a request was 1 knocking at the door 1 .

(Thereupon) such a (painful) sickness as this appeared in me:
through pain my soul was deprived of rest.

I have been left without power to perform my dkikr (com¬
memoration of God) and litanies: 1 have become unconscious
of myself and of (ail) good and ilL

If I had not now beheld thy face, O thou whose scent is
fortunate and blessed, .

I should have passed altogether from the bondage (ot this 2^0
life)* Thou in kingly fashion hast bestowed on me this sympathy / 1
Said the Prophet , 41 Hey I do not offer this prayer again: do
not dig yourself up from root and base.

What strength have you, 0 wretched ant, to endure that He
should lay on you such a lofty mountain r P *

He answered 1 41 0 Sultan, 1 repent (and vow) that in no wise
will I (henceforth) brag recklessly*

This world is the Desert (of the Israelites), and thou art
1 Ij. ' l iuch was r fee petition I made m God. 1 *


350 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Moses, and we because of (our) sin remain in the Desert in
tribulation.

j4Sj We are wayfaring for years, and at the end we are still held
captive in the first stage (of the journey).

If the heart of Moses were pleased with us, there would be
shown (to us) the way through the Desert and the (farthest)
border (thereof);

And if he were wholly disgusted with us, how by any means
would trap of food come to us from heaven?

How would springs gush from a rock, (and how) would there
be security for our lives in the desert?

Nay, truly, fire would come instead of trays: flames would
beat upon us in this abode,

2Vj o Forasmuch as Moses has become of two minds concerning
us, he is sometimes our enemy and sometimes our friend.

His anger sets fire to our goods; his clemency becomes a
shield against affliction.

When (how') may it be that anger shall again become clemency ?
This is not extraordinary (as proceeding) from thy grace, Q
venerable one.

To praise any one present is (a cause of) embarrassment ; on
this account I am purposely using the name of Moses, like this.

Otherwise, how should Moses deem it right that I make
mention of anybody before thee?

Our covenant hath been broken hundreds and thousands of
times; Thy covenant, like a mountain, stands firm and stable.

Our covenant is straw T and subject to every wind (of passion);
Thy covenant is a mountain, and even more than a hundred
mountains.

By the truth of that power (which is Thine), have some mercy
upon our mutability, 0 Ruler of (all) mutations]

We have seen ourselves (as w r e really are) and our shame* Put
us not to further trial, O King,

So that (by sparing us) Thou wilt have concealed other
disgraces 1 , O Bounteous One w r hose help we implore!

25 qq Thou art infinite in beauty and perfection; we are infinite

in wrongness and error>

Direct Thy infinity, O Bounteous One, upon the infinite
wrongness of a handful of vile WTCtehes (such as w e are).

Oh, come, for of our cloth-piece (only) a single thread remains:
we w ere a city, and (only) a single wall remains.

(Save) the remnant, (save) the remnant, O Sovereign, that
the soul of the Devil may not rejoice entirely —

Not for our sakes, (but) for the sake of the primal grace
through which Thou didst seek out them that had lost the
way.

1 lx* other acta of ours which would expose us io disgrace.


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 35T

As Thou hast shown Thy power * (so now) show Thy mercy p 2505
O Thou who hast implanted feelings of mercy in flesh and fat.

If this prayer increase Thy wrath, do Thou teach (us) to pray,

O Lord,

Even as, (when) Adam fell from Paradise, Thou gavest him
(leave) to turn (in penitence) toward Thee, so that he escaped
from the ugly Devil/'

Who is the DcvU that he should surpass Adam and win the
game from him on such a board?

In truth, it nil turned out to Adam's advantage; that guile
became a curse to the envious one.

lie (the Devil) saw one game, (but) he did not see two hundred sjio
games (which he should lose) : therefore he cut down the supports
of his own house,

lie set fire by night to the cornfield of others; (meanwhile)
the wind (was) carrying the fire into his own field.

The (Divine) curse was a blind to the Devil, so that he
regarded that trickery (of his} as harm to (lus) enemy.

The (Divine) curse h that which makes hint (any one) see
falsely, and makes him envious, self-conceited, and malicious,

To the end that he may not know that whoever docs evil, it
(that evil} will at last come back and smite him.

He sees all the master-moves mvertedly: (hence) they result
in check-mate to him and (in) failure and defeat,

(The curse blinds him), because, if he regard himself as
naught, (if) he regard the wound (his moral and spiritual blind¬
ness) as deadly and festering.

Pain will arise from such looking within, and the pain will
bring him out from the veil (of self-conceit),

Until mothers are overtaken by the pains of childbirth, the
child finds no w T ay to be bom.

This (God-giv'en) trust is in the heart, and the heart is
pregnant (with it): these counsels (of the prophets and saints)
are like the midwife.

The midwife may say that the woman has no pain; (but) pain
is necessary, pain is (makes) a way for the child (to be bom).

He that is without pain is a brigand, because to be without
pain is to say -l I am God.”

To say that out of the (proper) time is a curse (to the
speaker) ; to say that Cb 1” at the (proper) time is a mercy (from

The "I” of Mansur (HallSj) certainly became a mercy; the
* H 1 11 of Pharaoh became a curse, Mark (this) I

Consequently, it is incumbent (on us) to behead every
untimely bird (every cock that crowds too soon) f in order to give
notice (warning) 1 ,

1 /.jf.we itiLisidic to self in. order that we may show to others [Jne evils of egoism.


352 M ATHNAWi, BOOK If

2,^25 What is 41 beheading”? Killing the fleshly soul in the holy
(spiritual) war, and renouncing self*

Just as you would extract the scorpion's sting in order that it
might be saved from being killed,

(Or) pull out the venomous fang of a snake, in order that the
snake might escape from the calamity of being stoned (to death).

Nothing will slay the fleshly soul except the shadow (protec¬
tion) of the Fit: grasp tightly the skirt of that slayer of the flesh.

When you grasp (it) tightly, that i$ (done by) the aid of Him
(God) : whatever strength comes into you is (the effect of) His
drawing (you towards Him).

zy;.o Know that true is (the text) thou didst not throw when thou
tkrewest: whatsoever the soul soweth is from the Soul of the soul.

He is the One that takes the hand (to help), and (He is)
burden-bearing (long-suffering): have hope, from moment to
moment, of (receiving) that breath (of inspiration) from Him,

*Tis no harm if you have remained long without Him: you
have read that He Ls long in gripping (sinners), (though) gripping
(them) tight.

His Mercy is long in gripping, (but) grips tight: His Presence
does not keep you absent (from Him) tor one moment.

If you desire the explanation of this union and friendship,
read thoughtfully (the Stira) Wal-Dtdid (By the Morn).

z And if you say that evils too are from Him, (that is true), but
how is it a defect in Ilis grace?

(His) bestowing this evil is even His perfection: l will tell you
a parable (in illustration), O respected one.

A painter made two kinds of pictures—beautiful pictures and
pictures devoid of beauty.

He painted Joseph and fair-formed houris, he painted ugly
afreets and devils.

Both kinds of pictures are (evidence of) his mastery: those
(ugly ones) are not (evidence of) his ugliness; they are (evidence
of) his bounty.

as s e He makes the ugly of extreme ugliness—it is invested with all
(possible) uglinesses— 1

In order mat the perfection of his skill may be displayed, (and
that) the denier of his mastery may be put to shame.

And if he cannot make the ugly ( he is deficient (in skill):
hence He (God) is the Creator of (both) the infidel and the si ncere
(faithful).

From this point of view, then, (both) infidelity and faith are
bearing witness (to Him): both are bowing do™ in worship
before His Lordliness.

But know that the faithful (believer) bows down willingly,
because be is seeking (God's) pleasure and aiming (at that).

* LUeriiJty. “all uglmesacs surround it,"


WHY COD CREATES GOOD AND EVIL 353

The infidel too is a worshipper of God, (though) unwillingly; *j+j
but his aim is (directed towards) another object of desire.

(It Is true that) he keeps the King’s fortress in good repair;
but he is claiming to be in command.

He has become a rebel, to the intent that it may be his domain;
(but) verily, in the end the fortress comes to be the King's.

The faithful believer keeps that fortress in good repair for
the sake of the King, not for place (and power).

The ugly one (the infidel) says, “O King who Greatest the
ugly, Thou art able for (able to create) the beautiful as well as
the despicable (and) ugly.”

The beautiful one (the faithful believer) says, “O King of jjjo
beauty and comeliness, Thou hast made me free from defects."


Hoto the Prophet, God bless and save him, gave injunctions
to the sick man and taught him to pray.

The Prophet said to the sick man: “Say thus: — ‘O Thou
that makest easy that which is hard.

Give good unto us in our present abode, and give good unto
us in our future abode!

Make the wav agreeable to us as a garden: Thou indeed, G
Glorious One, art our goal.’**

At the Gathering (for Judgement) the true believers will say,

“O angel, is it not (the case) that Hell is the common road,

(And that) true believer and infidd (alike) pass by it? We issi
saw no smoke or fire in this road (which we have traversed),

Lo, here is Paradise and the Court of safety: where, then, was
that vile place of passage? "

Then the angel will $ay, “The garden of greenery which ye
saw in a certain spot as ye passed—

That was Hell and the terrible place of chastisement, (but)
unto you it became gardens and pleasaunces and trees.

Inasmuch as with this soul of hellish nature, (this) miscreant
fiery one that seeks (to lead you into) temptation.

Ye have striven (oft), and* it hath become full of purity, and
ve have quenched the fire (thereof) for God’s sake;

(Inasmuch as) the fire of lust, which was flaming, hath become
the verdure of pietv and the light of guidance (unto the true
faith);

(Inasmuch as) at once the fire of anger in you hath turned
to forbearance, and the darkness of ignorance in you hath turned
to knowledge;

(Inasmuch as) the fire of greed in you hath turned to un¬
selfishness, and that envy (which) was like thorns hath turned to
roses;


I


33


9


354 MATHNAWf | BOOK II

Inasmuch a$ ye formerly extinguished all these fires of your
own for God’s sake;

3565 And made the fiery soul like an orchard and cast in it the
seed of fealty,

(Whilst) therein the nightingale* of commemoration and
glorification of God (were) singing sweetly in the garden by the
river-side'

(Inasmuch as) ye have answered the call of God and have
brought water into the blazing hell of your soul —

Our Hell also in regard to you hath become greener)' and
roses and plenty and riches.”

What is the requital for well-doing, 0 son? Kindness and
well-doing and valued recompense,

11 Did not ye say, f We are devoted (to God): we arc passing
away before the attributes of Everlastingness?

We, whether we be cunning (sane) or mad p are intoxicated
with that Cupbearer and that cup.

We lay our heads (submissively) upon His writ and mandate:
we give our sweet lives in pawn (to Him).

So long a$ the thought of the Friend is in our inmost
hearts* (all) our work is to serve (Him) and yield up our
lives. 1 ”

Wheresoever the candle of tribulation hath been lighted,
hundreds of thousands of toying souls are burnt.

2575 Those lovers that are within the house (and nigh unto Him)
arc (as) moths to the candle of the face of the Friend.

O heart, go where they are bright 1 toward thee and are as a
coat of mail to thee against afflictions,

And give thee a place within their souls, that they may fill
thee with wine, like a cup.

Take thy abode within their souls: O radiant full-moon ?
make thy home m the sky !

Like Mercury, they will open the book of the heart, that they
may reveal mysteries unto tnee.

z S $q Stay beside thy kinsfolk — how art thou roaming abroad?
Cleave to the perfect Moon if thou art a piece of the moon.

What the (cause of the) part's keeping aloof from its whole?
What is (die cause of) all mixture with (that which is)
diverse?

Behold how die genus hath become species in the process (of
differentiation): behold how the unseen tilings have become
visible in emanation.

So long as thou wouldst fain be wheedled 2 Like a woman p
O man without wisdom, (thou wilt remain imperfect): how 1
wilt thou be helped by lies and wheedling?

1 J>. unveiled and sincere.

1 Literally * 14 thou art a buyer of blandishment; 1 *


THE LOVERS OF GOD JSS

Thou art taking flattery and sweet words and cajolement and
putting them like gold in thy bosom.

For thee the revilings and blows of the (spiritual) kings would sjsj
be better than the praise of the unrighteous 1 .

Swallow* the slaps of the (spiritual) kings, do not swallow the
honev of the rabble, to the end: that through the fortune of
(those) personages thou mayst (thyself) become a personage;

Because from them come felicity and robes of honour; under
the shelter of the spirit, body becomes soul.

Wherever thou seest one (that is) naked and destitute, know
that he hath fled from the (spiritual) master.

In order that he may become such as his heart desires—that
blind, wicked, worthless heart of him.

If he had become such as his master desired, he would have 2590
graced himself and his kindred.

Whoever in the world flees from his master is fleeing from
felicity. Know this (for sure) 1 .

Thou hast learned a trade to earn a livelihood for the body:
(now) set div hand to a religious (spiritual) trade.

In this world thou hast become clothed and rich: when thou
contest forth from here, how wilt thou do?

Leant such a trade that hereafter the earning of God’s
forgiveness may come in as revenue (to thee).

Yonder world is a city full of trafficking and earning: think -59J
not that the earnings here (in this world) are a sufficiency.

The high God hath said that beside those (the nest world’s)
earnings these earnings in the (present) world are (but) children’s
play—

As a child that embraces another child modo coitum facientis
con tact uni facit;

(Or as) children at play set up a shop, (but) it is of no use (to
them) except as a pastime.

Night falls, and he (the child who acted as shopkeeper) comes
home hungry: the (other) children are gone, and he is left alone.

This world is a playground, and death is the night: thou sdoo
retumest with an empty purse, tired out,

The earnings of religion arc love and inward rapture ■
capacity to receive the Light of God, O thou obstinate one!

This vile fleshly soul desires thee to earn that which passeth
away: how long wilt thou earn what is vile ? Let it go! Enough!

if the vile fleshly soul desire thee to earn what is noble, there
is some trick and plot behind it.

1 Literally, "them that have lost the way."


23-2


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


35 &

How Iblis awakened Mit'dwiya—may God be well-pleased
with him!—saying, “Arise, it is time for prayer.”

'Tis related in Tradition that Mu’awiya was asleep in a nook
of the palace.

i6c$ The pa lace-door was fastened from the inside, for he was
fatigued by people's visits.

Suddenly he was awakened by a man, (but) when he opened
his eyes the man vanished.

He said (to himself), “No one had entrance to the palace:
who is he that has shown such impudence and boldness.'”

Then he went round and searched in order to find the trace
of that one who had become hidden (from sight),

Behind the door he espied a luckless man who was hiding his
face in the door and the curtain.

siGi v " Hey,” he cried, “ who are you ? What is your name ? " 1 ‘ (To
speak) plainly,” said he, “my name is Iblis the damned."

He (Mu’awiya) asked, “Why did you take pairs to awaken
me 1 ? Tell the truth, don’t tell me what is reverse and contrary
(to the fact) 3 ,”

How Iblis gave Mu‘(heiya, may God be well-pleased with him,

a fall a , and practised dissimulation and pretence, and how

Mu'duriya answered him.

He said, “The time for prayer is (all but) come to an end : you
must run quickly to the mosque.

Mustafa (Mohammed) said, boring the pearl of the idea,
1 Make haste to perform your devotions before the time is past.* “

He (Mu’awiya} said, “Nay, nay; ’tis not thy purpose to be
my guide unto any good.

afiij (If) a thief come secretly into my dwelling-place and say to
me, ‘ I am keeping watch,’

How shall I believe that thief? How should a thief know the
recompense and reward for good works ? ”

How Iblis again made answer to Mit'dwiya ,

He said, “At first I was an angel: I traversed the way of
obedience (to God) with (all my) soul.

I was the confidant of them that follow the path (of devotion):
I was familiar with them that dwell by the Throne of God,

How should (one’s) first calling go out of (one’s) mind ? How
should (one’s) first love go forth from (one’s) heart?

1 Literally K 41 why did you awaktn fisc with earnestness r " K

* Literally* “do nol sen rnc rcytndy and contrariwise r FiI

* Literally, “threw M. from his #ss/ h i.e, sought to mislead him and a»E
him into error*


IBLIS AND MU'AWITA 357

If in travel you see Anatolia or K-hutan, how should love of
your own country go from your heart?

I too have been one of those drunken with this wine: I have
been a lover at His court.

They cut my navel in (predestined ine from birth to) love of
Him; they sowed love of Him in my heart.

I have seen good days from Fortune: I have drunk the water
of (Divine) Mercy in (my) spring-time.

Was it not the" hand of His bounty that sowed me? Was it
not He that raised me up from non-existence?

Oh, many is the time 1 have received kindness from Him and -sjj
walked in the rose-garden of (His) approval.

He would lay the hand of mercy on my head, He would open
(let flow) from me the fountains of grace.

Who found milk for me in the season of my Infancy? W ho
rocked my cradle? He.

From whom did I drink milk other than His milk. Who
nourished me except His providence? .

The disposition which lias entered with the milk into (their)
being — how can it be discharged (expelled) from folk?

If the Sea of Bounty has given (me) a rebuke, (yet) how have #Sjo
the doors of Bounty l>een shut?

Giving and grace and favour are the fundamental substance
of His coin: wrath is (only) as a speck of alloy on it.

He made the world for kindness’ sake: His sun caressed the

motes {in its beams). ,

If separation (from Him) is big with His wrath, Lis tor the
sake of knowing the worth of union with Him,

So that separation from Him may give the soul chastisement,

(and that) the soul mav know the value of the days of union, _

The Prophet has declared that God said, ‘My purpose m
creating was to do good:

I created to the intent that they (My creatures) might draw
some gain from Me, and that they might smear their hands

with My honey; „ ,

Not to the end that I might draw some gain (from them),
and that I might tear off a coat from one (who is) naked.

During the short while since He drove me from Hfe presence,
mine eye hath remained (fixed) upon His beauteous fact';

(And mv thought has always been), ‘ Such wrath from such
a face! Ofi, wonderful I’ (whereas) every one (else) has become
occupied with (considering) the (secondary) cause (Hi$ wrath),

1 do not look at the cause (His wrath), which is temporal, mo
inasmuch as the temporal (only) produces something temporal

(like itself). ,

I am regarding (His eternally) precedent mercy: whatsoever

is temporal I rend in twain.


35® MATHNAWl, BOOK II

Grant that my declining to worship (Adam) was from envy;
(yet) that envy arises from love (of God), not from denial (of
obedience to His command).

! Tis certain, all envy arises from love, (for fear) lest another
become the companion of the beloved.

Brooding jealousy is the necessary consequence of Iove p just
as saying ' Live long! 1 must follow die sneeze 1 .
a*4S Since there was no play but this on His board-, and He said,
"Flay/ what more can I do?

I played the one play (move) that there was, and cast myself
into woe.

Even in woe I am tasting His delights: I am mated by Him*
mated by Him, mated by Him!

How shall any one, O noble sir, in (this world of) six direc¬
tions deliver himself from the shashdara (the place with six
doors)?

How shall the part of the six escape from the whole of the
six, especially when the Unconditioned sets it wrong?

HS50 Whoever is in the six is in the fire: (only) He that is the creator

of the six will deliver him.

Truly> whether it be infidelity or faith in Him (to which he
is predestined), he is the handdoom (instrument) of the Lord
and belongs to Him /*

7/emr Mu'dtciya again exposed the deceitfulness 0 / 1 Mis.

The Amir said to him,“These things are true, but your share
in these things is wanting.

You have waylaid hundreds of thousands like me: you have
made a hole and have come into the treasure-house.

You are lire and naphtha ; you bum, you cannot help it 3 . Who
is there whose raiment is not torn to pieces by your hand?

2655 Inasmuch as it is your nature, G fire, to be a cause of burning,
there is no help but you must bum something.

This is God*s curse (on you), that He makes you burn (things)
and makes you the master of all thieves, T

You have spoken with God and heard (Him speak) face to
face: what should I be (able to do) before your deceit; O enemy?

Your stock of know ledge is like the sound of (the fowler's)
whistle: it is the cry of birds, but it is bird-ensnaring.

That (whistle) has waylaid myriads of birds, the bird (in each
case) being duped (by the fancy) that a friend is come.

2*60 When it hears in the air the sound of the whistle, it comes
(down) from the air and is made captive here-

1 jy**™^^* ““ condition of (he obligation imposed by sneezing/ 1

1 The board used in the gn me of Hard.

J Literally; IT (if) you do not bym s there is no help / 11


IBLIS AND MU'iWIYA 359

Through your deceit the people of Noah are in lamentation:
they have hearts charred and bosoms (tom) to shreds.

You gave "Ad in, this world to the wind (of destruction): you
cast (them) into torment and sorrows.

Through you was the stoning of the people of Lot: through
you were they sunk in the black rain-water.

Through you was the brain of Nimrod crumbled, O you that
have raised thousands of turmoils I
Through you the intelligence of Pharaoh, the acute and sage, 2665
became Blinded, (so that) he found no understanding.

Through you also Bu Laliab became an unworthy one;
through you also Eu 1 -Hakam became a Bu JahL

O you that on this chessboard, for the sake of rememb ranee 1 ,
have checkmated hundreds of thousands of masters,

O you by whose difficult attacking moves (our) hearts have
been burned and your (own) heart has been blackened.

You are the sea of cunning, (and all) the creatures (are but)
a drop: you are like a mountain and (we) simple ones (are but)
a mote.

Who shall escape from your cunning, O adversary? We are 2670
drowned in the flood, except them that are protected (by God) +

By you many a fortunate star has been burned: by you many
an armv and host have been scattered.”

a*

How Ihlh again replied to Mu'dwtya*

Iblis said to him, “Unravel this knot (and apprehend the
matter): I am the touchstone for the false coin and the true,

God hath made me the test of lion and cur, God hath made
me the test of genuine coin and counterfeit.

When have I blackened false coin's face? I am the
money-changer: I have (only) valued it.

To the good I act as guide, the dry branches I rip off.

I lay these (different) sorts of fodder (before people)—for
what purpose? In order that it may be seen of what kind 2 the
animal is.

When a wolf bears 3 young to an antelope, and there is some
doubt whether it (the young one) has the nature of wolf or
antelope,

Drop you grass and bones in front of it (and see) to which
side it quickly steps.

If it comes towards the bones, it is canine; and if it craves the
grass, it is assuredly of the antelope race.

A wrath and a mercy were wedded to one another: from
these twain was born the world of good and evih

1 /nf. "as it manorial (of youi skill}.”

* LiieraEly, dl


1 Or "buffets- 1 *


3&0 MATHNAWff BOOK II

Offer grass and bones, offer the food of the flesh and the food
of the spirit.

If he seek the food of the flesh, he is bobtailed (worthless),
and If he desire the food of the spirit, he is a (spiritual)
chief.

If he serv e the body* he is an ass ; and if he go into the sea of
the spirit* he will And pearls.

Although these twain — good and evil—are different* yet
these twain are (engaged) in one work*

a* 3 s The prophets offer devotions* the enemies (of God) offer
lusts.

Flow should I make the guod man bad? I am not God, I am
(only) a prompter* I am not their creator.

(How) should I make the fair foul? I am not the Lord, I am
(only) a mirror for the foul and the fair.

The Hindoo burnt a mirror in vexation* saying* 1 This (mirror)
causes a man to look black-faced/

He (God) hath made me an informer and truth-telleri that
I may tell where the ugly one is and where the beautiful.

=&&* I am a witness: how is prison (the right place) for a witness?
I do not deserve (to go to) prison* God i$ the witness (to tny
innocence).

Wherever I see a fruitful sapling, I foster (it) diligently like
a nurse.

Wherever I see a sour and dry tree* I cut it down* in order
that the musk may be delivered (separated) from the dung.

The dry (tree) says to the gardener, ‘O young man* why do
you cut off my head without fault (on my part)? 1

The gardener says* 'Be silent, O evil-natured one! Js not
thy dryness sin enough in thee? 1

3695 The dry (tree) $ay$, 'I am straight* I am not crooked: why
are you houghing me (who am) without guilt?’

The gardener says, ‘ Hadat thou been blest, would that thou
were crooked (if only) thou wert moist (full of sap).

Thou wouldst have drawn (into thyself) the Water of Life:
thou wouldst have been steeped in the Water of Life.

Thy seed and thy root were bad, and thou hast not been
joined to a good tree.

If the^our branch be joined to a sweet one, that sweetness
will atriA (impress itself) on its nature.”'

Hole Mu'ikeiya dealt sternly with Iblis.

W> Said the Amir, "O brigand, do not argue: there is no way
for you (to penetrate) into me, (so) do not seek the way.

\ou are a brigand, and I am a stranger and merchant: how
should I purchase any garments that you may bring?


TBLfs AND MU'XwiYA 361

Do not prowl about my property„ infidel as you are: you are
not one to buy the property of anybody.

Ihe brigand ia not a buyer for (from) any person, and if he
seem to be a buyer, p tis (only his) deceit and artfulness.

I wonder what this envier has in his gourd! O God, help us
against this enemy!

If he pronounce one more screed (of hia spells) over me* this *705
brigand will rob me of the mantle (of my faith).

//™ Mu'dwiya complained of [bits to the most high God
md besought His aid ,

O God, this talk of his is like smoke: take my hand (and help
me) t or else my raiment is blackened.

I cannot prevail in argument with I bits, for he leads every
one, noble and base (alike), into temptation.

Adam s who is the lord of He taught (Mm) the Names, is power¬
less before the lightning-like onset of this cur.

He cast him from Paradise upon the face of the earth: he
(Adam) fell from Simak 1 Into his net, like a fish,

^ Crying in lamentation, 1 Verify „ we haze wronged (ourselves)* 9 27l0
There is no bound to his (Satan + s) guile and imposture.

In his every saying there is mischief: myriads of enchant¬
ments are concealed in his mind.

He unmans 2 men in a moment: he kindles vain desire in
man and woman.

O IbliSp you that consume the people and seek to tempt them
(to their ruin), on what ground did you awaken me? Tell the
truth 1”

How (hits once more exhibited his deceit.

He said, “No man that thinks evil (is suspicious) would
hearken to the truth notwithstanding a hundred signs (that
pointed it out).

Every' mind that has conceived fancies (suspicions) — when z yts
you bring forward proof, its fancy is increased.

When (sound and true) words enter it, they become a disease
(they are corrupted and falsified): the holy warrior's sword
becomes a tool tor the thief.

Therefore the answer to him is silence and rest: to talk with
a fool is madness.

Why do you complain to God of me, O simpleton ? Complain
of the wickedness of that vile fleshly souk

You eat halvvi (sweetmeat), (then) boils break out in you,
fever lays hold of you, your health is disordered,

1 I.t v Prim high estate,

3 Literally, "lie* up the manhood oL 11


362 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

1710 You curse Iblis, guiltless (though he is). How do you not
see (that) that deception (proceeds) from yourself?

It Is not (the fault) of Iblis, it is (the fault) of yourself, O
misguided one, that you are running like a fox towards the sheep’s
fat tail.

When you see the fat tails in the green field, ’tja 3 snare. Why-
arc you ignorant of this?

You are ignorant because desire for the fat tail has made you
far from knowledge and has blinded your (spiritual) eve and
intelligence.

Your love of (sensual) things makes you blind and deaf; your
black fleshly Soul is the culprit: do not quarrel (with others).

Do not put the guilt on me, do not sec upside down. 1 am
averse to evil and greed and enmity.

I did an evil deed and am still repenting: I am waiting that
my night may turn to day.

I have become suspect amongst mankind: every man and
woman lay their (evil) actions on me (at my door), '

The helpless Wolf, though he is hungry, is suspected of being
in luxui^ 1 .

When, because of feebleness, he cannot go his way, people
say it is indigestion (arising) from gross (rich and heavy) food.’*

Hons Mu'dmya ottce more pressed Ihlis hard „

973® He said, “Nothing but the truth will save you: justice is
calling you to (speak) the truth.

Tell the truth, so that you may be delivered from my hand:
cunning will not lay the dust of my war (will not induce me to
leave you in peace).”

He (Iblis) said, “How do you know (the difference between)
falsehood and truth, O thinker of vain fancies, (you that are)
filled with (idle) thoughts (about me)?"

He answered, “The Prophet has given an indication; he has
laid down the touchstone (criterion) for (distinguishing the
base coin and the good.

He has said,‘Falsehood 2 is (the cause of) disquiet in (men’s)
hearts ; he has said, ‘Truth is (the cause of) a joyous tran*
quality/

uji Phe (troubled) heart is not comforted by lying words; water
and oil kindle no light.

(Only) in truthful speech is there comfort for the heart:
truths are the bait that entraps the heart*.

1 Literally. ‘magnifier nee," “splendid condition.”

* Hud

* Literally, “ the groin of the snare of the heart."


IBLIS AND MU'AWIYA 363

Sick, surely, and it [-savoured 1 is the heart that know not
(cannot distinguish) the taste of this and that,

U hen the heart becomes whole (is heated) of pain and disease,
lt 1V1! reco S n,se “ e flavour of falsehood and truth,

\Vhen Adam’s greed for the wheat 3 waxed great, it robbed
Adam s heart of health.


1 hen he gave ear to your ties and enticements: he was ;: 4 o
befooled and drank the killing poison.

At that moment he knew not scorpion (kazhdum) from wheat
( gandum): discernment flies from one that is drunken with vain
desire.


The people are drunken with cupidity and desire: hence they
are accepting your cheater) .

\\hoeyer has rid his nature of vain desire has (thereby) made
his (spiritual) eye familiar with the secret.


//or- a cadi complained 0/ the calamity of (holding) the
office of cadi, and hate his deputy an sice red him.

I hey installed a cadi, (and meanwhile) he wept. The deputy
sa<d, O cadi, what are you weeping for?

This is not the time for you to weep and lament: it is the time 274J
■or you to rejoice and receive felicitations,'

Ah, said he, ‘how shall a man without insight pronounce
judgement—an ignorant man (decide) between two who know ?

rhose two adversaries are acquainted with their own case:
what should the poor cadi know- of those two tangles?

He is ignorant and unaware of their (real) state: how should
he proceed (to give judgement) concerning their lives and
property?*

He (the deputy) said, ‘The litigants know (the truth of their
case) and (nevertheless) are unsound (prejudiced); you are
ignorant (of the facts), but you are the luminary of the whole
body (of Moslems),

Because you have no prejudice to interfere (with your dts- 17 jo
cernmem), and that freedom (from prejudice) is light to the
eves;

While those two who know are blinded by their self-interest:
prejudice has put their knowledge into the grave.

Unprejudicedness makes ignorance wise; prejudice makes
knowledge perverse and iniquitous.

bo long as you accept no bribe, you are seeing; when you act
covetously, you are blind and enslaved.’

I have turned my nature away from vain desire: I have not
eaten delicious morsels.

My heart, which tastes (and distinguishes), has become
bright (like a clear mirror): it really knows truth from falsehood.

1 Literally, ■* ill -mouthed/’ * I,r. the forbidden fruit.


36+


MATHNAWI, BOOK [I


Hato Mu'dwiya—-may God he welt-pleased with him ! —
induced Iblis to confess.

Why did you awaken me? You are the enemy of wakefulness,
O trickster.

You are like poppy-seeds: you put every one to sleep. You
are like wine: you take away understanding and knowledge.

1 have impaled you. Come, tell the truth. I know what is
true: do not seek evasions.

1 expect from every person (only) that of which by nature
and disposition he is the owner.

a?6o I do not look for any sugar from vinegar; I do not take the
catamite for a soldier.

1 do not, like (idolatrous) infidels, seek (expect) from an idol
that it should be God or even a sign from God.

/ do not seek the smell of musk from dung; I do not seek drv
bndts in river-water.

From Satan, w ho Is other (than good), I do not look for this—
that he should awaken me with good (intent),”


How Iblis told truly his hidden thought to Mu'dimya—may
God be f cell-pleased with him!

Iblis spoke many words of deceit and treachery, (but) the
Amir hearkened not to him and strove (against hlm)"and showed
fortitude.


ar?c


(At length), with the bitterest pangs 1 he (Iblis) said; “O such-
and-such, know that I awakened you for the purpose

That you might join the congregation (of Moslems) in praying
after the Prophet of high estate. v ’

If the time of prayers had passed, this world would have
become dark to you and without a gleam of light;

(And then) from disappointment and grief tears would have
flowed from your tw o eyes in the fashion of (water from) water¬
skins, ' ' '


(Because) every one has delight in some act of devotion and
consequently cannot bear to miss it (even) for a short while.

at disappointment and gnef would have been fas) a
hundred prayds: what is (ritual) prayer in comparison with
the (spiritual) glow of humble Supplication? "


1 Literally, *' from the of the teeth, U. with the utmost reluctance / 1


1BLIS AND MU'AwiYA 365

The excellence of the remorse felt by one tcho was sincere (in his
devotion) for having missed the congr eg a t ion al prayers,

A certain man was going into the mosque (when) the people
were coming out qf the mosque.

He began to ask (one of them), saving, “What ails the con-
gregation that they arc coming out of the mosque (so) soon? ”

That person said to him, “The Prophet has prayed with the
congregation and finished (his) communion.

How art thou going in, O foolish man, when the Prophet has
given the blessing?”

He cried, “Ah! ” and smoke issued from that (burning) sigh: zjtj
htss i gh was giving forth the smell of blood from his heart.

One of the congregation said, “ Give me this sigh, and mv
prayers arc thine.”

He answered, “I give the sigh and accept the prayers,” He
(the other) took that sigh with a hundred yeanlings (towards
God).

At night, whilst (he was) asleep, 3 Voice said to him, “Thou
hast bought the Water of Life and salvation.

In honour of this choice and this appropriation the prayers
of all the people have been accepted.”


Conclusion of the confession made by Iblis to Mufdwiya
of his deceit ,

Then Azizil 1 said to him, " O noble Amir, 1 must lav mv
deceit before (you).

If you had missed the prayers, you would then from heartache
have uttered sighs and lamentations,

And that regret and that lamentation and that (sorrowful)
yeaming would have exceeded (in value) two hundred litanies
and prayers.

1 awakened you in fear lest such a sigh might bum the veil
(of formality').

In order that such a sigh should not be yours; in order that
you should not have any wav to it.

1 am envious: from envy ! acted thus. I am the enemy: my *78$
(proper) work is deceit and malice.”

He (Mu'awiya) said, “Now you have told the truth, you are
veracious. This (deceit) comes (naturallv) from vou: to this you
are adapted.

\ ou are a spider, you have flics as your prey; O cur, I am not
a fly, (so) do not worry.

I am a white falcon: the King hunts me. How should a spider
weave his web about me?

1 The name of Ibllg before his ChU.


366


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


n f JW * continue to catch flies as far as you can: invite the
flies to (partake of) some buttermilk;

*790 And if you call (them) to honey, that too will certainly be lies
and buttermilk (fraud).

lou awakened me, (but) it (that awakenmcnt) was (really)
showed < mc ) a ship, (but) that was (really) a

, ) ou were c ^j' n £ me gowl the purpose that vou might
drive me away from the better good," '

Hote a thief escaped because same one gave the alarm to the master
oj the house, tcho had nearly overtaken and caught the thief.

This (behaviour of Iblis) is like that (which is told in the
following story), bow a certain man saw a thief in the house
and ran after him.

He ran after him (the length of) two or three fields, till the
fatigue threw him mt*j a sweat.

2/95 At the moment when, rushing on, he had come so near to
turn that he might spring upon him and seize him,

Hie second thief cried out to him, "Come, that vou may see
these signs of calamity. 1


Be quick and turn back, O man of (prompt) action, that you
may see (how) very pitiable (is) the state of things here." '

He (the householder) said (to himself), “Maybe a thief is
yonder: if do not return at once, this (fate) will befall me .

He may lay hands upon my wife and child, (and in that case)
how would it profit me to bind this thief (whom I am pursuing)

2500 ™! s M “ 1 ™ * me in kindness: unless I return

quickly, evil will come to me.”



hand (riolencejTsthis lamenution and outT^v otWs (ca^dV”

The nilKh' fh (thC '‘ See * *SK ESSil

I he pimping 1 thief has gone this way y

■At. f “ ,prii, ' s! Fo,i °" h ™ b >- —

“■ 5 Wh - *" >™ **-I Why., had

4 B a iSL** ,h,cf60 ' 1 d " mtd - <“ i-

What silly gabble and nonsense is this, O fellow? I (had)
found the reality: what (use to me) is the due?”

He replied, “ I am giving you a clue to the real (thing) This
is the due; 1 am acquainted with the reality ." ^ ■ 1 n '

1 laterally, “cuju» imor pro mcrccde (conduct)."


THE ACCOMPLICE WHO CAVE A FALSE ALARM 367

vo^Le h a e fi?. USeh ° !der) 5ald ’ ^ artful knave or eke

' 1 was / n ^ f ’ na> - ^ OU rfT a Eh,et and cognisant of this affair.

vou lefhim P ° 0f) d f a SS in S W adversary along, (when) 1H0
you let him escape, saying (to me), ‘Here are (h’is) traces.'» J

’iou speak of (externa] relations, (but) 1 transcend falU
rdattons. Jn union (with Cod) where ale sijjns or etXcel?
a J : h . man that ® debarred (from the Essence) sees the (Divine)
action (as proceeding) from the Attributes; he that has lost the
Essence is in (confined to) the Attributes

united (with God) are absorbed in the
essence, O son, hovy should they look upon His Attributes?

eve fal^rJwif he 1 d 1S a r botto ™ of ™e river, how will your
eje fall on the colour of the water?

*2? Hr C °T back fr . om , the to the colour of the ^5

^ CCr ’/r be ? yoy have received a coarse woollen garment and
given (fine) fur' (in exchange), B

rh?i e i PICtjr ° f th M ' ul ® ar is 5in in tfie elect! the unitive state of
the vulgar is a veil in the elect 5 .

make % y™f r a Police inspector, the king is his
enemy, he is not his friend. b

AJso that vizier will have committed some offence: necessarily

r Qt < do€S not ™ CUT ) without cause. *
fnStvk 1 k * a P^ to^pector from the first—to him that
( Rnt ) kl a fk b f en fo ' tune J ul I <1 . livelihood from the beginning;

But he that was first the king s vizier—evil-doing is the cause s °
of making him a police inspector.

the Ki n g has called you from the threshold into His
presence, and again has driven you back to the threshold
Know for sure that you have committed a sin and in folly
have brought forward (pleaded) compulsion (as the cause), ’

fkl was m y (praertined) portion and lot," (But)

then, why was tliat good luck in your hands yesterday ■

Through folly you yourself have cut off your lot. The worthy
man augments his lot.

The story of the Hypocrites and their building the Mosque
of Opposition *

r“ h ^ rkcn t0 another P^hle concerning,^
penersity (taken) from the narrative in the Qur'an.

crooked the P r°P het fJ usl ) **h a

Wiwij?) ° dd (aS *“ played bv lblfe

* ^ntn^T*"■ «w*«*f sejw^riw, from Cod.

‘W'rhc K '; e Ty?omk" Ph ™* OCcwn ' would 10 Wici*


3& S MATHNAWI, BOOK IJ

Saying," Let us build a mosque for the glory of the Moham-
medan religion and that was (really) apostasy (on their part).
Such a crooked game were they playing: they built a mosque
other than his mosque.

They constructed (well) its floor and roof and dome, but they
desired to disunite the (Moslem) community.

shio They came to the Prophet with (guileful) entreaty: they knelt
as camels before him,

. Saying, “O Messenger of Cod, wilt thou for kindness' sake
give thyself the trouble 1 (to walk) to that mosque.

To the end that it may be made blessed by div approach—
may thy days flourish until the Resurrection I

It is a mosque for muddy and cloudy days, a mosque for
daj?s of sore distress in times of poverty,

That a (poor) stranger may get charity- and room (to shelter)
there s and that this house of service may be frequented *

So that the rites of the Religion may be multiplied and
abound; because a bitter plight is sweetened (by being shared)
with friends, *

Honour that place (by thy presence) for a short while:
declare us to be sincere, and give a good account of us.

Show favour to the mosque and its founders. Thou art the
moon, we are the night; comply with us for a moment,

In order that by thy beauty night may be made like day O
thou whose beauty is a night-illumining sun,”

, Al “ ! would that those words had been from the heart, so
that the desire of those folk might have been accomplished t
Courtesy that comes to the tongue without (sincerity of)
heart and soul ts like herbs on the ash-hcap, Q friends.

Look at them from afar and pass on; they are not fit for eating
or smelling, O son. s

Do not, indeed, go (incline) towards the courtesy of the
faithless, for it is a ruined bridge; heed well (mv warning).

If a fool set foot on it, the bridge will break, will shatter
that foot of his.

W herever an army is routed, it is because of two or three
effeminate weaklings.

He poltroon) comes armed into the battle-line, like a
man .they (the soldiers) put their trust in him*, saying. " Here’s
the Comrade of the Cave 3 ,” J *’

He turns his face (in flight) when he sees wounds: his going
breaks your back 4 , e

This (topic) long and is expanding, and that which is aimed
at is becoming hidden (from sight).


; Literally,■*Irtuble thy feet.” > Literally, -‘set their heart, ,
U. Aba Rakr, the trusted friend of T he Prophet.
l.t. duals a fatal blow to JtOur hopes of victory.


the MOSQUE OF OPPOSITION 369

JW f a i° ! i d tke Pnptut—God. bless and save

him! that they might take him to the Mosque of OppTsitZZ

\ I^senJr^r d 1 S ^ 1IS over J ( $ P° ke deceitful words to) the
sndS ^ W£rfi dfiv ' n &( hafd ) the steed of cunning

-2*S2 !&£ ***■•< e» «fw

wJShSTto 'S mrent him ' b)r “ *• «M

•nJJSd^rarcsss " oi ,o “ e the “■*= *■* p“»«

^" d *"* ft* <***«>. »»<*« ft« tfc.

kindif. °^ ean of , bot)nt y s P° ke truly (when he said), *‘j arn
nder unto you than von (yourselves are}

blB^T£m‘V h ° ' dge ” f * *" '“ itb “ •**“"* >“pl=“lK =>«

l }l ^ tenin ^ Awards it like moths, (while) both mv
hands have become moth-flap, (to beat you off)." V *

tk» ■ 1 tbe £ r °P bet ba d resolved to set out (to the Mosauel

h Vr?ri!“ y Crkd|Do not hearken to d lt . ghoul 1 f

tor these wicked men have used deceit and cunning- what

have put forward is entirely the reverse (of the truth)
thee when e SL W but ^ ta brin & black ^ame (upon

fUSSir Ch ™ or jews thevvdfarc of ^

l (tie Hypocrites) have built a mosuue upon Hell’s -Afu

bridge: they have played the game of trickery lithTJd

the PmohT Z t0 “ us . e disun ™ amongst the Companions of
God 1 ? Ph h should any VaJn fod Uftderstai id the grace u f

hidicrT ti??' t ° rder that the -V may fetch

intonated " f Sy ™' WhoW Packing the Jew's are

lVi S e , Pr °P het said (to the Hypocrites), “Yes (I will do as ve
), but (just now) w r e are intending to march and starting on

“ L3,ITipaiCm| B “

to 1 f ? Um thi$ ex P cdid <> n * 1 will then set out

™ Mosque at once.

nW^ (thUS) P ut /hem off and hurried to the field of war: he sSfi ,
P la X! d 3 p™ of tnckery with the tricksters.

soiitrhf/tk r^ e bac!t /f 0 ? tbe ^mpajgn, they returned and
light (the fulfilment of) that past promise*

* /,*. “tfo not tiiten to ihe vaiec of EMptadon.”


N M


2 4


37 ° MATHNAWf, BOOK II

God said to him, "O Prophet, proclaim the treachery {with
which they have acted), and if war be (the consequence), sav,
‘Let it be!"*

He (the Prophet) said, "O false people, be silent I Hush, lest
I tell your secret thoughts. 11

When he had declared (to them) a feu indications of their
inmost thoughts, they were in evil plight*.
s0t® Thereupon the envoys turned back from him crying, "God
forfcrnd! God forfend!”

Every Hypocrite, by way of fraud, brought a Qur’an under
his arm to the Prophet,

In order tp take oaths — for oaths are a shield; (this they did)
because (taking) oaths is a custom followed by the wicked.

Since the wicked man does not keep faith in (matters of)
religion, he will break (his) oath at any time.

The righteous have no need of (taking) oath, because they
have two clear (discerning) eyes.

Breach of compacts and covenants is (the result) of stupidity;
keeping of oaths and faithfulness (to one's word) is the practice
of him that fears God.

Said the Prophet, “ Shall I take your oaths as true, or the
oath of God ?”

Again those people, the Qur'an in their hands and the seal of
fasting on their lips* swore another oath,

Saying, " By the truth of this holy and true Word (we swear)
that the building of the Mosque is for God's sake.

In that place there ia no contrivance of deceit: in dial place
there ia (only) commemoration (of God) and sincerity and calling
unto the Lord."

The Prophet answered, "The voice of God is coming into
my ear like an echo,

God hath put a seal upon your ears, so that they make not
haste to (hear) the voice of God.

Lo p the voice of God is coming to me distinctly: it b filtered
clear for me, like the pure {liquor) from the dregs’* —

Even as Moses from the direction of the Bush heard the voice
of God saying, "O thou of blessed fortune! "

From the Bush he was hearing (the words), “Lo, lam Allah”
and together with the words there appeared (Divine) lights.

2^5 Inasmuch as they (the Hypocrites) were left in the lurch by
the light of (Divine) inspiration, they once more began to recite
oaths anew.

Since God calls an oath a shield, how should the quarreiler
lay down the shield from his hand?

Again the Prophet, giving (them) the lie direct p said to them
in plain terms,Ye have lied,”

1 Literally, their affair became bad."


the mosque of opposition



{riieir request was ignominiously refused), so that one of the
l-rophets Companions conceived in his heart dislike 1 * of that
reeoilmcnt,

rhinking, “Grey-haired and venerable old men like these —
this Prophet is putting them to shame.

Where is generosity? Where cloaking (of sins)? Where sa*»
modesty- (respect for the feelines of others)? The prophets cover
up hundreds of thousands of faults."

Quickly, again, in his heart he asked pardon of God, lest he
should be disgraced 3 4 for objecting (to the Prophet’s behaviour)

1 he turpitude® of befriending the Hypocrites made the true
believer wicked and rebellious like them.

Again he was cry ing in supplication, "O Thou who knowest
the inmost consciousness, do not leave me persisting in unhetief'

Mv heart is not in my control, as (my) eyesight (is); else I
would at this moment burn my heart in anger.”

(Whilst he was) m this thought, slumber seized him. To him iS*j
(dreaming), their mosque seemed full of dung:

A corrupted place, its stones (steeped) in filth: from the stones
floated up black smoke.

I he smoke went into his throat and made it smart: terrified*
by the bitter smoke, he sprang from sleep.

Forthwith he fell on his face and wept, saying, “O God
these things are the sign of (their) disbelief,

^ rath (against therm is better, Q God, than such forbearance
(as mine), which separates me from the light of Faith.”

If you scrutinise the labour of them that follow falsehood, :
(you will see that) it is stinking, coat upon coat, like an onion—

Evot one (of their efforts) more pithless than another,

V hue), in the case of the sincere, (every effort) is more excellent
than the other.

Those folk (the Hypocrites) tied a hundred belts on their
mantles 5 m order to destroy the Mosque of the people of
Quba—

Even as the Lords of the Elephant (who abode) in Abyssinia
made a Ka'ba, (but) God set it afire;

(And then) they (the Abyssinians) made an attempt on the

1 Literally, “disapproval come Into his titan.”

3 Literally, “ became pulc-faced, ’ 1

3 Literally, Si wu*pidQuanta *. 0

4 Literally, ICnttr tit"

!*+ “girt themsdfw up with the utmost Mai / 1


sg«j


£910


372 MATHNAWj, BOOK II

Ka'ba in revenge: read from the Word (of God) how thev
fared I

The reprobates of the Religion have indeed no equipment
but cunning and deceit and contentiousness.

Even- Companion saw plainly (in sleep) some vision of that
Mosque, so that the secret (purpose) of it became to them
certain knowledge.

If I should relate the visions, one bv one, then the purity (of
the Companions) would become certain to them that douht

But I am afraid of revealing their mystery : thev are the dis-
dainful loved ones (of God), and disdain beseems'them

They have received the (religious) Law (directly from God)
without mechanical imitation (of others); they have taken that
(unadulterated) coin without (applying) the touchstone.

The V isdom of the Qur an is like the tmi; believer h s stray
camel; every one has certain (intuitive) knowledge of his own
stray.


Story of the person tefto teas seeking after fits stray camel
and inquiring about it.

(10 you have lost a camel and sought it busily, how should
you not know, when you find it, that it is yours?

" hat is the stray? You have lost a she-'eamel: (she has) fled
irqm your herd into a veil (of concealment).

The caravaneers have begun to load, (but) your camel is lost
(and has disappeared) from the midst (of the caravan).

You are running to and fro with parched lips; the caravan
is (now) far awav, and night is near.

?915 n Jr^hlH a f iS left ° n - the p und - ^ymg) on the road of
peril, (whilst) you are running about in search of the camel,

Crying, O .Moslems, who has seen a camel which this
morning escaped from 3 stable?

dirt?/ WlU \ du . C 1 ° m y I vvill give so irnnv

dirhems as a reward (for the information)."

You are requiting clues from every one; every rascal Is
making □ mock of you an this account,

Saying, "We saw a camel going in this direction, a reddish
camel (gome) towards yonder pasturage "

SayS, '“w and another says.

Its saddle-cloth was embroidered."

■< ^he camel had (only) one eye," and another says,

"(™ suffering) from mange (and) had no hair.”

-“'.twr* raKai - <**■“"*>««***,

' Literal]jr, "the black-faced one */ 1



THE TRUE BELIEVER’S STRAY CAMEL


373


Oft being perplexed amidst discordant doctrines and finding
(a means a/) escape and delkerasice.


(This is) even as in the matter of knowledge (of God) every
one describes (differently) the Unseen Object of description.

. he philosopher gives art explanation of another (a particular)
kind; a scholastic theologian invalidates his statement;

And some one else jeers at both of them, white another z 9 z 5
hypocritically tires himscll to death (trying to prove that he
has real knowledge of God).

Each one (of them) gives these indications of the Way, in order
that it may be supposed that they belong to that Village-
Know the truth to be this, (that) all these (various persons)
are not in the right; nor (again) are this herd entirely astray,
Because nothing false is shown without the True: the fool
bought (desired) spurious coin in the hope of (its being) gold.

,j ►* re were ,no current (genuine) coin in the world, how
would it be possible to issue false coins?

Unless there be truth, how should there be falsehood? That s, js
ial$ehood receives brilliance (prestige and reputation) from


, They buy (desire) the wrong in hope of (its being) the right:
(it) poison go into a piece of sugar, then (and then only) thev
eat (poison), ' ' *

If there be no savoury 1 wheat, what shall he get who sells
barley, pretending that it is wheat?

Do not say, then, that all these utterances are false: the false
(pretenders) are a snare to the heart on the ground of (because
they give) hope of truth*.

Do not say, then, that all (this) is phantasy and error; without
truth phantasy exists not in the world.

Truth is tKe Night of Power (which is) hidden amidst the
(other) nights in order that the soul mav make trial of even-
night. ' J

Not all nights are (the Night of) Power, O youth, nor are all
nights void of that (Night),

Amongst the wearers of the dervish-cloak there is one (true)
dervish: make trial, and accept him that is true.

Where is the sagacious and discerning believer, that he may
distinguish effeminate wretches from men?

If there be no faulty things in the world, all fools would be
(shrewd) merchants.

Then it would be very- easy to know (the value of) goods: i940


* Literally, --pleasant 16 caste and tal."

/-#, they win the heart because it a hoped or believed that they are not
ftae, but true.


374 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

when there Is no defect, what (is the difference between) the
incompetent and the competent (appraiser)?

And if everything is faulty, knowledge is of no advantage:
since everything here is (common) wood, aloes-wood is not
(to be found).

He that says, "All are true*'—'tis folly (on his part); and he
that says, "All are false" — he is damned.

Those who trade with the prophets have gained (thereby);
those who trade with colour and scent (worldly vanities) are
blind and blue (miserable).

The snake (mar) appears in the eve as riches (mal): rub both
your eyes well I

s<wj Do not consider the happiness of this (worldly) traffic and
profit : consider the perdition of Pharaoh and Thamud,

On making trial qf everything, so that the good and evil
which are in it may be brought to view*

The sky, which is beautiful and glorious—God saith. Then
turn thy gate again (towards it).

As regards this roof of light, be not content with one look:
look (many) times, see, Are there any flaws?

Since He hath told you to look ofttimes at this goodly roof,
as a man seeking faults.

You may know, then, how much seeing and discerning the
dark earth needs, to gain approval.

igjo In order that we may strain the pure (folk) from the dregs,
how much tribulation must our minds endure!

The trials of winter and autumn, the heat of summer, sprinc
like the spirit (of life).

Winds and clouds and lightnings—(all these are to the end)
that (such) happenings may bring distinctions into view;

(1 o the end) that dust-coloured (dusky) earth may bring
forth all that it holds in its bosom, (whether) ruby or stone.

Whatsoever this dark earth has stolen from the Treasury of
God and the Sea of Bounty—

*9m Providence, the (Divine) governor, says, "Tell the truth 1
Declare what thou hast carried off, hair bv hair."

The thief, that is, the earth, says, "Nothing, nothing!" The
Governor (then) puts it to the torture.

Sometimes the Governor speaks to it with kindness (sweet)
as sugar; sometimes he hangs it up (in the air), and does his
worst 1 .

In order that, between force and favour, those concealed
things may be brought to sight through the fire of fear and
hope.


* Literally, "whatever is worst/*


THE TRUE BELIEVER *5 STRAY CAMEL 37 >

Spring is the kindness of the Almighty Governor, and
Autumn is God's intimidation and menace.

And Winter is the allegorical crucifixion, to the end that thou, 3960
O hidden thief, mays! be exposed.

Then (again) f he that wages the (spiritual) warfare has at one
time (joyous) expansion of heart, at another time (grievous)
oppression and pain and torment 1 .

Because this water and clay, which is (the stuff of) our bodies,
is the denier (enemy) and thief of the light of (our) souls.

The High God lays upon our body, O man of fortitude^* heat
and cold and grief and pain,

Fear and hunger and impairment of wealth and body — all for
the sake of the soul's coin being brought into sight (and use).

These threats and promises He hath sent forth on account of 356$
this good and evil which He hath mingled.

Inasmuch as truth and falsehood have been mingled*, and
the good and bad coin have been poured 4 into the travelling-
bag 6 ,

Therefore they need a picked touchstone, one that has under¬
gone (many) teats In (assaying) realities.

So that It may become a criterion for these impostures; so
that it may be a standard for these acts of providence.

Give him milk, O mother of Moses, and cast him into the
water; be not afraid of (putting him to) the trial.

Whoever drank that milk un the Day of Alast® distinguishes jg-rc
the milk (in this world) ? even as Moses (distinguished and knew
his mother's milk)*

If thou wishest fondly for thy child's discrimination (and
recognition), suckle (him) now, O mother of Moses,

That he may know the taste of his mother's milk, and that
his head may not sink to (desire and accept the milk of) a bad
nurse.

Explaining the moral of the story of the person seeking
(the lost) camel.

You have lost a camel, O trusty (friend), and every one is
giving you a clue to the camel.

You know not where the camel is, but you know that these
clues are wrong.

And he that has not lost a camel — lie (too) In contention 5973
seeks a camel, just like him who has (really) lost it,

1 Torment” is used to trandaEc qhiituh u RfuU) literally/"latent Spite and
rancour / (or “insJJlC^rirv and dissimulation ), which torment the heart .

" Literally, " ]Loft-man/ * 1 Literally, ,H they have mingled.

1 Literally, ,a [hey have poured.” - , , ....

1 tfuntmjdn* literally, 41 receptacle for things which are jealously guarded.

* The Primal Covenant in the stale of pre-existence.


I


3?6


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


Saying, "Yea; I too have lost a camel: I have brought a
reward for any one who may find It.”

(lie says thi>) that he may take a partner’s share with you in
the camel: he plays this trick because of coveting the camel.

If you say to any one," That clue was false,” he (the pretender),
m mutation of you, says the same.

He docs not know wrong clues from right, but your words
are a cue 1 to that imitator.

.f..o W hen they mention right and likely clues, then comes to vou
the certainty in which there is no doubt.

That (due) becomes balm 4 to your sick soul; it becomes
(brings) colour to your face and health and strength to vou.

tour eye becomes bright, your foot nimble ; your body
becomes (the vital) soul, and your (vital) soul (the rational)

Then you will say, "O trusted (friend), you have spoken the
truth. these clues are a clear deliverance (communication and
message).

.ITierein *M! e (manifest) signs, sure informations, (distinct)
ci-werices; this is a title-deed and an ordainment of salvation ”
J9 ' } ) Vh 5 n J ' e has Bran this clue, you will say, "Go before (me) !
It is time for (setting out on) the enterprise': be thou the leader!

I will follow thee, O truth-teller: thou hast got scent of mv
camel: show (me) where (it is).”

(But) to that person who is not the owner of a camel, and
sake - 1 - 3 ^ enga S cd ) in this quest of the camel for contention’s

His certainty is not increased by this right clue, save through
reflexion from the true eamd-seeker.

From his (the latter’s) earnestness and ardour he (the Imi¬
tator) gets a scent (inkling) that these wild outcries of his are
not (mere) bubble.

flS *\ He (the imitator) had no just claim to this camel, but he too
has lost a camel ; yes, (he has).

Desire tor another’s camel has become a veil to him, (so that)
be has forgotten what he (himself) has lost.

Wherever he(the owner) runs, this one (the imitator) runs:
trom cupidity, he becomes a partner in the owner’s pain,

f , l k he V har sets ou , t (*? journey) with a truthful man, his
falsehood turns to truth of a sudden.

, . dtsert whither that camel had hastened, the other one
(the imitator) also found his own camel.

*5195 As soon as he saw it, he remembered his own, and ceased to
the camels of friend and kinsman*

That imitator became a true searcher when he saw his camel
browsing there.

1 Liu-rally. '‘staff." * Literally, " remedy.” * Literally, “ running.*’


THE TRUE BELIEVER’S STRAY CAMEL 377

(Only) at that moment did he become a seeker of the camel :
he was never (truly) seeking it till he saw it in the desert.

After that, he began to go alone: lie opened hia eyes (and
went) towards his own camel*

The sincere one said, “You have left me, (although) till now
you were paying regard to me."

He replied, “ Hitherto I have been an idle scoffer and, from
cupidity, have been (engaged) in flattering (thee);

(But) now, when corporeally 1 have become parted from thee
in the search, I have become sympathetic with thee (in spirit).

I was stealing the earners description from thee; (but when)
my spirit saw its own camel, it had its eye filled (with seeing).

Till I found it, I was not seeking it; now the copper is over¬
come, the gold overpowers it +

My evil deeds have become pious acts entirely—thanks (to
God) ! Jest is vanished and earnest is realised—thanks (to God)!

Since my evil deeds have become the means of (my) attaining
unto God, do not, then, throw r any blame on my evil deeds.

Thee thy sincerity had made a seeker; for me, toil and search
opened (the way to) a sincere feeling*

Thy sincerity led thee to seek; my seeking led me to a feeling
of sincerity,

I was sowing the seed of fortune in the earth* (though) I
fancied it was labour without wages and hire.

Tvvas not labour without hire; "twas an excellent earning:
(for) every grain that I sowed, a hundred grew.

The thief went underhand (by stealth) to a certain house: joio
when he entered, he saw that it was his own house/ 1

Be hot* O cold one, that heat may come: put up with rough¬
ness, that ease may come.

That (subject of my discourse) is not two camels; it is a
single camel* Verbal expression is confined* the meaning (to
be expressed) is verv full.

The expression always fails to reach the meaning; hence the
Prophet said, 11 (Whoso knows God)* his tongue falters/*

Speech is (like) an astrolabe in (its) reckoning: how* much
does it know of the sky and the sun?—

Especially, of that Sky whereof this heaven is (no more than) loa *
a blade of straw ; (that Sky) of whose Sun the (terrestrial) sun is
(but) a mote?

Showing that there is in every soul the mischief 0/ the
Mosque of Opposition.

When it appeared that that was not a mosque, (but) was a
house of intrigue and a trap laid by the Jew's,

The Prophet then gave the command (and said), “ Rase it and
make it a dumping-place for rubbish and ashes/ 1


378 MATHNAWf. BOOK II

The founder of thfe Mosque was false, like the Mosque
(itself): "tis not munificence if you sprinkle grain upon a snare.

The meat that catches the fish on the hook—such a morsel is
neither bounty nor generosity.

The Mosque of the people of Quba, which was inanimate—
he (the Prophet) did not admit to (equality with) it that which
was not its equal.

(Even) in the case of lifeless things such a wrong did not
come to pass: the lord of justice (Mohammed) set (ire to that
unequal (and incongruous Mosque).

Therefore (a fortiori) in the case of the (human) essences,
which are the foundation of all fundamentals, know that there
(too) there are differences and divisions.

Neither is his (one man's) life like his (another man's) life,
nor is his death like his death.

Never deem his (this one’s) grave like his (that one’s) grave.
How indeed shall I describe the difference (between diem) in
that (other) world?

30IS Put thy work to the touchstone, O man of work, lest thou
build the Mosque of the Opposers,

Oft hast thou mocked at those Mosque-makers; (but) when
thou considerest (carefully), thou thyself hast been one of them.

Story of the Indian who quarrelled with his friend over a certain

action and teas not aware that he too was afflicted with (suStv

of) it, M KS 7

Four Indians went into a mosque: they bowed their heads
and prostrated themselves for worship’s sake.

Each one performed the takbir (following) upon a idyyat t and
began to pray with Lowliness and contrition.

(When) the muezzin came, from one of them fell a remark 1 —
“O muezzin, have you given the call to prayers? Is it time?"

30jo The second Indian said on the spur of the moment 4 , " Hev,

you have spoken, and (so) your prayer is null."

The third one said to the second^ “O uncle, why do you rail
at him? Tell yourself (how to behave).”

Said the fourth, "Praise be to God that I have not fallen into
the pit (of error), like those three persons.”

Hence the prayers of all the four were marred; and the fault*
finders went astray more (than he who made the original
mistake).

Oh, happy the soul that saw its own fault, and if any one
told (found) a fault, wished eagerly (to take) that (fault) upon
itself i—

1 Literally, ,l an utterance eu&ed."

J Liiem]Ey, "from the need (*hich he felt of expradog hit feeling}."


THE FOUR INDIANS


379


Because half of him (every' man) has always belonged to the 303s
realm of faults 1 , and the other half of him to the realm of the
Unseen.

Since you have ten sores on your head, you must apply the
plaster to yourself.

Finding fault with the sore {in yourself) is the (right) remedy
for him (who is at fault); when he has become broken (contrite),
it is (then) the (proper) occasion for (obeying the Prophets
injunction), "Have pity.”

{Even} if you have not the same fault, be not secure; maybe,
that fault will afterwards become notorious in you.

You have not heard from God (the comforting words) Da
not fear : why, then, have vou deemed yourself secure and happy,

For years Iblis lived in good renown; (afterwards) he was
disgraced: mark what is (the meaning of) his name.

His eminence was famed throughout the (celestial) world;
(then) his fame turned to infamy* — oh, alas for him!

Do not seek fame till you are secure: wash your face of fear,
then show your face.

Until your (own) beard grows, my good man, do not jeer at
another whose chin is smooth. . , , ,

Consider this, that his (Satan’s) soul was tried (by the wrath
of God), so that he is fallen in (sunk in perdition); and (in his

fall) he became a warning to you.

You did not fall, so that you should be a warning to him. He 30 + s
drank the poison: eat you fils sugar!

How the Ghuzz set about killing one man in order that
another might be terrorised.

Those blood-shedding (murderous) Ghuzz Turcomans came,
and entered a village (on a raid) for plunder.

They found two of the notables of that village, and made
(ready in) haste to put one (of the two) to death.

They tied his hands in order to sacrifice (kill) him. He said,

“O princes and high pillars (of the empire),

For what reason arc ye seeking to slay met U herefore, pray,

are ye thirsting after my blood r

What is the wisdom, what is the object, in killing me, when 1030

I am so poor and bare-bodied ? ’ . . .

He (one of the Ghuzz) replied, “To strike awe into this
friend of vours,so that he may be afraid and produce (his) gold.

He (the man) said, “Why, he is poorer than I. He has
done it (made himself out to be poor) on purpose, replied the
other; "he has gold.”

1 j> r the world of evil.

■ Litrnik, "was revmcd. "


3*0 MATHNAWl, BOOK fl

He (the man) said, 11 Since it is (a matter of) opinion, we
are both the same: we are (equal]v) exposed to 1 (mere) proba¬
bility and doubt.

Ivill him first, O princes, in order that I may be afraid and
point out the wav to the gold.”

j°Ji bee, then, the lovingkindnesses of God, in that we have come
(into the world) in the latter days, at the very end.

The last epoch is in front of the (other) epochs; in the Tradi¬
tions of the Prophet is (the saving)—” (We are) the last fin
time), the foremast (in excellence)/'

In order that the destruction of die people of Noah and the
people of Hud might display to our souls the proclaimed of
(Divine) Mercy (who calls us to repentance).

He (God) slew them, that we might fear Him; and if indeed
He had done contrariwise, alas for thee!


Explaining the state of those tcho are self-conceited and unthankful

far the blessing of the existence of the prophets and saints—beace

be unto thetn! r

Whosoever of them (the proclaimed of Divine Mercy) has
spoken of fault and sin, and of a heart like stone, and of a black
soul;

3<*o And of holding light His commands, and of being free from
care for His To-morrow*; ■ b

And of being, like women, enslaved to the fleshly soul by
passion and by love of this vile world;

And of fleeing from the pungent sayings of sincere coun-
seilors, and of shrinking from the countenance of the righteous:

(And of) estrangement from the spirit and spiritual folk, (and
of) fraud and iox-like behaviour towards the {spiritual) kings;

(And of) thinking the fully satisfied (saints) to be (greedy)
&ecret ^ re g^rding thetn with enmity (arising)

3065 u ^ (such a saintly man as has been described) accept any¬
thing, you say he is □ beggar; and if not, you sav it is (from)
hypocrisy and deceit and gude. v

If he mix (in society), you say he is covetous; and if not, vou
say he is excessively given to pride;

Or you hypocritically excuse yourself, saying, "I am held
children'' W " 3t ^ ave to ^°) * n maintaining my wife and

Neither have I leisure to scratch my head, nor have I leisure
to cultivate rebgion,

l Literally, "in (he position of.”

1 /.*, the prophet .

1 The Day of J udgeiTYgn E,


THE SCORNERS OF HOLY MEN 381

O so-and-so, remember me in thy benedictions 1 , that in the
end I may become one of the saints.' 1

These words he docs not even speak from (true) passion and 3070
ardour; f’dft as though) a drowsy man muttered some idle talk
and went to sleep again .

(He says), **I cannot help feeding my family : I strain every
nerve to cam- a lawful livelihood.”

How lawful* O thou that hast become one of the lost? I
deem nothing lawful but (to shed) thy blood.

He can do without God, but not without food; he can do
without the Religion, but not without the idols.

G thou that canst not refrain thy self from this vile world,
how T canst thou refrain thyself from Him who spread the earth
as a carpetP

O thou that canst not refrain thyself from delight and luxury', 3«?5
how canst thou refrain thyself from the Bountiful God?

O thou that canst not refrain thyself from aught pure or foul,
how canst thou refrain thyself from Him who created this?

Where is (one like) the Friend (of God)** who came forth
from the cave (of idolatry), and said, “ This is my Lord (as ye
assert). Take heed! Where is the Maker (of all)? 1 —

(One who shall say )* 11 1 will not look at the two worlds until
I see to w r hom these two assembly-places (really) belong.

If 1 eat bread without the view of God's attributes, it will
stick in my throat.”

How should a morsel digest without the sight of Him, without s&to
the view of His roses and rose-garden?

Save in hope of God, who but an ox or ass would for one
moment drink from this pond?

(Who but) he that was tike the cattle , rsay t more lost ? — though
(indeed) that stinkard h full of cunning.

His cunning went headlong (to ruin)* and he went headlong:
he passed a little while, and his day set.

His brain became dull* his mind doting; hia life is gone—and
like (the letter) atij he hath nothing.

S As for) his saying* M I am thinking about it”—that too is joSj
y (part) of the deceit of the fleshly soul;

And (as for) his saying, “He (God) is forgiving and merciful”
—that is naught but a trick of the villainous flesh.

O thou that art dead with anxiety because thy hands are empty
of bread, what is this fear, since He is forgiving and merciful?

1 Lifmlty, - will-power."

1 Literally, K < from the roots of my leeih l earn-”

1 Literally, Extettmt are They that made (it) smooth f ri [Qur'dh.

1-1,48),

1 Abraham.


3$2


MATHNAWl, BOOK II


Hoto an old man comblained of kis ailments to a doctor, and
how the doctor answered him *


1 1 am in torment because of mv


An old man said to a doctor * 1
brain,”

The doctor replied, “That weakness of brain is from age.”
Said the old man, “There are spots of darkness on mv eyes ”
W . Il 1S age. O ancient Shaykhsaid the doctor, Awful
pain comes in mv back,” said he,

'*** is fr ° m age. p emaciated Shaykh” said the doctor,
whatever I eat,” said he, “is not digested.”

Thedwtor replied, “Weakness of stomach also is (the result)
° ,®f?‘ ,, l ♦*.'* ^\^ e . n 1 breathe, respiration is hard for me,”

he said, s ’it is asthma 1 ; when old age arrives, two
hundred diseases come on."

“O fool,” he exclaimed, “you have stuck at this 2 ; this is all
that you have learned of medicine.

3*)! o crack-brained man, your intellect has not given you this
knowledge, that God hath appointed a remedy for every pain.

,, )/ )U - stu P id ass * from poorness of ability- have remained
(taUcn) on the ground for want of a sufficient foothold.”

Then the doctor said to him, “O sexagenarian, this anger
and this choler are also from old age.

Since all the functions and parts (of your body) are atrophied
your self-control and patience have become weak.”

He (an old man) cannot endure two words, he cries out
thereat; he cannot retain one draught, he vomits (it) —
jioc Except, to he sure, the Ancient (Pir) that is drunken with
God, and m whose inward heing there is “a goodly life 3 .”

Outwardly he is old, but within he is young* What thing,
verily, is he.' He i$ the saint and the prophet.

If they are not manifest to the good and the evil (alike), what
is this envy which the worthier bear against them?

■ ^ not know them with certain knowledge, what

is this hatred and hatching of plots and enmity?

And (agaxn) T if they know of the Resurrection and rising from
s\\ 1<>W s ^ ou ^ th^y d.ash themselves against a sharp

( He (the prophet or saint) smiles upon you, (but) do not deem

such (as lie appears); in his inward consciousness
arc hidden a hundred Resurrection^

Hell and Paradise are entirely parts of him: he is bevond anv
thought that you may conceive (of him).

1 Literally, SH ittfppaj?e of breath ,/ 1

' ' ,y ° U ^ T tdkft on thu (DtiDipot)/ or “you hare

«“*«) *n tbu (single poini). ,+ J

Cf- Qur £n h 3CVI, go.


THE OLD MAN AND THE DOCTOR 383

AH that you may think of is liable to pass away; he that comes
not into thought is Goth

Wherefore (then do they behave with) presumption at the
door of this house, if they know' who is within the house?

Fools venerate the mosque and endeavour to destroy them
that have the heart (in which God dwells).

That (mosque) i$ phenomenal, this (heart) is real, O asses! The u 10
(true) mosque is naught but the hearts of the (spiritual) captains.

The mosque that is the inward (consciousness) of the saints is
the place of worship for all: God is there.

Until the heart of the man of God was grieved,, never did
God put any generation to shame.

They were going to make war on the prophets: they saw the
body (of the prophet) 1 they supposed he was a man.

In thee are the moral natures of those peoples of yore: haw
art not thou afraid lest thou be the same (as they)? 1

Forasmuch as all those marks are in thee, and thou art (one) 3115
of them, how wilt thou be saved?


The story of Juki and the child who cried lamentably beside
his father r s bier,

A child was crying bitterly and beating hte head beside his
father^ coffin,

Savingj 11 Why, father, where are they taking you to press
you tight under some earth?

They are taking you to a narrow and noisome house: there is
no carpet in it* nor any mat;

No lamp at night and no bread by day; neither smell nor
sign of food is there.

No door in good repair, no way to the roof; not one neighbour itso
to be (your) refuge.

Your body, which was a place for the people's kisses — how
should it go into a blind and murky house?—

A pitiless house and narrow room, where neither (your) face
w ill be lasting nor (your) colour/ 1

In this manner was he enumerating the qualities of the house,
whilst he wrung tears of blood from his two eyes.

JiLiJil said to his father, "O worthy (sir), by God they are
taking this (corpse) to our house."

The father said to Juhi, “Don't be a fool I” “Q papa," said 1125
he, “hear the marks (of identity).

These marks which he mentioned one by one—our house
has them (all), without uncertainty or doubt.

(It has) neither mat nor lamp nor food; neither its door is in
good repair, nor its court nor its roof. 11

1 lx. " l«t the same fan: befflU thee / 1


3H


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


3 U 3


In this wise the disobedient have a hundred marks upon
themselves, but how should they see them?

The house, namely, the heart that remains unliehted by the

beams of the sun of (Divine) Maiestv,

3,30 . ¥. nar T. mv ahti a® ‘lie souls of Jews, (being) destitute of
(spiritual) savour of the loving King.

Neither has the radiance of the Sun shone into that heart
nor is there (in it any) spaciousness 1 or opening of the door.

1 he tomb is better tor thee than a heart like this. Come now,
arise from the tomb which is thy heart!

Thou art living and born of the living. O gav and winsome
One, art not thou choked by this narrow tomb ?

Thou art the Joseph of the time and the sun of heaven; arise
irom this pit and prison T and show thy face!

Ihy Jonah has been cooked 4 in the fish’s belly: for his
deliverance there is no means but 3 glorification of Cod.

If he had not glorified (God), the fish’s belly would have
been lus gaol and prison until they shall be raised (from the dead),
JJjT glorification he escaped from the body of the fish.
" {? Ponficaban? The sign (and token) of the Day ofAhst*.

. /L thou , ““J forgotten that glorification (rendered to God)

° f (m " red hy) ,hJ

<Kat S^ 'toFilh.”" G ° d “ “ f G ° d: '" hosxnr “> ““

, * a sca - anJ,the body a fish, and the spirit is the

Jonah debarred from the light of the dawn 5 . ^

It ii be a gbnfkr (of God), it is delivered from the fish ;
Otherwise, it becomes digested therein and vanishes,

I he spiritual Fishes abound in this sea (the world), (but)
thou seest them not (though) they are flying around thee.

1 F ££,r"* a “ ,hW: “ pen Mn ' +■ ,h “ *-

4 *•-

u practise patience is the soul of thy glorifications: have
patience, for that is the true glorification.

h a vA& fiCat, ° n , hath ® UCh u a < hi S h > degree ( as patience hath);
have patience: patience is the key to relief (from pain).

** <«*■«> P^adis/on the other
side^ with every fair (boy) tliere is an ugly pedagogue.

to ong as jou flee from the pedagogue, there is no meeting

1 "openness of space.”

* f >. “* d as » im d“l*d Cf. v, 3141.

* R^ y ' J ™ ^ 37S "** 6 -

ThiE occurs agtin m Boot JJI.

throwing Ihcmwhc? upon / 1 ** blinking lhems^J


3 M 0


COntMCi WltH, h


into


AND THE CHILD jg-

,here ! * ” ° f ,i «

\\ hat should you know of the (sweet) savour of patience
that ^^CU^f^ , * daa! ' 1 ° f Pa "' n “ fm *• «f

4g£^*sz^IZdr t m th ' e,o °' *-

pCn ” : W$ *"**

1 hough he rise to the sky, be not afraid of him, for (it is

fiSAS*""* (dC8redalio ") hc »- ™ j “<i (“-i

albei ' ha rinss ,ht bdl

What is there to fear from the flags of beggars?— for those
flags are (but) a means for (getting) a mouthful of bread.

Timet puer quidam hominem corpukntum, “ Ne timueris■”
mqmty “O puer; ego mm vir non sum**

JuvenU robuscus puerum dcprehendit solum. Palluit timore ji*
puer ne forte homo impetum faecret.

T uit ’ " 7 tu enim super me eris.

, *? msi terrib . l ia (^specm) sum, sdto me tmpotentem esse
me sicut camelum couscende, propelle.”

(With) the appearance of men and the reality like this—
Adam without, the accursed Devil within—

Hrr? m y ° U ^ *£♦ J ig k S th f P®°Pk of you resemble the
drum against which a branch was beaten bv the wind.

swwt" hisp " y ,h ' 5ak ' of * '»« * »■“

(But) when he found no (real) fatness in the drum, he said,

A hog is better than this empty bag.”

Foxes are afraid of the noise of the drum; (but) the wise man
beats it ever so mueh t saying, **Speak not! w

■ The story of an archer and his fear of a horseman who was
riding in a forest.

horeemai*, armed and very terrible (in appearance), was
ndmg m the forest on a high-bred horse.

An expert archer espied him, and then from fear of him drew
his bow.

To shoot an arrow. The horseman shouted to him, “1 am ii*s
a weakling, though my body is big.

Take heed! Take heed! Do not regard my bigness, for in
the hour of battle I am less than an old woman/’

1 Literally, '*gnvc to the wind."


386 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

"Pass on,” said he; “thou hast spoken well, else by reason
of my fear 1 should have shot a barb at thee/*

Many arc they whom implements of war have slain, (since they
held) such a sword in their hands, without the manhood (to
use it).

If you don the armour of Rustams, your soul goes (your life
is lost) when you are not the man for it 1 .

3i?o Make your soul a shield and drop the sword 4 ,0 son: whoever
is headless (selfless) saves his head from this King.

Those weapons of yours are your (selfish) contriving and
plotting; they have sprung from you and at the same time have
wounded your sou).

Since you have gained nothing by these contriving^, abandon
contrivance, that happy fortunes may meet (you).

Since you have nut for one moment enjoyed (any) fruit from
the arts (of die schools), bid farewell to the arts, and Seek always
the Lord of bounties.

Since these sciences bring you no blessing, make yourself a
dunce and leave ill-luck behind.

3175 Like the angels, say, “ We have no knowledge t O God , except
tchat Thou hast taught us 3 "

Story of the desert Arab and his putting sand in the sack
and the philosopher’s rebuking him,

A certain Arab of the desert loaded a camel with two big
sacks—(there was) one full of grain.

He was seated on the top of both sacks. A glib philosopher 1
questioned him.

He asked him about his native land and led him to talk and
said many fine things 4 in the course of (his) enquiry.

Afterwards he said to him, “ What are those two sacks filled
with? Tell (me) the truth of the matter/’

31S0 He replied, In one sack I have wheat; in the other is some
sand —not food for men.”

“Why,” he asked, “did you load this sand?” “In order that
the other sack might not remain alone,” he replied.

“For wisdom’s sake,” said he, “pour half the wheat of that
pannier into the other.

So that the sacks may be lightened, and the camel too.” He
(die Arab) cried, “Bravo! O clever and noble sage!

Such subtle thought and excellent judgement! And you so
naked, (journeying) on foot and in fatigue! ”

1 1^. n JiOt ublc to defend yourself with if. tp
1 L*. " bear what God 5 aid* and do noi resist/"

1 Qur'in, u T jo, ulightly Jihered*

I “ a [in ^ of discourse/’

* Literally, " bored many pearls.”


THE BEDOUIN AND THE PHILOSOPHER 387

The good man took pity on the philosopher and resolved to tiSj
mount him on the camel.

He said to him again, “O fair-spoken sage, explain a little
about your own circumstances as well.

(With) such intelligence and talent as you have, are vou a
vizier ora king? Tell the truth.” '

He answered, “ 1 am not (either of) these two: I am of the
common folk, Look at my appearance and dress.”

.< T *l e ^ed, “ How many camels have vou? How many oxen? ”

I have neither these nor those,” he replied: "do not die at
me 1 . r B


He said, “At any rate, what goods have you in your shop? ” 3190
He answered, “Where have I a shop, and where a dwelling-
place?" 6

Then, said he, I will ask about money. How much
money (have you)?—for you are a solitary wanderer and one
.whose counsel is prized.

W ith you is the elixir which changes the copper of the world
(into) gold: your understanding and knowledge are inlaid with


“By God,” he replied, “O chief of the Arabs, in my whole
property there is not the means of (buying) food for the night*

1 run about with bare feet and naked body. If any one will
give me a loaf of bread—thither I go.

From this wisdom and learning and excellence (of mind) I m5
have got nothing but phantasy and headache/*

I ben the Arab said to him, “Begone far from my side, so
that your ilHuck may not ram upon me.

Fake tar away from me that unlucky wisdom of yours: your
speech is unlucky for (all) the people of the time*

Either go you in that directionand I will run in this direction;
or if your way be forwards* I will go back.

One sack of wheat and the other of sand is better for me than
these vain contrivings*

My foolishness is a very blessed foolishness, for my heart is
well-furnished (with spiritual graces) and my soul is devout/'

If thou desire that misery should vanish (from thee)„ endea¬
vour that wisdom may vanish from thee—

The wisdom which is bom of (human) nature and phantasy h
the wisdom which lacks the overflowing grace of the Light of
the Glorious (God).

I he wisdom of this world brings increase of supposition and
doubt; the wisdom of the Religion soars above the sky.

The ingenious rascals of (this) latter time have aggrandised
themselves over the ancients;


1 /je, 11 do not worry me with your qutaEioiu,”

1 Literally, have pearls, layer on layer/' "ore very precious. 11


1


25-1


3^8 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

j*oj The (apt) learners of cunning have burnt (consumed) their
hearts (in study) and have learned feints and tricks;

I hey have thrown to the winds patience and altruism and
self-sacrifice and gencrosity—(qualities) which are the elixir of
(spiritual) profit.

The (right) thought is that which opens a way: the (right)
way is that on which a (spiritual) king advances.

The (true) king is he that is king in himself, and is not made
king bv treasuries and armies;

So that his kingship remains unto everlasting, like the glory
of the empire of the Mohammedan Religion.


The miracles of Ibrahim son of Adhatn-—may God sanctify
his holy spirit! — on the sea-shore.


3110 Thus, it is related of Ibrahim son of Adham that after a
journey he sat down (to rest) by the edge of the sea.

(\\ hilst) he was stitching his Sufi mantle, an Amir, walking '
on the shore, suddenly came to that spot.

That Amir had been one of the Shaykh’s servants; he
recognized the Shaykh and at once bowed low.

He was astounded at the Shaykh and at his dervish garb—
(for) his nature and outward guise had become transformed—
(Marvelling) that he gave up such a grand kingdom, and chose
that very pettifogging (spiritual) poverty' 1 ;
iJtij (And why) he lets the sovereignty of the Seven Climes be
lost (by him), and plies the needle on his dervish-cloak, like a
beggar.

The Shaykh became aware of his thought: a Shaykh is as the
lion, and (people’s) hearts are his jungle

He is entering, like hope and fear, into (their) hearts: not hid
from him are the secrets of the world.

Keep watch oyer your hearts, O fruitless ones, in the presence
of the majesty of the men of heart (saints).

Before the men of body (worldlings), respect is (shown)
outwardly, for God is veiling the occult from them.
l men of heart (saints), respect is (shown) inwardly,

because their hearts have insight into the secret thoughts.

Thou art contrariwise: for the sake of (worldly) position thou
comest with reverence before them that are blind (to spiritual
things), and sit test in the vestibule;

(But) before the seers thou behavest disrespectfully: hence
thou hast become fuel for the fire of lust.


‘ I think best taken W a compound adjective. The alter¬

native rendering would be; (spiritual) poverty—« very subtle (slender and


UnsubslaiituJ) sflsisr,™


l n any om thert is an an [idicsis between and


IBRAh(M SON OF ADHAM 389

Since thou hast not (spiritual) perception and the light of
(Divine) guidance, continue to polish (cleanse and brighten)
thy face for the sake of the blind i

Before the seers, daub thy face with dirt! Act haughtily (to¬
wards them) notwithstanding such a stinking state (as thou art in)!

The Shaykh quickly threw his needle into the sea, and with mi
a loud voice called for the needle.

Myriads of Divine fishes—in the lips of each fish a needle of
gold—

Lifted their heads from God’s sea, saying, "Take, O Shaykh,
God's needles.”

He turned his face towards him (the Amir) and said to him,

" O Amir, is the kingdom of the heart (spirit) better, or such
a despicable kingdom (as I once possessed)? ”

This (roiracte) is the outward sign, this is nothing: wait til!
you enter the inward (shrine and) see (what is there)!

From the garden they bring to town (only) a branch: how nj*
should they carry- thither the (whole) garden and orchard:—

Especially, a Garden whereof this heaven is (but) otic leaf;
nay, that is the kernel, and this other (world) is as the husk.

(If) you are not stepping on (briskly) towards that Garden,
seek more scent, and get rid of (your) rheum.

In order that that scent may draw vour soul (thither); in order
that that scent may become the light of your eyes.

For the scent’s sake Joseph, son of Jacob the prophet, said:
“Cast [my shirt) upon my father's face.”

For this scent's sake Ahmad (Mohammed) constantly said in ujs
( his) exhortations: "In the ritual prayer is the delight* of mine
eye.”

The five (spiritual) senses are linked with one another,
because all these five have grow n from one root.

The strength of one becomes the strength of the rest: each
one becomes a cup-bearer to the rest.

Seeing with the eye increases speech; speech increases pene¬
tration in the eye.

Penetration (of sight) becomes the (means of) awakening
(stimulating) every sense, (so that) perception (of the spiritual)
becomes familiar to (all) the senses.

The beginning of the gnostic’s illumination by the Light
which sees the invisible world ,

When one sense in (the course of its) progress has loosed (its) -, Jto
bonds, all the rest of the senses become changed.

When one sense has perceived things that "are not objects of
sense-perception, that which is of the invisible w'orld becomes
apparent to all the senses.


39 ° MATHNAWf, BOOK IJ

When one sheep of the flock has jumped over a stream, then
they all jump across on each other's heels.

Drive the sheep, thy senses, to pasture: let them browse on
(the pasture indicated in the text )-—He who hath brought forth
the herbage.

That there they- may browse on hyacinth and wild-rose; that
they may make their way to the* verdant meadows of the
Realities;

s**s (That) every sense of thine may become an apostle to the
senses (of others), and lead all senses into that Paradise;

(And then those) senses wilt tell their secret to thy senses,
without tongue and without (conveying either) the proper or
the metaphorical meaning;

For this proper meaning admits of (different) interpretations,
and this guess-work is the source of (vain) imaginings;

(But in the case of) that truth which is immediate and intui¬
tive, there is no room for any interpretation.

When (all) senses have become subject to thy sense, the
heavenly spheres cannot avoid (obedience to) thee.

3 *J° When a dispute takes place as to the ownership of the husk,
the husk belongs to him who possesses the kernel.

"When there happens to be a quarrel about a load of straw,
observe who is the owner of the grain.

The heavenly sphere, then, is the husk, and the light of the
spirit is the kernel. This (sky) is visible, that (spirit) is concealed;
(but) do not stumble on this account.

The body is manifest, the (vital) spirit is concealed; the body
is as the sleeve, the spirit as the hand.

Again, the intellect is more concealed than the (vital) spirit:
(your mental) perception makes its wav to (apprehends) the
(vital) spirit sooner (than it apprehends the intellect).

jjris (If) you see a movement, you know that he (who moves) is
alive; (but) this you do not know, that he is full of intellect,

Until regulated movements appear, and he by means of
knowledge turns the motion of copper into gold.

From manual actions being conformable (to reason) you
mav perceive that there is intellect (behind them).

The spirit (that partakes) of Divine inspiration is more con-
cealed than the intellect, because it is (of) the Unseen: it belongs
to that side.

The intellect of Ahmad (Mohammed) was not hidden from
any one; (but) his spirit of (prophetic) inspiration was not
apprehended by every soul.

3260 The spirit of pro*phecy also has actions conformable (to
reason), (but) the intellect docs not apprehend (them), for that
(spirit) is exalted (above intellectual apprehension).

Sometimes he (the man of intellect) regards (the actions of


MYSTICAL ILLUMINATION


391


one endowed with the spirit) as madness, sometimes he h be¬
wildered, since it (all) depends on bis becoming that (other one) 1 ;

As (for example) the intellect of Moses was troubled by
seeing the reasonable actions of Khadir.

His actions seemed unreasonable to Moses, since he (Moses)
had not his (Khadtr's) state (of Divine inspiration).

Inasmuch as the intellect of Moses becomes tied up (per¬
plexed and helpless) in (the matter of) the mysterious (inspira¬
tion), who (what) is the intellect of a (mere) mouse, O excellent
(reader)?

Conventional knowledge is (only) for sale (self-advertise- 32*3
merit): when it finds a purchaser, it glows with delight.

The purchaser of real knowledge 2 is God: its market is
always splendid.

He (the owner of real knowledge) ha$ closed his lips (and is)
enraptured in (hi&) trading: the purchasers arc without end*
for God hath purchased.

The angels purchase Ad am "a 3 teaching; the devils and Jinn
are not privileged to receive it,

Adam, inform them of the Names, give (them) teaching,
explain the mysteries of God, hair by hair.

Such a person as is short-sighted, plunged in variability and 3*7®
without steadfastness,

1 called a +s mouse/' because his place is in the earth (of the
body): earth is the place of living for the mouse.

He knows (many) ways, but (only) underground: he has
pierced the earth in every direction*

The mouse-soul is naught but a nibbler: to the mouse is
given 3 mind proportionate to its need.

Because ’without need the Almighty God does not give any¬
thing to any one.

If the earth had nor been needed by the (inhabitants of the) **75
world, the Lord of all beings would not have created any (earth);

And if this quaking earth had not needed mountains, He
would not have created them sublime (as they' arc);

And if there had not been need of the heavenly spheres also p
He would not have created from non-existence the Seven Skies.

The sun and moon and these stars—how did they come plain
into view except through need ?

Need s then, is the nooac for (all) things that exist: Man has
instruments in proportion to his need.

Therefore quickly augment thy need, G needy one, in order &so
that the Sea of Bounty may surge up in lovingkmdness.


1 /,* P the intellectual man cun never understand the spiritual man until
he himself becomes spiritualised . _ . . . „

3 Literal*v. l the knowledge that u verified (by m^UOal CKpenenoe),

1 “Adam" in thb and the fallowing vme h the saint* regarded AS the
perfect type of humpnity.


39*


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


1 hcse beggars (are) on the (public) road, and every sufferer
(among them) is displaying his need to the people—

Blindness and palsy and sickness and pain—that men's pitv
may be aroused by this need.

Does he (any one) ever say, "Give bread, O people, for I
have riches and granaries and trays (of viands)?"

God has not put eyes in the mole, because it does not need
eyes for (getting) food,

jsSj It is able to live without eyes and sight! in the dank earth it
is independent of eyes*

It never comes out from the earth but for theft, to the end
that the Creator may purge it of that thievishness.

After that (purification), it will get wings and become a bird,
flying (aloft) and glorifying the"Creator.

Every moment, in the rose-garden of thanksgiving to
God. it will produce a hundred (sweet) notes, like the
nightingale,

“O Thou that deliverest me from evil qualities I O
Thou that makest a hell Paradise t 4

aw Thou puttest light in a piece of fat; Thou, O Self-sufficing
Une f givest (the sense of) hearing to a bone.”

thos< ; concepts (e,g. sight and hearing)
with the body? What connexion has the apprehension of things
with (their) names? m

. P? word is like the nest, and the meaning is the bird; the
ody .is the river-bed, and the spirit is the rolling water

It !$ moving, and you say it is standing: it is running, and V ou
say it is keeping still. ° 1

If you see not the movement of the water through the clods
of earth—(yet it is moving); what are the sticks and straws (ever
appearing) anew on it?

3*« Your sticks and straws are the forms (ideas) of thought:
(these) virgin forms are ahvavs coming on anew
. Th f SUr L face °f water of the stream of thought, as it roils,
tm^Eht? StIC ^ LS sbaiws, (some) pleasing and (some)

The husks on die surface of this rolling water have sped along
from the fruits of the Invisible Garden. S

Seek the kernels of the husks (not on the water, but) in the
Garden because the water comes from the Garden into the
nver-b©d*

If you see not the flow of the Water of Life, look at this move-
nient of weeds m the stream,

J3M , y:\ en th * water begins to pass by in fuller volume, the husks,
(which are) the ideas, pass along it more quickly.

" hen this stream has become extremely rapid in its flow, no
care Ungers to the minds of the gnostics


MYSTICAL ILLUMINATION 393

Since it is (then) exceedingly full and swift, on that account
there is no room in it for anything but the water,

lions a stranger reviled the Shaykh and kata the Shaykh's
disciple answered him ,

A certain man brought charges against a Shavkh, saving,
“He is wicked and not on the path of righteousness;

He is a wine-drinker and a hypocrite and a scoundrel: how
should he be one to succour Ins disciples?**

One (of the disciples) said to him, ** Observe respect ; ’us no
light matter to think so ill of the great*

Far is it from him and far from those (saintly) qualities of his
that hi$ dear (spirit) should be darkened by a flood (of sin).

Do not put such slander on the people of God! This is (mere)
fancy on your part. Turn over (a new) leaf.

This (which you say) is not (true); and (even) if it should be*

Q land-fowl, w hat harm (comes) to the Red Sea from a carcase?

He (the Shaykh) is not less than the (statutory) two jugfuls
or the small tank, so that a single drop (of impurity) should be
able to disqualify him (for religious purposes)*

The fire is no damage to Abraham p (but) let any one who is a jji*
Nimrod beware of hi

The fleshly soul is Nimrod, and the intellect and spirit are
the Friend of God (Abraham): the spirit is concerned with
reality itself and the fleshly soul with the proofs.

These indications of the way are for the traveller who at
every moment becomes lost in the desert.

For them that have attained (to union with God) there is
nothing (necessary ) except the eye (of the spirit) and the lamp
(of intuitive faith): they have no concern with indications (to
guide them) or with a road (to travel by).

If the man that is united (with God) has mentioned some
indication* he has mentioned (it) in order that the dialecticians
may understand (his meaning).

For a new-born child the father makes babbling sounds, ,ji$
though his intellect may make a survey of the (whole) w orld.

The dignity of the master's learning is not diminished if he
say that (the letter) alifhas nothing (has no diacritical mark).

For the sake of teaching that tongue-tied (child), one must
go outside of one's own language (customary manner of speech).

You must come into (adopt) his language, in order that he
may learn knowledge and science from you.

All the people, then, are as his (the spiritual Teacher's}
children; this (fact) is necessary for the Fir (to bear in mind)
when he gives (them) instruction.

Infidelity hath a fixed limit and range — know (this for sure);
(but) the Shaykh and the light of the Shaykh have no bound.


394 MATHNAWl, BOOK It

Before the infinite all that is finite is naught: everything except
the Face of God is passing away.

Infidelity and faith do not exist in the place where he (the
Shaykh) is, because he is the kernel, while these twain are (only)
colour and husk.

These fleeting things have become a veil over that Face, like
a lantern concealed beneath a bowl.

So then, this bodily head is a screen to that (spiritual) head
(source of mystic consciousness): before that head this bodily
head is an infidel.

33J* Who is the infidel? One forgetful of the faith of the Shaykh.
What is the dead? One ignorant of the (spiritual) life of the
Shaykh.

(Spiritual) life is naught but knowledge in (the time of) trial:
the more knowledge one has, the more (spiritual) life one has.

Our spirit Is more than the spirit of animals. Wherefore f
In respect that it has more knowledge.

Hence the spirit of the angels is more titan our spirit, for it
is exempt from (transcends) the common sense;

And the spirit of mystical adepts is more than (that of) the
angels. Cease from bewilderment (on this subject)!

£ or that reason Adam is thejr object of worship: his spirit
(spiritual life) is greater than their being.

Else, (why were they commanded to worship him?): it would
not be at all a suitable thing to command the superior to worship
an inferior.

How can the justice and kindness of the Maker approve that
a rose should fall down in worship before a them?

Since the spirit (of the perfect saint) has become superior and
has passed beyond the utmost limit (reached by men and angels),
the soul of all things has become obedient to it —

Birds and fishes and Jinn and men—because it exceeds (them),
and they are deficient (in comparison with it).

3J3i The fish make needles for his (the saint’s) mantle: (they
follow him as) threads follow needles.


The rest of the story of Ibrahim son of Adham—may God
sanctify hts spirit! — on the sea-skore.

When that Amir saw the Shaykh's command take effect in
the coining of the fish, he fell into an ecstasy,

. Said, Ah, the fish know' the Pirs. Fie on a person who
is an outcast of the (holy) Court!

The fish have knowledge of the Pir, and we afar (from him)!
We (are) damned to lack this fortune, and they blest (with
enjoyment of it)!"

He bowed low, and departed weeping and desolate: he


THE SHAYKH AND HIS REVILES 395

became mad for lave of the opening of the door (to union with
God) +

Then, O you with unwashed face, what are you about? m*
Whom are you combating and envying?

You are playing with a lion's tail: you are making a foray
against the angels.

Why are you speaking evil of pure good? Beware, deem not
that lowness (vilifying the saints) to be eminence!

What is evil? The needy, despicable copper. Who is the
Shaykh? The infinite elixir.

IF the copper was incapable (of being transmuted) by the
elixir, (yet) the elixir was never turned into copper by the copper.

What is evil ? A rebel that works like fire. Who is the Shaykh ? 3345
The very Sea 1 of Eternity,

Fire Is always terrified by water* When was water ever afraid
of being set aflame?

You are observing defects on the face of the moon : you are
picking thorns in a Paradise.

Picker of thorns, if you go into Paradise, you will find there
no thorn but yourself.

You are covering a sun with a sod: you are seeking flaws in a
perfect full-moon r

A sun which shines throughout the world—how shall it be 335a
hidden for the sake of a bat?

Sins are made sinful by the disapproval of Pits; mysteries
are made mysterious by the jealousy of Pirs.

If you arc far (aloof in spirit from the saints), at any rate be
joined (with them) through (paying) respect (to them): be alert
and active in (showing) penitence,

(In the hope) that a breeze may be coming to you from that
way (quarter). Why do you shut off the water of mercy by
(your) enviousness ?

Though you are far aloof, at (that) distance wag your tail
(ingratiate yourself with them): wherever ye be, turn your faces
(thither).

When an ass falls in mire through (^oing at) a rapid pace, he 3355
moves incessantly for the purpose of rising.

He does not make the place smooth (and comfortable) to stay
in: he knows that it is not the place where he should live*

Your sense has been less than the sense of the ass, for your
heart has not recoiled from these clods of mud.

You interpret (some canonical text) as an indulgence (authoris¬
ing you to stay) in the mud, since you are not willing to tear
your heart from it.

(You say ), 11 This is allow able for me: I am under compulsion.
God in His kindness will not chastise a helpless one (like me).”

1 Or 11 ihe objective onanifcfttatjon of the Sea."


39 ^ MATHNAWf, BOOK II

3j6«i Indeed He has {already) chastised you, (but) like the blind
hyena from self-deception you do not see this chastisement.

They (the hunters) are'saying, “The hvena is not in this
place; look for him outside, for he is not in the cave.”

1 his they' say. and (at the same time) put bonds on him,
(whilst) he is saving, “They do not know of me (where I am).

If this enemy had known of me, how should he have exclaimed,
‘Where is this hyena’? ,F

The statement of a certain individual that 6W most High would
not punish him for sin, and Shu'ayh's answer to him.

In the time of Shu'ayb a certain man was saving, “God hath
seen many a fault from me.

3 #s How many sins and trespasses hadi He seen me commit!
And (still), God in His kindness does not punish me.”

In answer to him God most High by the mysterious wav
spuke clearly into the ear of Shu'avb,

Saying, "(Tell him), Thou hast said, ‘How many sins have
I committed! And (still) God in His kindness hath not punished
me for my trespasses/

Thou art saying the opposite and reverse (of the truth), O fool,
O thou t hat hast abandoned the road and taken to the wilderness!

Hou oft T ^ how oft do 1 chastise thee T and thou unaware]
Thou art lying (bound) in chains from head to foot,

***° I hv rust, coat on coat, O black pot + hath marred the visage
of thy heart.

Layers of rust have collected upon thy heart, so that it hath
become blind to (the spiritual) mysteries/’

It that smoke should beat upon a new pot, the traces of it
would show, though it were (only as much as) a barley-corn,

Because everything is made manifest by (its) contrary : upon a
ivhi ic object the black becomes conspicuous;

(But) when the pnt has been blackened p then after this who
will at once perceive the effect of the smoke upon it?

I he ironsmith who i$ an Ethiopian ^the smoke is of the
same colour as his face;

The Creek who does the work of an ironsmith—his face,
from gathering smoke 1 , becomes piebald (spotted with black).

I hereto re he will quickly recognise the effect of sin* so that
he will soon lament (and) say, “Q God!"

(Rut) when he persists (in sin) and makes a practice of evil,
and puts dust in the eye of meditation.,

He thinks ol penitence no more: that sin becomes so sw^eet
to his heart that (in the end) he comes to be without the Faith
(he turns mfidel),

1 Li rurally, "from smokiness," CL


THE CALLOUS SINNER


397


That repenting and (crying) " O Lord!" are gone from him: 33S0
fivefold rust has settled on the mirror (of his heart).

The coats of rust have began to eat his iron (mirror): the rust
has begun to lessen its sheen,

When you write upon white paper* that writing may be read
at * ht.



When you write script over that which has been (already)
written, it is not understood: the reading of it will be erroneous;

For that (second) blackness has fallen (been made) upon
blackness; (hence) both scripts have become obscure and have
given no meaning*

And if you write a third time on the top of it, then you make 3 j«j
it black as the infidd’s soul.

What help is there, then, but (to take) refuge with (God) the
Helper? Despair is copper, and the elixir for it is (God’s)

i d.



Lay your despairs before Him, that ye may escape from
irremediable pain*

When Shu'ayb had told him those deep sayings, at that
breath of the spirit roses blossomed in his heart, ‘

His soul hearkened to the inspiration from Heaven ; he said,
(however), "If He hath punished me, where is the sign?”

He (Shu*avb) cried," O Lord, he rebuts me, he seeks the sign 333*
of that punishment."

He (God) said, "I am the Coverer (of sins): I will not tell his
secrets, (I will give) but one indication for the sake of trying him.

One sign of My punishing him is this, that he has (to his
credit) pious acts of fasting and orison

And ritual prayer and almsgiving et cetera , but he has not one
atom of spiritual savour.


He performs high acts and deeds of devotion, but lie has not
one atom of (spiritual) relish.

His devotions are good (in form), but the spirit is not good: 3393
the^ walnuts are many, but there is no kernel therein*”

. Spiritual savour is required, in order that devotions may
yield fruit; a kernel is required, in order that the berry may
produce 3 tree.

How shall a berry without kernel become a sapling? The
soulless form is naught but phantasy.

Remainder 0/ the story of the stranger’s reviling the Shaykh.

That malign wretch was gabbling silly nonsense about the
Shaykh; the squinting (envious) man is always of distorted
understanding.

(He said), *‘I saw him amidst a company (of revellers): he is
one denuded and destitute of piety.


39 ® MATHNAWI* BOOR II

34« And if you do not believe it a arise (and go) to-night, that you
may see plainly your Shaykh’s depravity / 1

At night he took him to a window and said, “ Behold a (fine)
debauch an d merry-making I

Behold such hypocrisy by day and profligacy by night!—in
the daytime (he is) likc'Mugtafd (Mohammed), at night (like)
Bu Lanab +

By day Ins name has become 'Abdullah (the servant of God);
by night—God save us! And (see), the wine-cup in his
handI”

He (the disciple) saw a full glass in the Shaykh’a hand,
" s O Shaykh/* said he, 14 b there a tumour even in thee?

3405 Nonne dicebaa?—‘In vini poculo mingit DiabduS festinans
lenteV*

He (the Shaykh) replied, “They have made my cup so full
that there is not room in it for a single ru e-secd H

Look, is there any room here for a single mote? A deluded
man has wrongly apprehended this matter*”

This is not the apparent cup (or) the apparent wine: deem
this (allegation) far from (far below the dignity of) the Shaykh
who sets the Unseen.

The wine-cup, O fool T is the being of the Shaykh, in qua
(essentia) urina Diaboli non continetur.

341* He is Full and brimming with the Light of God: he has
shattered the bodily cup, he is the Absolute Light.

If sunlight fall upon filth, it is the same light (still): it suffers
no defilement.

The Shaykh said, 41 Indeed this is not a cup, nor (is this) wine.
Hey* unbeliever, come down and look at it! pl

He came, and saw it was fine honey. That miserable enemy
(of God) became blind (with shame and confusion).

1 hereupon the Pir said to his disciple, 41 Go, seek wine for
me, O noble sir;

34*5 f’Qt I have a pain; I am reduced to necessity : because of the
pain, 1 have passed beyond starvation 1 .

In sore need any carcase is clean (lawful to eat)—may curses
fall like dust 2 on the head of him that denies it!”

The disciple went round die wine-cellar, tasting of every jar
on the Shaykh ? s behalf.

In all the wine-cellars (that he visited) he found no wine:
the jars of wine had become full of honey,

fie said, 41 O topers, what state of things is this? What b the
matter? 1 find no wine in any jar/*

3420 All the topers came to that Shavkh, weeping and beating
their heads with their hands.

1 Literally, condition of one whose s EOrnanrh is empty/ 1
1 Literally, "may the dust of execration be/ 1


THE SHAYKH AND HIS REVILER 399

(They said), “Them earnest into the tavern, O most exalted
Shaykh s and in consequence of thy coming all the wines have
turned to honey.

Thou hast changed the wine (and purified it) from filth:
change our souls also (and purify them) from defilement!"

If the (whole) world be filled to the brim with blood, hoiv
should the servant of God drink aught but what is hallowed?

How * A*isha—may God be tee!l-pleased with her! — said to
Mustafa {Mohammed), on whom he peace, “ Thou per/ormest
the prayer anywhere? without: a prayer-carpet . 1J

One day ^A'islta said to the Prophet, “Q Messenger of Allah*
openly and secretly

Thou performest a prayer in whatever place thou mays! find,
(even whilst) unclean and low (people) are running about in the
house;

(Quanquam) femina cui Suit sanguis post menstmorum dies
vel in fans vel (quivis) inquinatus et sordidus facit usu tritum
(pqlJutum) quemeunque locum advenerit,”

The Prophet said t "Know that God makes impure (things)
pure for the (spiritually) great.

On that account the grace of God has made my place of
worship to be pure (everywhere, even) up to the seventh tier
(of Heaven)/ 1

Beware and beware! Cease from envying the (spiritual)
kings, else you will become a devil in die w r orIih

For if he drink poison, it turns to honey; (but) if you eat 3**0
honey, it is poison (to you);

For he has been changed, and his action has been changed:
he has become the Grace (of God) f and every fire in him has

been turned into Light.

The abdbii (swifts) had the power of God (in them); else,
how should a bird kill an elephant?

A number of little birds broke an (entire) army — so that you
may know that that strength is from God*

If temptation of this kind 1 come to you, go, read the Sura
concerning the Possessors of the Elephant.

And if you contend and engage in rivalry with him (the saint), ^ jj
deem me an infidel if you save your head from them*,

1 /.*. envy, er v. 3439.

1 Jj- the iaifitH will punish you a


>


400


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


Umo the mouse pulled (the rope attached to) the camel's
nose-ring and became self-conceited.

A little mouse taught in his forelegs a camel’s leading-rope
and from emulation went off (with it).

By reason of the readiness with which the camel set out along
with him, the mouse was duped into thinking himself a hero.

The ray of his thought struck the camel. He (the camel) said
(aside), “I will show thee (presently)! Enjoy thyself!”

(All went well) till he (the mouse) came to'the’hank of a great
ru-er, at which any lion or wolf would have lost heart 1 ,

3 «° There the mouse stopped and became paralysed 3 . The camel
said, “O my companion o'er hill and plain,

What is this standing still (for)? Why art thou dismayed?
Step (forward) like a man! Go into the river!

Thou art mv guide and leader: don’t hah midway and be
dumbfounded!"

lie (the mouse) said, “This is a huge and deep river: I am
afraid of being drowned, O comrade.”

Said the camel, “Let me see the limit (depth) of the water,”
and he quickly set foot in it.

3+*j “The water,” he said, “is (only) up to the knee, O blind
mou&Cj wherefore didst thou become dismayed and lo$e thy
wits?” ' J

He (the mouse) replied s Jl It is (as) an ant to you, but to me it
is a dragon, for there are differences between one knee and
another.

If it is (only) up to your knee, O excellent one, it is a hundred
ells higher than the crown of my head,”

He (the camel) said, “Another time, do not behave (so)
boldly, lest thy body and soul be consumed by these sparks.

Contend with mice Like thyself: a mouse has nothing to sav
to a camel." 6 1

343° He (the mouse) said, “I repent. For God’s sake, get me
across this deadly water!”

The camel took pity. “Hark,” said he, “jump up and sit
on my hump,

I his passage has been vouchsafed to me: I would take across
hundreds of thousands like thee.”

Since you are not a prophet, go on the road (after the prophets),
that one day you may come from the pit (of fleshliness) to
(spiritual) place and power.

Be a vassal since you are not a lord: do not steer (the boat)
yourself, since you are not the boatman,

«» Since you are not (spiritually) perfect, do not take a shop (by

’ Literally, "would have become helpless. 1 ’

1 Literally, "dry."


THE MOUSE AND THE CAMEL


401

J 'ourself) alone. Be pliant to the hand, in order that you may
jecome leavened (like dough) +

Give ear to (the Divine command), "Keep silence ” he mute;
since you have not become the tongue (mouthpiece) of God,
be an ear .

And if you apeak, speak in the form of a request for explana¬
tion: speak to the (spiritual) emperors as a lowly beggar.

The beginning of pride and hatred is jn (worldly) lust, and
the rootedness of your lust is from habit.

When an evil disposition becomes confirmed by habit, yon
are enraged with any one who restrains you.

After you have become an eater of clay, any one w r ho restrains ut>o
you from (eating) day is your enemy.

Since idolaters are accustomed to the idol, they are foes to
them that stop the way to the idol.

Since I bias had become accustomed to being leader, he looked
on Adam with disbelief (and denial).

Saying, "Is there another leader superior to me, so that lie
should be worshipped by one like mer”

Leadership is poison, except to the spirit that from the
beginning hath (in himself) abundance of the antidote 1 .

If the mountain is full of snakes, have no fear t for it is a mine 3*155
of antidote within*

When leadership has become a bosom- friend to your brain^
any one w r ho breaks (thwarts) you becomes (as) an ancient
adversary.

When any one contradicts your disposition (habit of mind),
many feelings of hatred against him arise in you.

“He is tearing me (you sav) from my (engrained) disposition,
he is making me a pupil and follower (of himself). 1 *

Unless the evil disposition has become strongly implanted,
how should the fire-temple (of passion) blaze up through being
opposed ?

1 Ic may show some Feigned courtesy to the opponent he may 347*
make a place for himself in his heart 3 ,

(But lie really hates him), because the evil disposition has
waxed strong: the ant of (worldly) lust has through habit
become as a snake.

Kill the snake of lust at the beginning; else, look you, your
snake Is become a dragon.

But every' one deems his own snake an ant: do you (then)
seek the explanation of yourself (your real state) from him that
is lord of the heart.

Until copper become** gold, it does not know itself to be

1 Literally, ,+ b a phicc aboundint: in the antidote. "

3 /j-. hauim your brain,

1 /.r, "hr may seek to win hia Favour by ftutterinH him,"

K H 26


I


+05 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

copper: until the heart becomes a king, it dues not know itself
to be an insolvent.

M 75 Do service to the elixir, like copper: endure oppression, O
heart, from him that holds the heart in fee.

Who is it that holds the heart in fee? Know well, it is the lords
of the heart who, like day and night, are recoiling from the
world.

Do not find fault with the Servant of God: do not suspect
the King of being a thief.


The minifies of the dervish teho was suspected of theft
in a ship .

A dervish was in a ship: he had made a bolster (for himself)
from the goods of saintly fortitude 1 ,

A purse of gold was lost. He was asleep (at the time). They
searched all (in the ship) and brought him also to view 2 ,

Saying, "Let us search this sleeping mendicant as well/*
(So) the owner of the money* (excited) bv grief, awakened him.

"A bag of valuables / 1 said he, lf ha$ "been lost in this ship.
We have searched the whole company: you cannot escape
(suspicion).

Put off your dervish-cloak, snip yourself of it. in order that
the people's suspicions may be cleared away from you*."

He cried, lb 0 Lord, these vile wretches have made an accusa¬
tion against Thy slave: bring Thy command to pass I"

When the heart of the dervish was pained by that (suspicion),
at once there put forth their heads on even,’ aide
n85 From the deep sea myriads of fishes, and in the mouth of
each (was) a superb pearl:

Myriads of fishes out of the full sea T each with a pearl in its
mouth — and what (marvellous) pearls! —

__ Evepf pearl the revenue of a kingdom . 41 These," they said (to
him), are from God, they have no association (w r ith any one
but God )/ 1 J

lie dropped a quantity of pearls on the ship and sprang
(aloft): he made the air his high-seat and sate (thereon),

(Resting) at ease, cross-legged, as kings upon their thrones —
he above the zenith, and the ship before him.
no® He said, ,+ Begone! The ship for yo\i r God for me, so that a
beggarly thief may not be with you!

Let us see who will be the loser 4 by this separation ! 1 am

1 Literally, /nwilmes*” or “the quality of a (holy) man."

- 3 take p equivalent to namldamf. Th ta ilrtliuic cons truci ion occurs

etsewtart m the Mathnowi* Cf. p, 245 p note i.

a Literally, M freed frum concern uith you."

* Literally, " to whom will be the Icraa/"


the dervish accused of THEFT 403

pleased, (being) paired (united) with God and singled (isolated)
from (His) creatures.

He does not accuse me of theft, He does not hand me over
to (the mercy of) an informer 1 .”

The people in the ship cried out, ”0 noble chief, wherefore
has such 3 high estate been given to dice?”

Me answered, “ For throwing suspicion on dervishes and
on ending God on account of a despicable thing (as ye have done)!

God forbid! Nay, (it was) for showing reverence to (the 349J
spiritual) kings, inasmuch as I did not conceive ill thoughts
against dervishes — e

Those gracious dervishes of sweet breath (pure spirit), for
whose magnification (the chapter of the Qtir'in entitled) ‘Abase
was revealed. * '

That dervishhood is not for the sake of (avoiding) entangle-
ment (with the world); no, (it is) because nothing exists but God.

How should J hold in suspicion those whom God hath
entrusted with the treasury of the Seventh Heaven?

The fleshly soul is suspect, not the sublime Reason: the
senses arc suspect, not the subtle Light.

rhe fleshly soul is a sophist: beat it constantly, for beating 1500
does it good, not arguing with it.

It sees a miracle (wrought by a prophet), and at the moment
it glows (with belief); (but) afterwards it says, "Twas (only) a
phantasy; \ jj

For if that wondrous sight had been real, then it would have
been abiding, day and night, in the eye.”

It is abiding in the eyes of the pure, (but) it docs not haunt 2
the eyes of animals (sensual men);

l or the miracle is ashamed and scornful of these (bodily)
senses: how should a peacock be (confined) in a narrow pit? *

hur, i 1 i T 1 f ca , 11 1 ! ne ga^ous: I say (only) one in a isw
hundred, and that (one) like a hair.


Hok some Sufis abused a certain $uff saydng that he talked
too much m the presence of the Shaykh,

Some Sufis abused a certain §ufi, and came to the Shaykh of
the convent,

Shaykh, "Demand justice for our souls from
this Sufi, O Guide!

He said, “Why, what is the complaint, O Stiffs?” He (their
spokesman) replied, “ lhis §ufi has three annoying habits:

In speech he is garrulous as a bell; in eating he eats more than
twenty persons;

! Gieemtlj-, "does not Rive my tending-rope to in informer,"

“ Literally, become attached 10,"


4<H MATHNAWf, BOOK II

3sio And if he sleeps he is like the Men of the Cave.** (Thus) did
the Sufis march to war 1 (against him) before the Shaykh.

The Shaykh turned his face towards that dervish, saying, Bl In
every case that exists, take the middle (course).

(It is stated) in Tradition that the best things are the mean
(those between the two extremes): the (four) humours are
beneficial through being in equipoise.

If by accident (any) one humour become excessive, disease
appears in the human body.

Do not exceed in (any) quality him that is thy yoke-fellow,
for that will assuredly bring about separation (between you) in
the end.

3515 The speech of Moses was in measure, but even so it exceeded
the words of his good friend.

That excess resulted in (his) opposing Khadir; and he
(Khadir) said, 1 Go, thou art one that talks too much: this is a
(cause 0/) separation {between us)*

Q (thou who resembjest) Moses, thou art garrulous. Go far
off, or else be dumb with me and blind!

And if thou goe$t not, but remained sitting (here) in despite
(of me), thou art gone in reality and severed (from my company)/ 1

W hen suddenly you commit an act of (legal) impurity in
the ritual prayer, it (the prayer) says to you, “ Go speedily
to purify yourself”;

352c And if you go not, you will be moving (exerting yourself) in
vain; verily your prayer is gone (is void); sit down, Q misguided
man!

Go to them that are your mates„ (them) that are enamoured
of your discotirse and thirsting for it.

One who keeps watch is superior to those who slumber; the
(spiritual) fish have no need of one who keeps watch.

Those who wear clothes look to the iaunderer, (but) the soul
of the naked hath (Divine) illu mi nation as its adornment.

Either withdraw (and turn) aside from the naked, or like
them become free from body-gamnents,

3315 And if you cannot become wholly naked, make your garments
less, so that you may tread the middle path.

How the dervish excused himself to the Shay kh +

I hen the dervish told the Shaykh haw the ease stood f and
coupled excuses with the discharge of that obligation.

To the Shaykh "s questions he gave answer good and right,
like the answers of Khadir—

(Namely) those answers to the questions of Moses which
Khadir, (inspired) by the all-knowing Lord, set forth to him,

x /,#. " made a disturbance and uproar/*


the garrulous and GREEDY §$Ff 405

(So that) his difficulties became solved, and he (Khadir) save

tdlhig MOSfS ke ' V t0 ***** < l ue8tion (m a way)' beyond

^1? s P iritu , il1 ) inheritance from Khadir;
(hence) he bent Ins will to answering the Stk&ykh.

vet I tU a m , UT AlLh ?k gh the m , id ^ e P ath ia ( the * way of) wisdom,
set the middle path too is relative.

Relatively to a camel, the water in the stream is little, but to
a mouse it is like the ocean.

If any one has an appetite for four loaves and eats two or
three, that is the mean;

But if he eat all the four, it is far from the mean: he is in
bondage to greed* like a duck.

It one has appetite for ten loaves and eats six, know that that uu
is the mean.

When I have appetite for fifty loaves, and vou for fno more
than) six scones, we are not equivalent

■ >\ u ™- v bc «*n takas (of prayer), 1 may not be worn

thin by five hundred.

One goes bare-foot (all the way) to the Ka'ba, and one
becomes beside himself (with exhaustion in going) as far as the
mosque.

One in utter self-devotion gives his life, one is agonised at
giving a single loaf. 6

This mean belongs to (the realm of) the finite, for that (finite) « M »
has a beginning and end. \

*4j l ? C ? n ™ n ?. aild are necessary in order that the mean or
middle (point) between them may be conceived in imagination.
Inasmuch as the infinite has not (these) two limits, how
should the mean be applicable to it 1 ?



no hope of coining to an end,

„., l I [|j r ‘;^ ards . arid Crests should become pens altogether, there liA i
would never be any decrease in this Word 4 .

L" k cr“^ l ’" SS ” ay ' “ d ,tis n “ ml «-

think itfcssleep St3t * resembles sleep; a misguided person may

, ^ novv are asleep, (but) my heart is awake: know

that my (seemingly) inactive form is (really) in action,

e Prophet said. My eye sleep, (but) my heart is not
asleep to the Lord of created beings. F

Mh ° W Sjl ° 1,ld ' he m “ n *•* *° which it (the infinite) it
* M H0 prcijrrtis would be made in defining ft/’


406


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


3*50 Your eyes are awake, and your heart is sunk in slumber; my
eyes are asleep, (but) my heart is in (contemplation of) the
opening of the door (of Divine grace)*

My heart hath five senses other (than the physical): both the
worlds (external and spiritual) are the stage (theatre) for the
senses of the heart.

Do not regard me from (the standpoint of) your infirmity: to
you 'tis night, to me that same night is morn in gride.

To you 'tis prison, to me that prison is like a garden : to me
the most absolute state of occupation (with the world) has
become fa state of spiritual) freedom.

Your feet are in the mud; to me the mud has become roses.
You have mourning; I have feasting and drums*

3553 (Whilst) I am dwelling with you in some place on the earth,
I am coursing over the seventh sphere (of Heaven), like Saturn.

p Tis not I that am seated beside you, ’tis my shadow: my rank
is higher than (the reach of) thoughts,

Because I nave passed beyond (all) thoughts, and have
become a swift traveller outside (the region of) thought,

I am the ruler of thought, not ruled (by it), because the builder
is ruler over the building.

All creatures are subjugated to thought; for that reason they
are sore in heart and practised in sorrow,

15 1 yield myself to thought purposely(but) when I will I spring
up from the midst of them (that are under its sway).

I am as a bird of the zenith, thought is a gnat; how should a
gnat have power over me?

Purposely 1 come down from the lofty zenith, that those of
base degree may attain to me.

When disgust at the qualities of the low r (world) seizes me, I
soar up like the birds whkk spread their pinions.

My wings have grown out of my very essence: I do not stick
two wing^ on with glue.

The wings of Ja b far-i Tayyir are permanent; the w-ings of
Ja H fn>i *Ayyar are borrowed (unreal and transitory).

In the view of him that has not experienced (it), this is (mere)
pretension; in the view of the inhabitants of the (spiritual)
horizon, this is the reality.

This is brag and pretension in the eyes of the crow; an empty
or full pot is all one to the fly.

When morsels of food become (changed to) pearls within you,
do not forbear: eat as much as you can,”

One day the Shaykh, m order to rebut (these) ill thoughts,
vomited in a basin, and the basin became full of pearls.

357a On account of the (abusive) man's little understanding, the
clairvoyant Pir made the intelligible pearls objects of sense-
perception*


THE DOCTRINE OF RELATIVITY 4*7

When pure (lawful food) turns to impurity in your stomach,
put a lock upon your gullet and hide the key;

(But) any one m whom morsels of food become the light of
(spiritual) glory, let him eat whatever he will, it is lawful to him.


Explaining (that there are) some assertions the truth of tchich
is attested by their very nature.

If you are my soul*s familiar friend, my words full of (real)
meaning are not (mere) assertion.

If at midnight I say, M ] am near you: come now, be not
afraid of the night, for I am your kinsman/'

These two assertions are to you reality, since you recognise 3 J ?5
the voice of your own relative.

Nearness and kinship were (only) two assertions, but both
(of them) were reality to the good understanding.

The proximity of the voice gives him (the hearer) testimony
that these words spring from a friend 1 ;

Moreover , (his) delight at (hearing) the voice of his kinsman
has borne witness to the truthfulness of that dear relative.

Again, the uninspired fool who in his ignorance does not
know* a stranger's voice from a kin smart's—

To him his (the speaker's) words are (mere) assertion: his itfa
ignorance has become the source of his disbelief;

(But) to him of keen insight, within whom are the (spiritual)
lights t the very nature of this voice was just the (immediate
evidence of its) reality.

Or (for example) one whose mother-tongue is Arabic sap in
Arabic, “I know the language of the Arabs/'

The very fact of his speaking in Arabic is (evidence of) the
reality (of his assertion), although his saying (that he knows)
Arabic is (only) an assertion.

Or a writer may write on a piece of paper, “ I am a writer and
a reader, and I am a most accomplished person,"

Although this written (statement) itself is a (mere) assertion, 35*5
still the script is evidence of the reality (of the assertion).

Or a Sufi may sav T “ Last night, while asleep, you saw some
one with a prayer-carpet on his shoulder.

That was I; and what l said to you in the dream, whilst you
slumbered, in explanation of dairvoyance —

Give ear (to it), put it in your ear like an ear-ring: make those
words (of mine) your mind’s guide."


1 With isdfat. The point is. not that the Friend la near at hand

(which iff obvious), but that the nearness of hi* vo\fX enabJes the listener to
recognise him as a friend, and Verify h]j statement.


4°8 MATHNAWi, BOOK H


When you recollect the dream, these words (of his) are (as
real to you as) a new miracle or old gold.

3590 Although this seems to be (mere) assertion (on his pan), vet
the soul of the dreamer says, “Yes, (it is true)."

Therefore, since W isdom is the faithful believer's stray
cam eh he knows it with certainty, from whomsoever he has
heard it;

And when he finds himself absolutely in front of it, how
should there be doubt? How should he mistake himself?

When you sav to a thirsty man, “Make haste! there is water
in the cup 1 take the water at once/*

Will the thirsty man say in any event?—“This is (mere)
assertion: go from my side, O pretender! Get thee far away! ’
33« Or (else) produce some testimony and proof that this is of
aqueous kind and consists of the water that runs from a
spring.


Or (suppose that) a mother cries to her suckling babe. “ Come
1 am mother: hark, my child!”—

Will the babe say?—“O mother, bring the proof (of it), so
that I may take comfort in thy milk."

When in the heart of any community there is savour (spiritual
perception) from God, the face and voice of the prophet are (as)
an evidentiary miracle

When the prophet utters a cry from without, the soul of the
community falls to worship within.

Because never in the world will the soul’s car have heard
from any one a cry of the same kind as his.

That stranger (the soul), by immediate perception of the

j>°“*°f) voic «- heard from 6 od’s tongue (the
words), Verify / am near. 1 *


3&°5


Haw ) akyd \ on whom be peace, in his mother's womb bowed
m ™ rsi »P Messiah (Jesus), on whom be peace.

rhe mother of Yahyd, before disburdening herself (of him),
said in secret to Mary, v u

“ I see (it) with certainty, within thee is 3 King who is possessed
(of God) PUfPOS€ and ,S an Apostlc endowed with knowledge

. 55“ 1 happened to meet thee, my burden (the unborn
child) at on.ee bowed m worship.

,hM tmb00 ' - ** »*
“ ■ bowi " f! K' rf S™« J b v


J John the Baptise.


f


JOHN THE BAPTIST AND JESUS 4^9

On raising a difficulty as to this story.

The foolish say, “Cancel this tale, because it is false and
erroneous.

Man' in (her) pregnancy was not joined (met) by any one:
she did not return from without the town.

Until that woman of sweet address was delivered outside of
the town p she indeed came not into it +

When she had given birth to him, she then toot him up in ^
her lap and carried him to her kinsfolk.

Where did the mother of Yahyd see her to speak these words
to her about what had happened?”

The answer to the difficulty.

Let him {the objector) know that to one who receives ideas
(from God) all that is absent in the world is present.

To Mary, the mother of YahyA would appear present, though
she was far from her (bodily) sight.

One may see a friend (even) with eyes shut, when one has
made the skin (the bodily envelope) a lattice (to let in spiritual
ideas).

And if she saw her neither from without nor from within, 3^5
take the (essential) meaning of the story, O imbecile!

Not like him who had heard (some) fables p and like sh stuck
to the (literal) rAape of them 1 .

So that he would say f “Mow should Kaiila, haying no
language, hear words from Dimna who had no power of expres¬
sion?

And (even) if they knew each other's accents, how should
man understand if (their talk), (since it was) without any
articulation?

How did Dimna become a messenger between the lion and
the ox> and cajole them both with his palaver 2 ?

How did the noble ox become the vusier of the lion ? How was jGjg
the elephant terrified by the reflection of the moon?

This Kaiila and Dimna is entirely fiction, or else how has
the stork a quarrel with the crow?“

O brother, the story is like a measure: the real meaning in it
resembles grain (in the measure).

The man of intelligence will take the grain of meaning: he
will not pay any regard to the measure, (even) if it is removed
(altogether).

Listen to what passes between the rose and the nightingale,
though in that case there is no overt speech.

1 The simile in the Prrtian U ,fc 3i3cr smelt to the naqih of them/’ thin

hdnfj the final letter of the word

J Literally, ” pronounce spd U over them both f 11


MATHNAWI, BOOK IT


+to


On mute eloquence 1 and the understanding of it,

1625 Listen also to what passes between the moth and the candle,
and pick out the meaning, O worshipful one®.

Albeit there is no speech, there is the inmost soul of speech.
Come, fly aloft, do not fly low, like the owl,

lie (the player) at chess said, “This is the house of the rook."

‘By what way," said he (the literalist), “did the house come
into its hands?

Did it buy the house, or inherit it? ’’—Happy is he that sped
towards the (real) meaning!

A grammarian said, “Zayd has struck *Amr.” Said (the fool),
"How did he chastise him without any offence (on his part)?

3&jo ^ What was 'Amr's offence, that that rude Zayd struck him,
innocent (though he was), as (if he were) a slave? ”

He (the grammarian) replied, "This (form of words) is (only)
the measure (container) of the meaning signified; take some
wheat, for the measure is {to be) rejected.

Zayd and 'Amr are a device for (showing) the declension: if
that (statement that Zayd struck 'Amr) is untrue, make up with
the declension*."

“ Xav," said he, “ 1 don’t know about that. How did Zayd
strike Amr without (his committing any) crime or fault ?" *
<I( ^ e (*he grammarian) m desperation started a joke and said,
Amr had stolen a superfluous taho 4 ,

3635 Zayd became aware, and struck the stealer of it: since he
( Anir) carried it beyond bounds (transgressed the law), the
punishment serves him right,”


Hots worthless sayings find acceptance in the minds of
worthless folk.

.. ('kc fool) said, “ Here you are, this is the truth! I accept
t it) w 1 tli (all) my soul. Wrong seems right to the wrong-minded.

If you say to a squinting man, “The moon is one," he will
say to you, ‘ Ihese are two (moons); and there is a (great)
doubt as to (the moon’s) being one";

And if somebody laughs at him and says, “There are two,”
he deems it the truth. This (mockery') is what the ill-natured
(ignorant and contumacious) fellow deserves.


' wi,il ^ttgue of the (inward} slaw."

and satisfy'you"" instru ctWH VWiVeyed by means of the statement reconcile

f ‘ |Amr b written 'A™™, in Order to distiiiRutsh it

,k?V h WIth , wtucb * would otherwise be identical u far as

t-fie CDH9oruiniB are cunctiried.


MUTE ELOQUENCE 411

Lies muster round (those who are living) lies: (the text)
the tricked teamen far the tricked men has thrown light (upon this
point).

They whose hearts arc (opened) Wide (to receive spiritual .43
truths) have wide (far-reaching) hands 1 ; they whose (spiritual)
eyes are blind have to stumble on stony ground.


On seeking the tree whereof nane that eats the fruit shall die,

A learned man (once) said, for the sake of (telling) a story,

<l In India there is a certain tree:

Whoso takes and eats 2 of its Fruit* he grows not old nor ever
dies,”

A king heard this (tale) from a veracious person; he became
a lover of the tree and its fruit.

From the Divan of culture he sent an intelligent envoy to
India jn search (of it).

For (many) years his envoy wandered about India in quest 3<H3
(of the tree).

He roamed from towm to town for this object: neither island
nor mountain nor plain was left (unvisited).

Every- one whom he asked made a mock of him* saying*

111 Who would search after this, unless perhaps a madman in
confinement?”

Many slapped him jocosely; many said* “O fortunate man p

How should the enquiry' of a clever and dear-minded person
like you be devoid {of result)? How should it be vain?”

And this (ironical) respect was to him another slap, and it .'>jq
was harder (to bear) than the visible slap.

They extolled him sarcastically, saying* i+ Q great sir* in such
and such a place there is a very huge tree.

In such and such a forest there is a green tree, very- tall and
broad, and even’ branch of it is big.”

The king's envoy s who had braced his belt for the quest* was
hearing a different kind of report from every one;

So he travelled there for years, (whilst) the king kept sending
money to him.

After he had suffered much fatigue in that foreign land* at ifljs
last he became too exhausted to seek (any longer).

No trace of the object of pursuit was discovered: of what he
W'anted nothing appeared but the report.

The thread of his hope snapped f the thing he had sought
became unsought m the end.

He resolved to return to the king* (and set out) shedding
tears and traversing the way.

1 Ijc* they enjoy spiritual power and freedom.

1 Literal fy, '"eats and takes."


412


MATKNAWf, BOOK II

How the Shaykh explained the hidden meaning of the free to
the seeker who mw in the bondage of formalism.

I here was a wise Shaykh s a noble Qufcb p at the halting-place
where the king's intimate fell into despair.

He (the envoy) said, “Being without hope, I will go to him,
and set out on the road (again) from his threshold +

In order that his prayer (blessing) may accompany me, since
1 have no hope of (winning) my heart's desire/"

With tearful eyes he went to the Shaykh" he was raining
tears, [ike a cloud,

O Shaykh/' he cried, “it is the time for mercy and pity;
1 am in despair: now is the time for kindness.”

He (the Shaykh) said, “Say plainly what is the cause of thy
despair: what is thy object? what hast thou in view 1 ? 11

s®* 5 answered, “The Emperor chose me out to seek a certain
branching tree,

For there is a tree, unique in (all) the quarters (of the world):
its fruit is (of) the substance pf the Water of Life.

I have sought (it) for yearta and seen no sign (of il) except the
gibes and ridicule of these merry men r ”

I he Shaykh laughed and said to him, “Q simpleton, this
is the tree of knowledge in the sage —

Very high and very grand and very far-spreading: (it is} a
ater ui Life from the all-encompassing Sea (of God).

3&7G Thou hast gone aiter the form, thou hast gone astray: thou
eanst not find (it) because thou hast abandoned the reality.

Sometimes it is named tree, sometimes sometimes it

]S named "sea,/ sometimes 'cloud/

(It is) that one (thing) from w hich a hundred thousand effects
arise: its least effects are everlasting life.

Although (in essence) it is single, it hath a thousand effects:
mniimerablc names bent (may be properly applied to) that one
(thing).

One person may be father in relation to thee; in regard to
another individual he may be son,

.><<,£ In regard to another he may be wrath and a foe; in regard to
another he may be graciousness and a friend.

(He hath) hundreds of thousands of names, (but) he is one
man: the owner of every quality belonging to him is blind to
(incapable of) giving any (true) description (of him).

Whoever seeks the (mere) name, if he is entrusted (with a
confidential mission) he is hopeless and in distraction, even as
thou art.

Why dost thou stick to the name ‘ tree, 1 so that thou art left
bitterly disappointed and ill-fortuned?

1 Literally, “towards what is thy face (turned)?"


THE TREE OF LIFE +13

Pass on from the name and look at the attributes, in order
that the attributes may show thee the way to the essence/'

The disagreement of mankind is caused by names ; peace jsso
ensues when they advance to the reality (denoted by the name).

How four person* quarrelled about grapes, which were known
to each of them by a different name.

A certain man gave a dirhem to four persons: one of them
(a Persian) said, "I will spend this on augur/*

The second one was an Arab: he said, + No, I want 'inab, not
angur+ O rascal I wt

The third was a Turk; and he said, "This (money) is mine:

I don't want 'ittab, 1 want uzum”

The fourth, a Greek, said, 11 Stop this talk: I want istdftl/*

These people began fighting in contention with one another, jse*
because they were unaware of the hidden meaning of the names.

In their folly they smote each other with their fists: they were
full of ignorance and empty of knowledge.

If a master of the esoteric had been there, a revered and many-
languages! man, he would have pacified them;

And then he would have said, u With this one dirhem 1 will
give all of you what ye wish.

When without deceit ye surrender your hearts (to me), this
dirhem will do all this for you*

Your one dirhem will become four 1 —the result desired: 1690
four enemies will become one through unanimity 2 .

What each one of you says produces strife and separation;
what I say brings you agreement.

Therefore he ye mute T keep silence, that I may be your tongue
in speech and talk."

(Even) if in ihcir agreement with each other your words are
(as) a strong rope, in effect they are a source of contention and
distraction +

Borrowed (accidental) heat produces no (essential) effect;
natural heat hath (its own) virtue.

If vou have made vinegar hot by means of fire, (still) when ^5
you drink it, it will undoubtedly increase the coldness (of your
constitution),

Because that (artificially produced) heat of it is exotic 3 : its
fundamental nature is coldness and tartness.

And (on the other hand)* though grape-syrup be frozen, my
son* it will add heat to the liver when you drink it.

Hence the Shaykh h s hypocrisy is better than our sincerity,

* Lt, “ will serve Id gratify (he w ishes of ill the four . 11
s Literally, Einswtrdfn/

9 Literally, “belonging lo ihi> outer hall.”


4*4 MATHNAWf, BOOK It

for the former arises from (spiritual) insight, while the latter
arises from (spiritual) blindness.

From the Shaikh’s discourse comes union (concord); the
words of the envious bring separation (discord).
j?od As (for example) Solomon, who sped (on his prophetic
mission) from God, and who knew the language of all birds
In the time of his just sway the deer made friends with the
leopard and ceased from war.

The dove became secure from the talons of the hawk, the
sheep took no precaution against the wolf.

lie (Solomon) became an arbitrator between enemies: he
became a (means of establishing) oneness between the creatures
that fly with wings.

Thou art running after grain, like an ant. Hark! seek for
bolonioii! \\ hy art thou stilj astray ?

To the seeker of grain his grain becomes a snare, but the
seeker of Solomon may have both (Solomon and the grain).

In these hitter days the soul-birds have no security from each
other for a moment;

(Yet) even in our epoch there is a Solomon who would give
(us) peace and not suffer our injustice to continue.

Call to mind (the text)* 1 here is no people down to (the words)
™ m the past a reamer dwelt among them *

God said that verily there has never been a people devoid
ot a vicar of God and a man of spiritual power;

3710 And he makes the soul-birds so unanimous that, in respect
of sincerity* he purges them of (all) guile and rancour.

They become (as) kind as a mother: he (Mohammed) said
of the Moslems, “(They are as) one soul/*

{ I was) through the Messenger of Allah they became one
soul ■ else, they were absolute enemies* every one (to the other)*


lion dish trtStint and enmity amongst the Ansar were removed by the
bUssmgs of the Prophet —may God bless and save him l

The two tribes which were named Awe and Khazraj had a
blood-thirsty spirit towards each other.

Through (the preaching of) Mu^afi (Mohammed) their
(?f hSrtf UdS Vam9hed tbe ,ight of Isbm *nd of pureness

Pint, those enemies became brethren like the units of (a
bunch <>t) grapes in the garden;

And (then) at the admonition given in the words 1 , The true
Mteiers are brethren, they dissolved (and mingled) and hecame
one body .


“ U th *


MANY NAMES AND ONE REALITY 415

The appearance of the (clustered) grapes is (that of) brethren :
when you squeeze them they become one juice.

The immature and the full-grown grape are opponents* but
when the immature grape has ripened, it becomes a good friend.

The immature grape that has remained stone-hard and crude
— God in eternity has called it an original unbeliever*

l ie (such a one) is neither a brother nor one (in) soul (with 172&
the faithful Moslems): he is an ill-starred heretic in (the state
of) damnation.

If I should tell that which he keeps hidden (in his heart),
there would arise in the world a sore temptation of (men's)
minds,

s Tis better that the secret of the blind infidel should be
untold: 'tis better that the smoke of Hell should be banished
from Tram.

The good immature grapes, which are capable (of ripening),
are at last (made) one in heart by the breath of the masters of
heart (the saints).

They push on rapidly to grapehood (maturity), so that
duality-" and hatred and strife depart (from them).

Then in grapehood they rend their skins til! they become one: 37*5
unity is the (proper) attribute of him (who is one with others).

A friend becomes a foe because he is still two: is any one
(engaged) in a quarrel with himself?

Blessings on the universal love of the Master, (which) gave
oneness to hundreds of thousands of motes 1

(They were) as dust scattered on the thoroughfare: the hand
of the Potter made them one jug.

(But the simile fails as applied to souls), for the oneness of
bodies (formed) of water and day is imperfect: the (oneness of)
soul is not like this.

If I should here utter similitudes in comparison (illustration),

I fear it might disorder (perplex) the understanding*

Even now there exists (a) Solomon, but we are blinded by
exulting in (our) far-sightedness.

Far-sightedness keeps a man blind, just as one sleeping in a
house is blind to the house.

We are much addicted to subtle discussions, we are exceed¬
ingly fond of solving problems;

And to the end that we may tie knots and (then) undo them*

(we are) making many rules for (posing and stating) the difficulty
and for answering (the questions raised by it),

Like a bird which should undo the fastenings of a snare* and 273$
tie (them together) at times, in order that it might become perfect
in skill:

It is deprived of the open country and meadowland* its life
is spent in dealing with knots;


4*6


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


And even (then) the snare is nowise subdued bv it but its
wings are always getting broken, 3 ’

Do not struggle with knots, lest thy wings and feathers be

onThy p^ t Under ° ne by ° ne * hrOUgh vain display (of effort)

,JS a S. f b ; rds . t have had thei J broken, and have not

stopped that calamitous ambuscade 1 (from doing its work),

W S *" ^9 ^ J ( COt ;«min g ) their state, 0 covetous one ■
— i hey explored (and wandered) in them (the lands of the earth)■
mark (the words), Was there any refuge? ' } ’

^ Jr , K fficult? ' ? v *L aa J?« r and Vffldi. was not solved by the
contest between the Turk, the Greek, and the Arab,

“ -*«•“«»-
hkJirL rf“h S e hCark '"' ' ik ' ,hC ““"* *° ,his

™ Ha ?’ fr T tvery *j uartcr *« n«t with joy, (flying away) from

vour diversity towards oneness. ’ 6 - y

ay ,he ,hi "*

r 4 ^ r ,tnr™ ,wy tae,, ' t ' in ,im ™ h *« <« ■>"“

Like the owls we have become hostile to the falcons* con*

TSSL’rfT' t bchind (t0 dwdI) in «*“ P** of

Because of (our) extreme ignorance and blindness we arc
seeking to hurt those honoured of God,

How should the flock of birds which are enlightened bv
.Solomon tear out the wings and plumes of the innocent?

o,, “ : ^ -

-jniSSl nfJhZA ”" fo ' ds

(rIt\lTrJ CV ^ * rt . wa$ a , Crow in outwd aspect, was
(reaMv-) a falcon in asp,ration and (one whose gaze) turned not

«S) r k fi v;s c ,tt “f^=n s■ upo “ doubt '*“*

* *

J ?JJ Fhew mghungalc, which throws thee into ecstasy, hath the
rose-garden m its heart J ’

Their parrot was (always) independent of sugar, for the
trtfmsvithS^ a5tmgneSS ah ° Wcd its face < uas «*«aled) to it

■ SsS;— J «*-**>

t-t. Book il r verst 1M2.


SOLOMON AND THE BIRDS 417

The feet of their peacocks are fairer to see than (all) others in
peacock's plumage.

The speeches of princely birds 1 are (meaningless as) an echo;
where is the speech of the birds of Solomon?

How wilt thou know' the cries of the birds, when thou hast
never seen Solomon for a single moment?

The wings of that bird whose note thrills (them that can hear ?iu
it) are beyond Hast and West,

Its every course is from the Footstool of God to the earth,
and from the earth to the Throne of God it moves in glory and
majesty, J

, bird that goes without this Solomon is in love with

darkness, like a bat.

Make thyself familiar with Solomon, O reprobate bat, in
order that thou mayst not remain in darkness for ever*

When thou guest one ell’s length in diat direction, like the
ell thou xwilt become the standard of measurement;

And (even by) thy hopping lamely and limply in that dircc- w 6 5
tion, thou wilt be freed from all lameness and limpness.


The story of the ducklings which were fostered hy a domestic fowl.

Thou art the offspring of a duck, though a domestic fowl has
nursed thee beneath her wing.

Thy mother was the duck of that Sea; thy nurse was of the
earth and devoted to the dry land.

The desire which is in thy heart for the Sea—thv soul hath
that nature (instinct) from thy mother.

I he desire thou hast for the drv land is from this nurse.
Leave the nurse, for she is an evil counsellor.

Leave the nurse on the dry land, and press on; come into the J?? 1 *
faea of spiritual reality, like the ducks.

(Even) if thy mother should bid thee be afraid of the water
fear not thou, but push speedily into the Sea.

Thou art a duck: thou art one that lives (both) on dry and
wet; thou art not one like the domestic fowl, whose house is
dug (in the ground).

Thou art a king in virtue of (the text), li e bait ennobled the
sons of Adam: thou setteat foot both on the dry land and on the
Sea.

For in spirit thou art (w hat is signified bv the text), We have
conveyed them on the Sea : push forward (then) from (the state
implied in the words), We have conveyed them on the land.

The angels have no access to the land; the animal kind, again
are ignorant caf the Sea.

1 ihe great Ones of C his worJJ,


i

(


4*8 MATHNAWl, BOOK II

Thou in (thy) body art an animal, and in (thy) spirit thou
art of the angels, so that thou mayst walk on the earth and also
in the sky ;

So that the seer with heart divinely inspired may be* in
appearance, a man like yourselves*

His body of dust (is here), fallen upon the earth; (but) his
spirit (is) circling in yonder highest sphere (of Heaven)

WfcfiU are water-birds, O lad: the Sea fully knows our language.

37*0 1 herefore the Sea is (our) Solomon p and we are as the birds

(familiar with Solomon): in Solomon we move unto everlasting.

With Solomon set thy foot in the Sea,, that the water* David-
like, may make a hundred rings of mail (ripples).

That Solomon is present to all, but (His) jealousy binds
(our) eyes (with spells) and enchants (us),

So that from folly and drowsiness (forgetfulness) and vanity- —
He is beside us T and (yet) we are sick of Him.

I fie noise of thunder gives the thirsty man headache, when
he does not know that it (the thunder) brings on the rain -clouds
of felicity,

J?* „ His eye remains (fixed) upon the running stream a unaware of
the delicious taste of the Water of Heaven.

He has urged the steed of (his) attention towards (secondary)
causes: consequently he remains debarred from the Causer.

(But) one that sees the Causer plainly—how should he set
his mind upon the (secondary) causes in the world?

How the pilgrims were amazed at the miracles of the ascetic
tchom they found {tit tug) alone in the desert.

Amidst the desert lived an ascetic* absorbed in devotion like
the people of "Abbadan 1 *

I he pilgrims from (different) countries arrived there: their
eyes fell upon the parched ascetic.

The dwelling-place of the ascetic was dry, (but) he was moist
in temperament: in the simoom of the desert he had a remedy
(for his moistness)*

I he pilgrims were amazed at his solitude and his welfare in
the midst of bane.

He stood on the sand, (engaged) in the ritual prayer — sand
irom the heat whereof the water in a pot would boil."

\ ou would have said he was (standing) enraptured amongst
herbs and flowers, or mounted on Buraq or Du] JuI - ;

- uLiSf ^btediyu for ‘Abh£d£nEyya \s justified hv the feet that

Abb4dan was ongmatty named Abbott, Cf. Yiqtir* Mu'jam al-BuMdn,

cd. Ufltenfeld, m p 2 folk* tnd Tk*zy y Supplement. H,01 (under

The town hdd a gTtar reputation for ^sretidsm (Yitqui, lll r §98, 6 and 17).

* See p. 187, notes t and ^


THE ASCETIC AND THE PILGRIMS 419

Or that his feet were un silk and broidcred cloths 1 or that to
him the simoom was more pleasant than the zephyr.

They (the pilgrims) stood waiting, (whilst) he remained :09s
standing in prayer, (sunk) in long meditation.

When the dervish came back (to himself) from (his state of)
absorption (in God), one of that company, a man (spiritually)
alive and of enlightened mind,

*, Observed that water was trickling from his hands and face,

*+ (and that) his garment was wet with the traces of ablution;

.1 So he asked him, " Whence hast thou water? ” He lifted his

* hand, (indicating) that it came from heaven,

lie (the pilgrim) said, "Docs it come whenever thou wilt,
without (any) well and without (any) rope of palm-fibre}

Solve our difficulty, O Sultan of the Religion, in order that ;Bms
thy (spiritual) experience may give us certain faith.

Reveal to us one of thy mysteries, that we may cut from our
waists the cords (of infidelity),”

He (the ascetic) turned his eyes to heaven, saying, "(O God),
answer the prayer of the pilgrims!

I am accustomed to seeking daily bread from above: Thou
hast opened to me the door from above,

G Thou who from noti-spatialitv hast brought space into
view, and hast made manifest (the fact that) in heaven is your
daity bread ."

in the midst of this orison a fair cloud suddenly appeared, jBoj
like a water-bearing elephant,

And began to pour down rain, like water from a water-skin:
the rain-water settled in the ditch and in the hollows.

The cloud kept raining tears, like a water-skin, and the
pilgrims all opened their water-skins.

One party (among them), in consequence of these marvellous
happenings, were cutting the cords (of unbelief) from their
waists.

I he certainty (faith) of another group was on the increase
because of this miracle—and God knows best how to guide

aright.

Another group (were) unrcceptive, sour and unripe, eternal!v jSio
imperfect ones, (Here) ends the discourse.



*


c A to B R 1 D G E

Printed by W. l-EWis, UJi.
Al tht Umvmity Frets


V


Archaeological Library


CaUKo, §9/££7


/^U^y/Yi'c


Author-



Title--


- - -


BomdTrar Ho,


Data of luuq


i


Datfl cl JUtum


~


/


r#^ OL °Cs c


%


GOVT. OF INDIA ^
^ Department of Archaeology


NEW DELHI


PJeaae help us to keep the book
clean and moving.


\ _ / •;
