The Mathnawí of Jalálu'ddín Rūmí, Vol. I (Nicholson) (Jalál al-Dîn Rūmí (R. A. Nicholson, trans.), 1925)
========================================================================================================
Nicholson's Mathnawi, Vol. 1 (Books I-II, Persian text with translation). Completes the pre-1931 translation volumes. Public domain. Internet Archive.

- b .
“GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
| ARCHAOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
a CENTRAL , ie

ARCHEOLOGICAL + |

LIBRARY a

| ACCESSION NO.90682 |
| CALL No. B41. 55 Si/ [Rum] Nic ar

“Dc 3A. 78
== _ — — Zs
=
i*

Ly
} y *
=
» =. i
7 =|
7
P|
rd
A.
ho
~~
is |
iad
=
*
so egal °
+ Spt :
) = PROBSTHAIN & Co.
= Oriental Booksellers,
- Saws Gt. Rusesil St eet, %
ef Brite Mussum
== "LONDON, W.0. :
fi a" 1 OL * * rd *

et Le als |

ORIENTAL TEXTS APPROVED
BUT NOT FINANCED BY THE TRUSTEES AND SOLD
BY MESSRS, LUZAC & Co.

The Safar-ndma, Rawshand'i-ndma and Sa‘ddat-ndma of Na-
sir-i Khusraw (“Kaviani"” Press. Berlin, 1923), 8s.

The Zddu ‘Il-Musdfirin of Nasir-i Khusraw (Kaviani’ Press.
Berlin, 1923), r5s-

The Wajh-i Din of Nasiri Khusraw (*Kaviani" Press. Berlin,
1924), 45.

The Silsilatu 'n-Nasab-i Safawiyya of Shaykh Husayn ibn
Shaykh Abddl-i Zahidi (*lranshahr” Press. Berlin, 1343/
1924), 25.

_ —— =
— aL ama F
as L . | La
t i i

lea

“BE. ¥ W. GIBB MEMORIAL”
SERIES.
NEW SERIES, IF.

= 4
* x 7

ee fee
oe aS oy. tea

pe

THE MATHNAWI

JALALU'DDIN RUMI

EDITED FROM THE OLDEST MANUSCRIPTS AVAILABLE
WITH CRITICAL NOTES, TRANSLATION, AND
COMMENTARY

BY

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON,
LITT. D., LL.D.,. F-B.A.
Lecturer in Persian in the University of Cambridge,
Formerly Fellow of Trinity College.

VOLUME I.

CONTAINING THE TEXT OF THE FIRST AND
SECOND BOOKS.

B1551 —gagse Ry 18-5

7. |

PRINTED BY MESSRS. E. J. BRILL, LEIDEN,
FOR THE TRUSTEES OF THE E. J. W. GIBB “MEMORIAL”
AND PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. LUZAC AND Co.,
46, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.
1925.

———_
a ana, GENERAL L OF ass
me Cn Ros
AS £5 sel

a

Ahoy

PRINTED BY E. J. BRILL,
LEYDEN (HOLLAND).

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGIGAL
LIBRARY, NEW we. cil.
Ac. No, <ehe7R....
inte... .6- Pees cites
Call No, 34! ° .231/tens

ERRATUM.

INTRODUCTION, p.6, 1.5. For Bahldl read Buhlal.

TAts Folume is one
of a Series
published by the Trustees af the

“Ee ¥ W. GIBB MEMORIAL".

The Funds of this Memortal are dertved from the Jnterest aceruing
From a Sum of money given by the late MRS. GIBB of Glasgow, to
perpetuate the Memory of her beloved son

ELIAS FOHN WILKINSON GIBB,

and to promote those researches into the History, Literature, Philo-
sophy and Religion of the Turks, Persians and Arabs, to which, from
his Youth ufnoards, until Ais premature and deeply lamented Death in
his forty-fifth year, on December 5, rpor, Ais life was devoted,

4
eat “er, -- a Sania pall | hegre

OM Oy US LAG. LEE is UIRT
“These are our works, these works our souls display ;
Behold our works when we Aave passed away".

*
.
* Li

“EF W. GIBB MEMORIAL":

ORIGINAL TRUSTEES.

| JANE GIBB, died November 26, 1904),
E, G. BROWNE,

G. LE STRANGE,

|. F. AMEDROZ, died March x7, 1917).
A. G. ELESS,

fk. A. NICHOLSON,

SIR FE. DENISON ROSS,

ADDITIONAL TRUSTEE.

IDA W. BE. OGILVY GREGORY, appointed 1903.

CLERK OF THE TRUST.

H", I. RAYNES,
go, Aegen! Sfreet,
CAMBAIDGE,

PUBLISHER FOR THE TRUSTEES.

MESSRS. LUZAC & Co.,
#6, Great Russell Street,
LONDON, W.C.

‘hk. FF W. GIBB MEMORIAL” PUBLICATIONS.

OLD SERIES. (25 works, 37 published volumes.)

I. Babur-ndma (Turki text, fac-simile), ed. Beveridge,
1905. Oui of print.

II. History of Tabaristan of Ibn Isfandiyar, abridged
transl. Browne, 1905, &s.

III, 1-5. History of Rasuli dynasty of Yaman by al-
Khazraji; 1, 2, transl. of Sir James Redhouse; 19g07—
8, 7s. each; 3, Annotations by the same, 1908, §55.;
4, 5, Arabic text ed. Muhammad ‘Asal, 1go8—
1913, 8s. each.

IV. Omayyads and “Abbdsids, transl. Margoliouth from
the Arabic of G. Zaidan, 1907, 55.

V. Travels of Ibn Jubayr, Arabic text, ed. de Goeje,
1907, Tos.

VI, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. Yaqut's Dict. of learned men (/rshdau-
‘l-Arié), Arabic text, ed. Margoliouth, 1908—1913;
205., I25., 105, 155-, 1§s. respectively.

VII, 1, 5, 6. Tajdribu'l-Umam of Miskawayhi (Arabic text,
fac-simile), ed. le Strange and others, 1g09— 1917, 75.
each vol.

VII. Marzubdn-ndma (Persian text), ed. Mirza Muhammad,
1909, I25.

IX. Textes Houroiifis (French and Persian), by Huart and
Riza Tevfiq, 1909, 10s.

Xx. Mu‘jam, an old Persian system of prosody, by Shams-
i-QOays, ed. Mirza Muhammad, 1909, 15s.

XI, 1, 2. Chahdr Maqdla; 1, Persian text, ed. and an-
notated by Mirza Muhammad, 1910. I2s.; 2, English
transl, and notes by Browne, 1921, 155.

AAI,

x

Introduction a I'Histoire des Mongols, by Blochet,

Igo, TOs.

. Diwan of Hassdn b. Thabit (Arabic text), ed. Hirsch-

feld, 1910, 7s. 6d.

1, 2. Ta’rikh-i-Guzida of Hamdu'llah Mustawfi;
1, Persian text, fac-simile, I9g11, 155.; 2, Abridged
translation and Indices by Browne and Nicholson,
1913, IOs.

Nugtatu'l-K4f (History of the Babis) by Mirzd Jani
(Persian text), ed. Browne, IgII, 12s.

1, 2, 3. Ta'rikh-i-Jahan-gushay of Juwayni, Persian
text, ed. Mirza Muhammad; 1, Mongols, 1913, 15§s.;
2, Khwarazmshahs, 1917, (5s.; 3, Assassins, in pre-
paration.

Kashfu'l-Mahjib (Sufi doctrine), transl. Nicholson,
I9tI, 155. ,

2 (all hitherto published), Jami‘u't-Tawdrikh of
Rashidu'd-Din Fadlu'llah (Persian text), ed. and an-
notated by Blochet, 1912, 155.

Kitabu'l-Wulat of al-Kindi (Arabic text), ed. Guest,
1912, 155.

Kitabu'l-Ansab of as-Sam‘ani (Arabic text, fac-simile),
1913, 20s,

Diwdns of ‘Amir b. at-Tufayl and ‘Abid b. al-Abras
(Arabic text and transl. by Sir Charles J. Lyall),
1913, 12s.

- Kitdbu'l-Luma‘ (Arabic text), ed. Nicholson, 1914, 15s.

i, 2. Nuzhatu-l-Qulub of Hamdu'llah Mustawfi; 1,
Persian text, ed. le Strange, 1915, 8s.; 2, English
transl. le Strange, 1918, 8s.

- Shamsu'l-"Ulim of Nashwan al-Himyari, extracts

from the Arabic text with German Introduction and
Notes by ‘Azimu’d-Din Ahmad, 1916, 5s.

Diwans of at-Tufayl b. “Awf and at-Tirimmah b.
Hakim (Arabic text), ed. Krenkow, in the Press|

L

Il.

NL

IV.

x1

NEW SERIES,

Fars-nama of Ibnu'l-Balkhi, Persian text, ed. le Strange
and Nicholson, 1921, 20s.

Rahatu'’s-Sudur (History of Saljuqs) of ar-Rawandi, Per-
sian text, ed. Muhammad Iqbal, 1921, 475. 64.
Indexes to Sir C, J. Lyall's edition of the Mufaddaliyat,
compiled by A. A. Bevan, 1924, 42s.

Mathnawi-i Ma‘nawi of Jalalu'ddin Rumi. Vol. I, Per-
sian text of the First and Second Books, ed. Nicholson,
1925, 20s.

Mazandaran, topography of, and travels in, by H. L.
Rabino, with Map (in the Press).

Diwan of al-A‘shd, Arabic text with German translation
by R. Geyer (in the Press).

Jawami‘u 1l-Hikaydt of “Awfi, a critical study of its
scope, sources and value, by Nizamu'ddin (in the
Press).

Letters of Rashidu'’ddin Fadlu'll4h, abridged English
transl by Muhammad Shafi‘, followed by transl, of
Tanstiq-nama (on precious stones) by the late Sir A.
Houtum-Schindler (in preparation).

A History of Chemistry in Mediaeval Islam, by E. J.
Holmyard.

Turkistan at the time of the Mongolian Invasion, by
W. Barthold, English transl., revised by the author,
aided by H. A. R. Gibb.

WORKS SU S3/O5 £0 OY THE TRUSTEES.

Firdawsu ‘l-Hikmat of ‘Ali ibn Rabban at-Tabari, ed.
Muhammad az-Zubayr as-Siddiai (in the Press).

“-—
.

INTRODUCTION.

This is the first instalment of what I hope will eventually be a
complete text and translation of the Mathnawi in six volumes, of
which the first, third, and fifth are to contain the Persian text,
while the second, fourth, and sixth are reserved for the English
translation. To look furthef ahead, two or three volumes of com-
mentary will be required in order to make the text and translation
fully intelligible; and there should also be an introductory volume
dealing with the life and times of Jalalu’ddin Rimi and with the
linguistic, literary, historical, doctrinal and other aspects of the
poem as a whole. I do not know whether I shall be able to carry
out this project, but one condition of success, namely, the means
to publish rapidly at regular intervals, is already ensured by the
liberality of my colleagues who are Trustees of the E. J. W. Gibb
Memorial, If the text and translation were finished in seven years
from now, I should be well satisfied, though it is true that without
the commentary a great part of the translation must remain no
more than a skeleton.

The plan sketched here has long been present to my mind. I
have no doubt that its originator, though he never suggested it in
words, was /o mio maestro Professor E. G. Browne, who first helped
me to appreciate the extraordinary qualities of “the Persian Qur’in”.
The impressions then formed were strengthened by study of Ja-
lilu'ddin’s Diwén, specimens of which the Cambridge University
Press published in 1898 under the title of Selected Poems from the
Divani Shamsi Tabriz. At that time what I had in view was an
annotated translation, but it soon became evident that this would
be of little use by itself. Before explaining the reasons which have

2 INTRODUCTION.

led me to prepare a critical edition, I may call attention to an al-
most unrecorded episode in the history of Persian scholarship.

It appears that a corrected text of the Mathnawi, with French
translation and notes, was ready for publication in 1799. I owe my
knowledge of this fact to Professor D. B. Macdonald, who last year
kindly lent me a copy which he had acquired of a very rare book '),
entitled Notice sur le Schah’-Namé de Ferdowssi et traduction de
plusieurs pieces relatives & ce poéme. Ouvrage posthume de M, le Con-
seiller I. et R. De Wallenbourg, précédé de la biographie de ce sa-
vant par A. de Bianchi. A Vienne, de Vimprimerie de J. V. Degen.

Jogues de Wall- 1810. Nothing in this tiny volume is #0 interesting *) as the ac-
enbourg (1763- count given in the preface of Jaques de Wallenbourg’s career as
at a diplomatist, his delight in Persian literature, his theory of trans-
lation, and the tragic destruction of the work to which he had de-
yoted six years of his life.

jl fut d’abord placé & Constantinople, en qualité de jeune-de-
langue; bientét aprés, d’interpréte auprés de linternonciature im-
périale et royale & la Porte ottomane, et employé 4 différentes
missions pendant la dernitre guerre contre les turcs, soit au camp
ottoman pour préparer les négotiations de paix, soit au congrés de
Sistow, ou elle fut conclue en 1791; et enfin i Vienne, en qualité
de secrétaire aulique et conseiller impérial au departement des af-
faires étrangéres..... Comme savant, il ajoutoit & une vaste et
profonde érudition la connaissance parfaite des principales langues
de l'Europe, ainsi que celle du gree moderne, du ture, de l’arabe
et du persan. Comme homme de lettres, il se plaisoit 4 cultiver
préférablement cette derniére langue, tant & cause de la donceur de
son accent, que du grand nombre d’écrivains qui honorérent les
derniers sitcles de la littérature persanne..... Ce fut en 1792 qu'il
entreprit, et acheva 4 Constantinople aprés six années de travail, la
traduction du Messnéri, fameux ouvrage poétique sur différens points
de religion, de morale, de jurisprudence, de politique, et d’his-

1) There is o copy in the British Museum.
8) See, however, Prof. Macdonald's article on The Exrlier History of the Arabian
Nights (J. BR. A. 5., July, 1924, pp. 367 and 397).

IXTRODUCTION. 5

toire..... Il avoit porté, selon sa coutume, dans la traduction de His projected
cet ouvrage, la fidélité du texte jusqu’au dernier scrupule. ll con- rey"
servoit par-ld dans leur intégrité les traits originaux, ainsi que la 4), syitinawi,
nouveauté des idées, I'énergie des expressions, et la fraicheur du
coloris vierge encore; mais, pour éviter toutefois le risque de de-
venir fastidieux ou barbare par un assujettissement trop servile, il
paraphrasoit en forme de notes ce qu'il étoit impossible de rendre
littéralement en francois..... Ayant déji mis au net sa traduction
et ses notes,-ainsi que le texte persan qu'il avoit eu soin de véri-
fier sur plusieurs exemplaires, afin d'en garantir l’exactitude (per-
fection qui manque le plus souvent aux manuscrits orientaux par
l'ignorance et la matérialité des copistes), il se proposoit de faire
imprimer le tout 4 son arrivée 4 Vienne; mais l'incendie qui en
1799 mit en cendres la moitié de Péra, consuma et l'original persan
rectifié, et la traduction et lea notes qui devoient l'accompagner.

M. de Wallenbourg déplora cette perte beaucoup plus que celle
de tout de reste de ses effets.”

Fortune does not always favour the brave, and the name of the
earliest European translator of the Mathnaei is wellnigh forgotten.
Although his work may have had more elegance than scientific
value, his spirit and resolution deserve a tribute of respect from one
who hopes for better luck in the same enterprise.

I shall have no difficulty in showing that a revised text of the
Mathnawi is needed, not only to serve as a basis for the translation
and commentary, but on wider grounds as well. The single argu- Need for a cri-
ment against it is one of expediency. Not a few may urge that in- tice! edition of
stead of producing editions of texts already published in the East, eras
Persian scholars ought to concentrate their efforts on editing the
valuable and important works which at present exist only or mainly
in manuscript. While sympathising with that view, I think it would
have unfortunate results if it were applied indiscriminately, or if
the accumulation of new materials were allowed to bar the way to
improvement and cultivation of the old. The prose-writers, I agree,
have been neglected in favour of the poets and underestimated in
comparison with them; and for this neglect and disparagement there

hi

4 : INTRODUCTION.

is no excuse. Let the balance be restored, by all means, and the
sooner the better. But something remains to be said. Persian studies
will not flourish as they should until the poetical masterpieces from
which Persian literature draws its chief power of attraction, and
which constitute its claim to rank as a world-literature, are made
more accessible, in the fullest sense of the word, than they are
now. The Shdhwima, one of the two greatest poems in the language,
can scarcely be obtained for love or money. And when shall we
see the first European edition of Nidhimi’s Khamsa?

The Mathnawi has often been printed or lithographed in the

Oriental editi- East, and some of these editions are good of their kind '). The best,

O04.

I think, is that in six volumes containing the Persian text with
Turkish translation and commentary by Isma‘il Rusukhi of Angora,
who lived in the early 17 century; but copies are extremely hard
to come by, while the editions of Biliq and Teheran also lie be-
yond the reach of most students, Apart from this, however, the
Oriental editions differ greatly from each other, and even those
which give something like a standard text are falsified and inter-
polated to a considerable extent; ¢. g., the Buliq text of Books I
and IL includes about 140 and the Teheran text about 800 verses
which are wanting in the oldest MSS. There is ample evidence that
at an early period the copyists began to alter the text of the poem
for reasons which I will set forth in detail presently. In many cases
it is still possible to detect these corruptions and restore the ori-
ginal readings, though the MS. that has most faithfully preserved
the ancient recension contains only the firat of the six books of
the Mathnawf. But since the MS. next in authority (dated A. IL. 718)
exhibits a more genuine text of the entire poem than any that has
been published hitherto, I feel that the tedious work of collation
has been worth doing. Another grave, though less vital, defect in

1) The text in this volume is founded entirely on MSS., but it has been collated
throughout with Ismail Angiravi's text and with that of the Bulag edition (A. H. 1268),
I om also familiar with the edition of Teheran (A. H. 1307), which I acquired from
Professor Browne when reading for the Indian Languages Tripos in 1890. In my opi<
nion, the Turkish editions are superior to any others (including several Indian ones)
that I have seen,

INTRODUCTION. b

the Oriental editions is their ambiguity. The Mathnawi demands
thought and intelligence from those who study it, and they on their
part have the right to expect that ite meaning shall not be ob-
scured by doubts as to orthography and syntax, due to omission of
the izdfat, absence of vowels, and the fact that <\ is not distin-
guished from 4. For example, in these editions ., besides its ordi-
nary uses as a pronoun and conjunction, represents five separate
words, namely, é, straw, é, time, é, little , 5. mountain and &
dung; and it may oceur, with different meanings, twice or thrice
in the same verse. Where the sense is plain, such uncertainties do
not matter, but in the Mathnawi the sense is often anything but
plain. I have endeavoured to provide students with a text which
will not puzzle them unnecessarily. The verses in each Book are
numbered from beginning to end, so that henceforth it will be easy
to refer to any particular verse or passage.

So far as the present volume is concerned, I have used five
manuscripts, four of which were written within some seventy years
after A. H. 672, the year in which Jalalu’ddin died. Three of the
five, designated A, B, and LZ respectively, contain the Mathnawf
complete :

A (British Museum, Or. 5602), 290/f., 25 lines = 50 verses on a
full page, written in four columns in a small distinct hand by Bias
“Ali b. Muhammad (?), who finished the transcription towards the “*¢ {r_ the
present edition.
end of the year 718 (A. D. 1318—19). — is not, as a rule
distinguished from .s, nor a from ti but the post-vocalic 3
is absent. 7

B (Munich), N° 35 in Aumer’s Cat. of the Persian Manuscripts in
the Staatsbibliothek in Miinchen, 281 ff., 25 lines = 50 verses ;
on a full page, elegantly and correctly written in four columns
by Muhammad b. al-H4jj Dawlatshih b. Yusuf al-Shirdzf, who
completed the transcription on the 15th of Dhu ‘l-Hijja in the
year 744 (20th of April, A. D. 1344). % is distinguished from
1 from wm and 3 is written for 5 after vowels.

INTEODUCTION.

L (in my possession), 341 ff., 25 lines = 50 verses on a full page,

clearly written in four columns. The prose prefaces are wanting.
Dated the 7th of Rabf* al-Akhir, 843 (17% of September, A. D.
1439). The text of the Mathnawi ends on f. 319. A later scribe
has added the Wuglatnéma of Shaykh Bahlil (see Sprenger’s
Oudh Catalogue, p. 570, N° 157). — is distinguished from J,

‘d from w) and 3 is written for » after vowels.

The two remaining MSS., designated C and D, contain the text
of Books I and II respectively:

C (British Museum, Or. 6438), 114 /f., 18 lines = 18 verses on a

full page, written in fairly legible naskhf, with frequent omis-
sion of diacritical points, Undated, but must be early 14th cen-
tury, if it does not belong to the 13th. —. is not, as a rule,
distinguished from .., nor ‘d from te: and the post-vocalic 3 is
often marked. The unique character of this MS. of Book I will
be illustrated below. Its pagination is in some disorder. The
following table, in which the first column refers to my edition,
shows how the text of €@ should be re-arranged, and alao what
lacunae occur in it.
Preface Soa ce hee oe » Com.
\¥-—1 wid a se Dat el Ge Pate om,
AI—'\ + oT = 7 am . = = . C ff. ] r.—do i.
LT. AY * * * = ii . = in hy OM.
VPARHITU «6 @ oe 6 we we ws OS H.—Bhr,
CiVo-Uke: 6 2 ES Se BS OE OR
0 ee er Aa) Be
IVR T—1)-t 2 © 2 ww ws te 6 OE 82 — hr,
LAT. —IVEV «= «© « es ew eh elhUvel6h6UCl Um,
Late—CATL 2 ww ee cw ew sl OH BOR e

CIV—LATo «ew ew ew ew OF CT e—106 6.
SUT eee ee we ee OC HE OS OS
CAC —S41b 2 a we ee Be OL Ole.
TUV—PITE © eee eh eh ele UC OE OT 8.

SUIT MIEA. 3 oe sw we a te OES.
Cite: ere ut ae pe DER

Ceo Ot ce we es ew el we OO 108 0.—I 144,
Cae |—C411T «oe « 2 et we @ a) Com:
2a ) er ab ee sc fe

D (Munich), N° 45 in Aumer's Catalogue, 105 ff., 19 lines = 19 verses
on a full page, written in large clear naskhf by Musa b. Yahya
b. Hamza al-Mawlawi, who completed the transeription at Da-
mascus on the 4th of Sha‘b4n, A. H. 706 (8th of February, A.D.
1307). This fine MS, of Book II sometimes distinguishes — from
— and a from te and almost invariably marks the post-vocalic

5. Short vowels and other orthographical signs are frequently
inserted.

By the courtesy of Dr. L. D. Barnett and Mr. E, Edwards of
the British Museum and Dr. G. Leidinger, Director of the Manu-
script Department in the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, I was provided
with excellent photographic copies of ABCD, for which the prayer
etige ‘ail Gi is the most fitting acknowledgement I can think of.
On the whole, the four oldest MSS., ABC and ABD, are in sub-
stantial agreement. All of them have readings peculiar to themselves,
but except in the case of C these are not very numerous or im-
portant. On the other hand, L, written a century after B, shows
far greater variety and has already incorporated many new verses
in its text. Therefore, as regards the First and Second Books, the
question to be decided was this: Is any of the three MSS., ABC and
ABD, superior in authenticity to the other two, and if so, to what

8 INTRODUCTION,

extent? — for the maxim seniores priores is one which no editor
ought to believe till he has verified it. As ABC are used for Book
I and ABD for Book II, it will be convenient to deal with each
Book separately.
The number of verses is slightly different in A, B and C. Each
MS. omits some which occur in the other two (A 27, B 17, and
C 34), and B has eight which do not occur either in A or in C.
This test, though indecisive, gives the first place to C, the second
Manuscripts to A, and the third to &. I will now demonstrate that the same
used for Book I. conclusion is reached by following another line of investigation.
Let us examine the various readings in the three MSS, and see
whether, in some instances at least, it is not possible to discover
the causes which produced them. If it can be shown that in A and
# there are a large number of readings which have been altered
in a particular way for a definite reason, and if the originals of
these readings are found in C, the inference is obvious; and we
may then presume that in other variations of reading, where no
such reason is apparent, C also possesses the greater authority.
The argument depends on considerations which have been sug:
gested by a careful study of the prosody of the Mathnawt. I need
not go deeply into this on the present occasion, but as some know-
ledge of the subject is essential even to those who read the poem
in a critical text, the following remarks will not be out of place,
Jalélu'ddin’s versification is lax compared with that of poets like
Sa‘di and Hafidh. The izéfat is frequently dropped after , (.3# isla)
and .¢; the “silent” ,— may be lengthened in three of its four
possible positions in the foot or elided before a vowel (cf. | ty,
The prosody 1-Y¥, T%A%); long vowels are sometimes, though rarely, shortened
. a Pe before a consonant (I f4., IL joAy);") the nimfatha may be re-
quired after a closed syllable ending in cy (eg \gile, scanned

-v-);

1) In the oldest MSS. & and at are sometimes written § and ui

eren when they
must be scanned a4 short syllables before consonants.

INTRODUCTION, 9

and neglected not only in Arabic phrases (¢. 9. cnidall talib, scanned
-v--|-»-; c ec, scanned ~--|-~, an example which il-

lustrates the author's bold use of the metrical tashadid), but also per-
haps in Persian words now and then'). For our immediate pur-
pose, however, his practice in regard to the rhyme is especially
instructive. Here, again, he takes great liberties. It has been as-
serted *) that such rhymes as 5 (nvr) and re (ger) are inadmis-

sible in the Mathnawf, but they are quite common (e.g. I t2y one

and oy I YLT ,5* and 5923 I ToA’ ot and Ss I fot. ia:
and pulls I [4to and toy BS and aa) etc., etc). On the
other hand, so far as I havé noticed, yd-yi mo‘rif (i) is hardly
ever rhymed with yd-yi majhiul (&);7) in AC the latter often rhy-
mes with \ (cd).

There is a second class of Papertes: rhymes, in which the short

vowels are different, ¢. . opt and Saly yj and ry 5S and
Sy , or in which a short vowel corresponds to a nimfatha, e. 9.

\. i and \ All. Some examples occur in all the MSS., but the

significant fact is that their number varies according to the age Enrly altem-
of each MS. C has more of them than A, A more of them than B. repeals! the
The youngest of the three MSS. is the most correct from a pros- ;
odist’s point of view. In other words, we can here trace the pro-

cess and method by which the copyists have altered the text of

the Mathnar/, since in nearly all these cases the motive which in-

duced them to alter it is unmistakable. The number of verses af-

fected (in Book I alone) is about sixty. Without giving a full analysis,

I will set forth the evidence in some detail, as was promised above. -

1) E. g., I think the readings of AC Bul. at I \W+ and of 4D Bal. at I
are probably genuine, though I have not ventured to adopt them.

2) By Prof. C. E. Wilson in his Commentary on Book II, p. 249. —

3) The only instance I can recall just now is I \\-9, where i (jeri) rhymes
with cee (miré).

10 INTRODUCTION,

Sometimes the change could be made very simply. Thus at I
xs , Where C reads
5 IF Lad fe — : oF o Je ye pe oS
AB correct the rhyme by reading pal or OF y le in the first
hemistich; and at I [aiA, where ( reads
o aie ; * i se i“ © - Fa
2) NT ots ete ot OW Ge te we 5
A has ot oS @, and J pd ot ?- At I Tit A reads
5p RSS y A poss UH. 5 Sin Luke os,
The firat hemistich has been erased in C, but B corrects the

rhyme and reads ty bow he 5 Sin which I have inadver-
tently admitted into the text. The" original reading is that of A,
and there can be little doubt that it was also the reading of C,
In the following examples the alteration has been more extensive.
At I T7141 C reads
J. oar = = |
Pe pas td chek. oS EU os ot
in order to correct the rhyme AB read in the first hemistich
Bods a) oj oi. At I \frA, where C reads
OF oN 3 io poke: ce , ie G2 S yl Jl Ss
AB read in the first hemistich é> <2 use ed Wha Se At I 7aer,
where € reads
a a= - a 5 +2 ne u 7 = 5
we 35 ont ott ok + oe fae Ss a
AB read in the second hemistich opi oy. ail, S LS yp 3 acl,
Often both the rhyme-words are altered, and the verse is more
or leas rewritten. At I yyo C has
dye \ wt) et Ur a *35 jal vet lel ened
AB have |
Vis abe Le wh ut + ole 555 pp oma a
At I [to4 AC have

Ss GS 3\ th Ac ils jl. he 5

INTRODUCTION. 1l

B reads
NV 25 VS _~ 5] GE + sk use So wee ¥

At I ¢\jo C has

\y >) 5 \, EST ot f. Vo ol ule uP dig y ai
Here the rhyme is faulty, because a nfmfatha is made to cor-
respond to a fatha, AB therefore eliminate it and write

se STN ow haul. & tl, St te gly Pol ay,
In some cases the fault is not removed but is partially remedied.
At I Tei. C reads

- 3 i = os = a F
ode ew er GVbe yo wile S & Ay
A amends this by writing in the second hemistich

Sy ly oy oe YL
thus introducing a type of rhyme, like 23) x and ye a urtls
(instead of 35) | Puts) which is not uncommon in the Mathnavef,

but impairing the syntax, as \3 is now superfluous. It remained
for B to restore the syntax and write

We ot oe Th
Those who desire further evidence will find plenty of material
in the critical notes. I think, however, that the instances which
have been given are enough to establish what I undertook to prove,
namely ,

(1) that in many places the text of the Mathnawf was altered
by early copyists, not capriciously, but with a definite object
and in a particular way.

(2) that of the MSS. used for Book I C is the nearest to the
original, and that A comes next in order of authenticity. It
is to be noted that Z, a later and inferior MS., has fre-
quently retained readings of ( which do not occur in A or B.

The inexact prosody of the poem is quite in keeping with its

free, unelaborate, and generally colloquial style. No one is likely
to argue that the copyists represented by A and B sought to re-

12 INTRODUCTION,

move corruptions inserted by their predecessora, for if the good
rhymes of A and B had belonged to the original text, what possible
motive could any one have had for turning them into the bad rhy-
mes of C? Copyists, as a class, dislike anomalies and get rid of
them if they can; they resemble the pet bear that beat off flies
from the face of its sleeping master with a stone. Moreover, the
interpolated verses composed by Persians are technically excellent.
The ancient The Turkish seribes, it is true, write verse which is often exe-
oleate ‘** crable both in form and metre (see the Buliq edition passim), but
"even they rarely indulge in rhymes of the sort which Jaldlu’ddin
permitted himself to use. It might be conjectured that the poem
was revised by some of the author's friends after his death, when
uncorrected copies were already jn circulation; but this hypo-
thesis would not account for the gradual and incomplete process of
emendation exhibited in the MSS. Probably the first critical editors
of the Mathnawf were the copyists themselves. We have seen how
unfaithfully they dealt with it in one department, where the traces
of their handiwork happen to be conspicuous; and we can study
their habits and psychology in other fields which are less exposed

to observation. Here are a few examples chosen at random:

Atl o AT AC read

ov bb ol ot Ib I Ps oh 5\ su oy)» \plao ship
B has the correction made by some one who took offence at the

construction of 4+ ib with »,\;, and reads in the second hemistich

ot bh plo oo 5 of .

Archaic words and forms usually disappear from the later MSS.
Thus at I Aoo C has er for which AB write cal ips
while at I t7:4 ABC have ss, and I ae. At I \.r¢ AB
change {s; sisS ant, the reading of C, into js; aL pee

At I rivs € has S55 ” 3 ws; for which 4 substitute oe

dosti 5) wy me The old forms «\.3\ with alif-i mamdida (I

INTRODUCTION, 13

rt.2), \. for a (I yy), \, for ol, (I ¥.A\), and .), for
ay (I $2.1) survive in C alone, Dullness on the part of the copy-
ists may have wrought irreparable damage. The fine verse (( at I
¥¥22), which depicts the angels Harit and Mirdt gazing wrath-
fully “from the lattice (of Heaven)” upon a world sunk in sin,

ole 37 oy S\s ;\ af Pt oe lle i 5 AS coe
in AZ loses all its imaginative quality and becomes a dry state-
ment of fact:

Oyo) ogy 52 8 Sate 6 ole hile in AS oe

Since it is clear from the»preceding analysis that ( gives the The text of
text of the Mathnawf in an older form than AB, I could not heg- Book I is based
itate to make it the basis of my edition in respect of that portion :
of the poem which it covers, namely, the First Book. Lacunae in
C have been supplied from A. The points of divergence between C
and my text will be noted when I come to speak of the general
principles which have guided me in preparing the present edition.

Amongst the MSS. used for Book II (ABDL), there is none
that stands out eminently from the rest. D, on which my text is Manuscripts
based, has few readings peculiar to itself. Old as it is, it cannot be ™*? fr Book II
ranked with C; indeed I consider that in some respects it is in- .
ferior to A, and where A has preserved readings which are to be
preferred for reasons similar to those stated above, | have as a
rule adopted them, even against the authority of the other MSS.

If the accidental lacuna in D (vv. tovVe—rot1) is left out of ac-

count, D omits 41, A 50, and B 9 of the verses included in the

text. D omits 36 verses which occur in A, and A 25 which occur .
in D, while B omits 8 which occur in AD, The text includes one

verse which is found in DZ only, and five which are found in BL

only. These latter have little claim to authenticity, and I should

now be inclined to eject them (see p. 15 infra).

Of the verses, approximately 7800 in number, which compose
the text of Books I and II in the two groups of ancient MSS.

14 INTRODUCTION.

designated ABC and ABD respectively, very few are confined to
a single MS. So far, there is not much evidence of interpolation.
But in L, written a century after B, we find a considerable amount
of it"), and some of the inserted passages contain six, eight, ten,

Interpolations or more verses. The chief motives for interpolation are (1) to make

in the Matk- the transitions less abrupt; (2) to explain incidents in the narrative

aig or illustrate points of difficulty; (3) to amplify topics treated with
brevity or develop thoughts suggested by the context. A good in-
stance of the second class of interpolations occurs in the Story of
the Greengrocer and the Parrot (I 1&4), where the parrot, left alone
in the shop, is startled, and in sudden flight upsets the bottles of
oil on the grocer’s bench. What frightened the bird? The poet
offers no explanation, but L and thp Bulag edition add two verses
to inform us that the source of the mischief was a cat which had darted
into the shop in pursuit of a mouse. Again, at IT \ort ZL expands
three beautiful verses, in which the poet describes the purifying
effects of Love, into a catalogue four times as long; and this worth-
less padding is included by Whinfield in his abridged translation
of the Mathnazet *).

As regards the constitution of a text, at least two alternative
courses are open to an editor who has good MSS. at his disposal,
though the choice of one or the other will depend on circumstances,
If he has an autograph or a MS. of paramount authority, he has
his text ready-made, and while the iuferior MSS. may enable him
to correct it in mattera of detail, they will not largely supplement
or modify it. Failing such an archetype, he must construct his text
from the best MSS. available, either taking one MS. as a basis or
not. In the present case no MS. can claim absolute authority. Even

The constitu- C, which holds the highest place among them, contains 27 verses
tion ‘of the text. which are omitted in A, though on the other hand A contains $4
which are omitted in CC. While some of these 61 verses may be
interpolated, others may be genuine, and in the absence of any sure

= 1) In Book I £ has 123 verses which 4C omit. Four of these oeenr in F and about
fifty (often altered for the worse) in the Bulag edition.
3) Second edition, p. 50.

INTRODUCTION. 15

criterion I have decided to give the benefit of the doubt to them
all. On the contrary, verses which AC or AD omit, and which
occur in B or BE alone, are not likely to be genuine; the few
that were inserted in my text of Book II before I had access to D
remain there on probation, as their removal would have caused
much inconvenience '). Generally I have followed the text of one
MS. (€ for Book I and D for Book I). This was the only practic-
able course, for most of the variants are of such a kind that any
selection must have appeared capricious. The readings of C and D
have been corrected where necessary, but I have seldom admitted
a variant reading on the ground that it would express the meaning
more clearly or elegantly, since that is just the ground on which
many variations have been introduced by copyists. Their attempts
to improve the Mathnawf will not be imitated by those who re-
cognise that Jaldlu'ddin, great poet as he is, cares more for the
substance than for the form, and that the smooth perfection of
highly finished art is incongruous with the character of the poem,
the manner of its composition, and the power, fullness, and rapid-
ity of thought which it so frequently displays. Almost every cor-
rection of the € and D readings has been derived from A or B,
the two MSS. which come next in age. I have occasionally ventured
to make emendations of my own, as at I f-£\, where I read fe rs
ox 5 (MSS. and edd. unt 5 o »), and II rtvt, where MSS, and
edd. have 35> ,a= instead of 353 pe.

In its orthography my text differs little from the MS5S., but I
distinguish ., and —, tC and ad 4) and s, and ignore the post-
voealic 5, The archaie spellings are nearly always retained.

I follow the MSS. when instead of «S and « they write 5 and 3 Orthographi-
scanned as long syllables before consonants or as short syllables ECTS:
before alif; when they write oe and .4, scanned as short syllables

(1) The verses in question are ATY, \Fot, VW, Trt, Te-t,

The critical
notes,

The present
text compared
with the edition
of Ismiil An-
qiravi.

16 INTRODUCTION.

before consonants, I write © and « and give the original reading
below. The izdfat has been added throughout (except where it is
sufficiently represented by ,s), whether it has to be pronounced in
scansion or not*), Vowels and other orthographical signs have been
inserted in Arabic verses or quotations, in words of ambiguous —
meaning, and in any place where they seemed likely to help the
student.

Apart from unimportant differences of spelling and manifest errors
of writing, the critical notes furnish a complete account of the
variations which occur in the text of ABCD, but I have not re-
corded such variants as the omission of Pm aic or the substitu-
tion of an equivalent formula in the Headings. Of the variants in
L, which are numerous and extensive, only selected specimens are
given, including all the verses that do not oceur in any of the four
older MSS. The variants of the Buliq edition (Bul.) are given in
full as regards the poem itself, less fully as regards the Headings.
I have also collated the text in Isma‘il Angiravi’s Turkish com-
mentary entitled Fdtihw ‘l-Abydt. The principal variants of this
and other Oriental editions will be noticed in my commentary.

Since the lithographed and printed editions differ from each other
both as regards the readings which they adopt and the number of
verses which they include, any general comparison with the pre-
sent text is impossible. But the text most nearly resembling mine,
that of the Turkish Commentator (which I will designate as F’),
exhibits a great amount of divergence from it. In the Firat Book
F contains 42 additional verses, None of them occurs in C, and
only two in A. Seven are found in B, twenty-five in L, and thirty-
four in the Bulag edition, while there are five which occur neither
in the Biiliq edition nor in any of my M55. The variant readings
can be counted by hundreds, and many of these materially affect

1) The vertical line under a final consonant denotes that the tpdfat is to be scanned
as a long syllable; in words like 21'\, ws it indicates that the final syllnble is
long in scansion.

INTRODUCTION. 17

the form or the meaning or both. Where A differs from C, F al-
most regularly agrees with A; where C and A agree, J often fol-
lows B or L; where A and B agree, F often has the reading of
L or Bul.; where they differ, F sometimes follows A and sometimes
B; in many cases F’ and Bul. are in agreement against all the
MSS. It appears, then, that if we take C as the standard, J’ is
distinctly inferior to A and even to B, but on the other hand it
is far superior to L, with which as well as with the Buliq edition
it shows marked affinities. In the Second Book, where D takes
the place of C, the standard is lower and consequently the dif-
ferences are less. It is likely, too, that fewer corruptions have
found their way into the text of the Second Book, which was com-
posed two years after the First and may have received milder treat-
ment from copyists already familiar with the author's style. F omits
over a dozen verses which occur in ABD, but some of these are
translated and explained in the accompanying commentary and ap-
pear to have fallen out accidentally. Of the 22 verses which £
adds to those in my text, one occurs (as a doublet), in A, two (as
doublets) in D, five in B, seventeen in L, and eighteen in the
Buldg edition, while there are two that are wanting in my MSs.
and in Bul. These figures, together with the fact that / seldom
has readings peculiar to A or D, whereas it often agrees with I
or Bul. or both when they differ from AD, confirm the evidence
found in Book I for the close relationship between J’ and the an-
cestors of LL Bul. F is a good eclectic text; in Books I and IT
its independent readings of importance are comparatively few.
Next to F in merit stands the Buldg edition (A. H. 1268), which
contains, besides the spurious Seventh Book, a Turkish translation
in verse by Nahifi. Professor Wilson calls this text “moat excel-
lent.” I should not myself go so far as that, for though it is less
adulterated than the Teheran edition (A. H. 1307) and the hand-
some Cawnpore edition in six volumes, many of its verses are sheer
doggerel vamped up from more respectable materials which are
preserved in L, The Teheran text, to which a concordance (jadwal-t
abydt) is appended, bears a strong likeness to that contained in the

The Biléq
and Teheran
editions,

18 {NTRODUCTION.

Nuskha-i ndsikha-i mathnawiyydt-i sagima (Rieu, Catalogue of Per-
sian MSS. in the British Museum, vol. II, p. 589; Ethé, Catalogue
of Persian MSS. in the India Office Library, N° 1088) by “Abdu
"Latif b. ‘Abdallih al-“Abbasi of Gujrat (ob. circa A. H. 1048 =
A.D. 1638).

‘Abdu ‘l-Latif, who also edited the fHadiga of Sandi"), wrote

two commentaries on the Mathnawf*) and compiled a glossary of the
The edition of rare words which occur in it *). He states that his recension of the
Raa poem was based on more than eighty MSS. Unfortunately the abund-
- ance of his sources has only increased the depravation of his text;
the portion covering Books I and II includes about 800 verses over
and above those comprised in the text of this volume, so that,
roughly speaking, one verse in every ten is interpolated. My present
acquaintance with the Nuskha-i ndsikha does not encourage belief
that the time needed in order to examine it thoroughly would be

well spent.

What has been said will, 1 hope, eonvinee the reader that this
new edition of the Mathnatef is justified by the result. [ am aware
of its limitations and defects, but against these can be set three
main points of advantage:

(1) The original, or at least the older, form of the text has been

restored in many places.

(2) Interpolations have been reduced to a minimum. Some remain,
no doubt, but a much greater number have been extermi-
nated.

| (3) The understanding of the poem has been made easier by

\ means of vocalisation and other orthographical aids designed
to remove ambiguity in regard to spelling, grammar, and
syntax.

It is perhaps unnecessary to say that my text does not claim to

—EEEE

1) See the Introduction to The Firat Book of the Hudigatu "I-Sfagigal of Sandi, ed.
f and tr. by Major J. Stephenson (Caleutta, 1910).
. 2) Lafd'ifa "I-ma'nawi rin hugd' ig al-Mathnawi (Lucknow, A. H. 1292) and Mir'sfm
: '.Mathaai (Ethé, Catalogue of Persian MSS. tn the India Office Library, N° 1103).
3) Laafii’afa “I-fop hati (Lucknow, 1817; Cawnpore, 1905).

INTRODUCTION, 19

be a fixed, much less a final one. That is not yet in sight. The
preliminary studies (of the older Persian mystical literature and
especially of Sand’{ and ‘Attir) have scarcely begun. Even on the
narrowest ground, such a text would require for its preparation and
construction a larger number of ancient MSS. than I have been
able to consult; it might then be possible to determine more pre-
cisely the relation of these MSS. to each other and to the archetype
which, in my judgement, we are still far from having fully recovered.
I have referred to the importance of C for establishing the text
of Book I, and if a MS. of the same authority, containing the entire
Matknawf, should some day be brought to light, it would probably
entail a revision of all our texts of the poem. Again, though this
volume, with the translation which is fo follow it, has occupied
most of my time during the last four years, it leaves many pro-
blems unsettled, as must happen when the earlier part of a work
is published before the later portions have been studied in detail.
This is not the best way to edit the Mathnaiwf, but in the circum-
stances there was no other. In writing the commentary I may find
reason to reject or modify the views which I now hold as to the
interpretation of certain passages; and of course a change of view
may involve changes in the text.

The appended list of corrections is largely made up of misprints
due to occasional indistinctness in the Beyrout type. Errors of more
consequence are marked with an asterisk.

I gratefully acknowledge the generous help I have received in
different ways not only from colleagues and friends to whose kind-
ness I have long been accustomed — Professor E. G. Browne, Pro-
fessor A. A. Bevan, Dr. F. W. Thomas, and Mr. E. Edwards —
but also from many friends, some of them personally unknown to
me, who have shown their interest in the work by giving or lending
valuable manuscripts and books and supplying me with informa-
tion, To Indian scholars, including past and present Government
Research Students in this University, I owe a great deal. For in-
stance, Muhammad Shafi‘, one of my former pupils and now Pro-
fessor of Arabic at Lahore, most kindly procured and sent to me

C

20 INTRODUCTION.

as a gift several lithographed editions of Persian commentaries on
the Mathnawt, while Mr. ‘Abdu "l-Majid of Daryabad, Bara Banki,
with whom I have been in frequent and profitable correspondence,
was so obliging as to send to Cambridge for my private use his
own copies of rare Persian and Arabic MSS. preserved in Indian
libraries '). And amongst my chief benefactors I must certainly
reckon Husayn Danish Bey, a Persian resident in Constantinople,
described by Professor Browne as “a notable man of letters both
in Persian and Turkish”, who, besides obtaining for me a copy of
Ismé‘fl Angiravi’s Commentary, had the extraordinary kindness to
present me with a carefully collated MS. of Jiu md fiki written
by his own hand *).

The second volume of this editiqn, comprising the English trana-
lation of Books I and II, is almost ready for the Press and should
be published in about a year from now.

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON.

CampripGe, December 1924.

1) Two of these ore copies of an early (4th century) treatise on Sdfism, entitled
&\ 3) aad\ and wrongly attributed to Junayd. I hope ere long to publish the text
and translation which I have prepared.

2) Concerning Fiti mi fiki see my paper, “The Taoble-talk of Jalalo‘ddin Rami",
in the Centenary Supplement to the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1924), p. 225
foll. Studenta of Persian liternture will be glad to learn that the work is being edited
by Mr. ®aAbdu "l-Majid from the Constantinople transcript and several Indian MSS. |
was indebted to him for my first opportunity of studying it, and wish now to express
my gratitude to Prof. Muhammad Shafi and Mr. A. C, Woolner, Honorary Librarian
of the Panjab University, through whose efforts a copy of the Rampur State Library
MS. waa obtained ond lent to me for a long pericd.

LIST OF CORRECTIONS.

BOOK L

Preface, p. 1, L A, read yes ;
Verse Ifo, read Sy.
» I%X, note, read »\ for 5.
» IVE, read o,-.
OL ae
» V&E, note, read is for 5.
» bot, read (3442. The reading (34 , 4+ might be de-

fended as being equivalent to pk ix 9 x= and parallel to
oe) 4 elie, but I think , 4,2 is correct, though none of
my MSS. supports it, For the plural followed by a singular,
ef. Il YAY.

» IA), note, read “is written”.

» A&R, note, read *is added”,

n VAT, read oe OF o-

oe oe

» V2, the first word is oy.

» TRA, » ow we owe

» WIN, read >.

gh OSES og) lies

i-1, » jh Ss\,

ie
y

LIST OF CORRECTIONS,

Verse 241A, read thle.

7

‘T

bl

Fr

-

oAT > 8 toa
US, . 2 ot \§ in the first hemistich.

Tet oe \pees Gakk.
tol, , “kl for ht,
Ales oy oes

THE; os Ge.

Wt, » tai.

Y-A. Perhaps Sis 4 should be written 44\s,4. In the
Mathnewi words ending in 3 occasionally rhyme with those
ending in s, é. J 5 and Be.
YTS, read Yi.

YI , note, read (YET) for (141).
VEAG? <a: <9. «{VEA). for (TRA).

=

*

AGhs ; Bees ee

‘7 ae ae which gives a better rhyme.

Ae ry Sed de.

i a fe

sot. In the second hemistich I am inclined to read, with
Wali Muhammad, SE. 5 4 A\e 3), “from their scheming
and acting’.

41%, read ok aa

ITZ A, note, read el cy 5 deat

ITA, » 9 (ITU) for (1TAY) and S, for 44,.

LIST OF CORRECTIONS. 25

Verse ITtY, note, read (\TtY) for (\T4A).
» VIS, read N45.
» ‘ST, note. The first word is ».
» NTL, read A.
2 WO, wed tty,
e OVE: gcae pre
, Yl, note. In the second verse cited from L read i\ ly Al.
» VEN, read ous.
wiGety go mee
» no, » es ad 5a.
» \O%A, note, read (\otA) for (Voty).
» VIVAL, read gS iy.
a AVET Solr als.
, .49, Heading, read § for » before 6>5--

» eV, read axa.

» YA, note, Omit “Bul.” after ABL and insert “and so Bul.”
after i a
“44
» FAVSN@, read odin.
» TARY oe eee
= Thies = 2FVe. for (it. |
. VI, note. Add *Bul. om. , before ails":
» TT%0, read 44 5\.
o YSN, 2 soe 5 \gmy.

, FRTY, note. Read “C 454 5 Sl) :
, tle. In the second line of the Heading read 2375 =>-

-

24 LIST OF CORRECTIONS,

*Verse FTA, read o~ de
+ #
» ViTl, read cpm.
» T&A. The first word of the Heading is lt.
, Stal, note. Read op oy.

a

7 S08, 25 = Svete
Se Ss ieee aly
Jo ae? ios See “Al for i,
EE a oe eae FE i).
» TYT, 2 Melk chy.
* TAIT, . 3) ¢h5 j= with ABL Bul, and in the note
real “Cy, 4), ry.

, TATe, read 3 ,S-
5 TAIN bad Fe
. YAo&, note. In the verse cited from Bul. read _-+#.
» TAL, read jlo
* _ TAA, note. Insert *L" before the variant.
_ F%o%. In the third line of the Heading read {ole -

Pike, read gary.

, Vl, note, For “Ater” read “After”.
» Feo, read 4. for ol
* | fFIVI, note. For “ABL Bul.” read “AL Bul.”
* | \Y'1. In the first hemistich read with AL: |, tuly- Be 5
aes
» itr , note, For (S11) read (S111).
n “SITY, read re and add to the note: “In BC the second

Verse

=

LIST OF CORRECTIONS. 25

letter of aa is left unpointed. Wali Muhammad reads oe
(pus), which may be the correet reading.”

Tray , read ctl 55.

SOTT, read Gt (35.

TE1L, read ce? a.

Tit, note. The first word in the second hemistich of the
verse cited is g\St..

TULA, read JS.

TUt , read ort rere

tY¥i-, 5 dts a
TA.T, note. In the second hemistich of the verse cited read
\j~ oe ole pe Bred

TAo%, read en ol :

TAL , note. Read \ AO

. -y
Ti... , read - 3 > 3.

BOOK If.

Preface, penult, line, read ==.

Verse [ , read » 5 4.

m

HF

oA, read \ ane & in the first hemistich.

JAA; note. In the second of the verses cited from L read
cP for a.

tai, read \jlo «\, and in the note read *D \ plo BC
Tt, ,» = Bio.

OWN, \ eg ae

26 LIST OF CORRECTIONS.

Verse WY, 5 a\ghe %.

» \&\, note. In the fourth verse cited from L read ail.
- ) ¥-1 ,. ree. S35.
» YF. The reading syle is preferable on account of the rhyme.
» YA, note. Read gktl,
» YY, Heading, read \ yt? sla.
* . Vit. Add ‘the note “Bul. tia,> ole 538)”:

» A&, note on Heading, delete the full stop after yt».
a Me, read fai or IS

» AW, » aor 5 ee

, VN, ae VS Sl -

, bel, note. Read ol bie 3.

7 So eee ee
* {.o%, read js Jl *

Ls) ee

7 VITT, » be.
t. NITVS 5 Ses AE

— fio¥, 5 oles Joo.
©, Wl, » 38 cm,
» « VItYs » Ane land a ols,
ATE, a. ole oS:
» ATT, Fee
. tA. In the second hemistich read with AL:

350 5 SF ol eels Un

The rhyme indicates that this is the older reading,

LIST OF CORRECTIONS, oT

Verse ITA, read o\y 5 or:

+ EVE, oy Sables:

5s WGeey 5 Fae 4 in the first hemistich.

» ol. , Heading, read Has clei.

n Viewer ee ? >» U-=, thongh it is a solecism, is the reading

of all my MSS., and also of a MS. dated A. H. 880 be-
longing to Professor Bevan.

» \YYT, note. Read al for Slee
« WWWe; = c& 49 in the verse cited from L.
2 \APL, read cui 5 “LE.
* , %F.tA. Add the note * Bul. aS uy tne
, VAAT, read ity?
Ua gp Ss
& Kitts: « ge The MSS. reading is possible, but
less appropriate.
* | Ftat, note. Insert “A* before the variant.
» Vilt, » Head py.
» Feb: » , (fot).
» YFoAt, read 5a, (as one word),
eo Fads % ee och.
, rus, Wee
@ FA, » we Sh og.
oo Tvits: 5 ae 59) 7°
» YYW, note, read 3 qe.
» VY, Heading, read RS eel).
» "VA. , read bly 4h jal,

25 LIST OF CORRECTIONS.

Verse ST, read a\ 45 (le.
=) STEN, he ai
Pe a iy! renal i Spies

" TVA, . ue oF nly:
sl WONN, ye |

ni Se
ve: oe \ J
e549

lie 1 Am
1 ae J
eae Asean) ct

-_ 5)

hz | me

‘e

= is ie

| 4
dales ,
V ytd > ey
= 5 : i
Sls ot
jos <A

ARTO
Sr aa

i
.

42—-Al

41

IIT—to

oe
5) 2

wydis qalyt 5 US gts yo%) 5 SAS» cltcl ott pile
33,02 Vayu, lio goles 5 Vesti) Gab otal,
(all eek SLL S; lol, HT, 55 orv0h:

«* ib 5 Jt J aS

retSis \jollad S aye lol ol el

C39 EH OP Je 49 & So cyt sliok ache

(aie poy Fle el & 3 AN ole gal 3S

co IMs Vole oe £ oy sige ya S ol dai

cglke le 52 24 doy wy yr Jnr GLK

(Se AS; a ash;

Cle 5 dade da’

\yy\ Si Lai ois , & pol Mas

J ws Ji #9 49, OF om onl b (20 Jo pal
herd Fy ol oll chil sted ae 3h oa, UF I

oil, Lah GF aes beds Sl pal poy eile
¢ ge oF kc S lax \, 35> AS all oes

Cokeyte ylbgbs ols plaz |), dese S lSijh Xa

° 3) #2 .
35 GS ely 9 doe jal yg» & sulin ode
TYAS he Se x3) FAB ep) SV) sulin WS,
ry. pla) ogltee|,> 4 ode ass a
ITA cab) oF (Gh et 32 gslal UT
9 Mery MW ES He ote ol sy, 39 pe ll a8
A oe creed ih Vote tle opel
amy i eS ik one's oul IWS, 2& F olen wT
PS tle y ory sah Foo x tk WTS
See te “Oe bo
rr Cag) eS nth) edNS 5) F 09) 2S Goel
r5° pao
rot (aby Fae yo SE cat J cul, Je
Tot Ses FHC F \ye5 y\s 5 jhe bo
3) Lela O29 F O65 F ot LP oF cls
PYZ—TVT «Tot ie oo
Je V5 tee etlyls yo Lele de eS 531
Tlk-Too ipl ous:
rw—-Te copa t slé Lh cltsl otk
FYITU Se pA ole cae 4, pee del et yas ble
ry (S75 FV ES FS sah; ga gases

uw |

age
a

\To—) 171

Toc iti
ivt

ie
Ivy
1A-—ITA
joo

\¥o

VAS—\ AT
1af—lAo

LAA
a—-140F

Lti—Ee
r-T—14%

ty
Pa¥—T.%
r.t-T.¥
rij-—T.%
Flo—Tiy

Ff Lite» ole plas

(0d, EL Se oy yet

op te sejg el oll ~ SF Goa jile, ne 2S JI

bah pe & olan She ose Ol ope gadl

gh end 59 op yBen gael gies & olen ojaee MBI
t See

(dy ti lb ge I So J ale is

bo) oj Blaby ay Ulel Gi

(Léle ob , Cv > Ghao yo peu 5 n>

glues 5 64 unk

3) ot lets 9 At eye BLS op dist G3 295
toe FS

(Kar nt eusd 42 obyy 9 SF wt,

ce iS eS 2S p92 3) HS wh ji? @l5\ ued

bet oe & oe eS Ade

WF o3\ ey yrS WG 5 F Gap Ge ole ol
eel

(oy AE ort 3

gel ah 325 ko

Ccag gh 9 cag yle cai

Ce a9 th FT od cole

iG alls yo Gall oS (WG

GME Je 53 lie 5 oles PS Ex <a

——

5 699 ace) i
= a
T1o woul cp wole Le SF sx lai o> a5 aes
TUT (Kak 3\ \sdle 5 4B 5 dye lel oF le
PU Sa Te ye OF HAT Sx W tt OS
ty. redlacgt ali ds: diag be *
al (2S 7G Varo le SAL bo we
Kiyo Vane S555 3 J <p! oF pp ls
TA. TV bay el
tvt segltig Wjeskl Ole cae Qnty tile
4. 7—-Tt) (cml gle uly ST uc, Varghese Call ep S las
rat Ng) aki GS be , Ls asl 5) AG
aes cosle i og » Udit oye o> ob
thoy S\ cle ole cat JN ysl shh 259 ott oF
i. eye 5 kk 42 1,953 So» wl
Ehoct.A—k. 4 cola) GEL 55 tee g ylil. cai
4.4 Came penn ag Ms ANS yt ol Se
LAY taut So hb sae Hh CUS ole oa rad
IE Nye y Ley sd ls en 2s
er. Ny acaile
iT (Ses oy Ge a gle uty S95 G) 5 ror Se
St NM GS, eros oe J 3) SF y3e3
rae ‘po yal Sit oS s\
RPS bt yet 4eu 59 S 5\- 3) ri Ose 3» (5j' 78 wai
wl eS eth 4 2S Sx 22 Sy 5 abel
ifo cl, id yal

os ee ee enn

: (yaad 5 WE en} :
nye comegh 1S Abt Gas Lt Sk ake oJ
ryt-TYo (ple Sar \ ples Ame log? UR?
rAY-TY% cpt 2S Vols AB hol uaF i

: TAX (omy tS Vy tyr S\ sa 92 os eh
v.2-TAtY coy he S de i ah les, coal
TTE—TCP cTLI-T-t (Lp prep = oS te
TAA (Slay odie ole 5k O24 AS
viT—Th eal 55> 2? vip? po jh tt celal a

e\, So ens hai S \ yey oh 5S \,2y ch ls ces?
>

vit ; i.

ort Cg \S ear ckevlee oy? sya
TTT Aol D5 old Sle 2 ole
Ce canta pie cng? 3h urtle Jo u2 Fold clin law SS
cet Ge GL wel ol or 2 d% AS
TL1Tt. cykyt cle. ae ey oS JI
TLI-TL1 colllb ake 5. dha G> A Sy ote
Tit coy 43) Ltlas 52 jb S\yae or) 9 s'®
CU TT. cToY Tor Tey sii, 5 ca 328 sacl
ToT cals Bs 92 S Le aed wt
Fore Hs Ss) S Vom S Foy KS

T1.—ToA reser
vu Cagle ott o Luzdle she oF di
eAACEARCEYLERTUEN TE. tag UP cal & Glew 0,

’ “

‘Sl sep all po

Ags aguas 4 cpl Jyel Jxi Jet 5 (2) sgl AS Ve

MN oe ps Bone he al 3 oe cys alN\ 4d, yt conidl, Js)

choy on Ie Gls +\ 5 «chee ary BAS 2 5 Sh «eT

“sl 3S ae BE Ole lat, ose (8) 4 ctl 5 “shom 5
4 oit\ ea mse oli ~~ AS 5 ee lis °

aa Cicest Si aes chide

ayy 2 Sie wal (EY uli, : (5) iM te ce hs,

% 3 ow Seldl sit I Oyalad! Yo YO, ON oss"
4, ComelD 7 ir yy lee Fe g8y 43 py Ce, ‘ul, vale

WS Je Ja. Sia, {ial in Je nati), dla Ul od STZ
all Joe cn AON be Js with, ail be Ja edi,
SH AM tl op Dey Ke dls Die, dl dd Gaal
2b, Lal de Sect! spell pl Jobs g Sage a dl

This preface is wanting in CL.

ii

—

(a) A abl yl a9 I, instead of «sol! iS Vie. (b) Bul. 2,3
cael. (c) Bd. (d@) Bul. dis all J. (¢) Bul. adds ley

cnaeldl VI a Can. (f) Bol. sh. @) Bul. adds olla) Ly oe bos.
('}) From the words (leila ne to the end of the preface the text of A
is almost legible.
I. 1

Sal

aT2 cay

£TAcatyT

ari

“i.

2i7

St A—LEL

iyo an Ply cays AAR S
clys) 3 ab hell Ae io» en ak duals
a per 2 of; \e dls bss S Lat ol eS sy

a”

Nyhan
le ge Meas gf SF Nylons Myr il wd, atele HS
1 Sat 3h
co ALOT ok ot lie ae oe Gy ote
aS he i S43 3 Ws
se 9 ae de gt oe Fd oh a ols 9? Be
is)
if P Vpann 3 $2 Foust Z op oF
(ant 2 ay eyo ge Se S ety SM ote
228 wtb Su> ¢ As Sa DSi) eae OS jee 5
Nye oN 393
(ple Sy oS jhaail gly sl o,lae , eile ob _,
Mayan Sb (ea Ss: Sel + was
ile ack 5° S sal; 5 Alls 49 ghee 9 ole

ka

(DN yal all
sS3 21S Lele vl. a Se lS ox J 5! pan

SuletN +55 5 2 pnt jl. alee ye Ls Wlhg 5=
sLe\ 3, oe poh Ge ds lent ont ele
ri Je, JS: M9) A jee As fl jl alk ip SS
ea eae 3 oves aes pl aol oy Sco
ol! Sail iin Oo? av’ ce gle At oe OF Gl or
onto NGS 5 Ae tl. =e ody IL Ny
Sunt yg le Be Vos cent ogee GF) Ole yg UE “
Shy eet 3) Bl a Sp Sl ese, GE BS \ intl
ss BAIS cats tty o LS 4 I ett at |
dys Li ules, Giles. ner Sle 5) si > d-
39 4S dite, jlo dome. toe HN, G5 db =e
383 pt pe ely 2S gy tee GS
cmt ES oe whe Vals ee eet oe oe ot)
Rem telpow Vineet WG Vass) 6 ee oe Lass, Lee g& 5510
So Ae Scary HN ol Freng Hh 5 Fes, Hb aE,
D> Bia) Stig b Se pAE ya GH $l = Sp,
act, ok eg pee Ls @ we JL Wb >

() B \plie 5. (1 B pnk 50. OL ogy jo
(N) BL piles.

r

Zr i iad ate tad) ti yey pe Tol| 3554 cw Tull ree
too AF (Sdetany (Gtinsy coe s\po:.' ¢ kak sAS «Sl
pe ell, cosa 55-3 fall 3 (S25 ue SAS {eduw oe
Prunes ure AM: amlog t tly gal cna) ‘Spal ae onial is ab\
tle onl cae (ae ae Lis a) ales, 94 (ah » a A ghey ©
wn eo cel, GI ¢ Le plail yh «sal 555 ol
42) las ne sigh dy PY 3 ©) op sls (6) wd ahi ae
JAN 65M rey “> D 2, Gaal \ Og ol Ge
a) 3 bp eel, tay Sa J, « ei eld auth
adc po| elie aaa) cake) a 2 cas as os byl, 92 As
JY as ‘ao es lea egal 25 aay i We ary
Js Ys caliall a5 ye Gk Jey iS aT ge Yl ©) sags
lM shall AJ Cae oS je ey 2 wh air
XEN ON oa) SSN const ont 5 ole, I
Prep e\) ) hy eS ath Sel aire) ye) eM o 3M \9
a \ ley res ols ip Y sles ‘Bay MM olldl ty & yal

ao.

. UI Sf, whe als oy Ue ll be, oll, & atl, «HE

(a) Bul. om. (b) Bul. o». (e—¢) Bal. +. (d—d) Bul. inal
aadlgl @ Bes MBG. © B yl. (A) B adds

o , rh peo

wine lh Ps tos gor Al's cyl ea il gs: SBS oy.
NAS me 3) aye Lele Lo ole 24 ips Lt Liat
Ae te SS oT Ae at. lel +, #53 AS el
Cee wee ae ee ie ti
miele Gal cats 251" dt shay» 9 \yo) LE Oe tt
39) 99 > SF WL, oth. » 953 Pos othe & ON /
RS 5 F20p AL orp lel eet le OT ey oF
eS ee ; col) y Se SoS et oleh w
cml gly 5 pay SUSY s eeenl fe gle ele er ole
Co en (ey ee 1 ee ee
c= wei, wey! oS. pads pS wih gle 5 3 aS ale
copay Le ase 50 UN ne celle em agle Se
Be GE hey ak ay opie ail
cee elt we 3\ ue. 2G Leh ial oe s\ o-
ya) cok yy 3) eee > 5] > De. 5) 225 ge
22 6 or oF SEN 5) Pe + 3 by ur Ar 355 3
aye _ S35 pol ee 297 \ ie Sh Lad 5
= sna an ea ey eel eee rainy ‘\

Heading: AB Bul. dtak 24 jtle. After dtsl, ois L bas j5¢, » \ys!

har
gh atlas yo tok et 5 IRS yat, and so Bul. (TY) A isja, 2
(1) ABL Bul. om. 5. (4) Bol. fle gle 5. (**) ABL Bul. Ly gsi.

(1) ABL Bal. 2,3 \io. ABL Bul. a,i9 Se.

ob acs Sa +

35 Rtg et e-\ o\;) pel, ees Sis (.>
e902 cad sues je > Ls Creo ah
as bf os gb Gelb ay ler pe oe
aut SL gs We 5 very hs 2 Se its) we 1S
Lo slic ate cb e\.k soe se GS ul ak ols Fat

Le pple 5 UN gol. Gy , sd isla cl
st Av , 1 st, » oF + at SW, Gs 5) te pe ®
Be Goya ah Lisls st age uk Gt =
La wr Gm + ste F 2x yh oil
lj ae oo a2 fst o lia « Bie ss dls ‘\ cals
eK Se 5 us ol 675 Net, > MS, 23, SF che
an GEE 5 a 5ym 5} 2 pe Ge 5 espe ole"
cho g db Fy xo) + 5) 7 yee 2h Loe
wo a ple 2 5 oF» Puta Ue ph te OS
Se st 293 GE No oy one oF OS re GF
cans ghee AS) 5 LS ai em SLES Ie Wile cles!
gl eek Je 2b cm og» oleh yl oley ol Ags

(1) o begins here. (Ba IS eee OO Bh sb p-
B i iss. (TE) B yb ll 5 sy- ('T) After this verse L adds:
Gs to ae PP eo st * dey Forts vt a? ot ae
(Tt) A ee Ge a Sh eile Fs BL d'> «|. After this verse Bul. adds:
las Satie at Ge ete © ue INS 4; \ eas 5

(T°) In C this verse follows the Heading.

¥ t ays) oth

+4, sul ole & pe Re le Lal 4S deck
3) Ae ob le I Ge 3, Ge B Gleb ole
492 2 Hy? BO 5 A» sy) Lisi Sp 32 ps
wile 2 28 INE AW. IG Sin 9 fre oS

aS ps seas le 5 et ge oy dee gly cl

af >) ale, 535 ctl 59 Pyel Bs sis\35 51
(ly le, 2 cole, ET gla, Ue

wy wd 3 4 pF le a) 55 ange oases)
35 ewer al th weep © Vo 6 lo wola
AF ds st23 bs pou. dy 3? le! jl oo *
Ute g te F AS shy. US t= So > iy 5°
wbele 5 es 65 } the Shel ole 5 ob ot plains
Go» cnt 5 oles ole e Ge oS eslit om oe GL
suitls . Lali hs oye SS, wot LS er
sty 3) a3 Ss Ss cols eo yl S Lelel pt ofa

O°) BL Bul 4> ye 2t S idle ol. (9) AG, with 5» written
above. BC have \s quite clearly. L Bul. >. 1) A kegs Ll 59 a, with

O- gQ Written over cS ,>. OO A hae for oh 4. () In A this verse
follows the Heading.

Heading: Suppl. in marg. C. AL om. sl. L cule 1) 9

VA) AL oS for a4. Bowl. (YY) Bol, foro. (AT) AB Bul.
GY 5 olp=, and so corr, in L. C gles A"E (Al) After this verse Bol. adda:

eile Late Jy! os wis * Ole OR La 3 Jot atts

(*) Bol a © 28. (1) After this verse there is a lacuna in C,

extending to v. IT.

o)9) Say 9 Ok» NS atlas 3\ ISS 5F + ple
Vy al 2 lye» LS Gar Ld,

Bing? Some ile Say, Le Het Vol 9 A \ j= ee”
eee s shel ;\ Woe . a+ —ls Sx 8° yet yd dy
By pe th Ls ae LS HS, so) AS oF
ole ve a ey oe ere wut vf
e\, ere be L Se WL Lewy YL ele ts
“csp GES lg P 935 2 flee ZS sf +1
ust ule 4 Ul pil mia OF O Aw lvayal yy OF
dxf 9) GY SF 3\ ole 7 22 199 PF “catalan ees >
Bete Nee AS 3 cick T gb So cub, ciel op 4 vl oS
a cel 5 gb jiole . ewtdle pace Ape), i
we lS sale oo oe le rie 5>
sot jel a 3 is). + 5 9 Mee, ol ty oF
Soe clone &) Ja sate: eats ae Ee 5 2
al. sole ee ere ee — ar 2
ES Kees Se 43
wy) or 3S > Glee 9 + oly 23! She ath gee”
1S , wk NS jy? Se 5 pltle IF 2
el wees clay ys : =)! Ae ws all> ag

7S

Heading: AB Bul. |, 52 ps sltal, ot |. AB Bul. add we ce y
oye fe. (Inco, is written above 4. (BZ) Mr ay
(4) A oe: B 4) 2blo for iS gh. A om 4»,

7 ¢J5) Jao

sie ys) Sle le» » Soe | Atak o>»

pe lan 5 3X 5! em 0 OS he 5 ule htt” OF
21S tint fn o> ol gl ie» aly « sibs.» oe
si oll o— Ld as © Kt ayy8 5 UA8 5 95 SS,
Sta 8 thes eeey os, lp aN 6 Oislen Sighs) Sj pied
we Le “ti Sal +p Se 5) soy asa!”
25S yl Ley oF ole, dd. ie Gs > at GS, Z, 15
3525 Mal Sak pe pm Sn 6 og Late Mg Le 5 Ud,
aes LSS 5), etsy» = hy S a) sl ae
t tylie 3 oD) 4s ae CHS | eee _ ik
as oy Veal _ 56 wl Lele; “5th ele 1+
5 is ee ey
| ek Js é! EX oe sobs » ce ba ow
eters lid 58 We Sty ly et
SES oe Bal te oe okt Wty jl oe
a8 a Pde te ot eit JS 52 st oe Ut > JE”
wel 4) 55 5) ark lb $e lal No aot ih
Ree db oF Pur + Ae — a\si wh \ S55)
pil Sal ea reer Co oe y >,\ whe ol
met nl Ly) eel le ue et OF OF OE aF F

(\*\) In B Bul. this verse precedes the Heading. L Z. eee

OY) B Bol lan gly ljo gl. OA Bad, Aout. (M+) Bol
eu Ms. QV) Bol,» glu. (8) In B this verse follows v. 111.

OM) BAAS gh. Bo U6 23h. Ll OS sit.

(oa bedi A

Hr ae Gy 1 pte ey\uer reas sd i
jy oll 2 Py oP 3 . 3% ool gli S
whe, joo lay 3) LL; by Sh ee
pete fas wl. fy lb Nal Fn ee
col Sty suet yloy je © Sy? ly 2 Sha Sa *
iva = Leper Arye 1

oe

Ss phe > “0 ne a\ , Look OGY
| RAC D Vast ye elo

25S il 5 Jo 4) & Ff iS lke 4 Lh oe
23S syle yg ee he cdS tee uivlty 5 ow?
ptt FN ply eS 8s ptt GrSe hy ox”
cl cli, Jel im tr Po Se a a eg
We aot & p\ Bee Seas whe 9 cu a
iW > HL, SS a a Ye Er ey

ait wag FF

ee > Ge Le Ley
asks or, Me 35 a va Bp oo ac

(AY) 1, eh for eel lack (t+) After this verso Bul. has:
a Sr Baly p> 22 oY GP gt “y 3? Ss

(1) After this verse Bul. adds:

leet Jie lel © ole ot als Sil 23;

Healing: L 4a, 235 pie 4 £ d> oh Le

(it) A ade: 25. (14) B 5, for ji. (1°) After this verse Bul. adds:
cule 3 as JUL thee ® sail od; cuik Spo

CW) B gles. Bosco. (s+) BL Bul. 4.

| Tesh Pte)

cs ES JL MWe ale 2 ol 9 3 Xl —#\.). 2 lagsecs ay) ve
ee ren mis Sails er alc cel sy F gsi

said ia isola °F a shi > ceaame

eee ee Bee
Leite An 5 Pes Ss Layee .9 3S alas YS
Bjlveic WAljes Gab pO las eke, ah de wl
ele St al pe S. o EE ok ae
ee ks Sete ts) ci eNS \ 2 oh 55,
8 oe vl tee Glee Se SL og ole ts 2) ee
aoa pw oe joe ci ote aes
JF AL eS sb + Soe Dir i
lis eas a Os ge» bobs ee tt Lj 3
<5 Le S25 nse gies jas isu F \,Jo ve

O&) Dales. (8) ABL Bal. sy and oS. (187) AL Bul. J in
both hemistichs,

Heading: A am z= for hen 3? After the a Bul. adds:

(14°) After this verse B adds:

Aig* yay Vamlas 5 42 5) * aig, lAl5 4b om olay oo
(\21) After this verse B adds:
dt ole tle slyn'Se jy © a8 ale IK jo ij] am
(\°-) B Bol, ale for age. Ge) td 4h. (ef) A |s jo ye

. eee ee
apo papal 3h Jee be 2d oe ST GE Pu
nS DEP a VAP Pr oi 5h a ae we on
Bigs oho sl. eet \ pls 55-2 2°
aos phe rte dey ll Ot Say tre OF
Lal \ Sey pr + 2 pH) siz 2H) eb
oh aed Uy Sy o tb ilo oe ae
Lb 3 asl Ue $3 UL ee & et
ot gz 32 OP 5 T20 E ay bs el 4 5 &
Us got tei ols Lai 2 5L5:. piss Y
eee ji uls -). sf 232 LS
Seah hs ly ea Sgt hen Me GA Fro”
ihn BS ly i Se oxy ols ol we
Suis zis tith USG > GU oti
AR eee: ish ath oa) Le) bee
Se oo CB Men pt de 2 oe ES
gs GS ath os > Fe + OE Fa Oy ree N°
ENSis tye go ol ads lie - ah Gl ye
Spal gh ot ob $5u- JH gy ee 9 SS of
ey LG we Lb ete cp © SF aay 9 > 2 2x
ed dngd Ges dt ore

ee.

(TE) ABL (spy os Cr and so C in marg. Ful. eas EP te:

(\f°) Bul. eee i oe (ry Bul. sia S: La spy oe Se (it) L
ee: i ‘ s3. (71) L Bul. 35. (\ti) L has 2 written above =—..

am L om. Bul. jj 3 sa. After this verse BL have:

cer 93 oly se 2 VEN * ol ek ap pa oS

gies. *

hy iJ) AS

Per at Zhe . S SL Lab el wb ob
ee ee aly 3 2 2 Jo Soe So 5) wit, 5
wie Ue ale Ly 208 2553. cig pe de ee iy ot
oot lest eR Ol RH + ot oly ons 29 oe belo
IT 5 sil JF 45. ewole G25 F 2B 5 55
wots wl Loses wy) 4S « — wl cli) , Lore,
eS it oth Lance igc ao. pe eth lee,

wy & ++ iL os,- 4b, ww pS las,

‘Look pe |, 5) & Oe UP 5 Ve) 3s) ob >

3S S) Ws 5s oLtes oS ot to cle» lj

oti \,5\ Oo als a4) L.. a — oy 0) 5* 55 2,"

au

Q¥) A Bal. gle gla. (V9) a 3, tle; $B Bat. 42 ole ol the

354 \o; 80 corr. in A and in marg, C. AB Golys cyl. (WU) ABC plan.
B Sp. AW) L Bol. ons) pal oa ala. AL Bul. 3) heck B oe and so
corr. in C. (VAs) Bul, tity bis, (\4\) Bul. in first hemistich .}, r es. In

BC 2s in written above Ja,
After the Heading Bul. adds:
> or IRS g, 5 sh © S08 he Se ah
L has the following verse:
oil, ly ET gs aye * cil oh ae clue pS ol
(AF) Boom. 5. Bul. adds:
(\AL) ‘The following verse in added in BL and in marg. C:
3 F cle 3 jo MV Usb ag 9 a LT S&S jl bh ob
Bul. adds: |
OS tees oe oy * GF OS Lint ol Se

teens hy IF

: ! |
sre a J po et OE EP ee oS
oS, 6 «> suk Bb» 25) ASS el Samp» °°
2s oo + ao eslaly sie Te yer 3h ole Poi F
dels lis le apg eo 2p Be Te i> Se a
cfenye Je dee tl: eb Gb a db
ab 5 at 9 oboe 5 fe ye 8s Lisi 5) S>
up ote Ghee 5 Ua Sp : as lay pS wai ‘Sye *™
wlee 52 ile aya Oy hs ole ff. a 3) Ut S\
cya Wo So we Sh 3) ae 2 oF 2 bol oe >>
he Fede att IT 59 ENE One oS
os: Sa 3) LA > 20 SS, Metis yo & bo SS Bet ob
diy yl 5\5 le 5;\ of. dd. Ab Vlen > ol Sele
Bi ets bg tar UO do oF ad SE Oo ee
Pie So Nowe kg 4 ee
Jat 53 $33 gabe 7S + yo tr S92 o> Uae
ask gle LW 5 3 a a Woh 3) ol S 3 2925 OFF
pik bf , SJ, a) LF pol us 5) bf ="
oy ale La ee 9 0 3g) ene EF S gals =
em la lh Sole Sd wr Sods Wo der
preg 20 fh i oe Ft oor # PF peo Fw

(ot) Lola sg. OPV Bal forte. CO B rhe ele: Cs?

eee er (7) AL Bul. by) 4? 9 ole: B \hag® 3 ey?
2)) 2. (VA) L Urey for sy)- (VY) Bul. ay> ¢e)- (\¥-) AC Bal.

pp lS, Ls 3 = Ae Bol. oe 7: B om. 5 after <5 -

\o Js) pao

sak 5) Jy > > wie - 251 || Jit B95 or
sto yi Jo. Sai sal. Be ayjty 9 APY 94) Ji =
oy So =e dot HF 0 oy Sy Wg oe Lae
5y5)0% sy G5 eels . iss 5 Ss Pe a
3) Sx soi 6» wwe ce \ Sr oF Paw) 5) ky? oF
N55 SH Le ole) Ee eT WL
gee stat Seo cS ite « rsh BPN Dre
wen le tn 5 SF lee oh ge cp oll
wheel cl 5) és wea olde ve Mo wl
ot we Ape 0S he + cep b ot eS shi
may a oe Sor or og") 5 7 2 9 ial on a
gle ae oh gh Se oF 5\ ej) ra a S5\ 5) lyo 5
Ino Vela sul Le eye a be Ss g eS ole ele
Ny 6 By tS To dle ys Bp 2 ih un’
eg OSV Wey sys eae Nye eed al, Wa, ge shi;
ejG <b; 21 W99 Ae pt 3? 9 Wb » 5
cule o ealggle At 5S eth FF 04; dg
Ls, j= ;\ 5s AutL « (sl We ae oc & SN, ate
eet sets LAS Le eet JL oe Wi. Sy

(T-") ‘The second hemistich in B is: li y\ JS » sea gte- (Tk
Sa S38. CA BL Bol La. (+) 1 Bol. gyal. ABL Bal. abe yl.

1) Besa yg ONC mosh. Bae S ali yy. (1°) Bom 5.

() ABL Bal. €) 5 34). (AY B silgisle. Leslsgle. OB
at » \jb.

cS gine 1595 it

Fs Wyk 3 Tey E Pes

Jor we Ue ; gis « Jeo 9° J» oI 3) skp ae
Syd, Ea 5a ssh e Oro 2° 3 s5sa) 25, &
wis 5 5 La yt dl SG. Ie sl ita) st
Se lb fe ee 655 bse ob ob
fA 5 Sh ee dhe aes (Do Bech OD
ep QE 9 tt jh 4 pp JL ee 5 Ji ay |
oF ile aa Pe -8 x Ge > oly 9 ee ar yal
ks cals Vu Glee - tb ob 5 cont _» EH I
ail el aS Sy 2 ole ime oe
tm ch —— ie Sos

cate ol ee
eg atechae ier a wie

en i ae ve3 »! 8 ne 2 ela rose fe
sxe aw? 52 2 J oS ew «use wo! intend —
pene oxy

T-

(\A°) Bul. (- for «+. (\A1) ‘Text according to A. BCL Bul. have:
jeer ating 83 si et lp ay yal ade b
C has \s-y written above «| and gives in marp. the second hemistich as it
stands in A. Oa BL }6,. Oe ds. OY) Balomy

before “x. © om. 5 after "-- (\tA) Bul. ysl for oe

lv ‘ J5\ pao

op ey 5 lS. 5\ Arte ae wu ¥
WH oss oF i . it co 5) GF ote
sy aN Wick 93% pels oan AST ga Ls, on his
NLS oe a aa Mees
rH Me a oN os F. | 1 Hp lop war
Asks fo) 2 Ge ph. lee AS CD! vi oye 2
ds scsh Sly > dil ae y le wo, tik ol ple

4); ~ ae osl_s\ FS gan ee) ans srSis i i us 9

‘WS _> bb ne o 22 5 5 DE Op al
— LS J ity! 3? bss 5 ere
WISi2,- oP LL 85 Si» 5 wis ba o>
e35 Be glib uly jo. a5 —_3»\ — 431 wile 49
tS Ls ee SLkt 2 oe SF ue OSs Syn 3) soa Fe:
el -3 euiBgs 3S ye plas TEA ak Se 3)
83 I bb oS 95 2 - + ye ale y oS her a ave
5+ ,=> ol core ae 3\ JLa Dp» 3,S ls S + Se Saas
CY 5 ft fe wit. x2 ol Sis , Sey uly

hits J PP PG OF J Sd SE ys era

(F22) B Bul. > for : C gives ¢> as a variant. (f°) © gives = ag
a variant for 2li\. L sai. (AY) ABL Bul. |,,\ for | uy. B Bul i ae
(£1) After this verse I adds:
Di _ je pss Xs JP Om hy we Se gy ao lye
ee >aSber ys ws
Bo Bul., which has :,S > wy Gu and oe re 3\. Both verses are suppl. in marg-
A, and the second in marg. B. FOE) Ds ee othe 5: (P28) Bal, ope =

L z

(oo ce V1

so) SEL Sb >» ol 5 AS SS Ob
‘Sali Jeb 5 LB Sle 4 2p

23 3 > 2x 2)! hb pS ee ee
N dal, A GG Lt pb obs sl a
WH bs uly ply i 3e an oe SL
ely? WL 5: sola, Leber cebu a ea

rales saw gh pend g cent o eal, ai SF tt ale il
ks ie fa ae 9 8 ee ee tte, hel pe
sual slat sh Lule ye at ol See tAN
st Nuke acc Lar gre) oe pe lite
5 5 NSS SL, 703 eta POO \ ole
— Sah, ss Fb Le 2p - H3i) 2S w= Bry MS ¥
eee Aa teas o) aN oe
By SiN pe aE 0 eg ts lee i) it
lt 4 Gul, a ar haat, ll \ Sa5 of
Lua vi al , la S 24 yay Cams Sate 5) 22 ay
eke J gp sss EN gh AS gi
eg ee ROO ee sr fo
Be ies A wile om Si Ue he

Heading: C ok 5 for 2

(TT) ABL Bul. ay o\. L Bul. asl. (TFT) AB all ji plbl. (FFE) A
gee. (TB a she Lt Sil hile. (TN B ale S (pile 5p-
A & for 3. L Jad for ole. Tht) OC oy alk. (rt) vA old OQ.

it ‘ els pao

=

33 4 cmege gy A, a at 3 unl s M5 sheets si\\, oe ox!
lic as = 3 e wis emp, IL ak cls Se aie
SV aie) ca ola kt ls wala Sos 6 gaheele oa
rll abi S. > > orld 2, 2am Le Les
Lar 5) clas UF 35 ne epee A se bol
SSS 8h JP IG JP os + Gp ss Le Sb Lee
sy Po de lial a5 my er i eed Ce a a eae Ie
a Ke yp? LI ee ein Cae 2) OT
po pp ae oe 5S: 3S ¢ Ney W459, SY at Sc
pt NS slo LF G5 6 hoe OS we S oan MS 5h
oD) Ne » iio bia hat ohn 3S yh
Ky ~ cy oie! | 5) o liz » aoe Mae ple. 15) FAs
oe 927° ley GH L.='I5,7, *i2 9 jE >
—— =! Se a pte po 2 wile ack se \ jl eege
rh 9 ¢ ie ee o dsh th 2 92 eS
gE Le Fs 2 Sv oy, a pes Se Se
Fs HV aS gle yy « 058 oe vile 2] ky
m5 ait Lage rl be ony ols j\ ze 3)
nd el ator Mates se sdb36
areal a teu Oe am ee LE oh as gu S

(PVE) A SN, act pg: B93 9 cenld. ry AL Gea is.
(WY) A oe las. (PVA) TL Veja. (TY) Bul. «l,. (TAl) A Bal.
. ant JS. A ss for ss. Bul. |. (TAL) A om. 5. (Tae) L oy d-
(Ft+) The second syllable of y$ is short here, L o,¢ (471 (tu 3. A in
marg. gives 4S as a variant for ae. (TIT) A yet a3 ay ee: © os a
(TV) B isg2 pt A. L 39 als. C ole for tle.

(ae LS ae LA

__ =o ASS a ee
La a ap a See eee pal oh erate
[Op eure Ss 5s 0 lh pole wt 9 don oH
wid, J aK jal at Sb. St oF Lixo >2e

ade’ Yo etsy Se onan Do
2 S 9; ui? Si,» obs 2> car | oS s\n.
eee vl ML Sul = 5
Valo Gale etly og = F - 3 aloe ELS 3
here ah eS. Soe 3) LAs =
s> Jo) ro ore etulS cm 5 Me ee
a ek HEME atths pr Ligh La hee
ax 2 ple 2 WH! > L. "IN 8G Oh)
hia oe Nass 33 os » as oka\ sil Ssh
Jo Se 35 9 GH a a+ J). ee 5\ ByX o95 oF 32>
Basic, 5 4 db oS Sy . ae aia, \S gel od >
Re eel a j\ Bay 5 gs pty.
Se er ee LF ee et oe ol olla se
ve a AP oF ne Sr a3 Gok 335 ay cyl
d>\ 3+ af S4\5 Sige gh e Sum am 3.\; oF a

(Fe) A jul atl, J. Instead of this verse L Bul. have:
oi, al Fb aN ak’. “« Soe ee \5a \

(ret) A sb. (T+) AB Bul. ylsj yj! In the second hemistich A has:
oll ns >> oo 7 SV. Bw aS pty Bol. gi for 2.

(OW) BIS 5}. (1) AB Bol ctty. (TU Be olty be
A ay pul > b.- (UA) L om. Bul. &> os fe ced (TY) B
FORTE A Bol. S43) no) 9 By el 9 (WF) L Bub 22 old-

(TYT) Suppl. in marg. C. Bul. ye oP aap. AL Ms for me C Bul as! , 9 «t-

Tl « J5\

238 S98 2 POS ye age TS logs
wore glee als Wile See Ns "A oe oT
og? come 9 SF 5 OU Ore See eel 6m HE Sole ole d
oy! G3) >> >) S32 We a . Bs Se ae »\ Sy) Le ol n
rts) adj F oF dye GL, jhe Se Shp Sy)"
ey Rae ee soe.
ober wl er ed LG ete SL 9,5) she ality
Ut s po sub su) ya 5h Ut ye Sh ge lost
ors My ole 3) LG ey 2 9354 glig> Ge
Soins a Adee slsa5 tee soi Rei iadas clon ie
FAS AE BATE a nt
aac LIN Jal Nd ge se hal paldoss oa Lydon»
wis: , aS 3, ejteee Look » wl she eke o> ly 3

Or re ass Voth pai § d,a> Lad +) A ales

Sus _ ila, Se wt « jl-db — 9g _)>.. 2 oe
Nghe oy 5) ey glee) ol HF 5 on ot AE]
ie tals See Wiebe ly » ve Jel te
Vat | gl, ;\ A) cay 49 1 jwlee | Re ac a oe
Ad prt py) Foe AS op at 99 oy Ip oS

(1M) AC o¢ ea SF. Lass 28. AB Bul. cys 3 yl. L age.g 239,73 3N-
(Vil) Bal. ee at, ou es ute Z. (1%) L Bul. oe for ue. B
gee .)- Bal. 33 tt ne (V8) BL ops for ols in the second hemistich.

(iA) A ube ria. (TY) After this verse L adds:

See Pod te Cte tt gp ale ul |e ed, oy oe

‘Syme Sy 3

EP, Sie eo datas, SN AGN OS
aa eer 5 nets Me
isi “i ears ~~" 2° “eo ge 32° asl 3b >
we Y$ WL >. oler pret FOG A
J Jl b 5 + cn ois ot . ole ae) oe 32 * os &\o
Jussly Ws c=s 4 3 of 2? 9 sae) i By
mary igh ast sl} york a + Ne Ae lyse le 50 \S pt
tH Pe AV SSNs cee Sue 0; ols »
Se OS) Ge HN? or oe see eh ad lle
see! a a SH ae . oe yl obsy Ls uo
fe ale eo J es? eo ab 5) tet Oe ee
anes Apts, uw wo) es? ew be) om —' ee te
hy gl as 3 pits» CRG oles yor rw ue ay
= ae aces es ols i 3 Ss ot ie gles LS
ees Faby ers j\ tay 2 —\, te ele
Rees 4a 5 [y din, bony 6 AAT Se oy oben pee
i wes Seana IS ae ghee

(FT) Bal. a pli cyl. (FU) L 55 ow cel 2ij. A gl Sel. A glo jel 5.

(7M) B ojheel dle. (+) BOL lyon a. (5-1) A gles. a
ps (8) B git for g2- (T*4) A aot bis, BL Bul. 2.96 bis.
(T-) L Bul. ys i 5 and so C in marg. ("-1) After this verse B
Ful. add:
Seg Sh, Bol. glils] Gb sole hoS jhe Jl pte & dle de ol
(TA) Bul. \yye for ge 2+ B la, for oly. (T9) L old, Lowy. B

Bul. om. , before uh. By gay, for ob =».

Tv i Js! xi

Pi le SIN ain a ig ee Aer ee
ors Foe ui els pie Ls oly 225) wn
Vhs 59 Unb

wsls ly es 2h, lh ss Cr OS
wr ole A SS ad 5s Ge DLN 5) oS i}, LE
= , Kalb e,) > cbt. es ole 4) oo Lb ale r
BS at tg Bt we bel shoe ux dé
sin F JL & Ab sh ey ol Io > FSS
»~ JL Pe p=? Je ae a Je p14: S392 | Ny
Ay, 2S lope Fe Wyle co we G27 PES
fe 2 EE oblis see poe Ble Wb ot abt
is 5 io fe Bh. Ay ot 3 emt fy? oe
a)» 2S ode py ped. aes no peda a aa
Ls bar AS I cus Ls Soh, ue 2g | Vox) St
plates yl: Gl Sp Moo sy Sota: hy See 3)
ols AN, jel Ded @ liad aol ic cidlgi 355 ugh tt
ik Ol oh she jal Gb 6 eS SEW) Li a oS
55 set 3) gat wpe 52 25% WE ls | yy) a1,

—_ =

Heading: Bul. ne r fa

(71) Bol. stu (PR Ds he, ad, Wot As Si a
("8°) B Po me Bre ule (Y) L Bol. a1 vr (tan) L ‘sat
cy? for 38. (9%) apt a agi: y and cla. (Tl-) After this verse

B Bul. and C in moarg. add:
are megh Weel All . apr at y | Se A ec and so L.
(UW) AB Bol. cig S oly ale olan Gl, and so C in marg.

‘Syms Sa ‘fT

— Spay 8k vig —_ 35>! . 0 en) att 99 gl kel ead
fs» Leh 5° 35 les, op saab |. Let iA iS tt
d53 Sao \yatet 9) St ogy o 294 Pere oF a
(nes oe jb oF Jel oy ga a Sh & or
BS Jae Migs elites « eee Jord Lo Sati s A

as Bs be Jo 3h at Ae » Je ——T ye wks | ue os
5 pe 5 ye als ew. Sy) Jos es AbD fy Tho
ol “lt $ Ly Me Jo>| at Sd ails > Ai 5 ot
ety uy se Aly So ctS pj wry oll» +
\ Lick, Sa 59 Crea)
ee est garg Se hie!) eS ede gt 4 S ot Sj 3
oF ole 20 SM oe ere 2S ole Ay, bh; =
» ? , = ae 2
nent 2 5 3 J). a 3) vr? « eee oe os SNe Neal St
Ie EL Foe tlk . GLE eo 11 ceils |

dls hg we Wale d Webs olar 2 HLL
-

, SS yi! lS Ae . 4 La 5 shea us| =a

Vn Sickest #1, ss \,# kL; 7 re gahighd rs a oy al Tie

('T-) Bul. (Sp. (*T\) In ABL Bul. this verse follows v. )T. B Bul.
ot for 5). 0) De og Pe Lie ("7 A te for tie; in marg. i=”.

L a: A hey (lage) Dake

Heading: © is + Bal. ly > oye eto.

(TA) Boat for si. AB Bul. catyce Gj). © apparently od0.—*. (*4)) B
ae whl jo oe ok talk. 1 Bul. Ge » ob y = L pale.

(Tit) ABL Bul. Sm > seal psa.

To rar Fao
a, Mw bee Yo jytce jt), it sl gs
otf OL Je JLel, RS aimee Jil 52 332 oy oS
= gil 2» sas = le a Poona tet) 2)
WAS 5 sto Wai. > oly + ee al 5 ea) alee Et
NGL 4 ec ape. le sap — & edb > eh) te
5 51 i Seat ls. ce Ah oo Me ah
FE 36 Lb 3 og - 5 5 ak rs wile 5
Yel s e jle cs. Lebel awe Tan 5) ——
Lad 5 Aw, x 3) gb - vad wy ot ay see Led
oe we 43 te lols su OU ee
or » sow ce! Jis ides ches j 5 Fe ay ail 3 oe a
PP 3 ie Pl ee Pe gon Wl Ge ue
=) aed Sa ae 5 jy Lo Shel 5) ae
PI ANGER 2, ty © A) vo Ae on, Anes 7)
33) Po wit @ Lule of | uk Je wy at tte
Wish , s29nl wis ebb usa Gl » —,

Bh re a ite ; =
(TM) A Bol. ,5ial) 15. A ill ite. BOL é. Bul. =
("4") In L this and the following verse are transposed.

(TA°) A os55, corr. in marg. to .sajo. (74) AB Bul. wl.

(TAY) After this verse Bul. adds:
pd 230 SVS\ ea Sn ‘e is le bb oy eile ¥
(FAX) Bol. (pi. AB Bal. 5 pSe y fle J le. LOLS 5 ee jl ok

acai () oO 6 GI. (7) Bde Syelsl. 4°) A om.
B | ya for 1 pe. ("31) A om. After this verse Hol. adds:

Lae sy ple 23}5\ ure ° Sr op oe b> 5— | Ss

(Spm Cm rt

‘N59 & Voss wo S Jed
3) 6S 52 + px Sa) ds. 5) by LY ap lp ae
gL, 55s wo pe lal Ly Se gle oh
dy pd 5 nie bh jo <1). oy ASo\ kesl, le 5)"
JP GUS soy Gel. Jey 3h WY we
wb yetel > 9 ols ae le AF ap) nF
FS rsd | pale 5 + 95! pring \osl _Ss

wi NF og ake OE =< ye 232 ec
cole Guede gl! be, ey! Lah WL Nit, vy:

‘Vos b Li DS alle

pe aos dtl, ae 3 « n=: a acolo 4 wo
sobs ee ll aS Age Ke 390? 29
el * eel te) ae ie is\ e nl fae Je ry
3 Up Ee oF LL. be sl ewails , elo able 2
J OCS eo are enh ee pw
ge’u | Eye 2 ors glo g Li LP dLys
wes Sol pe : gas’ Ses os | Ls\ a
Gr Se 5) ees Ps dank Gon 1 pers
eed lag Lee glcl AB gy 0 95 pe SAF ib Ge
Sar AS ev NE WS Gr rt Be ole ol J}

FC) Bo Cau. OM) AB opel & fe (TU) A jl axe. C Bul.
S$ S sie. (WY) ABL Bal. #53 55 5. (NY) L attS one
yl 9 es gai (f¥°) AB Bul. |, for 4. AB ¢s els, and so L.

itv) B om. (Vt) BL sl > Ure (TA-) Bul. 7? for Up:

ry jh sso
ree ae, duns) aloe SLs 2 hd S ath Sl ae
wl 52 Leg) op, S95 ue bE 3) Se o> oe We

Pea, sh Me aul Vie | Wa ato vehs ph dig:
Atti Anant ei c\ i er s\n oer

woe ol <b v7 eps Hel , an Yo a be
55 Ais ne 2 255d 6 2p al. _- 5) soe nl
eB OL Nel Sg ele ge I LS WS sy
fos ee j\ 58 ile , £2535 Re ge ee le eet osal st
sb ab NSt 59 ota jhe ed Ft et UP UG
alk 4 JLs 3) sch, Ibe celecls woth ye ploy ren
rs, A, a ee ee ee
SNS tle ols OR, Ws gS bok ol
eelB Se Sit yg 2 eS ——\3,) si Sali es CaS tre
Ske <1 y> 5 oN ea Ye Ub Va gy SI) cxyl
le pe oa 1 Ry 6 =H Ws aln3 55
ue wll 7 plex Gel als ; j\ OF 9 or cel wile _ ji o,
glee wal | bth 2 ye IT ey i oS ao 5,
Jum 3\ o,\s Sime Cre Meee Ree aor 3) a,\o Ks pj ee

oats ol P Sie SS uel weg oly cme nj

G17) Bom. L Bul. asl. (M4) Bul. 3) 93 p-

(\°) BL Bul. 55 |, \)3; in A |, is suppl above. C 2

GVY © originally 244 5 44.

CY) A tle ols ao Tey eae B tls oy gio Wh» f». In C the
words between # ~~» and ul, have been erased and > sf has been added

after yl. (8) Bol sue ST.

(opu Gy rt

San gab p bale. £5.34) po gle Cr? 53
joo By 25) 2492 92 We « sL—1 qusyi 2b
AF el JL Lg: sees orp liege ey
ct! enya) pea ol pe aS Vig pli
59 Jos BG te LG el iy HT pe
se 5 ry A Aesss oul Marcenly aes sig © b
Le eS we ly wf be Nien) ol BS NH) o- ae
GS 9 px ne? \ Sam be Ge 9 GLa dhe cyl b
ols} Bho juin 3 wy « Lap sah OE pl La att
op AS eT nH a2? 2 VL Jk 3s oe

Vdd ie 23

EF y hty 14 ot FS a3 wile We \ aS
Sb wrt Fo ee of ed ai he
a Ae 5} Ue conte Frole 2° De ap
\_. gi, pe igjtg ene Le Ue dy3 jee GE oe
bs HF 32 2x2 Laas Se oS Nb oP le
pe Ay Lt ae ee 73 9 ds 3 ashe be d

(TY) After this verse BL Bul. (and AC in marg.) add:
“A ops 253 ss © 45 ope fae AM p-

(i=) AL aSue bgle —!, and so corr. in C. ABC Bul, 7'. (S°4) A
jh jap Al 411 4g BE Bul. jlo se tee = EM ole uy b
(&-2) At st, and 80 corr. in C. (£-¥) Bol. 9+ Bul. 3\ for s.
(£-A4) Bol. . ysl. (E\-) Bal L gl Ja,>- (21) A Vlg 9 oie

L ye 5 Gy. Instead of the second hemistich B has the second hemistich of
vy. LIT. (211) B om.

Tt t J3\ pa

ee a ee al is» eee
Pom Lob =e Wl 5,. 0 gh eee ay 5 Sis talk
= EN omnes Pe Dien yr serge
Ss 6S 3) S85 9 oat 5) eh ee Oe) tle
pea Nine 2M) os aL as ST Lie
oy So, ct y58 53 gl api eg Sh doodle, gal Vcc
Ly re Lt i, a Ls Mp OL HY du
BS ops 3) Se 5 ol ta 6 88 os ge ITU o 9g oe

Vaja oles et bi
Lely : At tes belts Lelie 5 \, ols stole p> too

(GAY) After this verse L adds:
le ee LF) aS anys yp © ols oj Gut <5 at, Ss
ay ok pe ok ob Mak on SUI GL OL if
OAS Sl ome sree ble yp * hale Ji agus oj
et Sy 1) SS clap me 3 * ail Ss does
SF op ol ppt SLi LG * Sie ol) ey Loe Ark
Bul. adds:

s= t= lL 5| alo ae me Te Ljcus os Ne
Jal gay 293 eel wap Gla © a, Gud oy Lyk, a
oe ol Pook ob slaok © on Chil Zh ull Se
els 3 ut thy je ce os Vy ale iF lap i
LF | pak Ls * 4 AL, os juss ts

Cit) A ale o-3. Bul, a. ». (1) L ia 35>. (oT) BL crus.
Lek fs. (Se8) B 4) Se pl. After this verse Bul, adds:

ay Vlesl Me oye aa © aly ol ty gl pW 21
Heading: L om. AB Bul. »j, ly.
(°°) After this verse B has the verse a Pes By cited above from Bul.

(Spm So TA

le sth oo) a re a5) Ga elas ol
25 DN oS Sh ae ole SU, ath ae ie nee SF
Se oth NV ey pF = Le: Lee
oy Lisle Vo a Bj ete & san S oF ©
La pat ie WF my Me hk 5 be obey Fe

259 > Ole

sis She eg AF Sele LS Ny tae j\ 43, 3
5) tS oe ps Ae wv 3 21 s—2\ 5
SS ge 9 OS tse 9 Te rH NS SO
cy rarer PS lL |, sy 0 pt Wt | Fath N get
ba a? I etn Op oo ae 8 i FP
ecto 9 AT ad fa 028s Sy Shg 3h ay tha
ale ooh, ot way lal tye hoe LSE FM
jl 5 no — "> . jh aa 35% 5) rs OF
a 53 3? = 55) IS + iy HE J uf ia a

5g & Vai cbiSle oS ptt

5) ie —_ ay je aid 5) iS 5) > 5 35 ale 4\

——

(tT) A AT oe Us ue yy). AB Bul. 5 for $.

(07) A ot Joe ‘ld doe Ae ({¥°) Suppl. in marg. C. Bul. sé x.
(TY) BA, oe. (ie) B oe,

Heading: AL jGole. A om. 'jLai.

(tt) B om. 5».

Ti ¢J3\ pio

cme S glo oi ee cS oy 2 258
Bite ces oleh en ae as
Wer sel et og WS. Vr hing Gee ae
ETE GRRE Dacre ae mae
jh we | een te eae ee
co ead AG ot ost) ob ¢ HG =
Seg Le sw i ye Vee A) NSS Aa Ne
SS 5 ont 3» oe bel Saf _ Fu
Sa 92 reste « SLI Gs 5 oS oll 9
ae sey b J Wo 2% ol WS SF _F 52
eee ole om UWS Se at ool. .caleze shal
a4 51 53) oS, ee ee yr eS )
=a le ale Je ig 4 0 dy eho uae ee, yo tae
oS, Co ot Pol HT og 2) ub 35> cA
ow 2Y Ge ls 5 o 5| so en ae ley i
=e jaw tls | Ls

els 4351 Sa5) poe
oO 5 Je Se ete 6 Ns gl ee 3) ee 5
ae ne a ee oe ao wb coke! —— aS _ $ yo tt
ay — Eek ER far — a ye gk dorks aude
J +\ Leo; LS >» <5 4, olin Bots you5 ale
apy ~ WL Visa Mi; dy - Lei oer a ae

I ee

(EM) A ey Be |e. (QV) Bay uu
(Al) L Bul. om, , before (+.

_ @*4) Bol. aly Bol ot By: GAY) © 250 uy.
4£1\) Bal, a a" (O80) Bol, \e. 4.

(ope Ge t.

wo EL 335 Peel ee ae pee pis ab ety 5) te
Ld — ge pte SIT LE WE go) pach sh e4

\ Leas 5] Lave 29 515> ole

rv) 5 rl SE " ge pd) ry Ves es
ab Moe pe eS ee eel
iss, i733 3 oy iat Megs yg ov) 5° cp) 5 0 cpl th
3 key rH oe esl. 4l jes oo oe ssi
Pe BS 3 F sce le + pte ese 5 =) 52 ol HY

‘JAI ASMP wy Ll
ie Se je re Sto he Blab ool
Pali dy foes 2S SP
(Fo lo 5 pS se Sy ‘(7 3 Yoh, oly _$ 70 2
eons “> I. wale oy cradle emt Oe ok) iS _$ tg
Faye lo Fj Ak SF or > pyr ee oS _ Se >
oe con Se oP col of > + Lt ps pe SF
waning: Si tl iyo eee el SiS _$ >
coke Ft ed OS yet ote Sif _$ 52
hey Wl ple bar eo ol ol pe ot Feb

(0°) B ot. Heading: L om. A Ja.
(h1-) A om. 3 before cyte gi. Cc gta Son3 iy as
Heading: C Bul. om. 53. (1) Bul. ey.

Y\) 45 for -£. ABL Bul. 1,5) <5.

tt ‘ J3) pte)

athe Sl oie oils Ww $8 sy 5 cay ol le
aoe ar ee Juve , wkLsv . geaik hal 35 ikl + yl et.
GEST St Vile Je, iy yh Se EL
a. cng SU op y eng og e Sli esl wS> 5a\> a
roy 3\ 8 02, \, owe wn Gh 21 lsole —.
er ee Or aan
oF vy sn & Ep. oS te 55 \ a EEE a ole
Lite 3% Ce Nites re Gee ee
collet dow y due Ho Feel Is WL &
FEN oe an aS

sles yoy i+5, 5 sas 23) 48 Gx ss

coum 1 € 9" G23 Le js 5) 25> ,) CHSee py of

Se Oy 9139 sai oy

evar ye Sa Fin oka
ear ae Sy So. cb on ee SH ce! ere
ese gee | 4 9 5 UE 6 ceo oe ans 2948 olor yr!
Lee 41 LL, “ste jh onSt oo tts op Sukkoe de
3» eats ai. vale Sb ls

(°18) A om. AP) A SE\..° (°l*) Lin the second hemistich
ee ae A,

I. a

tiga Big tr

fe DK 9 Sot mS oe ee 9 tl Op
aS. Soph acy 9 gh oenS le yl SSH
=2 yt & 34; 35) <3 2» os a2 Sad FS 5
Sg ts KS on « S9 S
Se ale Ss 213855 S + i » hg iy
> et oe ob ety 24 2 oo 2 §9 oy Li ol

(hy eiim pS eat yy? > Ssh od oh! ol

. 2 a : a, ;
ls igh Ge cle Ja OS x Uh Sich 5 3h e--
j : Zt — a
SY; ol 5 J ye CD os pS GK os
a ~} P
el Se Se eget Ll Vole " oul, olla Se aT ce
’ ae = =
ae) ANSI wy) Ue dy! OF © 9S IP wh 5 F ybla Ae o>
ot oks\y> el olt b. oa oly Lhe ob a=
yl dye 6 5 pth Se CN OS DF Oe
a} OW pk ais | ie P| ey je a5 ul ra
: 7 6 OE —————ee =
a ae Ser = and om. s. © om. r¥ _ After this verse Bul. adds;
Sule ¢ S a3 oly Pp © A? oF ate Veh if
(31) After this verse Bul. adds:
(t1Y) C “he - (M44) ABL Bul. gp » Sl>; 3 3) r i, and so ¢
in marg. C has te) é. (.41) ABL Bul. 59 , ylese =9-
Heading: B Bul. alnis|. BE Bul. =~ Cea Sus A om. aly.
(o-T) c Jey (o+A) L une 3 le pe B Bal. ene 4 cart and so Orr.

in L. ABL Bul. wls a4 & &. B exyd.

pk ms SNS er 25 co ire 3

‘o3 JWLI > 352 HES) So S-

sth Se 5? 5 etbS \j2aF ye me 3 3 Ss &
J3 oles er o> gy? ae ej oe a3 355 59 sie ys a oe
> bs 2 Ss , Je ie, jhe) a jh was wilyo >
By Sie yo 8 ath, heal, 5952 Sob aoy
aoe Sel 29 on Stat gag Fa LL ee oll OS
Ihe oye 5) jhe Ve oj) Ute e pe! 5 Aye) — 3)
pal 3 hse Val Ps og aula VL > piu pe Le ove
— 2 GaN 578 Ph eee 3 sm 3) fle =
siw| asks 50 by hs Sal co sls 42 glvl 2!
a 7 ok ol oy Joh SAVE ats ugh
2—~ \e> _)s a 3 AIF © 29°0 Les Se wl: rs
c\s>) 5 > So os re ¢\2 = > eat ABE bv
Nap Vad ST oe CHL Le Leg) al
gheles 5| iB) boas ata osu wus V3 » jo ao

(°L¥) After this verse L adds:

aS le \j\ye= JF lle © aS oh as ale >
Bul. adds:
Sobldege Site + 2S te ef ley
(HA) Dsl 5.
Heading: Bul. \,\ai eae In B \j\si has been added by a later hand.
(®£%) Bul. om. 5. (°F) Bal. | x3.
(229) ¢ al Ny

2» 3 Pee) Si LPH, © 39 piel 3s bla se
BS a it SS st ies — gS 64i,'0e SE ie Lt.
g\ —F5) Ly go be es tr + aeS\ NS oe PP
“Lt Ja Su St pee ly es OS HE pt
AS de Laas . IS. p= ISIS Le ra
S72 3 te be ae. be wy 9G % TS
2S 285 , a+ \,,\ 25 fo 8 Vita a » 3h 33 oxy ot
age ath ay GS Sg dle oop toe eS wad Lbs
Et 5» eas Ss a de Ca Ce rd es
Js Jk, 3 cy S 52-5 3) wy * Jai —) 525 gm | Te ee am
27 op le iclegs Mery ino
sl Mss acc 2 sl x a a ee —l ot.
ai yat Vd gf Coyle ware e_\ o\j—3! aN
Foe NS bole & \e gle ph wr af soe
Ai sl \ Seer = niet in 8 hanoek hae
LV a= BF eng oN 42 5 p59 42 9 9) 242
ee erp t las DN of. re aS, | bet ol wus ot
mS let 5) ashy, Lae + nk ak | Peer ee

ery a ol a. BL el faol.

(OT) A syle.

(OTT) A plele att

(ot) Bul. 8

(9F9) B slae

4M) B Ae ee L ie iS. ABL Bul. 35> ysl cae 4
(°T%) In L this and the following verse are transposed.

288) L lye te yl Or air 2 3) aby

TY A re

a IS OH 535 line » — gue ssh 525 Ve
ae er ea ph dik e bg jb eae pel “als ov
IS 2p SS 3M oS Jb + at gle 2 > ob F VS

2b Sle Foyt Mb oye po 1 5} ae 1 X 4 Weiss the
a wp ray —_ ad). a5 ay or yb y é
ed IS gh ns OF
Ses ae Fo VL at aS ub x 58 \ypo
69 \o>? oe el hs 2 3 LS oz i oebaat
BRAS Se ol the ols lh a se YL
eS oh Al yl ols lh. ib sb be ga
VO wb =) Sa, «AL op =) Sa”
cmleeel gee te go eee 0 elgg ely ed, yg?

KA \o'e J 23) HS |e
Sein pS yk ee Oy ees y aS og ce ST
eis Wee hel gute gS ental Qos eae ee Seg
ae 5 5 ol ay oe NS) ISL, ass
19)? Jil. ap 15); ee Sle yl WF oy

ee

(V2) B 3s for 23. After this verse Bul, adds vy. 9A%.

(9A) TL ‘aj)x\j. (eal) ok Sky ye 235° 25 P.

(°AL) Bul. a ff fe ay! of Gee: 5 ae for 3 pe A seems to have had
originally ae 9 feel 2 gi’

(PA") 1, Cileh for. ead.

(AY) A |. for sin.

(SAA) J, oS) Al cpl ele 5 yi

(°A%) Bul. om., but see note on y. 9Y%.

i |

(Spee Sot aa |

ds ee 5 LS NT, sobs dh y= Ss 9 de
ye ae IN , Ep eww ate 52 F ee S sl

olay 259 aS o>

RIS 9 hy DES 55. FS US ol yb oF ev
AS gr 2e 6e 5 Ge AS op Ge BF 3) Oi
Sat eee JT ge wl &
sax Dost) He bat oSu5, cS osure
aos ey Ae oS; G0 2a sy eS ee
Le st ou eee J Sgt Te ov.
Base yh we te ol Se Sale Se oe
d\p Lin Joyo) ee
x5 WS aya , oe es ea ia 2 gl FF She
oshs . 3s ravine grr ck ele \S 5\ ole ol

ab KF Digg et Bands te Se com
ows 3 ge cyl bo 358 5 EK oj) 6S eye b
a> Ae SS Gye Gu et op so! _plb “fs =

] \ pus ee sie

a

t .

Heading: Bul. . p>:

(719) B Bul. lad 5 lary. Cy 3s oh. (OV) L us,lan -
(°V\) AB ee) rp (ev) B om. © , we (@¥5) C ole antl
BAL bah ofl. (CV) A Ss, (CV) A is St bi, L yok ule.

CVA) © lie yy:

v4 é A ao

SF; aot phe NE 6 550 gat Aer ub LS
stg 5 pls bos. ae sl abate n
anes 2 LE ol oS. ae wt UE NS 5
< nee sly goes We ey od NV le “a
3); so oly ped eae em lar 6 ol
jus\ Ws a Le alt. bel Ub at Lh
came pj) 9 ENE 5 By? ty ee pt wD lel wo. F
col No S Lays sh be. eile ghSl 4 bel pF
3) ph 4) a ole, & ee sh oe 5h ee 25 $29
“X — > 3 TN ES « Keren a \yep) ee
OR AS Cree ae deol ahs SS S 4-35 cp
x ame = 5 Se se Gres eae J
— €\ he 0S 2 Su 8 5) rte
wae AS 353 eth S x. sj) S Se we» Ae
V3 ei 5 cian Buttes o Vp gee 5 al oS ot A
earesy \Gas i Veep « plel Viel oli
25¢) pilST 3\ 2 Ses 5959 5 phe oh Se
ge lee 24 GH oS Sb K8) wes SF

CM) ABL Bul. “3 >. MW) Lye 5h. OW) © p53) ole.

(+) Bul. oles Ler wlolal, OM) L Bal. 4) y) > aS ole.

CT) © Ss veo 52. (0) L Bol ele > S. Or) a Nay
for ,\s- OY L os 6 CY) A ys jlay for sly. A om. ».

(Ws) TL, aealt for lj. In L this verse is preceded by these two verses:
eee wale aS —= Ss o- salt nf) jo 4

(Sgume [6 yiee TA

‘ep een ole» 2 Lil

es ME AS og boi. os IS) 3, ol eS de
wily Ole 3 3h euunl els who F 33 sl eee ell
Aj 6 soa 6 aS MAS. dy, ol oO ob Lb
—_& 6) § dL 3 ol be 45 3 > Be ee L
she bes eS al oes L. 2 E oigt se
che te Bled Ar de ees a2 »+\ phat op
eras 2 3 \ rll. wile yle VL ¥ oh i Ss

Be any poe Ln gel
po po th ok Gl pd “fe pt wb wile oe b
er o L. ;\ s—bab 2a) yh onli 9 May old
a5 xl jh ate Lo gas et ls ML oy g Le st
Vypceed Cm dy, 195 3 gle 0 Vyas Aaa _ gut oi)
pita Ny 2 8 le gol, , Jes Fred. Ss A ea pels a)
aS 8 oy GGL HS. SO e's we and as
ps og Sle , ASL wi. rks ke ee alee
deers Lo aS 5 pill edged tals. £254 Li 41.
Kt yo AS xe tg ork ep, GLE He +h
She rir Ye or lr ate eae

Heading: A ight _p. In C the Heading is erased. © in marg. cyte os ad
\,eje, and so L,

(7%°) A So for » j5- CV) A 2s. AC cocal ol.

(etl) A, for 3. by ge My 1) AC pth 3b.

CT) A Bul. glide. (4) A Bul. Glide. ABL Bal, als S fn.
(1-9) L Bul. ere cle le (U+) Bal. 353 Le Lali.

= \ ¢J,) 7.

2 eee

Us Lie Lvl th 2 259 ce a6 dy

ol), Ge Sh oe Ne HL SL. shel cyl Gl NES 1
oS oe es. oe wrt th 2 oi
a ee AS cA eae
wh? GS, hci S ates
. wal pe be SL od log & LG
Se MeN yg WE epee Se ey Gig ee et Be
ged col nF ben the the eee ASN, slab sl oh
be > 9 F Ge eb ey Wee 3) eS oe Yel
ro Lol ai Vol ete sae ch 25) Ss.
as» $2 A). % peck hedenS as
Wis ky Lb J a, ht a LL _ Sa
ole 3% yl es xl Hs 1 Se Bd Jb wi So

S35 9 ahs 59 ST

—> °F 27939 set aman » Ss jy Jeo \ 3) ae
hap: Eee a oe ee ree ee"
357 ~~ 9) 3 33 55 we 5) * 2 xls bos P \,226 yy “IS +10

‘Heading: A\,S a.
(Wt) Bat. £2 lpi. CY) aA, k for 4. (eX) a Zo as.
(1) BL Bal \ an ye gle ay ine. After this verse L adds:

mel bal ob oA + at bly Sat as

(‘oem Se i.

aS es\;\ ne a! <i aS walk oO FE} 9 eed
sulents ot glen ope rolen oh SS ue Foy
wl ek GF 5 peo Se Uk kh SS Se gH
ye re we! Led aa ed oh pe F Or
oS Tie los Syd S oe lt cade SES SN» ga Me
iemelde> 51 oS G88 3 \ DP) rele yell THe ‘vor
shew — a 36 54> lal. rKhene jo a los oo Lyi
s| Lio |= Vale » Lisl _ gis = il
Us dy ole 9 ut 2? Lae eye ea
Fda else Vso = Bee) ot oe or lait.
st de gucle pik ep 045 wile yim cay bal
\ jai 3 3) aS jue Le A abo ok Te eI

3s (2h) 3 loley wip 2S sx9

ok pe ce) ox 3h May sis . als 3)! ost 3) is SU!
Gh glug 5 ob & oF ly Ve ot Lb 5
SS ose p Git ors Le Sabo 2 eh w
— SF 5 oi" \, cxj) Aad e cee JS tes 43) sw
poy pe ANB ple e335 + ploy er chee ul eli

5 ol Pri crs wi o- BL px ub
ie el pee Pe eS) a aH 2 Sp:

—e

OM) Lom, (We) 7, Ss Bed ed cylti.

(44) Bul. uP 2 ot: CAF) BL fie.

Heading: A o, for | Aj,. After 2) Bul. adds .\2) po 5
(UA) A Bul. ejy-

i 4 f Js Pt)

OOOO EEE EO a

ea8 lil» 8 Vile yo eg oles es Vile
SANE Say Sore Secu pe ohh Le le Nl
oS x Sey 5) 2) sh \s. é LF VbS WS uy
3) oy QP el 3315 {= 8 e 5) sl pls iS ~— 93
bvsy? a Sjpte she ly Poe Ldn - ale ,\ ve
wt A Nee hoor. Ft 5 gy ew
wl wile , gy FO. ASN aie 29 Th
SS ell yt OF Ee op ia: oN 31 “oe
ee cx uly 5 iF 95) Ge — Finis 5 I sas cas ss
abs ob Li wc AN. ey, Ny aac z*
go5 aah yep Ho «3 Bee Fy spam

Lm 35 bac ina pe! SL eat os)
SHE LF eS sb. We 5» Las
whe) pe wll, 5,- cleats ki 524) pul
Sule lh cpakcee pe a soil y bie coal

“ssae dy > ly) esjke

=, Qualls, pF ol ee ey Gs Ll oy wyl 2h
ws SN et lb ee oe TI eb th oS
soe 0) aj) te eels Te eee ey Ub Wl sl
at stile 32 69> 6 oF 5\ al Seo pel

ar) 1, Vl esi eapy a gi CU A ol ue. MY) AL 91S.
AL 3,\35. (1°) L aaju). OY) Ba. »S sh ,. c coy for cu.
OM 1 ole. (V4tt) pol, ac :

Heading: Bul. =u £5 f+ ag dy Sie dy ,>.

(coe Gy ‘Tv

= iw 2

ie Ble glyo 2529 3) 2 6 Gye GLa 4 08 5 se
Fy 2 er ps bor Ss st ed ge
hee dy TVy ls Pas ade ae eal pS lb
ch ST le
NE be 2 Sobel jhe obie ol Ge oS th ae
te »\ oa Vth 9 ced oe plial pple | Pa a i Na
pl 5) pe D9! nile » glo os Lk, Betyg Jt Shige W-
NS Lg Nauk Ligh ook Jo, 0 Hy 5 at she
5) ‘ake = 7. LS sy we tt lh, a tsS Stix
ae ai\ > a wie » me ae Lys OF

oy mt cash ee a ceme pl t y ss ae asl, 3 a; Wo

gh pty FS os on Fo oS 9 pe Ei cure cae
oo ite ie Fe oly "a a ee >

WI Fyre th Sf > 2G 53 al tle » glee
<i 3 5)! So ost OF ee ee ay = oly? a?
Sk og ot th alt ae eee BT 2 ge te pF

Se Se

CW) Bol. (je sll. CW) After this verse L Bul. add:
ME Poole Packt? * glad 42 pile ayo 5) de
(WU) ABL Bal, gle ul ad le pl ta. CY B Bal. pal.
CO) Te elie 5h pelle py On! wie, and so Bul. which has yr instead of 5!.
OWT) A pl ae 3. OW) aR Bol lela. OU AD yo ote eae
CW) After this verse Bul. ‘eine ie Heading cp de! iy os 4 en oy rs
Dae Glee oe $4... CA) AL ali ae. Caz, altered to 4.1:.

io i J3\

XS joy wl cals, en? p AS las rae —o jlas a
be 2S sy J? le OFF» Be rr 9 Ke 5
oligo ae Vo Ube oki oe wok Lo bh ve
este Se SL 6p ee bae,| Se Say as
Sy loge Se 54 aS Jo Sal oye 32 LO 3 Jo ve
be 51 were sare

‘hel > dy She £ =) ale pea ow pas

Lie ¢ nie ne ol. sles | pls: SA oop
NIST 5 5? 5 +S 5 on V Jeet 5 Lisle ps0 ay!
ea 4. meee OF . wid ot Pe acl «all

=) sl 3 rere aa ee a 5 ie hes 4d sa
pe al LG Se eee ars
aoe Saws SN plete aM ait ee
Ft Shp ay she 5) ae ey le
(Y0\) After this verse Bul, adds:
Lin ne fogs auth aw Las op ee il ol
(2) pele. Bol. aaa lede!. (WT) After this verse Bul. adds:
Me > & lp ae pte e ES Op bl eh UW
(YY) ABCL vylnelan. (VTA) IL dos: OT) oC th ha sole ay
las 5, corr. in marg. OT) Bk lay. B ies 5) fs
Wi) ¢ os S. (VFL) Bol. om. y before mae cl c\. In the second hemistich
L bas oes Gia jle gb ig J+ After. this verse L adds :
he Se sie \ i ? * em sities ar! e's
(v¥o) B as. Eul. ee op In L the two hemistichs are transposed.

(oes Sa tt

yee ie yee ee Geog cobb 5 4) je glr-
Meh alee dae oe lt tl) 25s. a
pen hy, oe aia\:5\ P20 ee ys 5 a ee ?
One. as Oh » als; e ts ats \.3 2p ia tw
cule oF ey |r pail Ste col) 9 tee SN See 9 Holy oF
Dy aS _- lal sla lee aS 5S \gsd slant v-0
ctls a SY ry, iS Be o eatlo jae IS 9 oS aj
Dati ye 9 4) or ce re ee ae 2 3S
3 ae ig cathy Ai,» Fink a jh eimale ad é\
> ary Sto er és 2 gt Wg 2% cere L é\
ay M9? — SN; * eye CN GS get 3
Ls cp, ee. Go Lm» jt wy
SE > we Bo > + Oe 8 a? Gm a ole
ol Vi 2S oe gp seed Le Op pl Ge b
Dy ee 2386 J Sa AE me ene de
—» L : ey ltl oxo —> > a uy ay Sve
AS VLE gla) ye. Ly) bel; > ae
wowal) 25 Lils a. wf of ov We
xe 3h sls; o> dogs Vise oe coh isxus cmy\l ig
we xp I ss = jo as» Wyleo AS plo Nha sh
asf clit 1, 3) wie Fase tS) Fee bw.

(vet) A \= ys! ods ee (Y*?) A originally ads. (Yl) Bol. om.
5 after o*.. (V4) Bul. ot pt 6:1). AL Bul. Scla,\ at ji. B ack
Sul3,\s- (We%) Bol, oth», Sa \y. A ly) a. BL Bul. LL, 3)

(Y\:) Bul. for oF. (19) A pill oy Zi

£Y iJ3\ 4

Bhija\o03 ged 5 Sel S 0 elieely g\ Scola
re wl! cia 2! of Se sell» ob
an Pb eo pe GS. ls scars el,
SST per Not = pot col \ ale ak =
he aap — ne —_ a A\5 a
oF ol, wt lacs esther Sees ie
Lelils wl we. Lele 2 ly Wl sols i
ls s,s 5) Cay es HL Py Voy ols ols
ta pate Wd 39 3, sty tpsietfl ples HF ble =,
Ens \, sae) okt Se NS es Bee: \ Ls
ba tr Sis 937 5 \. om 5 Ly Sl S, \, LS
colin Koll. 3) ks; Sy. ante oN ay AS, ne
EE, cht uss &, Sh ps al Lise
=a) Ly CaaS Lele 3) « Is 8 ee oe by 5 é\

ny are we Lente te egg pe Aaligle Gee \
oN da SF Sle ole ery Me LL PSH
7S BG Bede 6 Gb & oe K oye J

Sat SI Jo yo ay) ayy o eee oy og ee Gl OW

ee

(Vou) Ad yl 7s. Bul. aes. (Y**) B Bul. , 4 alot Er

(YOY) A Bal. ppt lj 5) glb. (ON A fim pia B yjclite as in text.
A ge wile. (¥o%) Bol, suf | ait. (4) © al, 4. OU) L oye
for y-. Bul. «3. (WW) B Bul. iss Si, csi. (1) Bol. 52 ce! fl.

OW Ls oe slle bk gy, 0) A cues Sl Jo op jl sya:

(Syme (Fe £1

ity Renee ROS. ee

a See OF das Sls x= cake we 2 az| t

SRF ge ot OP we SB dyer td, aa
hed 3 oh ;\ ssl yc oe AN phe Foo ej se
35 ys ee rp DO es) S53, So aur he
eon . oS (5 cbt oo ‘to Se oy) 8s x S
ole FS Ec perie en pa ne cre on
stl. 2 25, et sl sy __ ge oth ges .\ ay
wi Le Pe wt) 5, dul, Len > 3, )NK3
wl Gigy 2» 31 335 9 © ght 3 owe Oy ol Ln
BE D cg L Pate W3e 52 o a9? ls entel eS, &
iS ei wet Le = ih : cal ae 5 whale cel LASS
Sn pS sh Leet eS Wh Ls as
2x OS? *2 ie SN et 6 dy OF LoS L, Let
255 ye om oT £51; © 2554 ile a5, W599 29
=Ge a6 3) L 1, ontneitngs 22 Ak\ LG 1 eee
ee TARY fr
3) aye yp ole Sm ‘FF = Sy uns

(vO) TL om. (YT) Suppl. in marge. C. (VTA) AB nal ry:
Heading: A jo ¢»3 os ha.

(YT?) AB oll ,ul. In ABCL Bul. this verse precedes the Heading.
CUT) A Soa ol). B Bul. \e iss p- (YE) B she cel pie.
(YET) A Bul. ,»% il en CEA) BC es ela.

ei co oe syle kL. (YC) Am for ye.

a1 i OEY Pte)

cogil gril , ~

Sy alent 3 Gil, ce Sl ute o one I a3) JL is ch
xSe glitl ;\ >» diya hap acale UBT jo ae g3) _ lib
ot Ge ye J 35 Bk eee Kea >) oe ,\ b icant ie
on wy cas ees ae roe oy lel zo. VV jal
ies og pe ey ——\F + 5! us! ama
e role ait bel. SF ols wae 2k Tai
Ne AY tO le 3). et Se ST 1
week ge oth I See pel ed 1 juin
~—) pial 2 a> oe gj wl ahj ne eps 55
ier Arr ve is Le gs; 5h J Hs ely OF
of cn! ¢ ri ty lcs ~~? Us * oo ps Py OF ole or”
WF ptt 53 63. —sle ———- vil =e

Heading: AB eS Jw A uaF Bul. has (and so L): syge sito, O35)
oF Lad > Jib ol otal gras ol Lb ol old, nS Je a3
2 gall p> Lule. WAN) A cu cel te B 23> 9 bails ely After
this verse L odds:

a i Sie BT 5? yy * J OF ce Bi bl ot
Mie yl Sig ee te 8 eye roth 03 0! on
Bul. adds:
aye BN ab Wy be poe rh pe ty pe
oP ol 26 5 ae wk 9s ok) Shel 5 93 on

(VAL) A 385 (1 joy aley. (VAS) ABL Bal. jl. (YAY) B Bal.
wi ig le CNL Jee ey het. | 8) Bor oe. (Vil) AB
Bul. ¢\ye- (VT) B Bul. lyelge :-) and so C originally.

I. 4

‘Syme Sys LA

Me Be Le AB ee ie oS ol le on

Seles cal’ gue Neb) « Guligt ub a Le jl
ern are
Ses Sr wal sil og SLT HE ls ca

dato le ee ee pa — 3h ue A ee ce We
ied ng eae on gl + Lee We oe re ee ol
Boyoy sslje<ate wl Bin his th 2S Vig Je

Jer eee bot ot Je + de db th Je VS =
o> ie Le bt Gi? Seb a) 8) Ot
ghiges Le op) te Ge. hh Fe 2 9 5 ES Gi
a_i Fs Voll wl jd WS 9 WS GUS 59

-

wt Jer Pa 2) ly Joly S\ » x21, ce | a i

(WW) Bul. olay yh. A ee ae (WT) CO coless) pi yl 5, with oo
written above , =u, (YYT) A yl A ce (pi y- After this verse L adds (and

so Bul, after v. YY%):
ST. 395 AGN se UAV # Ob yb op > ly Se
oy § ctl 9 Se op yo * 2S ye love ok oe a
(VL) After this verse L adds (and so Bul.):
See g eg AS tle bs * op 5 sub Ste ysl »
ooh a sal. Tigh US ok hdl
(Wo) 1, Bal coy) ele. ABL Bul. gig oj 53, and so C in marg. ABL Bul.
oh t=, ind so C in marg.
(Yt) C ery a re ee . eee fr gS tyr 4
The verse in the text is written in marg. C. ABCL Bul. A. j=. A sly 9 1,
B el, wile Ch Bul. ; ol elt py: a i vas verse Bul. adds the verse which stands
in C. Bul. has ol. w\ and sly wat) hs
(WY) AL ale, ». (WA) Bol. |g 9 cee.
(VA*) A ol 5 is ie os she un _#, but originally al 5j\ & rr

o} ‘ J3\ ao

ae outs Vaal i. silt jo 5h 9 FS yo J
oN sys ple sills Ves Pre anne Fes \
Ae wy nt po ot» Sep psu vr ee
ope o dl Bg Os bs fal Gs ss OS aap S sale 13 oe
Ui glia —F 2 bot OS He tty S sale be oe
iF 6); wile WL Sigh | oheS sale se ge
com gh oky 3 & jo ope Gls omy) NFS S ote LE ot
et Ws Bs eV Sh elo ee uF »
of =F ob? eS Ep +2» a hye! Li
= sy) 2 tle 3 LG Sez oll wl oF
ley dine $F ieee Sm se eh

ee Lad 5 \y \\, ss\ wy als
SF a jruler 5 ee are oS vil 55

Sooty pa 2 _§ we hes =) Le . 2 cle ja 4 Sims OFF

ee EE ™™———.( —___;|| | | | || nee a —<_

(AT) ABL Bul. uiles Lis _~, and so corr, in C.
(AIT) B ye 5 walall. (Al°) Suppl. in marg. C. L 5 ofl aca yx) 2 =-
(AV) ABL Bal. ics ,,, and so corr. in C. (AVA) Bul. yale oy
(AN1) A cl for eos) Bis, (T+) A oy cane ol 5 y ol Em B Bal.
Nap SE. LD gly- (AT\) After this verse L adds:
DyiSyy OV 28 4 SVS Uy * 2S ge Ree Ons ory
ATT) L @) for “l\. L a wilal . (ATS) Leas alt 25. A

pee ’ ieee wi and so L, which om. y. Boje 4e “ess

(Spm Sy Oo.

was re Ace lee os . etal bee Ao ee AL vie
453) oj xi cpl = wwe Gl —_3¢ jl 7 jal
ced} icelgd Bie pas gal Care| JL) as Aire jah
bs it! ie > L. ‘1 seal Sted Sue oN re
aie ae acd Ze ha Pa oe, 3 oe A=
at? he els ade yl oe ee AS a x) 5+
eh aS op Shs yb, a? ,s\ Paes ree)
ve w a AAS 2 : wd a J Ms es
a ap are hag eg ae is te
_ » LS ausSe ome * LS obs ow acs ok \s
nd het —— ae 5 che i « _ as 3 ye hs 53 sf: N\
ras) pane er hs joe at ak . de ghd ol”
ee eet ig Seas = a2 fp ole ~S
ol sb ON ii 1S a ae . ee S95 3 a—Jas A Ale
alee fy -las\ A F tah ada de Am yore

(We) B Bol. 4h for 4). (Yl) In Bul. this and the following verse are
transposed. (WA) AL Bul. wi) 5 5

(VI) AL cide. Ash » for ul, ,- An) A oye.

(A°\) ABL Bul. »y> Je ©, ond so C in marg.

(A-T) il _s C j\ja te. (AE) A 5h aa.

(AY) L ‘lage ol. A jay ae. (A>) AT, , Lae 95.

(\V) L lS gl. (MN) B glut. L let.

ot é J5) pao

— SS

woe sy Lege sty Lee he weeny VL SIS Le 59
aS Soe tg IT AT Ne ee I ee os ™
wl os win = Rea » Lelie rere far \ —— a,
<< sal oo ce i Wyss er 5 sk oy ee on!
noone 0 a ba Lula Sax » ale Yoo Sur aS
oe Rie ,eme oF 5 os ee 5° Lape sles wi
tr * ejay F He Os OFF Sm 9 He Sa ae
SF NBN cere 59 2 pl Morte LL
pn MS ge ge Pe A Us fe ot
ahs pb le w2 SS 5) 0 1 wale o> 5! BL ese)

3S Able (ple 93 ALI ae 38 6 2 Sh M5
See el LEO aL, tat pre si _ gly 5S a3"

Wow prt evdtes oly oh, o Late bet Oly on cy de
soa ee ay, 2 p08 2 2Se OF, le ole
jag LA 485 ofl Lo gl ots) ats et or
wis Jy 2S p sri$ Np ge 9 €
dy op Lo a— oils » LAS PrP 3 SS vr
Jung poi a” GH 9 wt de LE el ge ae ®

De al

(ML) AB Bul. uye,. AB Bul. + py. (AL) In Bul. verse AL) precedes

verse ALO. L , g- Bul. ane for 5 »d- (AEA) Le pm for adeee biz, Bul.
cul odd. (ALY) Bal. gla gla. A gy! for o5-

Heading: Suppl. in marg. C.

(A08) ART coh gs Bol eoSS yy (91) ABL Bal. oue*-

(WV) A iy jl at ye A SESS. Bal. gk, Sy. (MA) © originally 4,
but ,g# written above. L day (Al) L Alt f-- Bul. een ome

beSyms (Sy of

on Os oh lS 3 sti. ~ee gti wt x glia
Wt LG eee Bird oes et le 5 Hl ol Sp
SL i NAT oip5 oe + ety bE ll tte
col ot ily ph DE be ele L eS wa 5 syle
Ab st 2 LV jh. +l flee oc, al
a Sse + praie s eG So Fasc
woh SH DS wll. SG Ne See g> 2
Vast ol bei \ diy ale ost SL. 3,45 ru ger es
SU; pe ees G5. Sa » a f = =>»
AS ar She WN 5h sige » AS SS ST cae sil
He we he wl gydctlie Szes) ees 51 aml ST Ate
SIT 3a He A Fs 5 le Soe F ie
dot Gals) Gl, 2 we oy! Wolt F We he oe
Bosley coe kceS ye ance ye heen dtl GAY col 5 ABD sk
ps oles + 5 jay HE oe? - PLS D> se? Sl Le Ge
St te pe Lhe Se oe SY al , Ka te
03 9 24 ox abe > oS. 0 Pact te Siw ga
att ea esl. pc ge Sot, debiacaad emg aes
igs Se ge dt 8 ceed oho! yas Vite OS

(AT°) Coin marg. cy Gye 9) Steep 5! aly.

(NY) ABL Bul. 2h dat one 2.5 o=, and so C in marg.

(ATA) Bal. pole. CM) AB Bul. «<* ol fla. L gu « bg. AB Bul.
ee et (AT) TL oe. (482) B om. (AVS) Ty dye ed old).

(ATA) chee is unpointed in A, and the reading of EC is doubtful. L cA ud «
Bal. leu. (ALN) AB Bol. oy Pp lye 9 ipl gale A =.

(ALT) AB se ij — ss

oo 65h Fao

LL

ut 3 ae il eg et ee Se I7-ry ee si
<5 1, gh: pe rere aight « ee ‘a_al a) yy \5\
cae yo bas § Libel eG lee 2 wl
we etS soon (siti ole. ats; Si er pbVical
SS ap Sf a es Sine Ls Seg dla Me
glee ue 3) 2950 Sa) Sal, gles VL sue v2 a
A be a> 3) Len Vash. JSS) ON ay yb
Lift oto wige= ae. fae a | Resa ry ae

J o> ~~ 5 Ss chs. SLAN- 20S Lisls %

Ls ats A : a: M3 a Mls ons 35; ee) paSs
oe J so) S 3 ae eee oe eF
Said oak i chose
D525) Une emt gt Oe * On Ws Sb TS be
ot ua, rac. Ha oh

= —_ a i a

(AVY) TL rep ref lal ys ei dye ages (AVY) In CL the hemistichs
are transposed, but corr. in marg. C. (AV3) ABL Bul, Lee 5? al, and

so in marg. C. A cat ah abis pig oy. L cg oS
(AAT) L ey L ppl. B Ga. C \W\ ,l>, corr. in marg.

(MAL) BC Ziad. (A) co Ll. aB LG. (MY) B one oe th.
Ge Wa Pe ae ieee CT) Ate 5. Di ple nl -

OM) Beto. A otk 5.

2

355 ee on F OD a 0 oH ws yeni Hi
oy pt pa Vile . Ht) yg Se il;
++ |; Bs; sy _ Pook > ox boa
SAS og ais PF og aj Lt ey 22 Ok = Mey lt dle
SS ARE ee F Sapa eh ar sae ot 9 3 og So wl
Js jae py et ee gp SIs Ol AB cm cme
its g\ ony y 2 LS By » Kyi ied gp hb FS
Bes 5 ES wey ge Ie tbe ST Ee

oes SU Jed 9 pr LL SSI Hb
‘ae olele
o93 3 I fe xe Sp, lye As 3 dd le yl
<5 poe tt \ anil eee vgn SE | es ae oll AV
Se 1350 po 2p \de + 2S +4; eed ceed 1 Ps
sy bp SH oh Na she dey Let) oye se Sal ok
coy Vilage Sly 8 dle 2 2555 nF See Hl ol 5) ae
Lal a, a Vel ce. a) Hh oy GLa! Wel
ve a1 3 5 Se Vay «58 ol toy ol Lh Pe

ae

(A) OC ayo al 4.j9;, and in marg. 45,3. ABL Bul. 3,3.

(AIT) Co cala ge pl. C dle |. tae I eRe ler ep ge
+g (AW) ABL Bal. pai; -

Heading: C om. sae. L pe owl. B Bol. glo 9» ot. In B the
Heading follows v. AV%. In C it comes after vy. AYT, but the error is rectified
in marg. (AVE) ABL Bul. ,i1 ay. L lay\y.

(AV®) ABL Bul. 3» atl, and so corr. in C,

oY ¢J5\ Ao

eed oe By Bh cake ys Oe Lay 93> 3?

peg Li p oS. H,r5 oy oy Loh
3 25 oy GL. w= Se ty oy Jak o>»

See polkas aad
ey Gaal en By las red hls ty,
=~ 2 i ee 5%. A 7 aN eae SSN x

Mel 253 olet ole ers

fe 95 yp No ia Se Bb ie MESS pak 5
pty? oe bd SM eo ee SG 5) eS et
Liesl wy sl 3) see CH e Me, be MN aS
oy loge ety le ATs on (> de 5 bil of de
Dy sled) es td als » Dy ale jt) +o y eee
Dike fale ka fh, SOS A ail et a
scone? 2S d5 3 ea ore eoys? als iw or (meets
eye: eal dtd sd ah « xl * wa gh aoe Ve >

——_

Soa ee

OW) Be
Heading: B \S3 » \4ur- Boom. Lj 5.
(UT) BC su psla,. After this verse L adds:

ee ee a= a | - ered 9) aS ye SS YP

Bul. adds:

Me 5 6A ee se re ey JSS 39
(MT) ABC pslan. (NW) DB cid A ees Le ow wl
(WT) LT sl oS Vb a>. Bol. 3% JS.

(Sees Sy o71

we at als og Ue dlp. wo Noa) 35 5 Ven
wl tie AF By > Ay oe le J ra) 63 5 es
wy slo 59 254 a) oh a. S53. Nosy Ge F ole
as |, ys 5S SLE be SEG 3 ea 5 Ls
Fe ees Sl Ed ip tly weal A ge ly 2

sts olet oS ux 4 52 SF ol

ee re he |
~— oO» ae sabes 5 oe pee chs eee wo abe
FN aL. CL. cae tik, >

(pS rue wld 5 oles ot oF lee
Korg dowr wks. Se ge tty Fa) oS
as ps OF wre mor ye gene Jb te
WE, KS pH AA AN Fe 22° A ee sat
seh Jo 9 Ne reg Jd ert wall GLY

AS 5 ser 2S ole? WE Gy
pp Hho) PAA re ls Ge A Oe

(AY C uss jh Ae cage, Corr. in marg. (ANY) B ? for 5. :
att) BOS GL. Bul. ole sb-

Heading: In Bul. the Heading precedes v. ACN.

(t--) ABL eS pls pt jl yeep (\) ABL a9) 59 4-
Heading: C om. cas after —\y-

Aes Spats aie py OL, aad a slg: Sb
aso (Sra gx » joy ole 5° WU oe
—35 We OF 2 Sy 2p + 15 i Worle lel vy
ds po Si by 3) Se ee oy S S _\e 3s ol
Jb p> » Sta Se + 1 5 py “3 6S lil,

Ree ods eS 3 S S > geew SG 5

‘sae 2 LSS chet ole cei ab

wo NGL pt Le ot os 9 or sl abe tl le

clas du eS Lao = "eo ghar | 3K), a3 lla ae
SH Sy S 9 aye 2 WSs AN oS Las
CMAN GV ce IN SII 8 libs Ge, oF
SF 5h, Us 3) oy sy * D5) gi) ey Sr \ S >
NSaS elyS= , jlo ah. No , xo 5) sols) le
Ls sl jay £3 J er soo sh gl) ob p- nF 400

ard Gh Pre ol Gt oy » Joly ai
Br als 23555 ee 88 ee pe

dats) >> A Was doc V— poe dey 9 shel isa hj

= —

i

(VY) L Bul. oy » gis Cpe pe A ob ge (XE) AB crt 5 ne
(4°) L o's. B writes with damma as in the text. (*) Bb \,
and so corr. in C. (Mi at a's5 salt la. (t9%) A ed 5) chy.
L Ves. (2) Instead of the second hemistich B has the second hemistich
of the following verse. (°°) Bom. Bul. ,lus for lis.
Heading: AB Bul. 50. Byale pry. (PU L Bul. gop ol. L gle.

so da ca mn

Poa ea ee nee
29S 9 9 Pg AILS 52 agg rg dy oF
Lie ool Li, 3) ds Ly gee sd Gy Ve oly
pe Ste > Uta fe he ee co \loal * oF
ap) Ss, 3) ai Te lent 5 Be J+
JA cag 5 dlp ps aes Chl Gell be)

‘Son \rer le E23 ob
se le bk GH 3) » Ll £3 dy Sh oes:
fe pe ltl >»: iene ee Sy Sok 5, ack al
Se 5 le Sor ob + Bs \pe Sox o oh
Ne, ph et ple ly ge ob Oe eet de one
a) cals gitl Te eg cle Je og?
—§) ye oll 3 Shay p> st Ie Daweh
JAS oS 35 aj\o po we e dew \—I ees: Ave
ys ath S je se Lt 5 ye _ jl
x Jeb ob on ee Jo + Oo > is ok
oy ei I ASF pr + Oy As otha SE pe
nS ogre 2S 5) ce pe BS Pl SH pe
# S52) Gt LF oy 3 oy WHE GF
pee SF)? or De Juess\ g be el) yl

(Tt) Bul. om. , before =2- (1°) Bul. .— for yal.
Heading: AB Bul. om. jb.

(40%) AB iss bd. (10) Bh ten SS ee,

(1) AL joS for tse, and so C in marg.

m8) cj) 23>

pS ole lee auld» SG | ar ne oly easoDe
ey 9 LH! Clore Se 2 OS) 6)! 29
a 2 5 5 Le; ae A. 3,62 ah, \glttge GL Ge
be p bin ES. GE wt Jb de Wel
xaeS 3.9) cle Aig. 258 ip S gr oleler
aN) 5 el ik pe ESol et oe tee
eee a oe dy) py a, La LL
vi 2h oslh , MM 2 > 2S PS Uy Fr JS
st BS sar Big) > the Se lent oS
eee ele © can. te y's sale Cys see >
eundsty Lo 35 30 LS» =a Loo S52 Ls?
Spo ea Ss ON ey aie ET: gape ioe Gl S ash fe
oly b Loe» oS; x opm pL as \s 4 os) glee es
Wij 9 lv sets cid. coy See Ws gh uo eee
Se) Ye ple i rae on n> sh re iS Je
el Se 5 eS ti gS) ws col gi SLs _ x» a a
Ae ae ul Jjo3 \ \ ell og Jb she
=, =) fcr se 5's Bh os a pl weed oe 55
2 SL cho pm sot Ppa aap

cele Y Pe Pat Se os aM lias Gl deed:

—_ oe Se eee a = SS ——————

(WT) AB ltleatge. (WT) L oye for Sle. (WA) Bul. «St
i gee. AL Bul. sjy, 9 th. (Or) Ao oS, (MAT) Bul.

yj 9 43,3. In A o later hand has written 23 5 over oli.
all
(UY) AL Bol 23, a1 1.

(em Ss Le

oy ee ele chad lh uy + oS bp 2 5 25 Fi) Ay
oS 5 AS 3\ y oslsl js fhe oe al x oe debe od
Lage +1 Lal Lis 8. le he & oS) oe aS
ap gle Ab Eb JS dun deo Ha tp Lely Lol
36 5h Ly ee de Ge IS ts +h
okt ght 5 LHS, Core le wv! Jl. Si? ov
oT leas 5p ee Lt by) 6 oy 3 LoL
Vel eS hb Libs who 34, ao Bry
Je) abs pte Me 94 . wy! Jt 3) oe ey ee 3S ve
53585 > ped cad le PSS se lr eS
Clee Glee F Vy) ole bl aA S & ops lh ©
aja yg? Gat glen gle en, He Mal S S = 5
Vow 9 US Peg UG SF + se Lol jes
Sh, ol & 3 ein, = 5h Jit e\ og 5 see <= 5\ w.

(WV) L 345 ats urs Bul. ans. (Vit) After this verse Bul. has:
tr ul uryk> 3 AS pe YA ASS Fe so
(1) Ta ae 5 et L w, dl, sl ob ea, Se. Bul. jj}. After this
verse Bul. odds:

— "
Sle Uh ont 5 25 SF po Se a coe el dt

L has the second of these verses, with |),3 Q for J a- (1) TL yp
e~ 3) g)2- (1) BL Bal. 35-6. Bul. ,, for gy. A yap cg -
(TM) A yl gty.. After this verse L adds:
(“= wie » et eee © pdt glee Gel oe
Bal, adds:
oS of yl se ie (a3 * obs be eb pt oe
qv) ac § jibe L jie vel. ABL G- 3 e's pe es op

1° i J5\ wo

PSS od Als
» ee jul lw oy) _ AS, at en
wl ae pee > ‘ Mi gal Si eee > en oe

oer AS lye

an 3 cine pet Me? nis _ at ae r:
» AS | ype os ae iso 5) a Lyle i
Ww of gi ib hb @ bok 6S sty! > é\
pe A) NI Ais Lew fe wey! ty SE pl
emt be says OR epee ar
VILE JI +L vitly eV alle gas sl;
es iN see Sas Wis) 9 SU 35) 25 Je nt auls Lu
st fe ls aed OS Le dg Bad Ge bel cles
ce ae ae Lal, ya OS sls pas SS We ska
cae Say? 3) comme We oe #\ aye See
ted hoe Sake Ne at's tel 6 SL oo) ies
enas: al Ie Sy 31 se 5 cea — Ne? pet Ul VT

Heading: Bul. om. OY LT abla.

Heading: AB Bul. oye 3\s

(+44) ABL Bal. oljlye oa2+, and so corr. in C. (\-19) A js G. BL
Bul. xis, and so corr. in C.L yy 3 e- (V0NA) A cytes & gle, but
& has been written sbove the line by some one who read cm .»-

(VE) Teed) (th. L eed ae 3) S550 58) Sy. B Bal. \,5) for 5!.

Se gee ah Ww

Be S\- Vda ceed sy ener

SS Sie flee die jal See 39 igh ein fest Spi dae

KF pte ee ote
re 3S he 2) ole 5 ne oi glen sl bt oy
JG ; 33 5 sti | =o SLE 5 SEE 5 8). 9 Sits
hj ree © kg pat by 2S Legs
pees) 2 UAS: 352 Gite re . sak sip ai
je x SP » Vos S| Cx * 529 49) sks,\ Jy Ba: “'
a i - Aye “J St : a a ol a SSF OFF

‘Tet pM) pe Pues ols SS
Wag See 40 eos Ws cle le HS pte S pad 25

oo =

233 233 99 99 df 1G « 355 a\ le. vis es z

hl A ee a bs Sun \ s oles \ ar? \‘ us\ aacake Lewes
slays shy! rae Wik 6% A We a
: Kailas ae G a oe * hae ad » yes ae

Ca JLo oS Pag ALL ie Poo | el, ab 5s
Dies ay ud ~ths» oS as ree het Ais Oo hays

(4) ABL Bol. .poge and so C in marg.

(ME) A ce ydd, A) Lyd ot (WY) aABL 5 6.
Heading: AB Bul. \;\u' i> ous eobes

(\-"T) ABL Bul. gige > Vell ee

(i=?) Bol. x) oo. Bul. Ji} Chae

‘lo ‘ WE pie

at Ey he bo ae SEZ ote es,
23, & rps oe \ CHAS, (30) 03a 3; SOLS slaw L i-

‘\3) ate ISS} cet orale jh

i aMla\ js Al) Coke yoo eee BES UWS 25) 5) ae
eo 4 ra. Disey ot end Ls 2S ich
JAS wi | ye pe Lights s tune sate 5 AM oh sayy

= A. ad

ce aS —')—* * ‘ 555) “sl So ee os

‘hea 3), JS > yo gis

te Gh & 6 al Glo ee eS gl cl 5), iS 1-60
ee a 353 5c) sip eae lity s op Se Lite 3 ;\
cael jy td jh g SS heed he Te ol ob»
gh oy 1! inS 59 0 9 9 he ee Vas ks
el aly Ble 5 Jee bli» FL GE x
d\ 5 Ae suk SY) Ls * fin a 5 12
at a ~ Si ble L —\S. 43 ee ott 5 “9
23 5 —\ ileal —S. ro panes G2 —)"
ee rd ee le 3 ions
24 ate KIN 5, + a3! eyes ee wr 2

(\-£1) Bul. .el for oS. (N49) bss, J hs. (1-88) ABCL poles -

Heading: AB ‘j\s:\ jl) 5\, and so Bal.

(WAY) AG an cel gle 52- (84) Bol, c_at

(V0) A Me. (\-¢) After this verse Bul. adds:
Cr er 2s he Lat + fer F ok ce! oll +
cae Jui pplstitl lag * ol’ + +9 phy = \s
L >

pe?

(iS sme Sa TE

lS oF 55 VL ae I eT be
cwd Kalo Lol Re Cpe 0 cen Je ols jp tt
oF FP GF Ge Se 6 at we Aj) Ghily —
al 7 wake 5 alc Lyle pl th ge? Vie,
ute Geo oO 32 ab Ue Hg corm oF Jol , dle re
oe cease al Jb 52 ax Ses . IY Sei coe +i

ls ASS A Ge GF eb Ge ve kh oF ol
F& GF 25 2 | bo we UF Se 5 oe > JF
SH ist iss Sn ‘_ 354 iss) 5 5p

fe nile 4 eyye fe Le. fe le i ve
ease S gs » *k> Ges 5 elie AA AL res
tem 9 lie > *, SS ae ej at 5 Sh 5;
oT ley dee Kp aS Uek oy ty 35
epee jae Lo t23\ « a Ser om WO 7 \ uso)
wile Ss 3 ge Pe jee DiS 5 DES ole ge ht
fe ely ge) Fo + se 2? 559 2? \ KF He
one § dls Lbs 5 > Die ey oi! pb ole aS
5 JL oy us le jy dpe Lars wel

(0) Bubb for Lot |. (FS) Lom. (\-F°) 1, om.

Heading: A cails piles.

(\-F¥) AB Bul. py for 33. OT) ABL ow (35+ igjlulat 5 So, and
eo C in marg. and Bul, which omits ,. (\:4T) ABL i 9 Sie.

(f°) L jo 52. (1-7) Bul. shige y- (\-tY) Bol. ale ue 3 p-

(TAD gle 5 Be

“W ‘ os} pao °

aw Vo we Si aS po Shi og sh oy 20? WF
mtd pty Sb \ygh Sey 5° » oS oT » » vk Jil,
aut Sede gh 2G obs JB 0a Jne Vox er eo
de og aly es jl ae LY yd, bY wy be
rh ah oh me eee sos \ el 5 ¥
JBN > wb Bt 9 oy ts pu! ISA Ls F
hep 02 gl Wor ole ly od hs MS ob
cos oho? DJS mW OF e eng Gh Ml coast ly 5
W533 sk Wut LS Sls ofr
ge ge FN at Sy oy e Se st Lo

IS AS Jy’ oily

poses 2) 5S yp dae o Asul> ws y kp uw =

—z=

=—

(\-¥\) Bal. S:. (\+¥T) AC Sis. L Myke es (\-¥E) AL ate 3 >
(\-¥°) Bul. sul... After this verse C has a lacuna extending to vy. \4°A.
CVO A led 5. (\-A-) Le kta

After the Heading L inserts the following verses:
S cn oe oth (2) oF fs ee ai je Ns eNel al

st oo tt yas Gr - a pe =) Re: ere r. ay 3\
a} Pp 3 euieee ys af s ole pp eis bl +e,
Bail. adds:
US aa lpg othy 2S + GS ob ola allyl ab
Ne Ay GS + ait che ublet rie, J o§ OS
(at) ES oS

(Gye Gy a

a ge

‘PSs & dai

Bes sat a peer: sole 29
_— supe 9 Se\y Ne 6 po wh 4) yt 3 3
I ge yb Sh po th Se 5 pon of
Read S\ Vp nang «SG od gh uN
ial 5\ te 6 te ot Soe oe prvi ab pp =
Leb le Pp» Le , Lyls aps nigh ol, Vets
oe wl Sy nat bd eel ie Leb ,
56 yy! ef = wags ol ote cS Sas & 5
—— Seat s\ 32) p35 - bse, oy Se pe
— bt oy) 3! ) OP 6. A 3
yo Bie ag gl anos ee
VW 33 rc I Se SS - Wont Jute, om Je
we glkl ul 2» oh ee 2 ab wie Ot od SUR
A> Bh SS alo ower 3) pay Se 4 GO ake Sp
5 59 te wile a 35 94; a Fe re Ap
a one ae ah & + GL wo Se

(\-0) A sus for ees 9. C ome ple. (Vi) Bul. om. 5.
(\-1f) After this verse Bul. adds:

laue ap Haein AF ole op ps ol A, oh cee

A ache Se ce asl tn CoP ea aale at

ola ye 9 ao We ols des By oe oe
Nay 9p ol al 8 pe Aas | eS die
et) 3 Bul. ae \astj- (\-1®) Instead of \,3,0, L has \u,) 5, ind so
in marg. (\-¥°) BCL pela

Vi c Bri ao

oS | ape ARG WAS coblol Hy obi;
ei ee Ls so io « 15 _ ls x Lasso i Aber
cole ty POF Ml ae the . yl We (weal

‘PS > Sole p ?

a wang lL Las. oS st HW ES 4

ia eho a Bs Se ioe
Jee V ccatlige ly dee We Je ly > oe lave «>
Si G5 _— NS ae S559 © wis = ty il le yy? Vile

F

oS 5 5, roth at y che » eth oe Lo ps 2 15 b
Be er ae —* ak , jk Je
unajail 23 pF ches Cys Sl ates wf Sy? 4
ya pe A la * 1, eerk hs 41 Ls
ae Ay Go Se eal ACS) sis wee zy Alo ol 1255 —-' Vito
ot = fait ge —l 5 ‘ eg ~ a de aie oe

(\\"\) After this verse L adds:

iwJm 3 x hs ie pp ulolalh & ol

and so Bul, which has i's dal dye SS 5 nts
Heading: Bul. adds Cy 32> oes oe b 5
(Vie¥) av 55 sim. (VieA) plas nels OS Sts Vibels
(\\°%) After this verse Bul. odds:
msl Male cl ak* pe olin 4 2

(M+) Bal o5n0. Bol Gl $9) (\MI) ABL Bul. om. y before |, -
08) A os: for 33. In L this verse is immediately followed by vy. 11\Y.
(Hite) A pc 4. In L this and the next verse are transposed.
(‘})1) Bol. om. 5 before 1. CY) A gee lid >.

sl 5 5 chad a cs pets a) b> cpl 2hal
Ja} IY 3s 3) ris « 2 IE | se ky 7 pat pat edo
ely Val ky Ss es Ok indi ee ea
oi ce we Woke dee celts GT oy gle ile
wt gry —» 2! ie ew Jot Gale
az SS eat Vy Sa tah eels SG eee

: » e rT + : —_
ay — 5 2" J? 5) tT + ay! — cel as sas ye cy Let.

pS ¢- a 23) 8 ods

Jos se ja) Sy 5 sl le) . Gre J tLe ol
er to ep» S- ee 5 Sir om 5 = Ss nt
2S ne |) wilting _ i 2S Ls flim bee
Ps), Ee acct, Sy ets 25 es Se Ue es
pen RIS So olting och Llal gy Jo sl ol So ts
S,2 253 S ol, J) OFF * » SS, alas Sy te =
Se AP de 9 FE OF HN 6 SO Pe img Son oF os
eet a5 \jySs poe tt ae pte ttl ey
we FG at go aa eco
WIS 24 land 59 el ;\ or Lay .-9| am ve
yh pie Fant \ye —F esa» lp or > sk
AS we él Ls a . S35; Glplin op te
Lisl etek , LS p= LSE oO, oS ol US

(MA) Lh ogi 0:1) bbc oa! ots CITY A ts,
(8) DL pyts. A wee ce Bul ape Ge 5. (\-4°) Bol el.

(i-V) A em AD Oe- (i-%%) L t=54-

a ee

¥\ «5 pas

S92 3) shyly Ue She cele Hl tr O23 oF
Fee shy bap ep ab ery dinege oe
a jemtly a lS hy ex 3a rae dyyea 3) eye
aemtle Ljo 393 “ho ae dat oo 5
Ips Ls 31 ah Se we lp or aj) ow be
Le pat) ot § sla Le 2 Lis spa FB
Jum 3d Alive i ene aot bed > Sor we oe a
Gael ice x (iss IT ‘sind’ te SH) <<)
SP: wm LL ie Be aes i | yo te
a rere ee auliv . + pie isxs 5) eae isso
salen ale S eAll Wie ah. coil 51 5 4) ab

s a
Sp pre tg nt 3 DTS On|
iggy sees PRED SAE SES aN i) nd We
Bie oe BBing Sg dL wh ts, thd <} 290
fy ty po pee ig caplet 25S
HBS sh sha yt 93 2 Sl. io thoy vty | te oe
jot ot phy SF Sm, wt + Me Os a; LoL 5S
5 2) ABIL se Fak SS 6"

SF Fl at ol BF. oS Se lB , ole 1

(ME) A Loge for Voge. (‘N8)) AB Bul. US. © gyel, LI.

Ou Lis £ (MEA) Bal, cide 9 315 cyl.

Heading: ABL Bul. nt: 5,4 ja.) and om, what follows in C.

(ViP*) Ay gt f= ?- L ils. CU"l) A ps as.

(WT) L le for gle. C om. sl. (Mee) T Bol. |, for 6. ABL
Bul. 5 x2, and 20 corr. in C, (1499) ABL Bul, cya} _» 5) 251.

SSS as

cme ols Slot gh 3 Sy! oe ee ERS.
Peet Neg Gh Veo gre Soak <5 ee ale
bo SS ws Sag S803 9 ales Ge
Be Oe Flak on ee
F tno Hg ho 3 ae 2 TS, 2 oe De
SSeS 42 lik tes She wt dhe
wy) Js S, Ws ser we S&S, Soe
Fe oly! ss 5 ways «Lge Vg ABT Vg ph tit
= Lbs og Zl pe oe + => or oF pr oe
cwlie 5 Sh > » Jie 73 Fo be UF > 2? oF jk
ot ben ay St ts "Bile esdaai Cy renee
55,0 3 dle oy ces ty - Si, “+ Si Sy wot
Soe AV Stee 3d tt Be I) eg We bs Bt
Be Wi 2d set ge lige 0 ay bing dom Leila
SS 5 000 a7 29 tn Ae 38» Sy aS3\ 54 5a ae
eioe:.5 sis \) 42 3 oy os sls og 3 UF
oof es le | gL + 29) 32 8S ons > oy
Sy yp Fe AK HH SY LAT 5a ae
cls sesh oF 5 abl = b+ ob ae hat & gw jl ny
el EF esl st 5G Fo ee atl I bly Ue ol
Be pk SIF =

(MWA) A s5j> aki. a ea fe cei VN) AB al oy) 2d. ABL
ws) for |. NT) A je ee ae S. Bly,» for \,,55. (ITT) Av
cog eee (MITA) ABL Bul. «siti 5 y9. AB Bul. \g3,, and so C in marg.

(MT) A Er CAT) TB Yule ot. (MIT) Tle F.

(Tl) AB Bul. om. 5.

vv ¢ Ji 2 aS

—” BS pol ¥ dks Rie ~ we eae. \ yo pe ai Wve
33 Seles ey wr ol * yale Clee oe as aay
ah wr Ss ue rp) nie

a= #

Bo kece atigls) Wt eet y ol at dh ayl 48
~ ‘sii, Ls 'S2 se apy cal azea ad's | ee a aie, 5) 3
F tha <y! Treg gl: os ww <tN a) wil ab, Si.

eal J GFP oS 2 > ue red FG dp oS

P25 Sle rl eFyp 336 fs) or 4 5 OI bl \
i ls Cyn ly) 3 es75 eg ae Cr ae hel pul
dy 02S tile plo ar she + oy ee ne S dle b>
AS 3 gl Li sks cus) Le ths; G 42 cpl Midis 149
Set ay ENS Oe Gs ple WIT I
Sipe (ERE ES ASE ele Sp) ces aon ls
Lt ae 5 SS L aSu. ol 232 ox WF? so
a je Le g il Se Spe Le
ot amar os sot il ihe ee S55. \y etd J Ga ray Jia

—————— —— —

(W¥°) Bol. US for «3. (MW) TL lice 59. (MYA) In the second
hemistich AL Bul. and C in marg. have 1 Lis \s oy ce! Le Ve, and so B.
which inserts 5 before \, OW) L Bol. apl. ¢ Bol. a3 Up.

(WA) Aly PAD g cl. (A Bol gh tte. (MAY) Lae ole,

(WA) ABL Bul. —£ |, i iN, and so corr. in C, (MAY) Bul. sl Se
dpa eS el. (IMB | oy, bt. L je og... OD A sibs

a = 9 39, and so L, which has i for j>.

‘35s a Bas

wt i gS ge 2 ee a es MI i ong oe A
le hada le} ls lel jue w\ jJc ae os
st soli Gelli. ra ait = Bh b—
Sy Sule — wilsl jis 2 >y eae iS =| gS NN
ise eng wr et Gb Sl bs e-\ oyJe

> eS Vel y pre eet SV 5b 4 ol oi
oe sh) 5) le 5 sige oy sl 53 a JN ole
SEU 9) 9 List ee LOE oF at gl p> #
S5 uy 3S Loy ene 5) 7 oS Sy Lys ott sal? 5 N16
sg ou Sat Spey wile sh se pS Gy els ait
as lens} vy ple = ull ule Al S gh aif
pri li cy. os by ea epcal tl, 5p cathe 5m +
BB) sing, 02S anny cir o 5d 255 Fe SI wie
Raa) er eee ok Oe ae isnt We
ee oe ee ee
ps aa& ol Le FS 0S me bet Ps LP

rt FM rt pet Bd 2S, UL BS a

ee

Heading: C iu marg. and Bul. add |, »* ws «J 5.

(Mev) L j3c for sie. (WW) Bol jy. Loy tie 5) oe gel plc.
ABL Bul. 3 (i> s)- OVW) ABL Bul. ass 4, and so C in marg.

(i) ABL Bul. pie: AB Bul. oS}. (VONE) yy, Jad Joe ye: A om. ».

w{11%) Suppl. in marg. A. Bul. 3s ~ C om. ». (WY-) Suppl. in marg. A.

(WY) A Ad? oS >. (WY) A oth $. ABL jl as,

Yo c a B oo

aa eS) 573 BF 9 ghee ly 2
— 337 3 >? ae o> a iyees oh; url
95 29s ole ble te» Oey Ll a
a NS 5 5 Blo jy ae 5h oe BL] SL ce» de

ogee joe aoe cl jl. oo |, HL eh le UL. i"
iz yy) 22> ul ol athe? Pome hen,
Qe lnd pom 3) alo wee oe dole 5) leo, sole Coe
SS 5 Fy Fg she 52 p B huas jab ix
ell y caie le oly » a!
cee oS ee oS 5 AT ae he at ah oS ire
x ol fe SST yp e®. Ws De ei Fy oF

wo oe Sl pe ek fe L ae
Se; L 3b; re PR ena
VLSI wl ple godess. 0 SS) rte De ol
3 wed et Ll. 55 2 S3) Ar rs eh A

= a meee sok » i oo ute S53 aoe zy

en

(TA) In © this verse follows v. \T*%. (Mi-yc Up
(iT iT) A arl5> 5 = gl y J ty daly as: (MT it) AB Bul. Wc Ree e
(WFVE) © lati oni. (WID B ys el. CVPWY) Te tags

(TVA) Bul, SG, we 5 euke ae y. (MT) Bul. 5.8 9 ol gt After this

verse L Bul. add: = \julel set is yo * Inal Sal rt tla ©
A) i. a J:

(See iS Yi

Se SS ——= a

Mt hls oS egy Je . ay Lele aD Je
ae one +3 \s lee eS tiling? dey) 2 to
Re ee ie i SS
megs LES GLa Lats sey FP hee LN LS ee
Ba ays gets tN eS OSI Sole cay tt
wer Vb 24 Sus naj 0 spel we 5 ILS Su db
Fwy be MEA, we clsel oS £5
4a Lei = Gl a Pa eer ey) say? \y 55> ae
PSS cu De = 28 pet
co BS Se aol ae ie end ps Bee lal
Rpt JS NS atl See tt Je Yee ee ee

7

= at a
3\ Lad ye Sh) ole > olde 5 sae 423
Dye Aid Uytigy eee

Side) eet ey 5) = 1 ue + 145 0D pig) pe yell a
cates gare uy et ee

Sent ls J re ie. ae * iat 4 i ces . Tso

(MN B des ole. Le ay— for a> bis. (0%) Bol, olaisl for 1 Ss. In

the second hemistich L has 5 ,.! me le 5) plasl. CY) After this
yerse Bul. adda: 55 pal Se \e 5h elas! 3 “ ner pal cS \,
(tA) Suppl. in marg. A. (\\%%) Sappl. in marg. A. B G~ for rio

(if-\) Bul. Ss ee
Heading: A >5+ 1,,%.

OPT A cose bles de. baal gh ute oley de.
(Pt) ABC the tle.

Leo uals oy Cale a ler 2G ae ry 2
ei 3 eb oy woe 1) ® eupieiee \_sais | ho Wes J
LB OS 5 oe ee & Ob L deg SI
FS 5 Ue 8 omy me 8 Ae tT & ol on Sr?
Le LA oy TS pie te eG ete aT 5! Jobe
Bcd yk Fla wd <2 cb ee
a, GES Lol 5 5 ole» eo Nh oe or pl As
wilt wa 2? 9 Wl oy joe oth 65> & el Dh ox
pls oS 1G pl Se he Wl 2) ose ol
Mak ise) pe td pot th tla e LS A) ngs ch PF
2p pF 9 1 yl Leo oy ¢-4 5) Vt sf re:
ct BS sp our 33 wb th ei x Jul tb»

-

oF 2, I, oth eos 259 + 25 Hh, 2 x Jb Lol

ASS 51 e355 25 22 a> 6 eae al ge es OF

Ay et Fg cle wel gers ol 5 oe Wel es

i AP 95 2yt Leoi\ 5 at « Sane dy Sy) Lab yl te
al » -

A> be Me Le —_ <p o> AS 6 2 Si o

25ST oN gh eth 155 oS EWS 4S ahs et

(TE) Cy) S for of, with 5 suppl. above. L Bul. S& & .43 cel Ge tH

ae \. (TET) Suppl. in marg. C. L ,s3,50. B Bal. 4 for ay
(WE) Tol asl. (Fie) B op rt in the second hemistich.
(WEY) A ty ps CO sila (TEA) AB Bul,
pt els Ls F eyo . te uel S ps) rites
(FE) A Bul. om. 5. Bul. Las yy ‘Sat (Fe) DE bole &-
(Wet) ABI, Bul. om. 5. (ITO) Ty Ab Sel J os.
(fee) A Bul. Lai |. (FST) A lat ye

i Spee Spe Yu

——

r oa
cole 2,9 gph co Shp FF + Hh > ol ee
£22? $3) 3; 33 >» Hee F327 sl gm a or

Nl; tab sare oS ee

Ws pte Gl phe te Joe LT UF re EN eS
i ee whe ore Se apo ie al ath F
iF a\> Je ble Fo 4S YES WS F Bi
ob BO oe Sgt 5 Sse » Ue 5 sy IS LF 39
Laas \yp tis pte 3 ty WS \,—= »4} Vyas ew
wit ih oe Grand we 354 pes

.

oy) halo ba
Sb 4 23 st G2

cnSy p tl itale ole te SN Ge SAN >
cud sia |, o\ oe gel pcan ee Oe eo Nim Se U8 el ite
35 3) dip yoy at a5 Jao) sb SAL
J 4 at \ys\ sles 5\ She whol: gp! eee EN \ a
pee LS py pe et Lb Ny ce
Sue Ne SI phe kl oe 6"

(TS) Bal. i. (\IT) B Sly. (VEY) Ae asl oe ¢- AB Bul.
las. AB Bol. las. (TTA) AB Bal. 25 se eel lows s. A im for ye:
OD A ee OF A ag gE A Sage OTIC Ly pt

(WITS) ZT a for ee. (VPt) 7 a ee

y% é J3\ yoo

RK LS ee

ols due — gst * ol oS 6, 3) rs ep go Wve |
ye Pde cB, 0S 355 03) OND cacll Veh. ok cet
rc WF sity do 3 S okey oft S, ce yle S ee |
opine oh opt So gels SHG sul i SF Ws!
Slat eh tt it, GLb Le stk ile |

—_ sal 52 83 Ass _\ y pl; 2555) S lite
Saye et; 2,1 yi) » vol | <Sapee e Se rh
S235) chee jail eles, ESm ok <3 AT le ol
OE 9 285 2p AIL oe. woe a) eon Wye wl
Be RE as ag ee Less F BF yl
Se Lise 4 ol Ss és ie 72 o,lo ola oS il ire
o) Fre clala_s WF pti +3) Ur 5 mca Lo Je
a) 44 Je os Je a cum J aS 5 iF
cP cP ots sum 3) 5,3) oe AT L251 S La Ss
deste pt ae hs Laie L283 > ol 29 3)
DyjtSyy DES Cty yyltsl 95 #29 5 nF, Vol ee SN ge 101
ew jf yl wh vpe eal Fagen
mnt SF 59 Jo te OS EF yh ene SES Se Says oF
akin Bom Maile 3S oN Boe * kasd, * th NS;

Ree as
Amv) B aus > OFA) © om, 5 before el. L Jle cage? gh G>-
AB Wecabs's. 0) Amt aoll capers x6:
(AF) Bul So jeope, (TAN Bol AT Lad Gye, ABL Bal. gi 9 tS by.
(AY A, for 5. OPA) LT slaps S ggat. (7A) ABL Bul.

ay rs “is iS, a aS, and so corr. in C.

(FAT) ABL Bul. (3415. Bal 411 5 Ss. Bul. 28 glo Sys. ABBul. tile.

eee ee ee ES

ie es Cis Se (ee et
aS hao sa cil Laie. aS: we sai Aa aol &
3 eS tre NS yo ty col Sk se Ls lire
malin = se Ls. etlge aS yl gb ny 3h
Se ol RS at sai 5 SX SF oe ei oh hh = yy!

‘dey de Eh2$8 oye 14 5) DSF OFT Un |) ob

MS |, gt OSH ly 5 > ant dal ole 25-5 Siig
ot) te OS™ ot b Lol - Lb & 6S usd ly, oS
=, cle 4) us a5) op ole « 24) sh 5 oo Sh FF ire
Sa any Aas Te wo) ‘2 - sed \yé50 pie
cw lo ee Se QE ee el OS] Sip he =
cP SN FST GN Ce HIME ny S&S
BT BB 8 oe tly ten
Bk ep. Ns ojo Jo Je 3 i XS,
Si 4 pe ath >) Sy So x Sh ober 55 &
St Le 5 9p Koala Baty »
aS Ns tel st ss Ay sl 2 ere a

(\r1-) Cc wi 5\) rr corr. in ming. (its) A isl, for sie.
(WW) AB Bul. jt a) chy. QM) c SN, 3} S cls, corr. above.
(NY) BC nelay. Le ol. OFM) A glti ae syle ule jy, So-

(WT) tT 335 ay Bey: ABIL Bul. 3, la for atl, and so corr. in C.
(ifvt) Tul. 52) Si. AL 2s si.
(\TV8) Bul. a for hl.

A\ J5) fae

dy 02) tp tle By. pO F ye asl ls ys
wile We a ae ol UE eS
— Freer emg Ste» JL tee 2Sp W.
8 sb ae eb ve & Ut bly Td
WF ela Se OF 2H ae» hig de ce
lye aN ai ale 3 gs he Cle gp a § Loli?
samy AM OB Ne eae NG pt GF
el ol , er eves hl) sal > entice oe
Ps ce 38s sles Pe ar bF sls F
326 NP ol ests | Lue ip Gp ie pe 2
dae Spat’ WS on pele dee as fe ol lot US
5 asl chal jo wth foe 6 LS > ae oS db ol
F GAG, By dls Ne 5 Lee tt X al See Se
Se cad Ft ol og 2 div oF a 5 Ob 53!
le oe Boy 8? Gay e le ed LA Wl 2
oS de opp S ent Gh th eae ok ol Su o~ » de
Sb lon 5 SW He us iy pt) og 6 Ab or
Safes oS Ss US 3) UB + 2», aS at lay ad 59> Last ite
sss eb ot ly Ss Diasndalee Cake we -

=——

(A) Lisp. (Tt-) AL Bul. \, 5... (‘T\\) © originally
oan db 3 j\_¢ § sl, and in the second hemistich gS. le. Bul.
= gel? dle 3) 3 od and so corr. in C. Bul. 31. for pl.

(\TIT) Ty cite po, (1%) A Si for 13. L Bul. lx. (VY) A de jl.

(171%) ABT Bal. Ly csi. (MT) A Be le. (IT) Bl oe
Sg aed {\ po, and so Bol, which has * instead of jl.

(IT) C 395. B apparently doy. Bul. so»

I. 6

Same “US A.

ly? 32 3 we) eb Bo WLS 2 at al & te
oy — 3% Fay ir) —_ i= = 5 — 35; 3 we ee oer Wie
las, Wj levle ud «7 oS. Let 5) yl J) ot 2 a\ 5

(PS 0325S on |p ee 3) Ht Der
BF EN Sine Fee oh tre he FS 4
—= nisl Gl; aad «2 2)4\. scaly ani lost J os
cus wlalie wile 52 215s candle js sus —_>
Be sh, oF F LS) So pe oe BL eb Su & edb ie
ce tle 4 53 SS ox: ge oali 1) ws Voth aS
aE Fo pl pe >? il ay Me ie o iS
pS 3 & ns feo ee Ar FOS

it a & in

~\> >

sa594 += Ls = ly 2 at Aire yp tl Li =
wi eal > 4) 4 5)! ph. ol wl nest Se 2 Shige ito

=F ey. oe Gri SE. et oI 5h od ui USE ot
Soar ee ls eatliSs \yg pe 2 el 5 Lute Shi

OTM) A Lat gee ge bl. Bll. (Tt) A om, 5.
Heading: A 3% for ,-, |,- In Bul. the Heading follows vy. \T%°.
(\TXA) ABD Bul. AS After this verse L adds:

La Blo isl 5k Gas * \> ¥ sags pls bel
(TM) AL Bul. $ js. (\t1) Bal. pt gl.
Heading: ABL Bul. om. =al pp.

AT ‘J3} Fao

Fp Lo ols jt te iS: ore yo 4 Oy 1s Mit
Sy 5¢ or \e had 5 Im . spo 3M Ay oF
Sad aig pig oig) a = 0 AS '3j) Me eg \S, 5 7
gtsket| > VL. Li aise, | Ut oO LS;
Le Sig mp lee + Ls 1S Lk? 5b; L
se '5 iat \ Salaen\ =F ls. \ Jaa oc \,L. Ji Dys¥ S \tie
Jost We, =) 3h my a Ae est jal a elle
27+ lai g 54 PP PF Kiet Ghai, G> G45 Si 5?
rey" op Vel 5 \ ole 26 sil, + cy oe Wyle 5 ula) viet
wk S55 S ont Ss 2d 8) 5° 3s ae
I pS S sale oo FoF oh 1, _% uk»
2 9 eH a5 AES opr le of le a) eb» ert 9 A
Yr 2 oR & we yh ak Fe Le yp wat Se yt
patel ‘le 5’ 3 L, Ln . >—Sat ash As? ¢ Olt sr
glu ad, tis ti , ce OS « lute agp Siatl ashe rey
Lebo ile 43 sca Lyle 5 aus ngs ad js sae ide
cian tS wake vb H+ 5S vow ai, 3)

= se

1 -- a

(TET) Bal. sls, (WTE2) A (LJ Is. (WEA) a wet aa:
(TSA) A lt pte. ABL Bul. 3) >. Bul. al for 2f. Lyle of.
(Tel) B Sa isi. (\¥°°) After this verse L adds:

Lesh wid Jae jh ols) © Lic Mie lai £ aap oop
(Tel) After this verse L adds:

dewey Wy eet JOS Le he © ye Ube 9 ey get

Cu eme Sg AT

ure c: hgyS) oe ¢ ay ae Py is) ee oes! ere
356 ee ey ooo ae « aT Pal 234, “lis 5\ tn a
o - , « vie |
2% pl au |, \,e- $3 — Ni Le Fai > me
Se liga ¥ ok ot be oy pie wl Sal sa
gp de fe 6 ah og Veet LG wn F
ee mA) ai ae si wl 5 wl een bsp ale Lys y "| \tte
a. Gir psd Sy opt oh Tate 5 F
eo Le Ste 3h oot = el ae rie

Mal de > nt S oly Ge ETF 02p OF
wath FAS gle lat Ge « ott okt gla, 5) aS» te
ee

(ITY) AB ssa Je aa. A Bul py» ¢ I o\ a5 Je Se, and so BL,

which have o— 5 Se. L bas & in both hemistichs, (STA) Beall, a: 5.25.»
(\8T%) Instead of this verse AB have:

alt 2255 Sar ye * oS att HL oly re
So C in marg, with ztl> for gel. After vy. ITP1 Bul. adds:

af pis "Ae il jeg eae Sak eons

(TT) Bal. 3,5 cl (TM) AL Oe. CIT) © JM yyu.

(\StT) AB Bul. 65 Qk» Ue 4a:\ Ax), and so corr. in C. After this verse
Bul, has the Heading wel, and so C in morg. (tt) AB Bal. 5
ole wil ot 3 Lay cy and so C in mary (Atte) o 443 5 Gl.
(\fTA) \ als vz!. B Bul. have in the second hemistich rice aP lel as,
which is also suppl in marg. AC. (ETT) A cylay- After this verse L adds:

sty Le gp pelt 3 aye 8 oe je iS a oo Lat

Ao i J3\ >
jm rer —'\- io Sa *j9) 3° J ite Mele
ao Eee “ ~~ 5 oe a =
“SY lee oh pel Nee cp ber

Es agree eee PK ee nial at isi
nf see SN od OF a ol eS
oe ae F 33S Lal, = ieee eanleas! B55? 9 UE oletis? \tYe
orn 5) wie 22S os jx ssh 52 \jh4 jo: an
—\a 5 5\ 9) st yal o _ jo 8 LS.
bs .-,\\,,\ SN Sey LSGMS oe Wee eee
Set aha ed
uy Ce oh3 ops theta S5s5 os a8 wi ae MTA
EP OE WIEST jh te 6p
Lay whe s5,!2 Js we Le ni cp) emi 9? > Abi x
as eden EV Soy Vr BS ol
conlang 3S SG VOUS elo eel, og Woes LS»

CVT) After this verse L adds:
sl, x 2$§ Sz See oth lo S oe jy) > oh
ees Ay ae au * S GS tol, 15!) Gar

Bul. Bese
eeiely at CoS o As 6 seclS op so ol Slo
FS uty Ue ple ol jl ae S BF ie» sol, 4
ole 9 AS oS Why ple + ihe YS yo tie
Heading: ABL Bul. a\g¢\ bis. .
(TVA) A Bol. loz. (SAT) ABL Bul. lagje ata? 3,l>. C in marg. ¢b
for de. (\TAT) BL Bul. oS 5.

fs cart ae At

Vi) SU, HSS OF het ot am

Ger 525? we 5) os 2 6 Gey de bs 3 aS” a
le oF oS oF + le > at 5) 40 8 ale
ef wolt Joly # G- ay, Ls Se PG = 3}
Sem d agi 5 cand SI» ean « cod NS bb le a ean NM
if me Says eg a ile FBP Ll ol & OL
Be heim Vile ol eS HIE oe b FL
Be pF as apt Lyle ak ES a

Le le >,\ 5 lle tee Leel 1 pe SF sl
es ao S Se aye rel og We ob aoe
slo 553 Lg em LS J? a ary: een 1+ §5
Lighas sey ie she gle + Lata tis US!
iu » —* do! ak - ie nl cus 5 oh

— & wolj) eg te Fe CS wl By Sh ye
553 oy all ew ss su 435 Ny SL ohh in.
alg. Ls Ley Flo 2» 6 INGE aay 5)

ne =

('T8V) A cpye b5?- (9A) AB Bul. :)\s 6 pak, 433) OF.

(HOY DL os F lat. (VTT+) A ee ble ceed. (‘7t) After this
verse L adids: |
13 ole b> » cai Whe gay t cols golt F acd ol F Gls
(171%) Bol. w for oy. (\UA) After this verse Bul. adds:

ley gE Oe Lt OP ert . Lo ody ot ees LG ite

Here ABL Bul. add the Heading: 4% alt yo. £1 int 28s orto +:
In Bul. 4 52» is followed by be ay J5 il of ee yt OH I S.

CMV?) TL aty cgi 3) Zy- (MV) DL Bol. asl Vlas).

AY i \3\ wes

ioyt od pe ae cont pgtee ler ox) a 5
ae She oe EI, « yp slo LenS! p25 F
see, Waals atpe gl) ol tc. omg slat See on sd Vey
sulriusk 5 rue Ls pd slay Lele wr 5 2d"
seal-90 > «= st Pee | > 9 cemin gy «ah 4 Sebo __#)
‘— 43> aL \ F x~»> 7 pies sang? te ar
po dks 1 355) ple a ie ; LAS) 422) Jr UFr
a Lyeeetl ig Vc ah 5 WIS Y yous
sb }y> 5) her c— alngs oS ay SN ro eee oul ae
woe ath gle wh le iy o wtjlee yl og 55> oe oS
op OL Oe prowl 24 0 age ib Ay) ee
JF J peg th Ft oS. Js * Sul | ass
Ie ob wy a OL 25 Le I lle ieee

aie as alll 65) \, aS cnee'gh| oul eo Jey OF

‘Fw >
sliss\ 3). 595 42 LyP pss ahaa! g50 3l 5 Lal gh sea
da ule se oS se alle w Uy fa else Ge
Se 53 a= 29 105 > WN. Se Ao ceed cine 9 ptt
Poa 5 2 ll te. ors Vole ye ot bal
2) lye 2 wt) eet + 35s HK 3 cot Le 5 ;\
Si, slafs ee Ue So, ‘: +S, 5 he ate ae sy

(iN) A SN gee ON) Dal for alo, = (181) B Bal, ei) op.
(\es¥) A ah for a (\+A) Bol, wt 4. MEI) Bol. o95 for ay bis

(AV) ABL Bul, (tile », and so corr. in C. (814) A pl aS ue >

Copa gm AA

Se

RA a ee ser \ TAs
Ly Se pr) 35° 97 Se 5 as Ly be
eS! ollie zl wig Ga ero! She= ep Nee ais
BF oh Fg ars S83 85 No 99

9! Se a we OMe) Wey Se sat
cas all 5, ps SUIS |

xs ule gh ee 5» ey he pany dual ph \_s it.
oS LA es, yg ely Le pte el wile od Fo
cemigy Stile pad Ine ee ee \\ «<= PAS 095
satbesIF 1,5) 2 ole? op - as \a551 Yo ow vi 25
pent es pte dig 0 po ot am ale
a? &= Gt - ree SIE oy) AI cles » 5! J> ge ihe
uh >: 2 pam dy 353 » SL le ae 5) cme ua
Sy aN” es puter hte os ot SL ast yee
al * — te Vt WS» Wolpe Se 8 ore
Se Gratin paren ya Be die} dt \,<> ~
wel ole yuil ols gee a\,So0 le iN eeu ae te:
2 Gel oles 3) ue Be Pe Sl

(\TA°) Bul. om. 5. Bul. j for ww. A Bul, age. (TAA) A GY 53.
Heading: Bul._~.\.. After the Heading Bul. adds;

oe ol Sat © SS are ole 5
L om. ,. (\F0¥) C om. 5. (VEN) Bol. 235 for ws 42-

O81) L pte 2 boil.

AX J Ae

sia alo go (Sltypie jg we dle ol Gok Mates. -\
of aL FE le iy ak Se oly FILy 3
oF > Shy sek jl ty es Ley 42
ue aa conti 9 we) jy Ge GLI 51 he
Tee awe
ES Se 9 2x chle oye ete Ib g oy, IT et

ent 25, 5 put srr, 0 ently Ste) gl 2% Gl ko te

‘as all 3) OFM el 5) Jey eS Sie
IY} sake oe Wy oly. at rel) el ae a>
aa saan or dey Goi. Lali 42 34 wer vitle ey
Gxt tule 2 ~~ ur © at 5 as >)\4 asians
oF) ae = Ex #295 293 Leese 5) oy 5}
Bly oyry pe 52 49) 52 95 e SLE oe dtl op y oh
Aaa acim ame Seg oe gale oe
Vat M5 Fae eb a. Mat oe G gl ee Led
$,S se 33) a4 Goh ts ei eg. > 5
Jl, At asene ale ye SX. ale oe AS IL OS b
: clo job , SS UN as : cel Oe ae Ge Se BR |b to

nue ae eb «el 3) “i, CES oe
wt 3 2p eS SSIS eee oe Se ae

a eee =—= = =

(44+) ABL dvs. O&O) A Bul. e535 ly y- (HEF) 1 mG. =+6:
(41) ABL Bul. nal of. ABL Bul. 2:1 49 gy. (\8°-) Bul. <ul 55.
(41) a ile 5. A ue 5 age 4. (‘42%) Ly psd yo.

(421) AB Bol. Cau. (42%) CL & ol. C yl for $, corr. in marg.

Me fine gee
So 5\ Ax 55 5J> » 3 75 3 ut po S-
ce) mee Nj) ll) ete ye On pe oy yl ee
swat 5 cole ap with Soko cent ge ol ee eee
> Say el sie uj) aye aS 2 = i Ra = iste

fas AlN 42, ool el py Sey 2S ee

ples S51 pM ety oie IL, LE sade SS)
Sls og ty 5 OF al. BLE Ue Wyle Se
oh ae cl 5) oo po eee Line Aya co \sLe |
iS _- S\. Lon 3 J —_s aS <- 51 \yg pee ey Ala itt

uv? gi > \ ent ee ee eS cp emt Ge cht
3, = sh EE aa Were pe o 35 slisls (aus, bee glh|s 3
W539) Gs. .. wilie 55 + 532 cle HT GN 5) 48
Ve , Ae slack b. VI Le olsily 5,
cea We AN ale I lie oxy « cert bey Dy ema ene Sle et
ee Nee eed le 25, LE 1, LE te >
upper We ath ot yl ule nae \y Niele 5 ple 02S aslo
— le ssl Lan Jal nual age 5) Sle Jal shat cae

air) L pet or (480%) A Bul. re -

Heading: L om. (VEY) ABC paling - (VSA) AB Bul. \,4\ 5.

(AT) Bol. PT 5 A ops rus, with _»» written above upp? at the be-
ginning of the second hemistich. (18f*) B ol for a1.

(AT) Ap ey tlt. (420) AB Bul. ‘yslle , o>.

(SFA) TL alitpe Sle

eg pat My asta 4 hs fee tt
a cit Ss) » le ule 232 inca 3 SH PS we 333
lua; >,\ Ue tam We o ji ie pee ls PONY <a

—2

Pus F rit ods TST pF ose
sa lea & Int V55 AT nhl 408 als!

wth eels yl eee VL is S, Segoe lg fo ase a Sig) Us aS 1h
Diwant bx Sin de el GS Js wh 5
wd) HE LL Jd. etry | UL Jal a> ge
25S 5° be | piSioys ies ee Le oe Ge |b pbb
Sh eas Guns 5 es J ds SF
we gl) Ge PF Ut Fo wo sh5 cal de ie © gj 3) \ue
ole + ol ib ole 2x or + i a
2 AS 3 NS So ma haul» Le
Bot ce op Sak 38 0a HO hy oS ls wed
Loh ls GE Ub 6S 5 as

C2") ABL Bal. ole 555 a asks ans.
(4¥%) ABL Bul. 3;l. for 351. After this verse L adds:
ler ol ait iol HT? le Lb at ols ¥
Bul. adds:
olor flee oN 3) sje Sl 8 le fe tT La
(WA) ABL Bol lb 3$ 5 Ge oS. L glo cou. COUN a gb hij
iu Wt, and so C in marg. ACL se \,. CL ae 2 ae.
(VEAL) A om. 24. Bul, as le. (441) ¢ Bol. ah eer
(VEAY) A cge for Ge. ABL Bul. de for 55 y®, and so corr. in C.
(HAA) A doy 53 ole- (VEAN) B oye |ai5.

heal al : LT.

35 35 5 a ck 93 pre ee
le EF jl ak yl M3 + le ty CeO
ee ed Fb. Waltlin Oo! re FU
es DM gS op rs + Ue OF oF 35 Jeu

es BES, Jet sluraln ce grace oF
Sage le 241, 02S we al HE pe bl
ot on) ol el i ol eed eg enim Ly com yl
ree S35 ool on Peo eee Mle ee ne yl oy ay SP
pet 53 5 Es lie aw ps GN aks a Lie
ves. ok) sy el 53 + bo lal ol
uS Lejsre Ul eG pa oes wll ae 5 JL
Spey enrp 3 N Sr 99 6 Bx 9 2b YS cy Sos
LS ghigs> 5 og Or 5h Ve wl eel tli aude it~
ot og SH BY 32 23) oF + 2x DF Oo wk oS S 5
Ry Ser a roe ft ee us oS & y
Jide oF + 4% ole o7 SLs - 33 3 az 9 |

yy ee aS le Ula 0 Set 3355 peck Je p> \tve

(E+) Lom. 5. Sot ol 3 f= » Lge u> 5. AB Bul. ,-» for
ce, and so corr. in marg. C. (OY Bol. S, ye for aii, Cope 5:

(M2) ABL Bul. eal s—- (\eA) a ensiey \pite yl.

(MU) AB Bol. 2.3 > la, > wade 93. (t¥-) c Mis 52 be Oa Ss
L. gltisy> 3y (V1) Bal. a5 age Sts.

(QT) ZG Bol, yy et ye 2S1 fo 50.

(\4¥2) ABL Bul. ale 5! 2+)

at i jj) Ae

pt en i‘ 2 el 4a =e ee )
—! ly! le , A i 39 © ewgl ws eee ba ei
r—*9 ; Cre shied 2 rae 5 ee Vey —
63 wt ly W) #49» 8 ‘z we 29
cs) wu j5¢ 5 he a5 eng) USE Se zy PE a9
@gowuv eos IWloe aa wie Hl HEL

‘hae <= sel oleh,

ptt cle np Ge Jue. ae ag ol
0 alee gle ub «BK 7 ae ale ow
ay ON ree here Pa
Yl 5 Sg ae + Loli Lee aa ee
prey an 3) >> WS 5 a ba yee eral eis a By
Sas Gaze ijl 7a os r= 2; ob duy ;\ ely Ver

(081) Ba ps | Nealon ds: Ue Ae eee (\°19) BL any tie

(V8\8) Bol. an ag 5).

Heading: Bul. 1 ,,\ 75). In © the word following ,\& is illegible. AL
Bul. a for s\_+\. After the Heading L adds:

dint Lt eeu Ry § ae i) Jr ol pt) cee

whe 35 Eb + et She uty 284

far os 25 ane it * fo 3 HHS, cil, 52 Uy Jel

Bul. has the same verses with a few unimportant differences of reading.
(N18) T, Glo wl. (VEN) ald, (\°\Y) AB Bul. ws.

(eT) Bol. Sn for i.

Same thos wT

dane S re Pee wal ji 3) S 521%
Ar Tie pall oe pled al aS
le dl wa y32 iy os wl sy cla yt S «
aci> Seay ne s 7 oS 2S ee coaeal ae
rae cath omed >) As os 3) >,\ 4
Snel i pce \yhir oe Se \b 11
Ba or os re
SF be Jil, + rls)! 5) “# ay ae
sa ce, aves 2). ok» ON
ae op eee lets atte pl) ST dla Sy
ela 55 oy bee Lee Sap cl cee yl enlist ws te
oy le oe AF wth 8 le oy RE yp WT be oe
ya = Ye thai asc Sad flix aul <4 oe
a2 bP Af\ > is fs wash + oy gh de 24 Sy
lee 52 at Ser » SA) ye le by 3a\ Jie ee OF
conlele 4I ole cri 2% to Fw eek gh Je Sy 5 Ge Soe 1°
Ra a wae Show coe wb Abe» Jess
sale 3b y raph Wl igi e\ 25 wl ok +3
Bi Gio on Je jy e eels 1 tog AT be ahi;

SS SS

(tt) a LS >. (419) B Bul ye P oad. (tte) aS for &,
AB Bul. .$ (35+ 1,4, and so C in marg. (484) ABL Bol. dat obj
B ply) wok s ub lets s\n and so A in marge. L Bul. in the second hemistich
have (Ht> ole cer lade: (9) © elie ee. ABL Bul. ae oy!
Sap ST ye. We) AB Je ee AC pe, OM Lal ole G3.
AB BY pg. L dl py 3h. (\2-4) AB Bul. gle. A Bul. Stae 5!) \S> 51
eae NS. Te See 5 g Lat 5h

4o is) eo

pew Le by Le hi > » Lip
U.S ak, 3 vl. Lisl elie 13 =
(ee mete pen pea nds a3 5 Vi oy
sad GoW ds beet SF Bare op it
canl_ Jab 5) ed os Pie oo att dla; Yad yd Se
ee) eee | —_ Pram Vere eres tear ee Lyais s — ies)
wl cot LG Ry aS» = 235 rer ra) Lzjlyt oy 3
GB foph te tcned aya Opes vas SS x) a cue \
sees) \ oS an lo bo 4s oh) eh WK butt
ceed tS gel de 3\ gd oy oo eet es Ge Jesh ae

shengaee glhbje ol> pix |) bb SoS jh
‘Sales, oid, ‘Sa
ee Las ure UA > bP ls INS Oe
oS js\ ols edn Sam i= \, ji Rah 3 the
25) OS pn) Fat oS. Sa} ta ne 5 Se
ap Ss wt 24 OF, ee “e hes sly < 3 a? ice

(\9TY) AB Bal. 3 ge for thy, and so corr. in C. (Weft) Bul. <5
' for @ 5. (Vet) AB Bul. | , oul. (veh) 1, ew ced
(\°81) ABL j\ptS. After this verse L adds:
GE pe lbp dla + ai bg ol IG A
Bul. adds:
Ge py Dek RW Gb! a ears
Heading: AB Bal. \,3) ort pal £-

‘ — Sy ai

so ol, i vs lle tee 3 owt lle ue

ele de SF at ob. a oe S eile oa
Gn ee l= ot * ents 5 LS 59> &.9
Pg AL) Je og oy pS 9 oi 5 \ 2S
“2 PF HS 95 5 She d+ oy pt b> ohh fe vere
VS ens en ee ee oo Ls
8 | N gy tS ad mL Ap al, ae:

gee i ok ok aL, do tet hits Sh ates
Ses dos, die dons 8 sagch jh. alll
eae a) ox er PE Bee
at eg ee 0; wry ob + Ge 4 Wh oh Ae Saw
a j\) i 2b. Vee ee oP > ox
ee i at gle ne Sas jo ab hg page
ane O3) ~— pe than og Soy J ds lure
enh Sy 5) S55 4 etd cope cent op L aS 3 S| si,

(lore) ) obs suppl. in C. (\erY) C in marg. 35+ i for 5% z. Bul.
a F-
i ee AB 4k) “ju 59, and so Bul. In C gly is written above |.
(et) Lo, et. (eM) BL awe eS. PTT) ABL Bal. yb
yl » \., and so corr, in C.
(94) Cae yke Sun, corr, above.

tV i J3\ po

epee a. ya) gies ete De eel Se ol Sh ol
PF GE 9 ents Gil o hele og , lee git
(al Jee ype elie
27 EY a my 5 i wo wy ye sbi dad \ove
Lee CAE g) th LS dee Ee &
ee a3). KE, St W3 5\s te o
Le PASI scmeadigs xj ew dh, ae ob se Ho
{SLM Ue eS tee me 2 erly GN
ee cl te ae el ~ ps ule cle & bs) ud
IL py bs VIEY. SEY, ole, HED Ur
tl; dS wy >> Wo pe dul go oe 5 HY
a seat 0 eo oe a) = Pe EY, om b
yall fei hi, —* PO et or
woke es 5 ls ea Sem « oes Sh w2 33 coSe 3k tone
he 55 3) Ue Bp SL, Fo len al Sted oS jh a

paz 9 eat? 9? Lolenpaie ohh,’ «le oP

ey ie sl cece,
as 5 oe woble yee ay oles shail iF Sis

(evn) A Bol. 243) and cee Ty cept fh. ()e¥®) In Bul. this
verse precedes the Heading. (ew) Bol. Cis ce: L AL? de

(OM) LS og 5) ak. (NOVY) Bl. 233. A Bol, 5d yslell.

(VOAT) Bul. uss 5) to _- (\°A°) ABL Bul. . for ¢» 3\, and so corr. in C.
Bul. i pce ot. (8A) C ok 25> pie, corr. above.

(VAY) BL |, for \G.

I T

wk Jes TNT ee jut
cel ne 52 lel sla Gl. colt Gh T bob GW OT
seal SLE 0) 5 ale LE jy o cele ol y DL 5) oS ls.
\,—3 50 eee Liat ao le « GLi| Lo > S wlig oS i000
<)> _ ger reer 2) bs ol
ols > le og re pe ot ke ob, Hh We yl
Mth vole > ape th oy ee sh a} ab
22 rt ol 5 9 dd IT woe op one Lub bb ob
eae ex poe Wedd oe 9 2p eet oe lk > ol it
ob dh See 2S pts S He ce Ab
peep Hep > > Sie « nO ool sl a. L,
$B op ida FG set
cee Sb DL Fog e enSy 2G shoe GL ST
Se Sh pee ahh Ka 5 ftp $3 Fr hie
Pest ep pix, a y- 535 5 sie <|
So Og Sy Se VU yl flee on re Spe cntl § UL
~ sh US cil) 55 6 5 OF aio ss Lede
ws AT Wye 5) LS jy ES GL SN eS es JL
3252 ox) Gale ee odin + A Gi) 5 8 ere ieee
pt YG ee oy Sh oe + et WS 1 > Je 5 JN Sl,
SIT Ls Lh gs). 2y5—* S's bs ES She |

—ee ee

(\eeT) AR Bol. aad a let. (498%) In C the greater part of the first
hemistich is erased. (VA) T, 44 sla ok. MO) A cynjee cee be
(VOW) AL pled. (V8W) A y5i9, In Bul. verses \OUY and 1°14 are

transposed. (hevey LT nelly.

4% ‘ 35} poo

oy a)s\ pat ee) 2A Ji ot

ape og He oly BE ol st i ole y

ath ods 3 2) oh wee
YY Ls met, > > 5 © b5 SN abo \ b> pole
sap oes 5 le Ke Nb 6 a5 a sly oth =o NG
(Sp ale lh: & o Noe Wis Gl aie: a, ees
oe tr) 3) We eb + a GV erry F 2?

— 22% 5! ie She 3 +h 25 cL * = ret

spate ce Baye jis 3451 5 +F a) 3
375 AS a 25 2) ual « 255 55 > 3S se F
eS cand Lalo 59 5 Ved 6 cls erg eye feos J oge Vue
tp 9 emis > 53\ ii, > 9 cwniNlayt eo UB o>
tit pe ee es eS a) See
igre rey Oe ac

Ja oles se F MN ae Lie» ole plas

of os \ L325 Gre OF onl pees | J ola |
> ‘al | See
Heading: ABL Bul. ps for ,iS .
OV) A aye 5, (1) ABCL pul. A oye B2y-
(\US) Bal. 90, $7) 49. (\\A) AB Bul. in the first hemistich (3/13 5!
| ye! 3,3: Bul. in the second hemistich 355! ps 9 re
(VUE) C Sas for ili. (V4) In L this verse immediately follows v. Wwe.
Heading: After 4 \y C adds in marg. \- Jai ae oa. Bul. aol ak oe

AS Slo oid.

‘iS me LS = TA

slo fet Calg OL gl. sho gh) ue ale) o>
ve ses, dp 5 WLS) e Ut 24) bb 3s shy
ae Ny > ra) asa aS 5\ ace \yse legis AE t°%-
Sh oy 9 22 pt > Soh. th NL eens & oh
1 8S 4; Vole By + a plo Le a= le ol
Voge ols 3) 244 é\s Fy Ke oe oly or!
SYi555 NAS, Se S595 £.AS Gt ten Lol s Se
Nt th oe Me Ue 2 GO eA SE UG
dtye Vl Lge 5h o eto bts S 3 MN WN
OS lst Wyo en * 2S yy Te Sh Lure
abel S25, wens One eer ay -\ Vogtle
alle te x9 0 Ge Lele 5) WF 5S
1 Wo wy ar 3) S xe + Sow oF 5 ole oe I
Wee sy) le eee o I cle atl
2 ul ue blo te + oye ops 243) ne Jp

j —_

(ier) L an = 3°21 ue 3 ro owe i =

(OW) AB Bul. GY sy 3) & 5 Lb GV Gay 3) 6 5 JF 65 ©

(ev) AB Bul. x. ©, and so corr. in C, AB Bul. eS 5 ae chy ob
-F », and so C in marg.

(V1-f) ABL Bal. 55, po7:'5-

#

1.1 i jj) we

“3, — sla gh Cle lL. cis GT jl yg 528 | 3\ pine
tb > 2 Glhe ob pedel 4 lest SF
BL tag 5 7) Shey ole Ji O-> oI); Je vil;
Saab user —_ ib ae » Mae ol 39° — i> <> F
“Fel sleas; ore a bs oll al 3 F
SF shel TT Us Vise o 5 5h, clas nt 5
ei? oul oe Ly ths oy dah y Sb
JIS FT 5) 2,51 33 i. SUS 5 >y541 a3 er
US ele oe le ol. aL oe a _ $55
She 43) al 25, 5 Gs. J i= ad 3) al; oS, Jc
dle ob Li ah abs , Jee + log ge ee F ody or
J A> , > » oS tlw cg) Coar's Add ee og OS HE
Lyssil Bas , + oi. Leal Cte 5 eet cll
lee SI oy pe ene Se 6 bo 5a jo wi; a:\}

‘clea gbbyb 3! ao gl bb b oF 5h
leeolt Je ey at GL. Le Yay 4 jb =
fal 4) aay Vy pce e ala) 'ojgle ge: pr
Fy o0:- dy. o F oy ae pb oS

ME obeSl 5 We a6 eos JI 3) Alas 2p cr dS

(VV) A sls catty. B jl. (VE) A om. 5 before aly
(ET) ABL Bul. $ for 3S. (WWE) Bol. lj for a1.
(VEA) Bul. caste 5 |». After this verse Bul. adds:

cle Lobb 5 oul ee + ole S ohh os Le ol
(VK) ABL Bul, A om >, and so corr. in C.
QW) AB gS é\s ee é\, and so L Bul.

(iS ame Sg les

2it' pra | bg) Solel » a ttl> pais ws 33
aH SS 5 les le I Idee ed I, hs S pad 31;
wl VES i Sl. lob lle Jy) GG of
ax bY ye Nn + as Vilbs pas 35 Il
Ai 49! i > kg eee « Heke | > Ser ole ir
JY thos oe lew 4 5 e Jie Ile a cS ,
ail opp > WLS Foe dob I ETF on
GE de ath yb Fee ott ale Ge Jj) tb
Weyl of J Go» jl-we> ee” gies it _ bs
soe 3s SS \wuiy - Fudd 9 fF os oT aa
re BS yo FF ash, SV 6 BF 5 ded SN 55

A yal a Ng ae su, a Js! £15);

=
ae S52 Pt ied

GCI os SN LLG. —- BLO (8st
cet AP ae a ae JF ges
Sy sw \yy a_i> aes OT Ue | cal eet eis \ yeaa CU
Sl. TL > L.\ pu. a > f Se olsh
hy » SS > = Sie aoe WF
ats 2 oe. F ood on o tay hi eo. ee hi;

QUY) AB Bul. Lae i> a ib 5 SiN 3 A _ ple. Bol. Sy tor

os. (WY) by LZ (106) D gh pe y>. O41 Soe
Sl ABD Bali: sles: ke QW) AB A aj) 5, (in C o,\x is
written above). Bul. om. 5. (WY A S for rf B fy Gi 5>-

(VW) ABL Bul. \,loo),. L lel. (08+) Bol su for & bin C tite.

(00) tn A Jb is written above ni.
vt eat follows v. VWTY.
CVVEE) AT, 01 p>}. In L this verse follows v¥. ~

\.° Jj) >

wie cbse lt ote Lie ws PH)
als — + hile sits 8 t's 3,345 Chg gpd wee Ye

CIS § bt a oe Be od < fel Fo js
evlt clio dt Jo role. alee Leh, 2 ob
SACS | fe ns ee vd iZ,
SUNS Se) alos disks ae wo) he oly wl LE
ges say J), a5). roey Ge Usyls er
ws ilo; ot ye See te ol bg SE ob be 4°
ee ie wah e Sit oo I 5\ Ybeb> Sy
Uglies couljon alc obss «Uglies fsa Aa ct
Al oe negiNeed gSiRS peters ges seb ges
ai Sb poe Nex. ai Sol 5;
jm 90 3! Sse Slee Coe” Laie , Le
wht oe pat 2 ul be ole ae 5) Late , Lee
Co or dh oy Sat dla Pe we 25, yo Lens], Lee
Lace 351 iF oe pe Le 5) Se isla seS tage

(VY) 7. PB je 4 tN oe a ae
OM) L Bol. \yis. B Bul. ai \ye for ¢ isle».
(VW%) Suppl. in marg. A. (VU) Suppl in marg. .A.

Li

—

(VTA) Be ot, L Bul. .¢- 5), and this appears to be the reading of C-
(ViM") Suppl. in mang. A. (VUE) Sappl. in marg. A.
(VA) ABL Bul, 452 pl.
(VIAY) Suppl. in marg. C. BL Bul. pee.
(UW) Bal. ual y Wyte.
(WU) Lgl 3I p. A pi 235 ul 2» &.
(QV) By» for ge. After this yerse L Bul. add:
2 ah a S Se a * oy 2 Jel Ge GH oe

i ig a 1.F

Bl, V5 sha 5 poze o SS 51 © re Ve oe
ens wel e\ oi
g ol wih 35 Le cll — ee
Severe 3 tyes “aNep a} 0 Sect hee 15%. WO
oe te Ghee AS oye dW oop VS go) FS oled
IN Jee Soh 55 #5 NS oe SS
~—} > Par erm ae eon ere 2S J,
is si US clas cle § 0 55 Ville yl eS ge 7
so ae Sally be vb Ley! ~F 2 LS
cule C2 lis tel aaodlye , She pele Ge le Sa
nS et 25K Vp SE py 6 ON, 45
oa es Jo 3) Vaso + 2° se Fe < thea ae
ube ak Li soles Lass © 5 shor de sb Je St
oe Nowe os sls 3 * hart om He OD
MS go de a aera earn megane gt ee i
ga | yp ily le gles Ba 9 oS one
215} ws)! jus o alt ;\ cspile me Nyaa
Bese oly dy 4S olett ieee aN sles «sn 1
AS 5 aap Ge SINE OL go Nae hh
Aug yw ays | aie. ak erg
Us 3 i Cee Beles

(1°) Bul. ., 8. (KY) In C vy. VOY and WCA are transposed.

OVA) Bal. ,) 2 S. (VW) L $3. (\V") Bal. 5, and |), .

(WM) B sa, A ot - (1) ABL Bul. aia i and 50

corr. in C. (4) Bal. oy 5 xia 5 3h. (WY) Bol. 5) 3) 5.

j.o

ce jor \jiy 2? Ly yo

il

wt jet cone Las us

—" hes Ls —v Leal ae ol “wea a ais st

Fab oe ioe,

F EP Pp ble 335
eecowed a pi 35— Jui 35

29

J3

Py » Sa) L, a +)\3 Zs it

=

ee JL Lele > wl

si ol te Ge gs Sb SF, ct ale Gk, 22 at

eg =<

Sarde 9 ce opal bl. tt 5) S atl, SV ene
mo lL; p> MSs Lai, Tas Loo op “12 lwo os)
wr 1, oS le. ort ice aie
i a YG eee iat a\e ee sla 5 MS Sia) cr
Es je 2) 3k j} A Sh 315) W555 UT: AS
Sgn Fe lS ole bb Tod sal
3) 32 oe ee Gro ke
7) aS Loe 3
set 33) 34; an 7 ¥
22 SU eS) —
w 25 + le Ub Zt. w° vl Lao ul La,» oh
2+ por 9 itl pe nt tt do EOP BHF
eet OS CA ol ee oy Ogee meg eed oe Jie Lee 3) il wre

95) Lt x» Vor ols aut

we? oO oF Lile ats (5\ VT:

Se AN NE bee 5) soy Gye cir 5S ee hae

(WY) an jsplme. L jp) ))5-

7 Fe

(Wis) In O verses WWI: and VWI) are

transposed. (WIT) Bol. om. 5. AB Bul. > So s, and so corr. in C.

OVE) A oy Gl ound. Ling

nes

OVW) A bob ol. Lg» m9.

(\WT) L le» ».

(WIS) © pe ads. (WV) ABom. 5.

(T+) © Isle 4h, corr, in marg.

=
bd NV orp 5s bbb jl aS bb oS oe
‘S32 ee Hep 5 8 >
Spe ety Ls) a5 Ut 2 oS oe bb See Ae
meta tt NS 35> Daye ge wie” ods (242 yee ole
43> bok S 5 eae 3 ele. 44 cle or 5 Sy ots oe
oe ES Ve oh oo9 & ole UF ee tbe ol oS
wr bP 2» pt Lajos ol. >» bla bea Lag jo al ite
a wo) a 995 es rv . — oles Dea Lin,> ol
S42 Gey I Joe 5] ae Se Ga be ose ade 5
et >) G52 5 559 “7% ws hj Sg La, ol
VS we & LF 63 ae ler hb 5 ols ol
5 ee > BT gh tee Ce Py HI ly ol v
SBS ol LS orp Fe 3S Lal ¥ 5} ole lk o>
63 hea 2 p obj ole 53 hha eS 2 Ub oS
NA ety tl 2 tb ey W536 4 rio p
a Gee wu 028 9} py ole lla ul WSou fll sue
VW CS Ag om Sin poe ls Em Owl $v
0 oly wslt aI; Loe eas as: nS uy — \,

(WM) ABL Bul. 2344 f. Bol. old y 25). A > dees

(Vt) ABE Bol eur »- B the dS: arty Bol. ca ity 5. I
“o> s eal (VW) Bul. pe olty aS, rr (V05%) ¢ apparently
Soy dhs. Bly > Ke OV Ale oly».

QY-T) Toh @ 5 ate». After this verse Bul. adds: :

oe clk nyo WP * ae ob als No)
iw-Heat oo. (Ov) Bow for 3s. C es

AY i J3\ 35>

BS BI ach eg ere
Bape De deol, sa eS Gla Venlo 5
> \,,\ Ve, fe A 4 Js 22 cl eie Yolk »
ales wel le ol. wk Iles Le LL. Wo
SJ = as als Jo. $3 » gLite iy a
PN, Seah oS Shy lie Say il ee Meee, cata
OF orl ol + 95.95 oS ob 5 JP ol ont gf 1
5 opr \yows? Oo 2 ul. ost 3 an te
Ve eS Gj eee ay ho oo an
J—a> OL wt Be BF + 229 9); 3% ob' ree.
esl 5 wh elLigite 6 we ul Us aS pee at
Olas P ain sl & yy» Oe he ee
an ee ee al et Lis dS dx —"
se él SF 555 re DPS ere wl
ot GS 93 hE 32» glee 39> MLE et SL

git 5—- AF 5 cS? Jhee Ge cpl ak Sr Sik

——— - = a

(vey) TY ieee enios eed (WHA) o dl.

CV?) TV lees etle- (QV) AB Bol. cle.

(WF) Bol. zor. A oS wilh.

('¥5) ABL Bul, \ys for |» bis,

(Ve) ABL Bul. oe Ral ofa and so corr. in C. B Bul, le 95.

OVE) AL se AL ge wl oe, and so corr. in C. B Bul. her} oo
OW) © ee a 9 ole.

OY) Foul So.

ot > ide pid « wr gis pl
wt ie 2? ag ote 456 ay tlt clos Ue
355 ole Je op oe Gee Al Bal 5 boy eGo
f5 69 9 Loe yl 3 5b 6 LoS , 25 > an
le Mel 5 AS Gee eS HO FH.)
VSS Ns aes ye Pls s le we S\, 99 3
a Pl ry GR (5 ene 5p HS I
Sy aba we ALG ye B, SUL od 5 dtl, am \e
AVS SV 2c 5S Ute See ee oo ™
33> 25 ys 0 le ale 1 2 > en re ul: de
ue ee eee glib dee une ee ee SE lz
pest Lola) LS 2S L « jest Viney ree opts
<ehitls USE GL Sstee Se og yar Sb bal—b
SN Pg gel Pee a He Ob Got Hr Ge Se ™
Gh SF Se BS oe oho Gh Gx 5 eno! ote te
aS iN > ay ap aS Ge Je oF SX
oo ~Slal. oe ols po + Oy dl» S poe ro
m3 9 le SE go oP ae US le GE
aye Ly SU gytcas gh pg ely b sul te Le

(WT) A ee glala je. (VTA) Suppl. in marg. C.
(YT) AB Bul. ala S we? ake. (Wt) A Bol. #2 g.-

(WT?) T, Bol. pe > in both hemistichs. L .- for .-

(\VT¥) Suppl. in marg. C. L in the first hemistich c-; <—-- In A verses \YV1
and VWT¥ are transposed.

QYT) AB Bol. gle a oles ladog: and so C in marg.

1.4% é}3\ ote)

wx vloJdo JL 6h be +» ue » oy Ge ol UH
guy 3 de (Sogn pte tg > yg VS fw He
ese ea se 08 WS = ange ae) pf ae
CPi asap eld oaf deca, ble aul
pee sb St 6 oe pee gle a tle3
Jw Gis 5, + os, A su S 2 re
kel ase oe 5 te F ole SEL #8 Fl Ss
cle | SG N Sy 5 \- pee Poe, kel
3g 2 5 goo seed cl» ey le hye ow & us) Was
Sy iar ¢ L& shy. 55 LS) og! Hh oye oF 9
wh ene Googe Li gl. sh» ol e bow ol

sys ble V5 edd » ay ole dh oP begs ub
UF 3) whe jj ON Sl hey ce os
4s, 7 2) JL ye neddce wily Bosh px
Se eer ie whl S Se 5 a cubs 5 F422 5) 5 >
oy 03 as oe Ns aay, Peace
cle ee BE Fee ele a F GH Re ZL
SH oe NF Bole Ee clle 45> wy de
F 3 ae i le To oe J\ we Sy oS o> Wire

(VAT) A ag, 955. A ee fore. (VM) AB gle. Bul. S for OO.
(WA) AL 2h 45) for <li. (\VAY) After this verse L adds:
Set ols le xf cdl * ct ae ch ssh st
(WA) TL leg gue cele Bul GLS for gle 2h. (WYAY) Lyla jl scheee
and so corr. in marg. A. (Wt) A Bol al pre L alse pe
(VW) LT - o—, with x, written above.
(VTP) 6 iggy age Sle

(iS So \-A

‘ S> SB et

ode, Ge Nice © dk bb 5) ce

les eg AS Gh 5 & BI oy? >? J! GE
Se BM, £2 NV, 3a Ge 8) A dle 3 emo >
we de ep, rt > so Ge AS XN ayd hy Je Ae
dog Abs ok ole sh AIT. SW oe lee y el ox 5!
Og be ois, GUA oe ewe et ik ole Se we
ssl ak at ls cane « flere 4) 1 —- ++ sj
ne Fy OF Uv? v7 Wi? | 05% oll Le,
eS ea cc ue yee alto. jh dey et eee

coellS y Lhe a 3 hye eb pole b » O- mS:

~

res WS 5; sal Rie Sm 5) 4) Dy! —s \ als ww
a = . ) ie _ | ‘
ost Fy er AS «+ >y prs Se x a ee
dLith a 5 58 ole ole i has LF
a5 AS ol sir v\+ JS os 2 pit cea Dee
pd r— > a_i de r jl pol a als 1h Le
pts te go er oa) cule) & oe
3) 5a Noo Soo Se de shin a et A MS OR

Heading: Bol. atc alll ir, iS. L om. the verse. CL om. , before
(WL) Bol. oie 92- In L this and the following verse are transposed.

ou Jo

(WW) A Bul. 3 ay yal |. ABL Bal. n— for 429, and so © in marg.
ABL Bul. cae 5 Wie, (VWUA) Bol, to,. (WW) Bul. 203.

(W¥-) Bul. x ¥ \,. (WY) AB Bul. 2 9 ¢4 os-

iit ‘ J3' yao

> pl Sip oS. Sec S egy SiSeg cell gal tc| > M9
ete ieee: ae AG calles:
Baie Ss 3 | jo Ses — je as wie dys
— A Sl ee eo Wt oS & s,)seo \j
Be 5) 4 ye ur - Cit wal jlo ay,lo o~52
ooh Away So 5h DE og eet le gy gh cult ah sh) are
rad ol ss 5 Ole, oy) ie
wl pI aes e Ge thee 4 Aire ie
Sr ihele 5 by on ues 9 oho pal gs ts
mijn pe lt ey GS oe ejp yoy yp Sc ole 145 ge

‘2d bb oy 5 pad 1, bb ol oy ce! oy»
ay gl 5 ay 4b . 3G oye Lad 5) AT 5) ae
3S 655 G+ wise «2, jh, Wile oy b>
pp bel sos Sb se a eS \ tS ole ae] =
apap 9D are Je wile 5! jie en wliS . 5 WV 5)
vse lb, oS sl. pet $e Mir cal
aly 5 shi cl) SF La, Salo ay Lae go> be oS we
Seay ct} ot Ot SLA ee 3 =) may
Oo S ye cing gh ore kg RV EE or alg
3ST, IBS tl, at age SF sh le

FMS oS ch, eee the BR ST ole, SP

(MAY) Lgl oe pe (ATL) Bul. 2355, 5>- (ATW Bol. 3k 5 43:
(ANY) Bul. 42. S's. (MAT) Bol, AZ 31 5 _ilsl .
cary a \

Fen (MATE) Y, < As.

ls él ole pt are ees SS y=
ie ee ome pe 3) pS Ne x
IS Jon Sey oe Fe UISE Wh; iS or
Bh ap oi hag ot tl BSNS ae a Fe
ytd Kis Le ete Yelle gl wile wile ape
x= NS! J> 5 ule & oF 5h Fle FOS ole ol
bee has S| ih ae Oe ee
LL. Ue 295 Ap Des LL Le tyr 21s walt 5 & 5h
ems ut Ge S Fe ye Fo ey Jt esis ae
Se glhel > 9 oe NIH 6 LS ghil elle 5) vis
ed sly tle Sire Crylole . etal wal , & ghee\ 5 os

—_—

A-@

oye ll 20 tai, ae
W393 lee tb 5 we ye + +39 le +S ely p36
a 3 la ewe a ears ser ae
{ra aoe ee Ln oho ine Ce 9 lo
La ny wis 358 5° te ele ter sh ite >5 oo
agile cd at ce Loh Io gl bg ot ewe Le gh ah
ar 3 Wyolh wS Gb ee ny oe Le 5 for L.

Ci to\e ob & =)
Sop) Sel ee lbs Sele He ol ele

(Wt) T, Bul, acs. B Bul. Flo. After this verse C has a lacuna extending
toy. NAT: (Mer) Ll op Ss.
QA) BL Bul. yltim 5.

(WAs%) T le 9 el pee ay A al for us |.
(UA\-) BL Bul. 3» s. (\AVL) TL aplye col ty Jo.

hy ¢J5\

FN pS rar 9 al, ae je er ee Util ee
2 phelye.s Jad, Sle > . se I ed os See a5 A)
cai gle Jab oblbe le. gl Je 5 » aF Sl
age se 3) ope SS 5) e A ee Le se > |!
ape Pr ore LL Sas
n'a) uit ZO o> we ees se ole | ls i eee
gh wb 255: lb ,\ o,> USAT 5,5 , oles poe
ms o 2) ~$e we 5 le pe 3 x | Cc athe
Lipson 25) a> 25> Laj2 > eo 3S = aS eosk

obj tg Hath See 6. NaF chips Fab oF
cians) et lle +l E+ 55 + wd) 59 wacky oS) 5 AS Lave
_ we ple 3 = ol. >3 —3, L»;,, Pr!) wo)
‘Gaus o\_} gi hl; ali 3 ro cmins po Jol
6) & 9 Gort Cet lb. we VO 5 ele
—F ahd OO) ost oN le Os V2 29 Lyle Kye op
ole 3) ef Liste oe Le soe seh oe
DE 2 TE

(AT) After this verse L adds:

aes uF 3S pel . ses Ge © als ei

Bul. has: git pe Cake sil © ie, ty ae ul

(42°) Bol ple wie),

(MSY) Bol. pe 3 ce: Ad for .»-

(\APA) Bol. yl for 4lj- GAN) B plas 5 SS.
GAY) EP tiled 3S ye sl cel OA) LT he alyj-

(AT) B Bol, gle ak. Bul gets for ge. Loy) jus. After this verse L adds:
Hat by¥sly NL at gyal © ib ol rye ee
IL. 8

slg 4) 5) Se 24 uli ww. a\0 yo \yo5* oo gh sla As Mate
LSee SV ol oe Sey Ge ns Lae, 5 Le 5 Le
dx GLS59) pA olay? Ps tj Lb >
5555 cpl ead sUils a> ols gle 3 eaitS, 5\ 23 pe li}
<4) ch) bl oble Sek Sb > i & >
hn 228 Vs ee Ag To ye ST ak bl, BM
at WS lls 6 et Ub bo SG ber 5 a
29> 29% )> 5! 245) Ge ope el 3 Leal} vl
al, Spe Lush es as or 6 Lat oF
pa te 5 el eo eS ek we ol = Ss

‘dee 5 lel b> 928 ae
Bll PL aS J 5) ae. SE be oko Gy, 99 Sh me
Fay Brf opel le oe HN bl 3b US ole
armiit a) zl S 5 5) Aye cul b, oS ot oe kk ee

Clee, els 5 52 o oe DR EE oF es yg

—

(MAT) ABL Bul. ats 5 \yete- A UW oye Ot ley Le
(ATA) Bul. a 2 (MEY LE shell y G.
(VAL9) TL Bul Gial, phe. After this verse L adds:
oo j3} ealjl roped a was a> | is! rlos)l
oo Say OU) set PY obs by ey abe ol Eloy! |
Bal, has the same verses but transposes them. A) $ for S afer a

(VAY) Bal. 35 oy 5

ilo i J3\ we

Reis sh, OS ash iy, SC ea es
Pt Reba ue Beye oe Genet
ct 8S 5 yr 5 Wy 5), =%, 1 44 |p > o's
Ge ah dec *aten | taad
aS Cw 9 — ue rar ites as 43 lle s0
whe SAN lis duce aun eee S~ \pse 5\
Je 4 > GF 2028 ous. Ji 5 i
SNA pes wi 5 cy re | Ve 24> =
Sp» el, 52 th, tp 1 6 en. Aid ols
pe 2S toy) ES 2 » Sey wo tae Op FN
od jlo wo 2t (pros ej ons 3) gt wl) ale
Ahh Sy sa7 5 ls 5 By Be ar pee zy vate
Low gcslle fd wileti CEs tind
Re ete 83 ne we jl 5g Fy i > as
a VP le SF itil che oS he, S iil
ately MoS Sy « ol” Sis 5) ace alee ol
on Se MIS 54.9 Se ae 6 355 LT ee ba Ss"
ls» HF, BL ae. Lj Ay > =
os sesh O49 aj be lig sh pte bhp

(MAE) Bol. s:$ bis, BL Bul. , 2a3. (1AA9) HL Bal. | sii

(AY) aL ox, Sb. B Bal. ox, S |. (AY) Bul. ae l.

MAN) C olalll oe. QA) ABL Bul. = 50 5).

(ANT) © Zh,. (At) aA silo ols. A Bol, AS Sy.

GAT) A soils sb fas p>. (ANY) A om. 5 before 5. B Bal.

(Some Ge hi

Rue ic (i lie yi 38 25. Ht ee Lg ops 3
Be Se A oS coe Eps» She NL gto lt b
J Nol Gol oul g gle Sle ol 5 Hu = oF 4
#° WS oud des ee 8 ty sola? oS othe etal LAV=
oo ee ss
aS aba, rs ls capil ts dues) Gal bo So
3) we 5) Seal zie > aah ~~) aul — Ne 3? ee
oF Ao oy
is 9) Bisley 4 24324 » snug 3 Bo) wy 7 LU
Sb | 3? > 51 syuse ole! Ug) SH p> G— OF
ek SS oP tS ee or + JusH5\ ils 5,21 a K'

SCAN FL yet

Fe josie sell S 3 ge lee cr ee
by aps US dL 5 LG + ber > Sai oi b> lm
uty bet ot Ls, awe 5 c+! pier ree
Ae thy aS Jaleo Us Saat cee ile oe
3 Bly Wo) DOS be ple asl oonle ole

(AW) B Bal. \qm oe un 3) us and so A in marg.

(MAY) BL We ces: (VAY) Bul. & for =S- (VAT) A op de |G
aeS tals » upg corr. above. (av) C om. »3. ABL Suk 2? Ina

as) has been suppl. by a later hand. In C vv. VAY and AVY are transposed.
(AY) ABC jx) 2hl. AB | 2251. AB 3) ee. Bal. ast, 3 5+
MATA) © & 5 cal :

(WAN) A Bye Lolt|. Bal gx 5.

i oJ5! Poe

3 Se wl - pts—| op ley b
\ ate ne Sad fe s bath 25, S31) aj
ae oe woh) OU. a lysi ph ys? 2° Lisl
of ath oe ES lee So ce BF Va OT og
wre! Gh sy on Fe Vs) bee Ss oy
aed > ps 5) Sy So sai 6 seme ee J Sy, P 5
Sula ey! 5 p29? 3f o Let arr Sr ss
ls Glu \,) 58s \—ailart a) ols ay est a
Yioljh ul SU ee Pee ae wd Alipyas Vile
sa asa Poo NE oy 0 Le ot ow
i 5 ey Lh, gle + sks, Wd 52 Ooeny of ol
Ladd ay ee Lobe ela Ut SK LS
Sed pyed 5 25) No eg nd oO oS choy LAS

=

Lim 5 ewe gly; loo - Wy) sls, _ hil, S cpa tt
IS 32 Ol ee a LF A eo oe
oS 3h! oe . elie Lalsi; nA el aE
ee 5 S.. Pils ent lL

(NY) CL) with fatia, as in the text. In AB either reading, |.) \, or
be 5). is possible. 1 dev |, corr. in marg.

OM) Disgaea ds. (VN BL os, FF) and so C in mang. Bal. sy P-

(Fo) at Y us| pel aS. (0) B Bul. 55) 5S Pos he ce), and
so A in marg., with ¢»} for :»\. A corrector has introduced this reading into
the text of C. L has a5 , la,. (7A) AB Bul. ke5 5lj-

(V8) A yl for cas. BL Bul. i y 2ile, and so AC in marg.

ON B op od 3) top th a ole. (4h) BAST Gl. Bul \ejl,) 3 i
eelice ot \yelj.

Same Ge WW

aS blk \ywu Gey Sys aS so \625 ee

en ern ere ee 3) yt gle Sais Gt ep 1
pe ed dels SEF Se Moe wl ge
oS CT aie FS gsr 0 5 po ek: Wy
p> 5 Lend ate seth oe. Lg Lib &, sk a4)
I asin og fs pee ae 9g LE ee
Joumay lo Bg Gee ys SY se — 5 ee
Sos 3, oe oy > ans 0353 | _ sen
Si, Sy ayn SL 9 ane , So jay o7¢ 3 ble

pele Me ies he Vpn hee ake Shes es

‘hin 25 Se sls vs us D9)

pag SY rae airege

SAE de He 3h we + G24 275d 5! i. 3 Je
ve a3 aN le pater cu ES EF o ue

wpe a 251 J ole LS ps . i bl= |

2

(V+) Bol. a & 59. After this verse Bul. adds:
Be oF ont oe WS oe th oles He ot For

OF) Cals gay bye:

(“-¥) C5 nis aj, corr. above. Bul. 3 5 Ls 3\ . A in the second hemistich
5Y y yl.

(V4) Bal, 3.2 4-

OMT) Bol. oS eys5l-

Heading: AB Bul. 3) Some s),) jay Lb es us :

1% J3 Fo

— = iat

ae at ee 7S
mae fon cy Men, te <i, a ak an ce Qf Cn we ‘lo.

emetic: A aeteate e

wie Shoe A we > “has 1S ys oid
\ nao lent woe ol sk, joe bs) el alo ua r as
3) 5 SHAE le ely See 2g to VE AuN aes
tele Me calli. thy 51 a, So at
ne 29% 9 al oy le ‘ _ Susi fe cil al oe te
wt) eet ole slice pe e —- I ae Er _ $s
a SE Ae
Lele Lal loeb ls 5 jl Lee 3 el pp 3
ses a 5 Jo cae 3 iS + sa or le Et! 26 ayy
can ay et 3 Gite 4th ges os spl rash Oe Sao Wt

a aN td oy oS itd Od

(ME) Bol 6) yl a. (8%) ABL Bol. 5) 5 glu. ABL Bol. «lye
Oe ae 5) (\1s-) g cng. Heading: A lau.

(W181) ABC pala (VC) AB Bul, ast. (Vitek) ARB Bul. «iu. A
dit ®) "7 ce3). (VAES) Suppl. in marg. A. B Bul. ys, ole. L Bul. gs 5l
for 3% 55. After this verse AB Bul, add:

\ sl gues 3) ace > pe . \eai! Les 3) il, am ois
So L, which has i for \s. (49) Bol. 54. AB Bol. jules oltce-
(VEY Bol cas 5. OM) py 2S,

(71) Suppl. in marg. C. Bul. eethd 5).

: ae errs Si
a5? 5115 pi 5) 395 jl, a Say LS ol he
2s Ni wie pyle hog Se oy ot hag 3b CK wo) ple
fa croclo- FAT IAG \ Las
ee ru ie a) ob a oa OS

Fis UY OLS ac LAG ee: i i\ od: WC task Sup

2 eee ws —- oe 1 es by WS itt.
le eS. LA aut bs 5 Sh; pl LE»
cate = dls 3 o35 L io 5) ft OS sle \, gt
a Bei pp; \ iS 3p eh ool ry Val
cae a i ae ee ¥
ton We ave lp Seed Br wn IF
(VN) Bol. wu. (1%) BL Bol. 1 a Ba es ee a: obs is! ana is), and
so AC in marg. (VtEN) TL i\ee5.
(VIET) After this verse L adds (and so Bul.):
gall -F opt le py 5! + Lb sl _$y% he
(WKS) B Bul. pa Jaye.
(Vik2) Ry, weeligg B ceteye \y. After this verse L adds:
fe sty jae ? Vise OO geeagll sly sf gx Aye ol
Sl eel PS oy * ae 5 ele ot ol le
Bul. has the same verses and adds o third, namely:
ne gle) ao ney AT pt dh oe Od ot
(V%E1) A ie After this verse Bul. adds:
Ve age ble er igl ao 8 by Oe OD ey oat
(VitY) After this verse Bul. adds:

Wo gS p ab al © $55) bly th ts FT

iT « J3\ Fie

er ra &

Bink. Fone = ne WWE yr Je
mee) Ss Vass ls cd cu LA ews. ye
ee rina So see won a
Omen giant Yio ching» aera ae Na 3h Spe
DL, b Ls i AS joa. jaa. ILS 3) sls , NS Ob
E13 42 ns ad «is Sys eS, 26, shal i: Cars
Bet 8 gas st hel —s\ Lire etd tye 3 2S > lj
a8 vis ot 3) ili at. Ss nih: Sahai
ele 2) pane Gils. ctl» thle ls Ile
pre ee wll sl lis Gae tst ween ole to
Kea lols agp S ae el agains
HS BLS cle nr Fe eS re Le + dy
Sided dhl ald p ec waey cue
i Bh by se Swe te Sige as Sa ete
yb Bs Ly eet de ae GJ ci at Ce
ce ASS cred Ly cr ye Sas, Gay te SS
ls 52 ath oe See le te b oy wt Sp
22 Sey oe 9 928) MN 6 iS LS Vygo jo ashi
wile sll oe oF MY pe . ls core cy) as Ss" ue he

= —

GUN LT aly. OUD A Bar US. Bal. a5. OW) LB ps oly,
and this may be the reading of C. (MAX) B Bol py al 3 52.
(VUt%) Bol, 3 es. (3%) In C ve. 144° and 14% are transposed ,

but corr. in. marg.
(\1%A) FR Zhe Jo. After this verse C has y. T-:4, which is also supplied in
marg. C after v.-T*:A,

gins ics So iT.

a ee

je a! Jo Cia Ue Ls le a) agi oes 3)
Ee ikem NSO ores alee sh oS os

o2\ us ae Jhil; « au Lp ate no! ola je
cong 6B at ile ly o eee Ut aS kil ule
he Fe a wilde oN op col sl A
2 ME io 5 a et Sad oh FS
Si>y yim Sel. SK pee 550 9
$5 FAS AS uF 2-H FS Vth oy eS ol
SF ox ol St ee Soar JeoS 1 ee)
ar aalngae — >» + Ler 5 apes Fl
Reet b ll yates Moe Sls \S ste aj ac ae Glee.
Gi dy8 5 §5j Loe Si 5 atl GT Vim ost

GG gy) see GUL ps oe eg eet BI ne ol
DNs iin bee ad 24 tie oth Vie
ee a tlte S euile ol i gh o cee os Se By) SI I
ke BS one a aS Ae af atk ds ol
sy sh 5 > 253 sr se OF 9 Gers Sa aee
dye Gale Sj I Se OS 0 an SS SN cant § oe
ie al % ALF BAG by lenny WS pS? ge

—33) 3g Uk 5 4s. G29 Soh BE a 2% I) SH He

(XW) Bal, 4 sl 5)- (40%) Bol. see J ote »-
(V0) Bal, rate for &. ChTUl) A gp for oy: Le yids.
(iv) 7, OF all V cal. (VS¥-) A os ol ues:

(UA) B Bol Gy nit 3. A later hand has inserted this reading in A.
(MAY) A \ei silo. C Bal. tse. B sde. ABL 32) is! 5 a5+ oi ue:
and so Bul., which has 35+ for 3,-

itis

=
az

ive

LTA.

irt i J5) wo

a Oe

3y A Sus he Niele eee L,
a bor ens duh oS. hw 5 > ole o
OS asl Ns Voblé le oT yet 8) glk 5»
(ae Ms 5 ye 3! oS gli; . 5 a\s a> 5\ oils 45
Gage f-— Ve cyl + 65 ce) ce oe BF Sore.
wiles» gL siky» — 6 Dk. 5> yp gl ore
Se i ar ASS ole sy Ly v9? If IS»
3 Opa gyn F dle 2 2S + ol = = ip cht Sy
3 SU 5 je Sb ob. Ss ee oh Se
bm» vl wl Recs Sjleus Sythe re
ee gel lea 0S asl a a SS te Ll, 523+
HS VP g Lt te Bro tS Gl a ok W535 OF
sy Sy RCN | ue « ols via st Wide pe
ahs Hoch S 3 $79 3) B59 le
-wele 5h jy ed al yk aS. ls ort A ety ort
FON NN Bi Se Sb ce ss allele
AA Fly OI PF Se 3 Wiss Seo, tae
wa VL Me Ladki, pee eer ol og Ol pe oS
Le So 5 Ks x Minammcledingas leer = Sen

2S aa

ce «a ee se

(T*T+) After this verse Bul. adds:
Sete ree 3 * cutls ot ol & oly de
(TT) A Bul. syne. A loo ea,. (TT) A Bol, ¥ ss 3). Bul. S\, 5).
(TF) A 52 aly. L Bol. Gt oll.
(-O) Lom. 5 after ale. CL 53 for yp.
(TT) ABCL planes Age for am.
(TT) halal, Uy I ees Pa

‘Syne Sg irr

ots NN Seg og 6 Ge ener ibbor 2
as ay 5 a Jt jal SLE cyl , rt te I, as jal de J)
ail | shh tase 25s o call Le uy 9S oe!
F > OY ol GF Lo 5) aly 3h nh tle Gd rs
ep Re Ree 5 Ge og lS
wile; M8 wee Le Ww na de Vt FF
eloty o& yb Meee be NS ey Uy Ge VE go
PBS on 5 sss Ls os a SL, ag) SL
wo Be Lye» Spe che wig BLE, Fs ghee rr
“2 bt J 5} obk wy) bd 6 sou —~i\,h Bry.

MSN ade joo 5\ \ys al 2, able es Jip a3
Ney S Sy og 2k VL jaz) &
‘emt F oor F lye SB
cay NL 5) soy gle Lye ed ke S$ 5i90 ee
oS v5; ae aoe 25035 OS) 5h fe Je

roto pea 25, Ke oN ae ie age The

('+*f) Suppl. in aan L 5) 93 5! isc cage © cb yo 5 bis.
(T+-8) AB Bol. x) 5 \. (TA) B Bol. old \gge g, and so corr. in C.
Lege LG a -\) Suppl in marg, C. Cf note on v. VY1A.
Vetvece. in marg. C. BC # ul gy of b. Lg 8.
Heading: A originally atule ede AS ge gs A OM. Ge before wu 7:
(T-\") Bal. , \ als ay | (T-\°) AB Bul. #l\. After this verse L adds:
[a yty) trys | \aibT ole « th \ jLumzly at
Bul. adds: once tf Vy) owe © aS ES LLsl ue J

\fo J3\ FIO

ASie ol, Ls 3 oily os 4 Sie ee o cs \ hil;
eek we We aro 3) ak tH
Rokas HFLS Sy ol p Ps + uloy lle oe) glial
Xe ghSer Cu OLS eS oeaS ol ok pee Cree:
ele yg ele oF ole » Je > cml 5 Ut Ls 33 ot A
hie od 5S SE. le Sir onle L
ot Eo a Se. Series SNF
— "5 S pm 9 hs uy * SL Las >, cx! Jule wt
are wee lil; = ge tp 5 Samet L},| sLaSr20
r—* 59 HF Or > ery Bs Ne nor r- ai$ 2, aS pS
Sing hy Ge Be Sy hes oe 9 oF
eS) So 6 he ye elo; Wee ks 3 dl
"3 s° ye > fans 5 0 29 File Sil Jo »

Da, e435 9 ol
=F 397! ole sano s 3m on? s\ 50 rere oS 51
LS, eg ete i LG oy ey GL;

(T-8-) aL Pe | pally earl sileay. A 0, 5 for Ge (T-*\) ¢ ole =.
(T-e°) AB Bul. \3,) wha dee 35h, and so corr. in C. In B ola So 9) is’ written

above tag cre (Fl) AB Bol. 035 5, and so corr. in C.
(oY) A 5 yey. 19%) ABL a3 5.

Heading: Bal. Jaye After the Heading L adds:
BH er Shooll y gett © Gee wade oF Ul U,
Bal. adds: J\5- le 32 A128 * JF oo vF oF ale
(T- 1+) Lb ox5 J 5 acts lS. L esi, yl.

ee cleat sli glee . le eed, > ee Be
fcolial,> 5 jth sles . ele, 5 ce t *) 2

Pe ee Or rene ee No br bere
suite Jo Ley ol d Wh - Jo hele 5S VW a AN
Soph wr 3 Uk a + Sox we Uh ee
Be Crh A la ell gy ble Mh ae
Ss P25 9 GP’ JF Uy» SY vw 338 GLe Ww!
le <5 gis mlb - snl , sy 3 Ln ye" pes
oF 5 By 5 5 Dye y OMS 22 © il ewthl He 52 ie
Nye 5 j\ 45) Oe 5 do oe » the oy atk Jit Pw
SSG yo AeA fl sal ctl GLE wubb Ls
ws bl: whe hag ah ch ts cles po 2th, ass ty F
See ale 5. etls jb “hl. Seis yaa gD IS ok Ft

+. 4 s - Fo
‘5 >| J pe S\ , \ ase So yl “gas )>
Hs Say L sly ie “it ol: a rs

=e 2 eeeeeeeee ee

Heading: After < Bul. adds: «Jc al ie,

("-¥2) After this verse L adds:

eS et i eee lh 5 OLY oer ol

and so Bol (T-S\) ABC Bul. ne 9 fo L oe 9 £2

(FT) Aly pe. (F-40) Boom. T-€9) Lys 9 25-

Heading: Bul. ¢;\s for ga». C om. d- After @sic Bul. proceeds: \yeist! =
IF Slay ja wb G4) on bob Shel, jes F lak ja ob mel ox
6 lel, ju. (T-£1) ABC pslins.

Ty i iss) Pte)

My > Veo 9 dh de Nb) LS 5 LS SLRS
is, Jl, wey Se; s+ date Cid 5 etd fay ler thie
ast LL Ube ors Lib. os wile ple 5 # 28
SN 53 oe oS 5 jl s SL ale lojas ae
FF 1 9 a Se he iy Fs
Cages Ne Siege igel aoe 5 cass pg Vt
Lik x54 98h so. Leen) 5 5l poe
MS BS» 5 25 wth Ko le ~ NS le 25 Ke
ent 9 2S Ly US 5 Ke 5m Stile be Gor elt
oe ee ee a
V— ws poo Noo aS 9 Vioakecs tuts ar eh 23

08 24h 5 We ON ea en ah wy? fle c= ye
wsripet DS als gd be Se te Ld el
er WISE LE eS. flo & 5 EN 6S »
4s Sa ww » Sys ew shoe le ate yee
ee Sree ae io oN je soo i ri in
87 23 or We 5) 2 ah ig ea Aes a
to Te) 33° Tl yes 5 >» ee
‘oo an \jd> — $5 3\ 35 tl lel i) sle

(T-Al) B om. 3 before a. (Feat) @ aly Ps (T-AL) Suppl. in mary. C
oft at ‘

(-A°) Bal. plz dis, ABL Bal. eg GS. (TA) A om, 4.

(TAA) A om, y after > §. (TAQ) A Bal. ole £y.

(Vet) A Bul. Pad “

ped haa a Ps
(0) CL Bul. tae ol.
(T-*¥) Suppl. in marg. ©.

‘cou S pe ivy

Sy oUt tepeliss Leo oy chile ois Cl 5! ul
ema) alps Se S « a Kl 6 J oe) ot
Sigs ssl 45 ai pe gs) gle BN mF
= 3) G3 oye Laem « obj 53) 6 oly ole
om Lge spl yeh yee a nilis cle oh Meo s\ ea
o< cr 328 ci tee gh ge g ether oh) Sty
3 fe —» | Ses a ea x isi Shot
J Le lie 2° 35s Ge dee ea ah ke ol
Sat Sea as « ear eee
rye" ple 9 AeaS Ainge © gy AC) Gage Sm Sy CB

‘o\ ®t ob 5 Se oy 3d 48
= Is els anes 6 wap) 34 ye vy S ajo
GAs : ole ole Use Ghite by + 6a oly _* a uals 5)
aoa 3\ be sh erty 5 15x, sal us
SON ot be Wb! eH ot iS & No
alee US 335 5 ety s Elsol} aH! abi sats
Ot net ct OL) ome OT th sy oly Por
Dts Sy OS ae lL, a8 tk J Se Soy

I © j\ied SS. j\ op = oe » ine 3! a
Sa) eo) chal Se # Say 5) el eal ipo f-As

(FW) yy ts ail
z 1 a a =
c- oe. , hae - | oe
Heading: C 5). , 3 aa} 5 o Jo 4h. In A pa fs suppl. L Bul. 5) ai.
(F-¥8) Oe eye, corr, in marg. L | |> ups-
T¥t) AC wi
('-VA) ABL Bul. peels \S. (remy AC =:

Tt 3) pao

Ken Nelo ss, be aid oy, 2 tys\ esle &
Wal ol ale? 5 Sony othe 5 gla g bes,
Ere Or pam le 5 Ses
oe = ali. See si A athe al
oie Ji ion IN
2 et Fj) 1 i. aS AS Be
dH) > Lil: lb, ot. SS 550 5 Me ho Le
ile ae 3h Fe \ gts lb at po Spe Sok
ee 228 to ye oe Be uy 23) 38 yes Lege ol
sl. J] 3 wile Uw \ ot CLS Clay Se _ ila \_s rir-
By ie ena Wel Ueeah elle 9 S55 rey \Sa
sy all Wie wee & . als \ i 393 \,5) matty
je Hl ont FE 6 Sy pe dos GS”
oO cp! ibs iS 35 oh 3 Aas lil Frere pig

(TI) After this verse L adds (and so Bul):
Se ory Pe ST sy Fe LS tis, ple le 59
Deouie Vee Bea Ks ew ele! ool re
(8) ABCL ve: (Tile) After this verse Bul, adds :
(rvn) << oe GC 4» for aa Bul. has:
er? jets dAonk * Je, ae gle 3
MY) © yl » \. AB Bul. 55,~ ci. ABL Bul. wu! (.

L. te

(pm So ITA
29S VL A 4 pat eae «| * 358 ols ee de = Clee
a aN Eg ero

eee 4 eet ties
emt lonyS 9 & 0d dy sla JU

cathe cenit Galas 3 he Ss m oh al ro > oly J
See Seis — 3 olsil it; cpl eo cee Spee oS alah CE jo Me
Ble as ee Nh Bal. bo he Gor whey ole -
ane Wen We sp aay» Sh n bo als 3
es vee SM 2S oti oer 5 Sah 3 35 goals

Bes gntiye yu J) ma S qa » Ky Se, M5 isle = 3
oe io Sis cal sl > er toa pre — 2 Ss 3h 2 a
Path prs 5) lsat. ole; aig
Die ae oe oe op es gly KS

hes) B ayn, L dd gle.

TVD Nee le L ss bet!

CV) Bol dy» de. Lid» 5 >:

OY) Bole Oe.

(V4) Bo Juss.

(VT 2 jk. A See for S55.

TV) @ su for cue.

OW) Bat Zi. AB Bal. 943} ye for y \f\, and so C in marg. L y =5=
Sa. L S59 py gity aad. After this verse Bul. adds:

Sip gg ph Gi, p + Ss ee a

v1 esl gee

No Jot Se So 33 ee Je 5 eo cl rie
a 5) Ad, Lp p\ye 50 53.5 yd eo) ee 5S eet
LS 3 I mS «| ah ‘ lh as
A HA Eid Ales uk Lb
dita do, oaths ged ae No ob
So Fb = J el: . 5 9 dey ol bill ab EVs

233 pr BE oo 35; pe 2 SL 5 5 | par

oa

ss IS 52 99 LS exp o | we» she o\ ok 5
‘ey as lal, 5 eee De See a Sy L; oe) L

ee Pope saa as WI ale sulin on abl
ee a o\> ee =e ale Jee >

23 ee ol & aa\ s\ oS. oy Seg = LE

a 3u3 ls oe Lee le fa pp cme yy S10

aol Ss, es Me lg | KE ble on
Sane pd ONG o 3\ > os! wie 6 rs 3 jab n° cp) ee ung

Bij g 21 KE wales p> + So oh >» New ole
eH Sa lh ag ale iS. 2S OMY SS IS

—— 7

(2) B Bal. ides 52 nije >. In C 55 is written above the le.
Heading: Bul. adds at the end 5) osha LE
(FNS) Ty ge

F = —_ :
(el) ABL Bul. =e 41. ABL Bul, 1 5, \.
(TVOA) A ety le jl, with coo written above.
(Tie) aBL al YI ,,

Le ‘use | hes

as i, 5 42 2 SH, hg as Sal able ae rire
NO eg Cen SRP, Brag es 5 oo ats
ods) os se ce) A oe 99 oles col o38\ yt
29 DS og eF we GL op Vee ale Iaeel oh,
parte oS oe GL cts 290? ky ols i) is
eS ag ee Deere en sy nr.
ra, —\,)) onS \y.- 22 sl. eo a |e SS) oi
Bees ose hy) es Sis Sle |
eB 2? Gro» Ne lz wie 3 res mate 556;
oe 5g Lele a ue Sd 0,29)? Ss ale ONS
a Ach FW

ye lal 4» er, oi Fite
able Low , oe vi ojo 5 LS 35, & Lae yl
mi? SN Sy i hae ale tg Ke ll at lee ge
495 So Fe 5) Lat ole eaaal ee 3 a\s bles 5)
Sosas nee Lt he « Hu) Jil je et NS Wile
oe ji Sos Lee 6 6 las ovals poo 1S 3) wile rite
ae \ kal g he at let oe oS Wael y ry oe
> pp Gh ys SF ee WU oI 5 9 Sy Lar 5!
aparece cle i 8 0 ope Cl dy Jnl os S$
5g Se Bm Ob bog Kis 1 oe

(iT?) AR ola jel}. BL Bul. Ree Po cltaS3\, and so A in marg.

(Ty © > S for oe &, corr. in marg. (VT) AB Bul. ys dae
and so corr, in C. (TMT) Bol. oy (iF!) Ag).

(\TA) L Bol. act. L Bal. 435. (VE) AL Bul. Lar 5! -22-

OVEN) A sone, (PVP) A Bol. cel. B dsl 5 9 ob:
(FUEL) T, greme 5 lee Db Bul. Je 5 gor il

Itt 5) 2

35 y45) 5 oS 8, con othe jal ah , 40 LF
CINE Saree rer nite ale Fo 3\ Lie Mis es,
3-9) 9 \y9) sad + 9-5-2 | f227\ = OFF
p25) 35 Lele 5.5 ‘en wr HS LF
25 ¥ So 3 | is LG. 25 9 S> oe glaz te Tu
5 Nl 5 oS =H beh ey tk
ted ly & 5) Lig es ore Sp ee ee
Ly Lal gh y bl ~* Leh sue WAly 1
A 94 wile , Jetliue Cund sky 25— 5 RWer cel oy
3 oly Come | em 5) Sue lia Ale lS 352 SA riAe
SS ad, a ae 35 \ySe 02,9 25,30 5\, coal Se ak ae
det 3 il FL ele oN cle oy el
SWS tee Mm my 9 ale NL she ee ye 29% sh
Lie 39 A) ae F eye, La wstihe Ly pslice: sl
Ni lyre gee a ge i ae
pg 5 > le pays 50 epee Foal Sag
Lo Pe ke GV casks 6 GV: Soy 0p Sar es)

Sm J2 oe Jo oS at he so 5 a SI 5 tees 5S She
foe ss So dt OAM «Lite pene cual hl Keb

(OY Bol. Ly oe. (WY) B An. (TUS) ge cole es.
(Fiat) B Bul:

sae FF yg ele ge * Sit bel oe eT obi) 0,
(149) oC € for «iS. CMAN) A iy 5 sles L. Bal. sy by lec b-
(TVs) AB Bul. oh 3l jy» AB Bol. gle yo 5) a3,
(FV) Bo. poke 3 42d 5.
(48) Bot 283) 23 se. AC ola oS.

‘Gypu Sa ivy

we op | VWs Sl fs 3+ a ir WE a oem

ae Ce) el mask, lens — iad ack
‘slo 5),) wk A, Vinge ail

Just; Gye eS et whl; ob AS te dle 5 oF 5h
> jl pss les Wn ie pet ES | Tank Sal Oa
Sa, 9 MS Ses pF 2 uke e—!> ren
Lisi Ss sas seats» pe JUN a5 en wt I
Oe lue es glis 33 i Le 5 cle 5) ty 18
Val at em cop of EH Legis\ me vl 23 =
BSA A) got Vale be eee Ghl ene ob oF
fn gt 53 Bitte ole fe 5° » ay hig pe ~ i Ge
SES EAN 95s a Sh phe wg et be? aS oF
Ai NS eg eat, Oilei's eee ae ol eS rv
co 3 g aewlt » Je. coilouy Vile cys Ge oS
> ole pe NN Ss rb oy SS
itd oF 5 LS ye Sf « oS, eS 35S Seo" oh Bh:
ofa, Jo te = ob 49 oo cnt ny AS 2S ob a

Cunt » 2g LS whe we ne et Ll ol we by sal rive

teen nen!

(mM. *) After this verse L Bul. add:
re Woe VY Velo So pole 3 Ju oy: of
ils AT gM SM te ord 5 oF 4 SHY » Als
(VV) Bul. a p- (TVA) AL yea). AL SF 9
(Tit) - hen sS tsp ABL Bal. 2-4 5\_n | é, and so corr. in C.
(TW!) @ =) for uu) bie. (TVWT) A om. (P\ve) A om.
(Ve) ABL Bul. 5 at

lve i J3\ xe

oF OS ex oe 5234 Sh. os gy 5 4S a ole
ahel 5 5 3) En Se hy Gl Rope Cer as
oS the 55 why Gy. © yee Sly 3) aoe yg eee
JIA 43 dle jo aS 453. Ni, Je ol, Valeo
PN IONS ply Sia ek Ogee
Se LG Wels 6. USE LIT OH Sic
J it lai or neat 7 0 dais Lolis A wage Me
Begs a5 2? Sy le , 5 aay WAN ay as Sak athe
sk LL. hs is ol pce Ce ee
wi eh Nis ole bls tee meh opis, Ute ol iy 5
= sil le ty pe. wk jlo ale sy jlea: >
ae eae ia ooh ety Lal ©+ lidale Mr-
eof Le aS ee es ogee OT ot ok ie
wb, —) oF Fave » a ee ule — #51 ee

(TT-%) © om. y after ad,.

(T\)) Suppl. in marg. C, A et ae.

(EM) ABL Bal. 3) dls , je.

(TIS) A Sacks.

(Me) Bom. L ks cel

(FTW) 1 gl las.

(TV) A a1. Lal. Bul. aly

(iIt-) Bul gi for J.

(TFT\) In L this and the following verse ore transposed.
(TIT) After this verse I adds:

Sant sy F Ole Je e de os HE jl, oj

CS me Sn Tt
Leal 25 USS ple slo + deol s Wy es Ls ul”
Pe eS Ce oe NS Is + Spe pla US 3) a5% alo
lee stole elon stat chs? An 5) oS
BS 2% Sy G2 3) Bp * py; ath gL So) ew

FoF din 3\\,\ jb ae al Teen
ert ne) & 3\ ail lic nha

3s DU pp a 5) ol & SF
See lS isn 2S); ree —_S\, aS _ ibe el, tres
AAs Speer Atos 5 «Phi gm Ls ly tS )\ge mate
bx pr oh sh Sa. FL 52 ey ol sl
oo bl gp SI te ey Lt oe Sb as. Nos
ae 2 ol wk og Se a de oF
—_ LS i eee: ad eed ao lene ol ites
Rog yl oy SS pp WS So 5) 5 el
FNS 1); UTA. F 5 Ls SL ls

sot Mee gpl slay cole 6 et -) a! palb lige

Sc

(T\%°) After this verse L adds:
lee ce 3) JL ols 25 UF © ole 22 po! oe US als
(THY) AB at Gl gp. (TWA) AB ath gL. After this verse L adds:
Ssepr se Ors" gid lo 5 oS > oie
Bul. has the same verse with 5) dle get pe s3,e.¢ in the second hemistich.
Heading: A oe for Pap ABL om, 22-1 Ss.

(T+) Bor LS. (Ft+\) Bul. el, for ol. C Las.
(TTT) 7, Di Ae SS. (TT) ¢ je 3, with » written above 3).

(T-¥) ABL Bal. 93 «3 yb. FA) Ts 8 Ue:

ity i j5)

Head wile > te 5) Bo ole « sao cil G> ote'5) 8 ob
BS ak Siva Ss deh ae

Jest all J S558 6 alley Sd 9 Sym 5) ake

oO aia sys mie Bee oe skal 228 ale As

> e Heal Suro ule 1. oS athe , 3k Lil hae ae

—_ cine 59 = je Sy eo ge SLL pels ON cp

ré bow bh» wr gle oo AF ts ae.
ols yl sls JF op 3h Sy » wilesl 5 OS iyi 3

& fle 5] 23 oy PS > J ails ai
Fes Et o> pei 4 25) acts |

n> aa pe Vaile 15 ue pul wr ay 4 idee 4,
aztls > wl 5\ cel , B. Ht sl ol < LS\ ~ —\, rrie
aol Gls ls Gls 3 s\ aoe ou wile Sr as
eee pan Le wales 5 al 2 oy 1, 51 4 Ns ee 5°
<i oe 2, IS; 0 IK, ville 5
subi 2 aye o—le Pe oe Pe lube r yp —— awh

CP) ABL Bal. jal ‘Sh,

(FFS:) Bul. AIOE L om, »y after 250. Boyt sty Sole tye 9.

QITS1) A i olor cel. O ONS) jo 5. OL cigee 9 5. Bul. che.

(Tel) B Bol. ran a4 C 3, corr, in marg,

(TTS) ABL Bul, glsg yy: ABL Bul. 6 ase

Heading: A om. +e y as

(589) Bol. a= for slo.

(TE) AL Bul. jo st. B > 5 ¢. C has \,»> Written above ps. ABL
op 5l. Bal. (slate jl. (TPRA) AB Bal. , sill.

(Spee Bye iv

s\n S\h Py F520 2 § «i; = 5V isle pnt
“6 le pall sin ff Shas ‘all SS

ly sale gi Ol 6 pS des Gb sv.

lye ly Spe Boel 5

SuuSn Coole be sts 52 6 24 ot glo aS ety oS
Np se 02 Coxe \gliga 2 «bo ne Vole bas ule
wh; oi\ 3 iy oR » « ee 3 \ pee Lobe us| fTte
Oe Oe oe dE ee DS 5S SEL I

IPT abs 3 gle Le 3 3 Oh ae
aS Oe re 3395.2 ok rae
Sear ls soe yt 6 Seb) a Se bom
aS Ji SUL , Jb. Joe 5 th, pe aye
sp sll tes 2 ees NN
_,.. Gs 9 is5 wl; ae » Lt op “pss Deo ae
3 sewygk ob wey» Seo er 2? ne Ara oe
gevbicay!| \\ 0 nal je pre eee ory glee
mith isle 34 Co et a ice Y FE pls 62 A rrts

Heading: C om. ,.. Bul. as S & Vie alee (HITT) ABC yslan -
(TFA) CL lat. (Ttrt) 1p b dls is. (‘Tt-) Bol. te. AB Bul.
ge Jk. AB Bol af JX J oleh. E pleh. In Bol. wy. TTT* and TTS)
are transposed and the following verse is inserted after v. Trt:
oS \yk Sls » bat jb 2$ jasc a 5! Sais oes
(PTT) Bol. gb. (TTtt) In Bul. this verse follows v, TTT 1. L Bul. a4.
(TF2) Bot, bh_all, L pu

v4 ‘ J3) feo

ews 5, be 33 Se p+ Ls gu SL. Vas am
& 3) 3 alias, Deatede

o> Valea) 5 595 Beds Plat gly ye G5 5
Hs tape Je > cathy Jel,
| #

ole ee

Gee ee eer nee per Gee

Wik> ey 5) anh mee et al 25) Sy9 yp oe
ieee tee pp aS ae 6 ge eaalo 3S S Atl

(TPM) A Sst ee B Bul. i 5 Gia wa cee ee
LS » ly5) a. After this verse L adds:
pe are <a ‘4 Pp cht) JL oo be
a be culls fe Nan © £5 ca st pl Lyle bei oy
Jeal y bel 3) pst * oe pat Li, ls £
ples ne wilde + Sole vrall $b
NE ss ) te eolet © ole 214 Baz é\.

sad CS bees HS dls et 0152 oe obey ol

Bul. adds:

Du =? Fi) Lae © SS; Vk ky 3) oe
ase) 5\ i é tae # No de pile at
el jen et SS pe aid S&S
viele one i IF AT rs $ Bo
Try, Cc ies aa crs. ABL Bul. ee and so in marg. C.
(PPA) Bul. Pa for os

(Sem Se ITA

—£ » she , om j\ ok. ope, YP ? oe
EP ay are 6 td 055 0 5 hyp 5 33 be

ska 3) \, 3 wy is\ ala 3 te tle ai
‘sl? 3 As

WS 5 oF ay se Ny eS. Lust — 3) UN aS.
ALL sg p(k Ur. Scoble, a+ os"
SE oo sh kl os hg SX. AE, yo gh soli d ghoul
wei et Le 41 Git 5 wile —— «£ — tl elt 390 ls ale [Toe

-

| HE Cage wd wth, oak us \ a Lee
L Sl jay 5) by el ts wy? | R<
wiley shop Jk — - ws le 5) os ee Ae
Hah sei pps ANS eS Sh Pye 5
Ws bes al et 5 ae yo + Ue, = % Flo ™
pets ae pesos Leal Ys

GIS) AB Bal. 25:9 5. Bok. ple. In J) Oile and the Rllowing verse ‘ere
DO Psi) 23 a> > Te Ts See, Teeilaeae re: Smmpere
(Fe) B dlp.
(POV) B oltiggo dle. CL 4 5 jv:
TFA) BCT, a\Se i
(TOR) A Fle. At for ots. L a
(TW) AB Bal. clzS ,- g 8 pe |e, and 20 C in mang. After this verse Le
ide yb 929 yee 0 geil tee b tee og
and so Bul., which has jy for \53-

Niel jy es Tae (> SL ys 4S 3: pl S 5\ ae
6 septs Sas) 8 9 oS wa
af! Wal il 5 aly athens le 3 Poe
fat sls Sl, aS |) tous 5
2° oO au) ia Goo $9 5S at Ib ob
a 1 Shy ath clea ans Sekar

bs 3 2 ve? 3 ti. Lats wt Jo y se wee ITAe
coe ll kw LL. c, o pili fered 1s

S we 3 ur + poets le Fae rel on \

ISB 5 no oh 5 Ly; al el oops ne

Oe 03
SAS Fag AV UF jl she og 6 eis Joo ae te Susy!
SS be ot 59 1s Ah; . oS let 5 ty 4! Jie
So 5 > the ee she Se ot he ole in
2359494 ofS Do 5s jectie 5 le owe we tl
rae AL ee SEL ye eee | bo S565 55
Et SN end 4 Gy ls) ©. Jas | ue so Sy te
dunl ie glad es glo Sas eS Vols ed shy

Heading: ABL 3 ys and om, 1t,. Bul. Pe Atl, yolks

(TTA) T, Bol, om. re (TCM) Bol, ee te Com. 3\, which is suppl.
below the line. CTTAt) « ie. (Tht) In A is = is written above we

(FPUt) av xe +4, but t= is written above, AB Boul, a\s%.

Le 232 Le Vili re Mee S =i\ |b J
Ge EA cil ihe Need « jpn gs SN 03 Leb
eo il; lb a. 32 + $4 9? Le Le pi
Fal» 3 S48} yl ome e\ 3 be) G ay 1 5
eg pth Se ob se UE pO by or 2?
oF 2g saws F 3), JEG + ge hispk . htiss ote

Ss ry 275 wl a;ls Ss “ ak FF » oS eae MTV
obstl A ge es | te 6 lel ult 5 tb! be
peo\ seis i i rleole lye 45 09 yas Uns
G8 om Por wht Bdge Ve (A2k dol. tI
wi gly \3,5 ‘es 3 <s Serpe LS a5 OS6ig pe \_,JL.
ee wt 93) oS GES cate en ee ee
Less soy 5 wl Ee. L Sans 558 on 5
ope 301 <3) lb fo dg tog Fos Uy Shi

OM) Ty Vae sl gi jo. Le le oye Ole:

(TTY-) I. om., but see the verses which occur in L after v. TT VW.
(V1) Bal. (Aisy for A3l5.

CTT) Bal. ga < |) las jl.

(IVT) T e35%. ABL om. , before Au.

(ive) ABL Bul. oa? for syr5-

(TV) Tals,

OMA) BL 2* 2” esp.

aTF¥%) 4, a3 &'

(TA-) aS bs. AB Bal. 3 5 (te ji, and so C In marg. L Jo J 5:
(TAN) B Bol, cus.

(TAT) A Bol. ay.

Ay i J3\ Bo

(sl (8s) oaslow That oy PS ema |
cemuinl, ao Sl lear oh ili a a
5 is 32 WS ol pom ly S53 (hie op

‘sth alll Se eX, 2 >> gh 2, able

Se UF PLE i od He ESE UT Sib. 2; sg
pe oS jy oS 3) oe 95 + eS iH 5 EF | \ colar
3? pts oy oe Je , Wb. , LS, Syank Ge te
Fe Sy Be te iy 5 MEN 5 WS
Sai 2S gy ob Vo . - eae a, 9 9 Go A
srl AS F Lele ule yl le 5 Sess slit
5 hd ee CS ae esl mee, =
obs B 9 FN SV oe Fe by Se es oo os!
Jeo wie pd pill pie. _ SS 5 AS ie FLAP
ie S lp > be ye - se Se Woy ge hi: 03 ost
SM 5 Sh 3 oe + lle 5> VE Lee
= 6S) » gl pS. ot le Se
Ce Jes po Oa Se Log Se

— Sta ge Sy he ce yah ik ST

Heading: After & Bul. adds Ja a sigs Yes Ue fi é.

(my 0 ie as (TRAY) A > is. (FELA) A of. 3 before Si.
(rts) ABL — 9 5 au. (FIT 1) ABC Pualau .

rth) Br =

(TT) BL 1 Ss for bale. C lye».

T°) A om. BL Bul. lil 55. (Ty) A om. (VTA) TL ast.

Sell 4 c oe 5 Ul ide, at fists CaS oy 5) ones It0
sale Wg Sya8 5 aa No ealee gtol & Lee oh ol

\s ae ees At ose us\ « cals plo OF oe IE os!
Ser. 2 5) Sy Bs . com leyls py ot Cis Jhi's
<%) sale oe 2 GT als 2 ekS _ ils 5 oP VF
be LF neu ct ghils . Le ert 5, \ 5) yore
Js sh, ob® 33 » Fy) 5 Jj" Jr sale S$} 3) Lss,>
on we cise Fg) eye a ee oh S25 wa Ae
Sis pee sus til. Ss #5 Woes
joo 53 a5) 2S sz yd vl sles wt ees
bi 25 D5) 39> ws 53 0 GIs 2b Bee be eure
Gat J eat ye 5, GI 2S oe or 4 4 53

25) Sul & Coble, gee © ot po J lege
wzeobian LAW aU Le wzdep au oie ol pie
rs 5 59" 9 UES wie 9? 2 0 pS oe J _— sok oe
5» aul le Ute pp - Le al SG 42 sh US _L Sm.
SSP s3u2 ey pt pie Sy So N53 ths co
SES Ny De ST + Se ee Es ae Sh
M55 n8 we FL Beye \ me Fo Jo SF Sm py
jor ¥ 3 | Se S55 ar g HIE 3! Db oy

(T°) Bol. Ly. Lom, 5. A in marg. JS3i for all. FT) A ok +S

_ ,
ae 3° B Baul, oy 4 au 2S. (PTt¥) TL. om. 4. (r¥-T) B Fa sy for foe

So AC in marg. Bul. Ligh pes (rt-t) Bol. ii. L ee sl. Boe ws). ABL
3) al 5!. Bal. | yd cel. (TT-) In A vy, TY-A—‘% precede vv.
rY-\—Y, buat corr. in marg. (TEA) Ty cele fins js

(OT) ABL Bul. je jen cel s dis ol, and so C in marg,

|io ‘J,\ Fa.

Ly he Fy hoy OF. OS. wget Oot Vy a5 gk
opal f= — OS Soe path Ley: sue il; 2h)
Oty Se ee pe ee ak ah > * Dp Thilo
Syke os 31 ot 2 tase J 1 ak oP Ses
I 5 5 j\ oo Sha ey Abs 5) aloe yl a5
Gare Ge , otk Lele «GS b Ge ous > els
wale Lek La _,1 Smee — ele su EF pb 5S Ihe
wks \ alles sus bees 3 wh agneser «
yu 2° 5) 43 aa ais) . M, Je Pies olttg,> a;
wba me ERE ETS. Ne eubsle Ls >
ois A gees \, 50 ree ern”
wtulem 93 pk ge. SUF ys ENE yl Slo) 625 Size all
SL eile, % Ne Goh, eS | oS ;
5A) pip she ig pe bats pst Ng: es 23}
od WS ML. pS Hb J S&S
asc bes ee 5) Se | get yt « msl “shee ey lo Ny 2h; rT
sane = eS | e Ae 5S a)

(FREY) A | Siew. BL, tase y+ Bul. ai re (TV°r) After this verse L adds:

ele | lene Ge rep? WF ot, bo stig shh
(T°) Bal sed. Bul, ag si utp p- L i =e
(Tel) ABL Bul. slo , le. (TOA) C se nS jk. Bul. pode ends Le
(F%) B Bal. ys d55 US 3) st * le wlan & » KS, and wo
A in marg. CTU) A eed pe ?\,=.
1. 10

(oy be Vee

al Sg ye SS) endie 6 Qe culo» Lhe 5 Je the
14 SL; 5 eS . ol MN 5 2 9 pb pce
SS hig log Sb 0 ok lh SS Pol: 5 0
sehS J 9 2 3M Ge pee) Ske 28 5 ey #3
Dee OMe oe od she, 0s oe WE Syl
LS alt \ je oo zy oh oe) 3 ’? a9 Ts
aM apt oh ol ae 32 6 IT, Ss ers Kyl 2, MH
oe ot ord 642 98 5) s oe 5 ov S35 ul 254
8 5 ot 9g Shey SV ele» Ue We
Fe BS po Voie (oe 95 bh Gl bd ee pe (EL
9 le ye he or sr ole FS! sen — 3b
a ji» we Oe \3 esis aes ele S) ae, rs, \_. rit-
Mala = \y> SA 3 lS - Las o SF oj) 5

9 pe (S)\ 4% Olaa y & \,5 y > ye 2 5eL “}
P39 2B poy oe 5 SS Mol se | >»
‘Rye calie oF, J cbs

| ; Po ea ee re .

EL UN Waar (tt) AB jc, S.. B Je pcs. In € ow is
written above Se (ToT) AB Bal, = y!.

(FST) Co wlgt. ABL Bul. jls 5 jb. (TIT) ET gS UL a S-

(Tt) BL Bol. 5 , o- 3- (PST) Bal. coe cna.

(TTT) ABL Bul. yy slp). (i) B Bol og salty oe oS £\..
AL clay. (FFE1) B Bul. layley yh oe Heading: A Bul. 53 oj
Mais BB By chwv> OM) aval Lat BB.

LY iJ) Abo

SI RW LF sls j\ ee ole obl> 5 Aye S- 1%
2 ee oe SX Ss be ¢ ols sue
ett bs Jo -— fle; 59 ae Le VS. earl
ly 2S ue wuts 2 — ole > eet OF ul
act 085) og oop 4) Lely BA Oe 5g OY Le
ers Se ak 335 ohn 2 a ol 050 age pede FM:
> Wl oS ly 3 a, po? 5\ 34) > A’ thor
AUG 50 le rue) . x8 5 ) me oF 2.1 J7 3
aS Ler wp elo jl. 3S \n5 5 et 5 we | ve
el ined , bP ol Asm ora . jh! oy S
oS gol na rn + Pers 3h Oats Veli rae
canal 5 oti cule o ewlasls y jel gcse
eS wh om lel «, NSE ol 5 bes cx!

29 Bin JS pus Gitte 6 a9 WL woos
INN 5S pte A 0 5b 2 Ee

S or 3515 oz F By * S ys > to twee Sm
oe ie Be SE 55 0 Say A Des See
auys f Lede 3\ Yo Se ty tl Se che ee ly
Shs veh Depo S. Sali S, oS he

(TTA) Bol, a1 “jt. (TTA) AB s,4

(TAL) AB Bul. Sicm for op. L op y 3\,\. Bal. els

(TTA) LE Bul. ys je \jtles. AB Bul. , for |. AC aol. In Bul. rv. TTA
and TTA are transposed. (TTAT) T ees dle}. BOY 5.3% ot-

(TEAA) A Mies dpe CM) L Bol. 4 4 th ,

(TONS) After this verse Bul. adds:

Sor ale yal Sy 2% © Sa et Ney, wt oe

‘opm a 121

Se eo ere 2 lo»

NTN ke G1 9555 ye be Cae el
OF hy ge OF ak . yt OS 4 wo be Foe

s VV Se mts S \d) || \ oS woe el ol
Cs vk 265 \ ols sof aN Dun 29> yey oe
—_ =
5) 258 See 22) ye 1S, 51 ab og 2 o>»
‘ach Ll, ach, FES cxssly 5) So Gk
oikt tle gS geet. eh , Se »l Lam\ s2 rme
SB 3s ly» _ gl, S yy as
wl: Ge 35) 3 Bt 3» Sl ol GS tise 25
ae sls Gowsi. pF ul es <I, ar\
lq S22 92 9 Se ; Secale gl ete lle
#
ee Sty SN ep 32 9 9 AF oer Sgt ie) cy» eS rw.
1 il; is ~~} VY ~~ Sst pL a — » ul
dy ees oy) SLA ab Fe oy ory, 5 Lb eb I
FP ge Lt wl iL Lb. § pe = Ls F bal
JvZ1 3 So eas 2M; » J: VBS 5k Sx
FEY) 0 ds >. OTM) To. jl. |
(FU) AB ats 3 op » hy, and so Bul. Bol. ge vp. L nos.

Heading: B om. 35+. ABL Bul. \é, jh \t on:
(TTT) L gel sl © o S. B gulsl |8. In A all the discritical points are

omitted. (ThU) L oy ol. (TN) AB Bul. yf) te esl and,
and so in marg. C. OT Ele gee (TTT) ABL Bal. Lp al

(Tt¥t) ABL Bol. “y for ,.

124% i J5\ >

paul dhe me BN eS oto pl woul 41 AS 5 11
eb Si +s oo gn A 1 OLE ee
bl Als) pS aog. SL > Fy) ie
ae Lud ute tee Ey te 5 ts pas
» ol Sy SF eee. Ce Su es | Gh 5h
a st oe A gL ee ee Shy de yy» Gl GF GO HH
Sen we wr Je 3) +l; emcee iS SH9> > Aly ey de
OS yp 305 & elle Sl Ks cl 05; wle Ta
sls Cay os ak » oS, —ilal LL, ads GS oy
BL Jo og ha eS yg Aye ch chy ete hog aS
Fy wv p>? Sy\4 35 + s+ dy S bh | 3h As rer-
OS SEV $3 Ce op Ce 3 on LF Sy Oe Mi
oot MSF OY oF x2 or + 2x Ny) ob LS 5l sii
ba: wtyge gh GG 59 ul Shee 0 on oe cle 5 Uo Uhh 3h ah
sal p30 99.3) 9 Sot ty Me ge o kcake re ie 5 y= » hi

ren AB Bul. wl 43 ee. L eels A. (TRAT) 7, Fe gy
(21°) Bol, <a, (Thi o od L Cor ce A>.

(8%) AB Bal 4 4 S 43. C hl. L has
a) iP a bow pte ole ch cls at Jo ji a 3
L adda:
vijo oe Ja of wt Fp 8 she re g 2h EN os
(Fey Ly. (TET) B ay written above .s,5. Bul, 3, heb In
Bul. vv. TEPT and TST are transposed.
(TF) Bol. ye Gl. Le Bal pilie. L culpla. L cule le age gl ge, and
so A, which om. 35+. After this verse L adds:
oe le OS ae oe * od WS rat oe AT
BR thoes shal ue © hal SF a A

(Som Sw

a,

‘fae 23) ont Meatl y \09d oy oF lel,

a3; po a8 oS NT as,
pls So sy) a» 35).
oe d Le sb -» eS.
sks Se oka 9 i.
eH te Nee at oe
bie sls pled ws
cud Shy jhe

SY ily» be 0% 5).
| peteaas
ET es
bese cole 3 si el,

Or oF Sy F Oy PM OF *

leh AF 5 at os _—_

= . a
See won SL, Look -

(TV) L r for 13.

(PVT) Bol. fle. L ge «.

Stag gts aS Vy) Seo eg
py ee TF ;\ iS Ite
HF ne Sl Ml 52) yg
os Me gts ul ae
mom ne 5 A> 429)95

Ips 2s Lies o5a Ve 93
oles Fe ye Sor 9 ok bess

° AF —t Sail, oe

S32 oo by ST eile LT
o® wy ose ol oe bk Fo
IF 625 23 a Lae
Su > > gs te 98 4S Fito
wr Sys or Fes 1,
lat, al Jo 5 Sop
Sm pre iF gilie w

(TTt?) AL Bul. ual.
(TTAY) 7, — f= -

(Ot) Bo Be Sl gl. A Bal cul 3 yg.
Cis) ATi So 2 ew BE Bale £ poles © a 8 ~ goles ABE

oe isi». A om. cy! before dl.

e-8) CL se a:

O&9) 6 gle od 3. L Se ole }> 9 vle 2.

FEY LT Vile 3 sls.

(Te-A) J, 35 ime ca op.

(h-%) ABL Bol glul.. a SUL el. C ent be Lb ot kk eb.

Jol cJ5! Fas

— IF ce ee Bae ces eee
YL, Jer bo pe dba gcd tel Mae tae res

dyo8 Set A oer >, gi er Pre Lad tg

pr Colles sles pt 5S pot bests 03 i) So,

et Te ee cS HG (3 jek

2 ll. 94) gio lige « opts het 5 nti

“ee GG! ee Ee anf oe ee

Le peS 2h OS) 85.g -Cetive- eet 5) gto SLA ged
Ske iY peste = 3 > ses 9 os & i RAW

18 yy 55 wef sel. sop 9 CLE 5 5 5 wh
‘3S Cel b

Sod wily 2 65 | ale 6) bow et 9 Ory
wal MS ye i OT Li te Fe I
pr oF Sak by PF be vl ol of
oS, Ce eS ey ens Vs ELI; Me
02,5 pie Le sls 0, ye ys ii;

(TL) ABL Bul. pled ae OF ole. ABL Bul. op Ole py:

(+) Bul a1. L Jai aty. After this verse I. adds:
pal oe Lai ole WLS + ne el ols oil ll GT
MM) BL (F849) Suppl. in marg. C. L p65,
(Fete) Bol. 23 pte. Heading: ABL jajk 5 23. Bul, jajal, 5 3j-
(T22¥) After this verse L has vy. TL9-.
FHA) AL Bol ot GL Sp. Boy oh Sp.
(201) In O vy, FLOV and TLOT are transposed.

tis yas ey lo.

bom No Ge <3 rere
say I> sl pl aes Fw ir AUR Ss oe
a= Jb a ok 3? Se Up UE oe jy 2» 2! SUE —
ee eae AT ou, Je 17
Oe Sth oe de AY Ns ae AN gy BE le SF
ass \, it a's 2S cm o Let al le 52 Seo hig
abe boy 9 dm LEE. Jl oe 5» Valk
SAS NN eS Lobe fe + ennsl yo gle Ce ol
oo eile Gul Soe gl ola?
wrbpale py eH 4) le. i yy Sone oS
31 cond lym 15023 V2 lial ,olT . ays CIE Sle G3 po 5h
Le 2 HE eee i . ob, , Gb! , 3, Wie Fite
“3 Shr sles Dott 5 Be Oy tle) Lies 25) 5 We
co 58S) eile os iyi I ey

tues SE 5} 9p 5 ll a\ Lot 2» eS ples
‘Ado > SEV o5 ALE sl s
Bi ene ip oF ee ae ols KS a

(9) Baty. 1 iis dale Gees TEA) B ysael pnd ce ple ahi.
(809) Booty |) (4i\j, which in A is written above the line. Bol. >.
(Tit-) B ly9> r. ual eh ao Ah, and so Bul. (Fatt) ABCL als «

Bal. om. 5. (ETS) ABL Bul. 25% ane, and so corr. in C, ABL Bul. 41;

Sie ut 3 gles), and so corr. in OC, (TLto) 5. Sy -

(eM a SL aed, (FETA) Bal, aid,

lot i J5\ 2

sul a5 Le ab) Wiel « aces ws bots, te
Valk al phe siSe s Vea lke tees a
ce SAE Sn cons slp gagl aaSce Ss aa P
les ol ene Sak BT tle I opel ok
fod VES pA 5 © Ss ps ST fie
Lyles L® j> 2, es. Lely 9 £3 9 ol NF of
2a j\ poms 2 op Se 4 aw Je 50
sla}, | icant’ pbveeat Ells 58 hf ees cen 8
Bat Oh got, «ots Aaa ce
3) oF Ly aaihe 9? Say 2 Sy 5) Siii}yee Lol’ run.

aos: 3 whe 3 es ope et eS clk

rete oe i) ae wed as wolis| ee —_
el ee Sl ole oe oS ol tk og LL ot
Sy tS it cS > > sl b45 a
bye gdh suile Css elie le Le wide 5S aS (Se Ch rie
an#y\ 5h sil. whe » os, 7a bli; Soe
Lew sims oe yo 4S P-L LL lel oH _- I
liek wl gal Jl on . wl p> uu 5) 3Sis — ra \¥

(TLV\) B om. (FEYY) A on as \g_s jl. | |

(TSvA) TL sie) for sial,. (TEVT) A ail, & and so L. B 1.

(F2M) B Bol. ose =» and so A in marg. After this verse L adds:

F ‘Ta ee acc aucgaets amen tue
2? 9 Fo GED 4) sd 8 yy ce hie i jl od
(THAT) Bal, with ALS. written above.

(THY) A Las. B le». A Ye. BYE.

" LS game So jof

pole Ath ae el Gye oe - plyle-| 25: oF 3) —t
“ye wk, Ge 5 oS ede iL , Ly 5 as

Sis ly pe ws a . Sig LS , upn\b Leal As jet
7 SE 55 Tb 55 + ee oh ol Bs fed Ty

wikiy 52 Ys can as . hss Ll e—sl tees
abe =o Vie ae . ss + aaa es
= Maal SPO ree 5 F083 >
le Ny 33 a eet sl oe of og L 5 s\, ret.
ee or CF St rr + p78 ir 5 ole oo

2-3 ee IF ieee rye Opt pT i 2
Bg allal ch, eye tad : comigh So » aby 5 5d
elt 85 AP Mee F355 = th tS aS she wT a
«| WS ey ge sth o . IW pS 3S le «ad ri
Sal ye liSa yi ¢,¢ » <2 165 <P helt oy
st Be 39h Msg Ly Listy) Ut $3) pol Sou shi
Exe) 35s 255933.) Soe e HD WS ws Shier
N85 JS jloy de 3S, . Whe oS wet wl £
cal Sm 52 OF Sia S, oe Siu 3) S&, OS EF ey tev.

(TL°r) Bol. re) Liye. (Thos) ur Sly = ym) itd So above the
line in A and in marg C,

(29) BL Bul. wu! aty » Leu. So written above in C,

FS04) ou, for se. (Els) AB Bol ais, FA O she tye
(2W) CO 5 Akl; (FA) Bol. a: ,l>, and so corr. in BC.

(Te¥°) CL jo for \,. After this verse BL Bul. add:
hs og de ST bee © opty ool OT ey Jel

loo i )3\ xe

ow ‘\ le aa\; ste “em (SlbQO 29 pat 5 sim
Nt aie gli! jit 9 05 SY eo) & Sul
He apie SNe aS Lait \ hoeas
Lat OS Vs \ Al _ a 3.

ca S) es SEAS ee = co 5) t ail:
g545 ul gu" 5 Sol SAS te yom al isl, 3\ for-
—- & 3 stl Le Oo! + 9 Sex 5) Seal dit

WEL De yo gS ate te od hee
oS op WS it 2. i eerenies

wre Os es yal T° = 8G uP 3 dwg op 5) TY Tele
cae Id fo a at) Hb te 75)
rf 4 35 +) Grey. pi oli) Jo sek YS

Sassad : ) ‘ jae . oH 23 * en oe AFL ae tle 24
coll pitas ste 9 Adyble LS + oie aaa rae

Heading: Bul, om. tie ak 5. Bul. \sSs) & a ae
(We) AL Bul. Ae sor: (T'\t) After this verse L adds:
seg or lo et Gi tl g “sk te a»
(or) ABL Bul. ¢lo oy" 7 y5- In Cv. 1912 follows v. Foly,
(FOV) In L yw. TOVV and TOUA are transposed,
(Flv) ABL Bul. om. See note on v. ToT).
(FeV) In the first hemistich A has gle yer ly come ol 3} Ge) and 50
in marg C,

ort Sas jot

3s pal sli obs ve + qe Sal hy Paw
Os ov) a wobbe ol slak . Cole Ss ole onl 5 uh
ot 9 299 3 X52 bls « OI) 45 Se 3\ BS
wees es oat ee AS ne a:
a SW a lg om ae

Be og See ere
cea cet, & ee sak, adel SSS coe bcs,

a > Be ne aS Es NE me os Sic
lal Ls celal Jl 4 Kelis 5 Lit) sis jis
pe de oe ee dhe eel) got) Sa glal ya
ls) Joe Bu2 38 ous eile voxel tm 5 5335 > Fo.
2 ees yi i . 39°C otk 5 3 ole ob
Bo ter PS pe HS PO Gt =!
olitl js aus coe 0S wey be alee rs ple che cal
we) at ni =a Pe wl iS i+}
Le 3° ler 22 5 oy 23 + le dl dp Jie sh Fare
re — $8 Wt 9 Loe 2S 0 2,S0 ps) oy dk iS gle
Che Sat Alen Nuke Send» AAS oo) ah
engl Hshosse ea Cals ees ite Soy AS hh

——e

(TA%) ¢ pit for ee corr. in marg.
(TEX) shana cel ol 9 cel og dlls, corr, above.

(TENT) DL she byte (FEY) alee. (FEN) TL le y.
Tei) DT ole oh. Bj, >: (Fo-%) AB Bol. oct) i, and so corr, in C.
(T-8) AB says dl’. F80) B gle »> ctalemy ol ay 2):

Te) A fle. (FY) a S for J. T?-A) BS oh ls.

joy Js) Jae

SIAN yi; » re 35 Pant g? 4? ye
wk or ohh cul I” ov} ae 235) ig a>
AS eee ns Sag ig Sel Ss Bs s\j- Tot.
Mt hop ST eng ol 23 ead ay ae ae
Big S59 hy tl ee, j\ fle
Dol Sieg be es. ts lal lel) db
WS oe wll 3 oe “lel. Lal hake bel eae
S53 fey) Sie 57 doe oS by OS 5 Sats Juits HN fle rete
ee Pap ee gyi ey See 3 ul oS
ES jh le Ur oo glia. Uke Sie iS >
Like 55 tt ae. 5\ oy pet ow Lie hn, at a i _.,
AE 5 ail ty ot okay thee A ak Oe
MTR ee po mea
L-= or we 5\ 23, an Leo 2S le
oS oe eS 5 Jel oS. 53 a
sae Ly oat ot Bl AS UF! as
oe 3 cobs ola} Si); Leia pice Oe
Sr ita ei fer eee
35 p gS 3 Ab om > ty aS easy 3 § Bran S@

—, wl reyyr \ claims: o Se, sl as 2 FR» +

(Tota) AB Bol. £3; — wislk ,>, and so corr. in C. L lat =
FY) C Vine. (Fel) ABL Bul. |, 4 le

Fel) A ale jl fle, corr. above. (Fett) Bal, ae

(Fett) B Bol. a9 5.

(Feo¥) Suppl in marg. C. L 3j_~aut.

Cisse Sy \o7
Ls je ie oS Sis. oN _ ge Lb oS Gls I;
Be ak Cl we tet Go. a
ig yo) Uke <F 53, ee 355-5 «hee ners) SS, fers
—)*) ost em 2) ere er NES Ose ky Js\ I39
Na ty 2 I jl aw s he) Lys a8 55,5 e-
2 a A rie il Se AS, ot) yr 5) tel ¢ jes
cmon lo 5) Lal cat Te M5 8 oS oj wee 2eusls ‘9
Taras" eS Ls er =F * mt) 2 Fl rh ee LE oS Ft
aj oe Vian sesy) rT @ ADsercke joo ai a ew oy 2 er -<¢
or, 3 thesel ; soa he s ee atl —— a_i cs
see Woh 5 3k ts o ytSee Sosy el) BAL! Oe
=A as 2 eM ot JU 3jet 8 yp AAS 3 Gay J5| Bry, rete
ot 3 a S19! . be J ra, xy a Oe

(T°T\) Soppl. in marg. C. After this verse Bul. has y, T°\V, with i for 141+
(reTt) y, x35, (Tere) cycle Soy jay, COrr. above, EL Bul. tale.
(Tory) a 235 pw 59> (Telt) After this verse L adds:
pet Bay Fl Ot Sm de oh ol out “a

('°v+) After this verse Bul. adds:

AM Ly wile Se FG SENS AN oy oe
(ToT) B Lad ol. AL Bul. Lol.
eT) As ai ole S. In C the > before 4\—~! has been added.
(TOT) Ls sayy. A Bul. | tel.

lot are) peo

ti oie. 5, 3 eg pode, 25 oe i Sis en
er ce bee el) Se ne oh y oH 5) js Pe
Sey pe 5 Lele bys. SS or 5) 95 Pe coy
oer AES. jus pty cle cle»
a oP Sa ens >So St Be Oley
345 Stk Liye Je! ahi; . ss wes ile ge TA:
aoe dl EF eat LL zs nt he tees {ce
J AKuls ie 4 Sh 5 RU Hj art» @
eles 2, ol a ol de . oly s2 sly ye! fon
dy pode St ox\ ay 4 + dy St wor TS ot by ol
5 o> 5 or 5 3 uD * Gols we 4d) 23) Foe
LAS” + Nous J 5t oy er Behn dy ue J SS aay Ho
25-5 4 2 Lo dlp A Slag F529 Ss
J=85 er Je 5° = LI ee Lie 54> \ 55 :
JF 5 3\ S a So Dy eset 5 (LI ae WS J

spill pe oye wl YF 8 53 ely. Urea yy!
yj op 3) ses le © ke Ves Sc 5 es —_
HL, dy, 5 Ste ab gil ol ALN aie OG legie
sy Fe) Sd ; ks sy 2) se 49 59 oF Gh
Sel Sd 3s LIM 3 bes Je FS > ond Gol Ue

on Be Gy oJ) ey e 3k bf at ge SAL! = rete

(reve) A le 5 a}- (rev) A je. Bol. 5), (fev) 7, Sa pe
(Fev%) Bal, Js 0. TAN ACL SF pls. (FPAA) ¢ en ee

7

the second hemistich BL Bul. have tas pe * 2) 3.9, and so A in marg.
FoAt
FAY) L ype ai » Sy.

(TOM) Bas 5. Fett) LT lal Soy.

CUS seme (Sims \oA

Sob LS Sst 2S. ee UL HLS ole 1,
= 6 > seg <9 eth aS 4) Jo ex ol 5h
op Gla 3) ley obs. oy ES ole , Se ghee ops Th
et F alt le peil ole pe eens oF oS Se 5) J
wROE 5 Le a ee
DIE L Gie* 5 Be AG; 3 eh ib.
hile SS” te 9 ghar pe ANS ls, (3,
ht & OS or SS et Oe ern
5S pe 5S glinle S oly - 55 te 5S gla FT glis
i — Je ol lL. J aL, jp XG _ i 5h
53? ES 5 pte eh, SI eb my Se bpm
mB: Saas wi ytale Lo. .: ae" etalop Set caigs 5)

‘Mee SOs Weg Neh Sal FN ge p
wlan § en SMa 43 « S39 a yl AN Jal ray.
aS) GLE oT tle 50. ctu! 555 Sy _ss\
BL, 5 le so gli. 5> . L¥sls5,5, te Sica
mS ole oe bee, 8 Sake tle

(F°*) ABL Bul. os\yec—t, ol J 5S, and so C in marg. L cna. ABL
Bul. ¢s3 ile il aS, and so C in marg, Fee) CL |\s5 Im

FeV) A hia gah ley.

(reW) C apparently ja 4 ol, 5). 4 Je Mgies 5 2c, and so corr. in C.
Bal. jie y ox! Sle y- AL Se ny xl - p-

OW Cg te ye Le poy. L pay Sb pe y oh Sl.

Heading: AB om, “lau ‘Y.

Wu i J5\ >

-

RS cd ts ac cas
oh 3) Jas 628 Le 5 wo ine ere
per ged die Eh «th ae tS aE
pred in ae og 938 hae ak Soh
PS mtd gn5 SL SN cy 2 on yl SS oH ole LM
oF py Je Ws oF po oF ysl oy oth oe oF
Veg a tes ate as ie Lae Wella Ves 5 2S est
ni td ees 34 Se
Se ae a ath NE as tte
Mt) sak Se jl oe Sh Se gore o\ 2 re

‘s\ aie g we Sie

_ lx. my? tyr jl _ le |, 5 9 2 ulel
je 5 yeu og ppt Je ol o hs sLish 35 5g a lel
3 5 3 cminh dhs 0 oy tee Sry 9 4) ol
Nfl pil goo eS a Vay Saket Ojo) eet go ee
> ols » M53 el gue LE Boe ley UT
en sue ASS WS. ESo\e ws OO Lee Oe
cons MW oe pee ule poe ens AST OS oy oe Ji

(TU4) A ed 5 |e. (Th) A sod unl Tey ac. -.
(TUT) AB Bul. |), lL ,,! ois ait i, and so in marg. C.

(UN LS ol ge. L om. , before Sul. UY TL ah 99 cea-
(W-) Bal. gle. ABL sie. MM) co 4 & gy.

LL. li

eT el suas Vs

wo Gm 52 ow y 29 oh Val ot obh abe 3
38> 5 by ee 5) ob 2. 5) ul pe GF So LS

re q)as i Leal 53 ek gy 5 or! Poms uli oo
by dle 43 5 5 — sla » 2 Jo ale’ 329 » 2) wl jo
O52 bye ey 59 bet oye e oy Cole ask | Lai 5 .-
Ss yard ty ESL og «5, Rh Ae See josh |
yl 7 a —S5- pla f Lin o> + pl 5 & 25 5! > ak

oe Ors pheS oh \ ogy S$ J, 2\ il ana 9
336 oly Vile Ll 2 Ns Shy end be F oF ad
3! oly bee Ul Oe: Ob; 5 Vides ST bys Lee
AS ts ioe Nl 2) Sis S unl, Ss
aku 6

25 st yht_ lb ay 5 0 oy Fy 9 Sj dy Pos
(TOU Ae} ie cel cee. LP yl. Bol. ls aj.
(Fo°l) After this verse L adds:
+ = dle &- gis > * Fe de 4? 5 > gli 5>
ie de > 5 Je _ yl Go . ley dle 2 5 te ge >
ley _ fle 52 » wi gle pp * Lt _ fle jo 5 # sli i>
Llae fle 5> 5 gus ge go * Lis dle > sae gli
Lin fle 5 dle yl po © lic fle ye 4 2)9 ple
6 dle py Si yl > * He _ fle awe uli
pis dle s Se git » + St le, jhe yl |»
Jit oe Sle > Jer ale jo * joe (se le » Lb uli 52
(1--) ABL Bul. a» glo. Heading: C om. aki. A Bul. an d>-
al. ‘3, », ABL Bul. om. o~,. ABL om, 2.1.

ay Js) 335

oe 3 St ou 3) — - oaks a 2h, T ih-
Bie >» et are Pe ce ve ole z oe 4 3

§ 92> Sym 9 He oh hdl » we Ole SP

=) NS wok Ss We sh pts ‘to) Cb op
fe ee

Sh eam vo. ie ar te at —
a th! 29 002 Sa e def }y Solo 5 Ns Puss
ui ° LAY) we j\ = uP Ue ue 3! oy rE s\
3) WG 5 j\ wl, bed co Pe sh ot 3) a3 AL \_5 re.
se a Ko 92 0 def 55) 09) SF ches co
lent eis Les sl SG. ie Ih J Les ly >
oS Yur 2 52 pth eo cecleage je > nag oS
BF SV ols ob oh iS ye 0 8 Ey lel g os

| i a | = 7
(+) AB Bal. at ao ¥ for yl Ahly. Lg! ship.

Heading: Bul. o,6. In C 3,6 is suppl above. Bul. »j for pls.

(TUR2) Bol. uy for AP (i) AB Baul. in the first hemistich: cb a
= — alt

Ss co Aca\, and so C in mang. (TVA) A om. 3°
(1) Bub ylul ss, (MT) Laos pla yo.

(FT) ABCL pala. AB Bal. Jy j2> ¢* pxSi, and so corr. in C. In B - >
is written above the line.

Soo US 5 mals

fa pa eb sage» fs genth yl oS
as, Sb , bi Pe ge ee ENS Syn ee Nae’
see Slits oj9y 9? + Se pS ae Sie
ee i aoys oA antag ep SIO Mey Mega Gpdn
Mts poe ekg ow Lc ath ob NS
swe) el 5_- eat po . dowel: lb cl-Lol lil;
$95 8 5 os 5 a) Sos sS Fea) ee cal, SF csakt
Bes Wg AS sg ey isla. ci Pore Pn cae
Ge 3) £3) SF bo ee 525 des ulp oo)
ees 4) re eh ols Gage day Jal jel
obs Ss JI pe Lele lL o ad =n"
“F a oe, it uv hl. 2 er 3 Bt Lom
meer eS age ere ee Pe 2gs WI ag
ee 63 ee Le 1 elie 43 ail 49 DN 4g be
age ool jy 228 255 0 3s ae ye > ot b

te 2 23 OF gp SF OR» oe Sl — st og tele
ea, 5 ASS ow wl FL eat - So
(TW) ¢ Bol. silo. (TW) ABL Bul. jbl , jb.
(Ti) Com. 5 before 25. L oli ppe- (WY) ole y.
(A) CL ee lt. | YBa aS for at. OT) AB sy sla.
I Bul. ve Sy > ob. (PUT) Tad ole.
OUT) AR Bal pe yl. A cel, y 6, 0 andy 8. (Fw)

PLE We Le yl © ll a te Uy abl op
and so Bul, and C in marg. L p¥é a53- In B v. PUI, os it stands in the
text, is followed by the verse found in A Bul.
(UY) & om C aust L.
() aA ovLae.

al
a

Ve ‘J3| pte)
Ess 33) 53 COA ee ae sk ae j4 420
eS Vo E od, Ai ag CS eck pet Sel Jo
BS BS BTW ay del BI Je eae
BIa, a oy Nice Gd Se Je ole J SN Ge
eae ih i Cn prs y eel Lae ge 5
GAS coh Youle s Ge cel cwiletl eteee FU
ps b= GF Se pup HT et F le
els A yl eh Pa erie Jo su) 34, ba legy “Js
cole IT ae ey gle mB + ell aritenat

3 pe S35 39) Ab > 9; er Oy
‘) eS JS

it, ghty 55 lk » = tus) hs oy 2
Me Se Bp 5) ele wm L535 suis wole, —\ me
yd Ft op one lh cae
ShE os gle MB ogee HbST oe oe pti?
Bos phn gt thy Gh 2 ody Kes Pan
po er wr ol Sx Sle d+ pp? oe Ld ao ea
—ei a ee) ee eG ak eee
5 Ao 2 ack Pd sm ot De

(TWA) ABL Bal. dian’.
Heading: Bul. om. 3.

(FWY) © lio ye TE Byey palo.

(Tuy c Pp -ee, perhaps originally uel? BL Bul. gual, and 50 corr.
“4 —_ a
in C. (TMA) ABL Bal. os | po, and so in marg. C.
ry 1s at
(FU) ABL ie =.

(Syme tS ye ats

yest 3 Be aS a FN eS ry Jo 42 mee
es Wr ash 5 yes Raise copes wees, ia BS) oS
ae le shade UT a ogg » Ute uke Ley) OU! bt
deny Ge og Sang? de sae Hh te x oF
rj 3 x ope gil 5) Uy YE oSe dL
hs ie ie pie ad ee pe
IE JVek eer om GE op lo eee a oS
em ole boy sy or ene SLB LL WY Sal
ee joes ea DL oh Least
ce Lai, yo Lesh Ir ‘ Mao Ne Lai. ;\ oS Ft
end is Ban Me \ te Ute e eh cme be gle yl rite
Os. by > S aad 5\ fle « ons 3) BES pox We
ee ht NV UL aes ai. La Oy UL ond ee on
Weel Sb he SL ay Lee oe
Vo}3 5 | Jt — Ad * \, We wos ee ww! ow
Lisl 5) 5\ sn eee bly Le He RS Le S re
eo wie pet eh gb UL 2 4!
cali PE Se NG = a Jil;
Ale, JUS ce ee ek
ee cr Fe Sy EG

(Fie?) Bol, = ppl. (THY) LT lyy) ab. (PVA) Bul. 3.44 for 4...

(2%) ABL Bol. 2iL, 2, and so corr. in C. ABL Bul. uns} uy) 2: and so
corr, in C, (PV) ABL Bul. cnej )>- ('V) ABL Bul. gpl \-

(TU) AL tem. Bul. ay for +L. (TV) AL ail, bin, L in the second
hemistich \Z\ 59. (FIV) Bul. om. 5. L cj 59 pe.

(FY) BL Bal. al S. (TW) a 25. (Wr) B Si tor $<.

ity Jl Rio

ge aA yl p23) Le yet 5 SS) oe :
i pM has Nd oS 9 Fl le ol
ee ls ik. yet ae
we es 255 5 ‘ain
i Ie ls at oS A3 J Winn gto Wi
oA ak —_e GI AS oe <id Shas! Uris Fe
Se ar ant enigne Se 0 AS YO eilsy — 3 |
a ot , Let © ob, koe Gor ot woe >

woe LU Lt 64 Sm ee J NES gle » 35
Los \el wl yp wh eed oe Sal yg ee We

3 =
Ore es bolh ol Sym we 9 Gp? 3? 45>

Sasdge Vibe cuts te VS ow 6 Jase gee View 55) dS Sy TEs
Voiny ete A ET LL oi S ead EP ag fe
ee Ay a eh J) e ee Sa) 42 ul i os

V+) © ot 5S \pol, with jl written below 5S. (VL) L agye up

(NY 1, 50. C eign pe AB Bol 68 oyt* dla isle ce, and
so in marg. C. TV") A et.

MY AL Bol Ge ¢ 5) 9. B lic ¢ yy) 53, and so C in marg.

Heading: ABL Bul. om. ,5 after 1. The words > sigxl =.\ 3! ore
erased in C and omitted in Bul.

(TTF) ABL Bul. in the second hemistich 3),5) 4l. 5 se) je, and so C
in Marg.

‘pe iS = WW

Ee

(7 OF seit 3S ets 22 * (32 wor leo 5) =<
Lae Sl 225: L5t. Lb mS. gs
WIS LL Ss bog Lee Ok LL > a WE
ba: dle tyr 9 Gee Oldiay « Sy edi, ts SF lt mie
< iat ooeerete SS og oS
melt og dla > Ne oe cole y engss oll hl;
Saag dle ee Ge Shey Sg FHS
ee SSeS gry Vos (Ss ole nr ONS oy
Ke Ls i Neo Wt S555 8S 1 lf gr.
a oe J Lai!) wl Sl gwd Sb, 5 wh) ate BIS Of
1 Sal yg la bo) Ub Se a

Sis Bye 4h gle 3h bh Ol spe WE On 4am

Ae 28 , 5S = agains $32 95
sh ne ay STF <a - Wes 5 & See
(4) A om, (M9) A om, (UY) AL gt it oS y,. B
die AS py Bol. cies aS phy opt ¥- (TY LS ols of

as Soy 5 255. Bol. clad). (FY-T) Le Pl yeas.

Heading: Bul. «il \, for cis gh) xsl). A om. A\AS.

(Y-") AB Bul. 5 ue 2, and so corr, in C. In L this and the following
(YY) C Bul. pi. L 35, 1. B Bul. ple »

Terse pre tr Cee]
<— lj, and so A in marg. and C in marg. ABL Bul. a+\; for ay.

ah ¢J5\ wo

6S 0S 6S sie 5 aS sile WT sky A) ole 5?
w\ \ Pr Son Gere WS Sad le ¢
ne WN ul 5) > 2 Woy Ge ne ESSN 5
le sige aa hike ” ane > Ll scl age 1
> eg WS 5\ wile So) * oo Vase W215 oh So)
tanec iS) gy She. wa \G 3 i> oy3 ~ 43) uf
ood desis\ Go) rs 3 ps ob eae Wn! LS oe
ae ols 31% $> lye ty aI LT poe ea uo
SUN gle oye ae Ly 2h, o aU oe ST AUS Ls
ent ld» ue rend! 3 ey 3) » cet lode a> 5! ei tel onl = lil,
sk, clas 3 be td 9 Vat euatys > Eh le 53

wlyitl Guus 5 LK Ye JG Jl Gj) en,2

a a =

a a ee

Heading: A om. ¢ +9 agile 5

TYE) Caio. Bb sl. (T¥L9) TL, om. 5.
(Tve-) £ aa dye Sy 5 cn! > wh Lae L tom led gs

(TY9\) After this verse Bul, adds:

Lee Ld, Luthd dy * ag eg At We tugs SFT
Heading: Bul. = ,) pz.
(TVEE) Ty le jel sl ob 5. After this verse L adds:

at ne dy tl y nm gl * 32 pb ae S§ 259 Ah)

(Same Sym VA

Sp r siete oy Lie eats & clk Gil Hi;
{Oyen Se Wil> o> 5). gS yt wis pa
ere Glo ae pie le cay gh Seb yl as ys MT?
ae at ala aon ce jl nj 3 sh
4) we as \wb NF tet ete g ol 5) ele Lila,
See eer epi IH 2 32)
#5 532 wh a Sug At ie > + we oe 25) als po
oe LG kl 5) PS got « P2 aay ja a
5LE 52 03S iy pe & ye jy 3h oo jh, he
| re Serie hes 3 VL \ oS ace
senits Nile lof +. iss Podtig? oS
aS Jot au; opts . JF J) yp Ath 4 og
gh “Whe ond 5 2p pp 59+ 3! "5 9 5 e—lales ;\ rte
BE: a oe 3)
es BAe ak. Ns it os
SP ae ete Cee Mery ones a sal cee Ci
sae ose jp ey 3 se BP veti glia corre Xe
ra 7 Dies Gs pe ell ta wv? ~ 3) 42 M-
97? 78 5M alee age oS 045 og LE IE I le, Ub
mth Lge te ge th ole 32 or
Gos Sas Vie ne rotete ll oe eee gy

(TYTT) Ags en. (FVvFA) A gle <P ,, with ie written above.
(TVW) ART, Bul. passa (FveT) Bol, yo & P. L ee ce —) lee
YT") Bal. d for |. (VEN) Gale 5 pie.

(TYE) Tal, aye 5 59. Ap for

Wh tel! pao

i =

ome Ua see rere. 5\ ’ ace rd Syd Glipse rvy-
cons NS) 35 ale les saga A, O99? “le ah;

‘\9) Soe Gps

: Pa
s

sey 3s | J'>,,2° re ol wll 5 vlh— ay)
at} ue ill ah gee e JS ahs) ope ht uw
+ 5) uty Wee che Rar —_ Se JS lings 4) cele rrve
ae} AV ie ne Breer yr cae SS che. gd
St fe oR rr gs Reg ae

“rs “7 # 2 y=
| = at > 4) ,» OW all Plas play a? us\ T¥A-
coal Agi nie Saeresper
awe » 4A, slays ae vey \ wis Sy
spla\ jus ie fm Te aa . jlixs —t: Eat Ls
opie OF os als . 43° 7 sia cae ot ete

wy Ts ssa iS (TYVN) AC \ple yyy be

(TW) Bowel gh 3) Les and so C in marg. L aj (f155 4.

(VW) L ni 5 £5: (PV) AB kis 3. Bal, 3,3.

(TVA) AB onl = 2 3 = a and so © in marg., Bul, «4 » 3 oe oe

(TVA) A Jai for ty. (YAP) ABL Bul. \ub eyo.

(Syne Sys \Y-

5 4, T 0a err roar
cymety Lay Vdd 9 Se. ols 492? 9 Se tal
bie slats 4) s+, ale \52 pe 3) owe SS ie
Se yo Ste tle oe» I) eo) = tk
wlie, Ll Po eee Bs aa ke > a) a5 Py s
BA 4 ¢ oo) ee tels Wie e ete , GLe,|} 02) 25
—eaI 35> wolite 53) >», at tae Poo rer WH
aSy chie Li ple nhs © 35 dole §S\ 3 ees) 3 m1-
wo Lash pat sl les OL T+
SS: » 25) po a Js a eine aso ely
St oth Se pe ilo et oe Se ol gle 2
OE EY ee goes lS mae pan ae ame ant a)
My 5 ozgle & by S&S, ote oe bo & bob Ge
J GA 5 (2 o'a5 3) 6 35 AS SE LS) te
wig Aj 9) os va? aor) e)\3 9) 5 St ws?
Se ee Fy eens Nt» cde Jo. Ey

fSaagS gas Shh cage’ ON JVB oad ie 3) Ue Ue syye

(FVeA) AB Bul. in the Arst hemistich 21.1 3,0 cle Py, and so in marg, C.
(Tet) AB Bul. om. 5.
UV) AB Bul. aes or 3 je =e and so in marg. C. L wide \.
(Wie) Bal. Cn pepe A ey. tok, corr. in marg.
CAM) Suppl in marg. C. L 555 ,>-
(YW) co yee ‘| Ab, corr. above. L ome for lie, corr, in marg.
(PV) Be ke jo ol. After this verse Bul. has:
steal y ely a1 ok Vi a5: ates se jh ie CBE S50
So in marg. C with ,,!oe for ont and co for cule.
(TY) CL se GRE oye. In C 2.5 has been altered to cule. L jas s54-

ivr i 3) >

BE 9p S emt hye? Gite Jen yo gle aT ols
Soy9 of SS 6 GOSS Shee 5 tee 5 As|
pe ples wlan! > calls) (3 3) eau lo jl
picwnd ss bl te oral sees

~- sto =a", }"e.- ~

‘ogee Lb Ons rou Je Vau\ ail pr
gre gh 4 AT IL, pre ste SP jit
ca os yin 255 + xt Bape Ge Sai Si
ieon iy een

“oh 57 G3 Is} Get 5 35 Sloe Je
Site at jal nt ee ee ces os oBb tHe
je 5 tL AM en se oy oll; SU gh AS wel Gy Oe
sy eh SH é, ne > oe pile sho ook 5|
rae er M5 CFR ae Gy Ba cea tae gr wie ss
a > tk a tS - wl ps Fo oS. By re Fe
ater Chey eH ee 5 eet Sc pada 8 TAI

Heading: Bul. =J¢ for 43. Bul. om. *

(TAN) DL lee eel aw, (FAS) AT acid ABL Bul. ,\ as) oé Ox,
and so in eae C. L bas at for 401. ABL Bul. ae.

(FA-@) wy SoM. (TAY BTS tye ra ABL Bul. om. ,. A »)5*-

(AY LT als gy Jol pe. (TAA) @ Ap for len.

(A+) ac J 4. BL oty-

CiSpas yh \yF

Data Ging tr 3 le ol. Wye NAS als\
ees esl NS 5) a9 HT ees, ABOU FE oy 25,
wel pie i Gan + i> 5) da b se ee
Oe pps Hig toe, be OF ps: — > pl to
pag NaN ak at he oe al ls wail 5h
yy ld Le ge eel pe eS Ws Je de NS
Ot 2,1 5 cals wilSab oo wpe ar sobias ot
wo pa) yg el a on 6 OD nh or ul 0.
N55 5 gh = 3 22 65g HH HY Loe uit ryt0
pul plas woe AT 532 pl Se wb 3 St
i rb ay é\ Se + Ub se pos) —_'
eee 9? ysl \ys wii. ete 5! Les! 4i\, ~~ oF
MN oe 3 or PF Be ae Sh oe oly 5 OT 5) 65
lite le Ft 5 pe he le > GK oe SF
(FYAY) In the second hemistich C repeats the second hemistich of v. TVA,
corr, in marg. In L this and the following verse are transposed,
(YT) A ae 5 5S. B Wi) |.
(YI) 7, wlele, corr, in marg.
(FY%®) After this verse L adds:
Wie Jay Wise 42 ge Lhe sk, Se ol
wd Sal slate y te * cmd ol pt ad et
a3 Si eS a ne O% \elay So Sie ov

(T¥ty) Bul. » et a pts

(TYtY) AL sie jte i.
(TY?) CL 3 + I Bul. 49 cx,>.
(AL oe y-

1Yo «J5! as

elena IF on F = ss
Sree Le eae FE J “ zie , ad | a
a et are re
25— ue e psu we « 39 —- ry = > \ =
wiles - 4) 1 oS as * cceelay #3 —) Sokol 3 \_
ae, 3°) jue nl wis : Le PrP vile Baca a? on

me 2 sl se es : da uae Ss _ > a o) Fate
L555 5 es. Tat pals 4 jon
ly 5) Pa Fh ch ahd SaaS
sok. Se le gl oi. 3% ils, & LoS aly
pee eye sl a8 eg Ss a8 Las &
aN LSS, os) iF eS 2); eh Se os ag 35 26 FAte
hy ol okt go 9S lt Les) Gules #
sa, 3 Ly oH; oy ope SE Le Ras oe
rw dare ol- \ pts rs ley § Oo Ya
Be ee oes gl + Whe * § Lille «& oI
OM) cng ce ole cel gl 2b. Woke 2 me mee os rate
trl et ye L pee? I 5 WEF 2

(TATA) B tay pS. (TATY) BL Bul. 6. C in mary. to 51.
(TAT) ABL Bol. si} ure: (TAT) ft (TAY) Bul. ore aes
(TAT) SoppL in marg. A. L se tee Suwa oid.

TALS) A % yoo. In A 8 is written above %.

(Syme Gee \Wi
oro Je > yee je. eS ge sh oe 23
Ag tom Ss Jbl, 35> is «. Jor aoe eae, eee

J oF Sh oz GU isigs & Oe lot 5) oY Coe
Ago Scag ae yy, lols bh ose pl

‘AiNE LDae Nip Yaeae ae ie
eS Spe S| 42 yond i tls uty 59 Let Os Sa
de Jy cole; \ja dl ody Nek Ade eo oh oS
Bl er eS UN Fee om 9 et ol
ee st vi sce y Nigh Voshs Sia) eee
oN) ws a? ul 2,5 ASR eas Oe wy Lt —ila) Ki;
Beets aig a oe a lalt oye TT
Uh > ye ob wl aS He SUD och 5 cl hae
NES Ge eo ul Lr. SN, etm 5\ de wl che
24, 2) ol Jy Se + thy es aide ee
PP Sp os im Pre free wey a) ph ewig zap
3 IF 53 cae yl) — IF * wad Cee A_siels —ilal fare
eo 2) 2 boy OP gee Suge es Se ald
woe 3 be 8 ei) J? Fre wis 3a Ss 2

(TAN) AB Bul. Rh PE PE i CMT) ABL Bul. ., th5 3.
(TAIT) © gltxarye. C om. op. CA) CAT ae.

(4) AB Bal,
LBS 52 obs OI NST * Uy oe po old wae op
and so C in marg. L in the second hemistich has the same reading as AB Bul.
(Fare) J, 2 \aJi. By Sp ns cud 5,
OAT ao ae ys (TATY) Bal, Sm 5

Saverers Io So So mee Bios

A pt S3 Sy oS
> c= sil jue Lie .
2S) fuels Le. Lae
Ls wo SLs m es we
$33) Sh amp lou
OE pS S215 gee ly
Ree Cee etsy pega ee
Nt.» s\ dst oa J .
iat a a, Ss mg :
oS aslet ners os at 4 r
ob ge 3 JEL EPS ai, :
Ij Pe) a) di Ge
yg Bo 5 Seg 35 6
It elo oe Le a wea
$5 ol sly o> S oF +
etl \y Ke las) AS
33 ee M5 ae os
Ak edss ites AS,> cy ¥.

Es A\ ooo
SiS hee toh) hes _# Ss
oe Was ales 3\ 2 war 2,
Soy sek (Saino 251 pe
225 awe Sut .

al #

Je, |) Usb - I
a 5\ a et witty? Ws gw
won ids PT sod 2» we ge TAY

uN, SIT at oS x
oe AST tS 5 IE ob
Gt Bly me F IE oye
_$- e Se 5 sae a uy tne
a Ke > ce RS) SN
25 ne 28 re age K Ahly
ws aba bo I!

(TAM) By Soacel gage abe aN glad
FAIS and FAW are transposed.
hemistich B has 41 2.9 6 SESS hi

(FA Bol. — dels. In the second
. So A in marg. (TAW) © oxy.

webs St. (TAU) op nage. AN) a ob asl je) ay-
(FAVS) A |> 2, with 4, written above.
(TAVE) Bul. sy4 a8 the rhyme-word. A ,g)laz 5. In A |-= is written over |.
(TAY) Lo o5, orgs (FAYA) ABL Bul. ty, cd).

L

lz

(ise is Yt

aS Ms ish _ aL HF > Ue ie a AAs ais
ee e icles tte Cols o Gals ehhsila col Btn tah
(— lee Le gh + GS + ee MLSs eo yee
293 3p ed 423; > © 2y yydee tls sl sk re-
Lit le Ne eon ghee & wry oe ales ©
ie eee Loe le wa ii}, 51 ales ;\ all,

S52 ME, C54 8 lec , \ ye arly oF Se

‘se ol 5) 5 430 SN SI

a 3 a ieee ee eh edit Gel, 25 ale >
pol» wiles , Lire ah. pte ili 3\ ols lw ==3N
Ly idles 5 5 22S |, tee « -A.bS ry sawn: 3) pa oS Taco
wo ops Hl vy jhe ee 5) y eed hss, 5
AF 5 Le 3) oS ee to deo y enti 9 LS oe
Deol Gl 7 FF yo hy a ee ar a

293 293 JES AB ninth «age hoe ol ee Gl ead oe

(TAL) ABL Bul. > le Loge. (fAe-) ABL Bul. wos (pe des s
a aS and so C in marg. (FAST) B Bol. da ~ii!, = aloo ;\, and so
corrected in C and moarg. A.

Heading: C 2.l3 written above lic. L Woe , oalS. A om. ~ aA 2 are

(FACT) CG om. 5 after 4.5. (FA*4) ABL Bul. ail 3 2S, and so corr. in C.
After this verse Bul. adds:

slo ols tt ole ol * a3 3) ol a \ yhaais un
So in marg. BC. (TAee) © Bal. | sles. (A°)) A Bul. 5y ital s, 5I,
and so in corr, in C. L a5) (ples. B oy des. (TA*) AB Bul. 45 ,;,/-
ABL Bul. 3-£ j\5- (FAP) ABL Bal. oy Glsl.

\¥% iJ5\ xe

Ug ewdy Jel LL onli Le Uty Hoy J Chee Dy oe
wip vd fs ar fe SN 5) ki ol og Sh
on BF ot cdg be Sle gS 0 rr eed eal A al ile m--
2 54 Yom ol gas ee es 3x? Ay,
Aiton Wis aby — LM gt Lis ge pr Ls ae
ee S dub 54> x Vee 5 ver bois ob 7 Le
Las fas | SF as eee & 5\ GI Jo\ og) 58
= 4 pr SS 2 wd Sect Le 3 SS ge
ox Sh! 2 © En Sh. oy SS as ae cj Sill
LR slo ely SAS : be > sO) a wD.
eo Bi a Tall OF nee ge I LS
Lyte Lalo , oS 9 re Se Lsh ne oS wl
ances SO ee oe bb ote ~~ rt.
wore lil ae gio oer s cok o> eh

eas eagle 45 ae Ue Lt 5 ek oh —
S92 pr GG Weer rere
ils Ly 3 d—xile oie, His le ce > fl
WK Lb; a eh 5 5. oS ao le Sy > go Mie

(TAYA) Bul, om. 5 before ,|ji. (TAN) Bol. yl 99 a

MME Sh, sl. OV AB ab, .L Bol. aby ,-u.

0) TL leg pe Ge (TA) Tall (.-) B Bol. \-l S lel.

(T+) AB Bub. lajel. L cuted lela jel pel. (TM1) suppl. in
marg. A. B Bul. bol ||. AB Bul. 2sle <3), and 20 corr, in C.

tit) ls 3 54 \as (T%\%) Lin the first hemistich «— te
we prod S- (M4) In C gym is written above 3), A Will sl Lb. B
will 'c . yee, and so A under the line. (FM) DA yy-

(Spe Som \YA

Resa) pre Lt lel clad abe
5 SF yp sere tbe 5) 6 GE Sx GED AS GA
aS te Ohl AN LB oy oP NB OB US
wk 2S YS a Sle oy + We Gy >\> 45 2, J
eesebisssly\ Vyas qty) ule Jol e enous wie ££ 5ST
lb gpm — Lit =. — a)
NM met Vi Ae +) peta ple wo) um
ere re eee ie ae
Spat ose oko a) 33 pe sre i IS SS 5 ;\
ace ae a pv 3. wee cole Sy ee
SSe Hb Sp. a Ail oN
AG oO aes a hi; Oty we td a 2k 5 rat.
SS ee vb . oes ay is 2, ols
ALE Se pe 49° J7~* Lot 5 35 2-6
rs 3? 9 5, way +39 eo dk or ee
yt big AF oe ste ob « te le ie Fae
aes pe 2) Se + 3S, yal » ib pal Sh. te
FSP S ole Ge 9 2 Sale j\ WW 1S
ei uk Sy {sig tp ASS Se 2!

(FAT) ABL Bul. uni sy Ss aes 3 x1, and so in marg. C.
; ,= i F =
(TAS) 3S aS. AB Bul. <1)! Ley: C in marg. \, 43.
(TAA) L om, (TAY) C apparently yt for opt.
f F i a 1 ih aot = ~ Lo
and so C in muarg. (TAt+) AB Bul ops (pe, and so corr, in C.
(TAN) BL eis, slo, and so corr. in C. B sy) for ak. (TAT) Bol clio.
(TAY) ABL Bul. litle By and so corr. in marg. C.

VAI Js) pao

(Sy aS sllan 5 ty cio >

JH eiey 2 1 xlS 5o sh. P< re > oti Le ul
cant oy (aa od set ot eo SV gee
a ae Sey HN eS ork , cow oS

oi Ll; Ss ge, SU 6 eed WF eek Oy gm ce
me ey oF 5 uk Ve lol) oe Shel oe
Le yy lt aol Ge. Lo 5s lie , Glink
me (UN Va eee Gy Fey JE Lol ee lve ™
aoe Jal ¢ BB se Loe ee LET OS ey, or

oS 55 ope Putt ot + SF opts 5} 2%
ee, ee ere aS oS by
Sree eee ee ee ee
ge 2833 Le gr I EF gt SV 8 oy re
JF St a's As aS i yt JF Fe NL a
Sa Gale; ete ae 5 _S3\ 0, ;\ oy
oe who ; yar oO tae © lye J1L4 ~ Je 5)
es sl Oe ree eale j\ ol, J 2 lla te

Heading: Bul. j\4 for ,>. C in marg. cals: I s Pe ee yl»

HY oO > be: (TARY) A ‘Ss ety. AB Bul. 2% slap, and so
C in marg. L lal yp Se vlay. (XE) AB Bul. yo bis, B Jy:

(TMEF) TL opty Fist In the second hemistich AB Bul, have .¢ - me aaa \Se
el ge ath €, and so C in marg, (Tt) CS for F. é.

My tls 7. (Ftt¥) © aly 3), with », written above.

(Ft#4) Bul. 2S gh a=. In L vy. FXEA and T%L4 are transposed, and v-
rtiA is followed by v. TULY.

(TA%) A Bul. pool. Ly jo). In L this verse follows v. TUE.

(Syne By 1A.

22 yb Node» S&5 ody th de 3 Sf I
a 5 Fy S oa\y5- ) As ped | ee 332 ould U4
nity) ee GE Sys ee Sa oe Sp
HL ag oot oe eH 5)» S18) oe? Gy =
ry a\~\ te ee Nye AS! a \ persis ee: Be » Tif
comity ee 9° \ys eee ae et
ATL, oe Uy 2455 Be ELE ol Ges we:
oN SIS ge be Gd ge Aye b
LS; oles Su aki ds ole, sls ys) oF UF
ae J 5\ 4 Ji, 4.5 oi\* on 39 \—i\ sl ? oleh rire
Salas a Ps els eld Je enki hth a 3) lee o>
bees i LS 208 su S 3 wy
0S Nas Lage SI BS So 05 ope GSEs bb oy b
35 pw ole Sh oF one 2S fo oye 2H) GE OF
cries) eg od} ee Tih Ly Wt 5 ogee FTE:
Boje gil gh at at £5) digg A, Hb ge eH) OS ox
snows FS Late «Sb. aa Sicags Sc ok Sb
as \, sli sot SF + 5 Ly sos ate is

TU) o 35. Ke 9) corr, in marg. (MY) ABL Bol. 243 5.43)
and so corr. in C. In L the hemistichs are transposed.

(TT) Tyke». (FATT) In the second hemistich B has ¢.| Sy 9 5) Se.
| \ at rare) + for rary:
Bul. cp Sa} aol Ai, - (TW!) A as for a ( IL

—_ " —_
cule gh 5 culS ch yl. C spparently AN, oe yl el. Lh i y) el.
AB Bul. emp 53 45 y» oie _y®, and so C in marg. (TATA) A ass,

(TW) Cap yp ge Lad yp ole (PT) AL for y. C

\slade So9 F, com. above. A in mare. ay} surg Als J.

VAY celal is

te Witkey Cl, a RS ae Ay lee ele 3) ke Ut
senSl gle Wang » aed gh » 5
ies we? hj wy Gis eS Sie ak » H+ 5
gle She Oh. Pig Gh dee © ie ee sll Ca)
oO So pois Gion guhn gh fol Eta oes

ls Bo 23 pee yp Beer ee Bg aH as JS > ob eo TW
Se yp 9S : aS, Youn S soy 5 Sh BFS
aly pel GY OL sleeper ele
aS pool ole oy oj AT p05; ile
soe Jo tle Ae teeny Gal Lab Le ee

=e: iN 0545 ps 5) coed r seat AIS Nal 3\ we eee Ftve
Seat CMS: Fac se ; 3\ ele. Aes cole Ce \ cheek
aug Liew cou ile Gy» tou Oy Lore \ lle
Ndeahvuw eet. yt oe ES FSX
Be Sig ol ae Oy pe + tle Jods mn aS oe

reo

S~ an) Jie Wi LE Ep uiS FS oe FO
Sets 9 et ype EL p33 0% CT

= eee.

‘be i es aca y ee
wg wesley ab > e le cole 5} 44 enh oh
cor Biol ES ese
(FN) ABL Bol. dt pls <L, and so O in marg. (FM) pol. a5.
(FW) A she oe os! pe. C ae (PRvE) A 28 833. Bul. af p-
AC ,p4n\,. (THE) Tle, gel job. AB Bol. olin, 248 osu f, and s

C in marg. (FWY) ABL Bal. ole .te- In L the hemistichs are transposed.

(TWA) LE aap at te LS |b. rwy an § ol.
(TU) ABL Bul.) x 9, and so C in marg. (TUM) Bol. om. 5.

ice at ic AT

lay oly » Sse lay 5 we clilebenl
Ge vos, 5 ble, oS A, Go 3 > et
see Bp sey) GE 25}; olde Sy 5) emo 5 Le Se us
ie aa Bind ayy N's ab b ates SSS
oi oS Vos oe Sle le ee cell, -- to
Sab ab Sant SI US + onl + fl a Se Sr
<a> * com ‘ ee Wise «Sl <- egy ght
Saas DN Jue SP SL aye 0 ee He Fat ol
Re aye ideas Tera pS) 3845 Nhe |

oe 5 a25 MN Sse AU ae J rere,
era Ser VE SB St ee sib ge oS
ok Fed ty <P 5) F Ul tan 5 Sle
> wie Ce pt + Le gle \ be ne, oi
sed NE LL oT jou . ssl Pp OS ont 1m.
KU . ho als Se fe oisvalengs + pl
Shed te 3 rey 7 Ob 2S og 5 5 >
pe ole, pei | N ge how als Lb KS
bal rel pour Sw > 5! eS tri) a >

(Tier) Ful. se for a. (tL) Bol. L for ue é.

hc lp Ape tet en (Fl) ABL Bal. S31 5.

Heading: B \jle (1) > ale po ys f- A ul g pod (pe. BL Bul. om. 3.
(tet) BCL pales (TT) Bol. dgzel. (TM) Bol. ale SS.

(TV) Ater this verse Bul. adds:
the & rt ‘ iri
Al, 5, J) au\ a3 sa S A. * 5h «3 ry ish |

1Ao (J3) eo

- glass a ae) at be sck ole Wt, db ag
Ves je Ses 28, oLsy\ Pol oie gE eed ee al
eee I eee
Be WF vt ve 8, be He op uF xe ls ol
29 >)\ oleh 5 se 5 Ge + omy Jl By sa
A 9 Aye 2 Dh yy ee St) j stl oy de
LL era ri A soya uigen aS ge tee
SH AT 35 753 0 ga Al oie ae
Mich an ode deo oned han oe &
tls $e 5 y)> Werte» Ll as jk
ye dorky tay VER «<i Miod Wak oe
ji oe wet xt Sto iy oF Sink Se dee Sr
ja jl Lind 52 Ue of” « She w3) ge 2 eaten
cunt go jh ale de eal) cba @ ated go cas cle) paces

f Gacs Tet eS 4° ogy 3 SS ws,

ry F =
(Tt%%) Suppl. in marg. C. L ou ute (T+*-) B Bul. ee Jl for r> yy hs
So written above the line in C and suppl. in marg. A.
(Y++\) After this versa L adds:

oe pF ok y at Oye Jl " 03) aie ile Syke

(TF) Db pte (9) Bol. 955 ol. Ae te.
(T4) Bul. WS, 1) Gast IS 5
(AL Sle, |e (F40) Bul. ous 5 eos.

(19 A aad BL Bal. 423 5 )4, and so corr. in C.

(Syme Sa At

33 Lp S 15> r— 5) su Lis’, ae oF
wisest 2S 55 p29 1S» pty 5 TO Oy
TS et ng? cr) a Sw Cte tl fj ey? ee
3 WSS, S dae ej ot AB ert ple
@ Polo Gk aS. 6; may? end Oe oS
eh S Si Slt 2 a) > 6 Sor 93 wir ol Sie
WBF yg? 4 Fg ly ee le wi db 43 oe
bon! wos lil s_> ;/ oii wi Ve Jae) rei. @
Dales 55, g50is\ js: po Gls owas) ok Sas)pal cS ert
5S Soe Sd oh 503.6 GT 29 pt ASS , 5 5
IAS 65 NaS gr po Se lect el FG pa xt
p33 ag Lely a Le a ty eH! SS Ko wie
ES a» sh cms cel aie 43) cee am os | ss Ki
RB es SS. 5 1 VAS ops clos UES LS.
3S se Violas gad ge + ope Le) AE Se ie
Soe Mant SH ceil odo yp ell op ile pe oF
Vm LS: sol, S&S oe bs sh Sl LG oi

(FIAT) © asa. (TA) L Bul. 2a 5.

(TIA) Ap ey oh ol eiils 2 235, and so L Bul., which have fal,
and C in marg. After this verse L adds:

es ep ols ot oie § pee po GF py op

(TAY) Bol. Sale. (TMA) © pla oy 2iS) ABL Bal. par a 5) 2a%,
and so C in marg. (Tutt) AB Bul. Pn) rc) up lmlys 3 Vie ust and so L, which
bos ji\,.. (TUL) A ey) for os. (tte) A om. y.

(F144) C1 for 65. In the second hemistich AB Bul. have 3,9 443) at:
lee; 3 2, and so L, which has |, #3 cae

VAY i J,) eo

coe ale lee clolle 3. wr oh jh DEL 5 2 ol
re 5 Ht G)) HE op. 85 IE a Gib | a
a5 ASS on | We ee ott See So ee oil
rer pide om HY Loe ral a pails wb
wishiels ppl cole 5o ak b eS ual Vee wile, ly
tle ol et clans + Ub os 35 % ol bot
V3 5 ap 9 om LU oS er Glas 2 Lio Lh te
oes » \y2g plo ee wk WS oie sl eh yg ig) 8

SEN S\ Gy © WS \ SF nt oF ole
Lh ole bane SF
AF THN FF Vote SHH Ler ES SN nt oS

ops = gS Sh ey Vie Sasa os Ble ay el
oe ads, Sas fad os ae ja Acs
bie a ke rite Lies «- m5 og atthe pS a Np y Mt
go ase fro Sins SS ox SF Sh oF
on Je oat OF ue = 42 ie S29 Suse 0 SF

> \ys) 25 dom Mel tty» tt oye Ses cl) Uy of
agen ccoitlyes > 0 Sued ed ge Ce Cae

=
ae Jae \ le Ve oy) eo d= 5h wae al I= Tate
(FT) ABL Bal. s\ely 5 | isl, and so corr, in C. (T-¥0) ABL Bul.
NE a. (TOY) DV plug. AB Bul. lt exe oy piv §, and
so C in marg. (F48) C came dj. (F£) TL wthe y-
(TE) A Bee, (£4) ABL Bul. 4 92 $, and so corr, in

marg. C. A >, , for 53. (T-2%) AB Bal. gy Jt 5 jue. L dy pe >

‘ Sgne Bg 1A

kee Te Asc. 5 ca OSA see
oof BLP 9 Sl 2-5 A eon SL vt le 5
ast, tle a ot 1). com; $4); \45 ie ool
conle e N — le 3). Ls 1; ye ose ol
oti ual ees Cal \, ae So dae, eee pane a
eek AS 5 x oe StI jbo ete 45 33) F 93 22 hr
is aS 3 ele Se Teo wet oF ne Incl ee
Fs tS oo os alee cx) sab) Shige
3) Se DEN N= 5 sth» 235 ESF 4 do 35 36
ES Need 5.353 AL feel et atl, on
OF op tls Hts os EH rire yr. 53 ose ote
witht Jam cad 29) 1 ijl gl og 2 Yan 9 SS
MeN ake 25) culls Hie of tO pe Use
et? til ea Jil gh e al y ol \ ee eb aS yp
te pe ee Ces Joo peel abe jo cS ow
BAe, b\— 2 oS} et am bh Vn 5 2 te
shel, > ol seatls 3 2iS |, E-lys 3 smi OFF I=
Be \— lies en oa)
ye aslleel jo i! a ee SEAS asa WAS

Se .:/©>(2$’:£2000 SS

(T-19} Suppl, in marg. C. Lo) 5 Aue L 22S lao.

(7-4) Suppl. in marg. C. (T14) L enley sith.
(To) 7, om. 5 before yi. (TTA) Gs nee a a, \.
(TT) AT geaty nl. L lee for st, (TF) Bul. ly sl alo.

(T-18) wok LS 5 gle- |
(T-TT) Instead of the second hemistich B has the second hemistich of the

following vere.

VAt i J5\ >

Lisl ¢ See bt oe eee» BLS! js th Wey te
Fy Vb, shin pe + Se Lge Shh ot
ISS ES MN op on Fe st ak ee
2 SE 3 2 5 9 8 aS ighoas 3\ Je»
De 3 ~or? 5) 23F 05; oe vay Hh oe eal 5
Spt ples pF Arle] S55 6 2p Lr oy px wily bY.
I _ }s 58a | byt = be yt 3 mw re ss
poe ee 2) jy > Get SF prt
ls yy PD » b i tc * lpi — wel; 6S)
en 2 oaks Pere LSE 6 poy 6S
JP 5 ype gS 5B eS 1: Sip Sly tle 3) eg Sa eve
sey ah we a 5! Sy eG oe yl okh oF ol

pee eS ee So pr le al 1 i Bh oe
W399 STG > Gx by F 5 > fF be a St,
ee 3 pao agus’. 352 sal 35 yy 59 9 OT
a1 4° » J st at. ico gs) 2F sub be uit

1) B bls ,l Aas ly \jaxt,, amd s0 corr, in C.

(T-Y-) ABL Bul. a, jaa. ,) sich as: 32, and so in marg, C.

(T-9T) AB el Sanjay ppl ie po, and so Cin marg. In the second hemistich
Ge Rieu dee

Heading: AB om. Eul. é cad 3) p= ai ee cles and so L, in which
the Heading is greatly expanded.

(FY) ABT xl. (TVA) B yy F Lele. Bol. at 9.

(Yt) oC old tb. (TA) C aL eyo.

9353 eS Sa. oe fet S39 OFF
FS 9) soy > % ys Mery ae GS: LS
Rs ES » i ah Da las oe
hood Nigh ys lp-.ei ¥5\ Vx eS 52 obi;
2 Jos gp) hk. 5, 0 da 9 kee ggg ee) Lae
fe. oe
‘th, cy sl Aes
sve bl 5 uk « of, 53 HL al
=e Sadie me vce iw gee 3
Be Noa oS cS dl 5 -# Gil p= Mg
gr 3) Bj ey? él 3 ee Pp WSL OSes 3)
Bee \ Nik 5S 5 ‘ls FOI Ge
5 le MEG play Aap a te
heb ul sy #29 < eX e Nicene 5p S sh 95 Sd
ed rp tk me pg 8 a iS

fe Las 4. (t-2°) AB 53, ja, and so L Bol. L x py Fy >
Heading: The Heading in C is 425 <-ic, Corr. in marg.
(FsOA) A ale for >. After this verse L adds (and so Bul. Which has =u 9 3):
et ys p lp ah Gey * 234 g Sli FF OF
(TOA) A ahs ft. (F99) A je dpe g) eg LP 2
("-4-) B Bal. P< for 24, and so written below the line in C. AB je ae:
In C ;\.e is written underneath. WT) A To oe sks cor:

it) ‘J3) Fe

£85 eli; rou 55 b> le ig Gl
A IRS
wle le ¢ Ju Be SS +e nes fe um uy ds
wlio Sy jdm 5 ONS\ + or > 2 us “sosts cas tho te
hee Il aig bok heale et aclegle

‘Dy 0S eg gt ueapewnd y S\, 55 3 ge |

jul s ba py ANE LS 3h l= oS, \, S55
wv) ose ed S350 op een SS sh cm \ ob Cat

2 ght sly Aa Jeske ge sl ta
od ols isi wth ad grntle « we ng 2 2S of Thee
re

332 a alk eee tere 9
Saal WME alae cto oa en USS So ly
Sp) S55 a ee yl eh J sn sl of
ES No 3\ che lt sl eS SH sl \ gy) ES
Popes ee ern yee Kall go on SO
eth sor ell ez- srl Sle oe be
Vie Ss fp Fo ch LIS) Ue , bb
Se Cee ee bo SS slant BF on

(TY) A Bay gp o- (Tt) fle.

Heading: A +? us! gd, and so C in marg. BL Bal. 525.
(Ti-t) Aas os

(M4) ABL Bul. 3) 5% op 5! S pe \qlead, and so C in mane,
(Fi-°) B Bol. MS of. L casj elt. (1-1) ABL Bul. » cle:
(S\-A) BL Bul. geyei S 5. (TUT) A ale uel Le ls.

(TU) In Cr. TIVE precedes this verse.

Gu LS Lys ALE gee th Woke TL we F
elo dh BIS al) jo eet 6 ee iS NL 52 a
Sy Us je e Usjlgie’S) sak os Cea
aT a tl) ae Se | Pec rr ses A AE
Ls, > ath Wek 4 aK + Leite) 4 g9 el
eS le spe > |) +. aS | bits» Bog
aoe =i MiSs} al4Si. ry =|, |, ae a sie
ee Lil ga qphadjre cemwlin! Goh col cali,
sly gly YA se 39 bel» WE lb eee Ve oe
cube a Vg Ol +3 yy 2 elle we ye abl hv
LAS Lb JUG LS Lass a , SE oe
Po Ge ran ay Ss Aw 3 Lis gf Vile be ol
ae alge 5? PS ae aon pd 3) ak ge a3. a>
Yas Hh ews JE Vy LL, WL rvs
& lel Me ath ee Gly e prs Sh Ws al 55 oe
J36 axe Lad wy 2 294 5 + SE j\ oy FS ee GL

(f-A\) AB Bal. >» \yey 4 jb, and so corr. in C. L a bile Ft» 5
Dp sy. (TAT) ABL Gile. AC Gis. ABL Bul. oj 5- L yy! 5-

(TAN) TL Bul. sll. (T-At) © originally 25.2 3 26 ehe-| »f* with 5
inserted before sji-\, AL i355 9 2 obi! =. Bao » so any as
and so C in marg. Bul. 23.6 25 » ohi-l) las: A in marg., 14 5 ahi+lj Les

ae (F-A®) Bol. lini) 4 23. (TAY) AB Bul. 5 's.
(FAY) C Lol, corr. in marg. (FeMe) A cal plead A om, 2+. AL
de ise. (T91) CL. |e MT. In L this and the following verse

are transposed, (F-48) B 5. C i L Bul. sky » »>-

(Vth) c Las \.
(7) AB Bul. Je cep |}.

ay J3\ #2

525 pan = lke ut * 35 — ts 52 50 ae
Sr ple 5 2» BV ge oho B79 3) on at ble Le ne
elt oe 25) 7 tat ove 5) s els sh 2 1, ee lie
Ub EYE. ¢ SS on wl ge le ol He 2 J! 4
silt — | oo LAE . Gale 2 vt Ol SS aw
go st Foy ON nt Sy et o> 3) SS ge ah -)
- Me S25 ld Sa G geal ero A — S215 mito
3 Vor el oS AS ge + See, bet) Ge = Sh 8
FOL, de AS SL Soy ol
yp) alle cy) te all, 3g Roy ob le
a a oe nt eg te cel ly 5) 2) 1B pe
= jsiouka weg pity NE 4 ST, | hil; hts
meee SN Soe Slee gle eee ee IMS op , KE
whl SA Se cls 22 als cel Gea hy ee
\ys aul Nee fe Ls aE Vp hs ) fale
Se a ON ho LL. jo aiyh & & gle
<i algal taal arly Fe gee SP gies ie

(ATX) A Bol. st, Ge 5! Urs G23 S and so C in marg.
("1") Lin the second hemistich: gs 5 lo 3) 4 «iy ay 5). L adds:
Ge fle 5 2» vil vol * i! toy Lie » 3
(11) ABL Bul. alat gle. (HVT) A «Sh for 4).
(Tif?) B Bol. se) oF». ABL Bal. iS.
(Tl) AB Bul. ana é3- CaaS for 2§, corr. in marg.
(ITA) Tog) IL, ll. (181) A loo un. BC azlai. Ant 5 os an -

(MU) A ot gl. (18) BL Bul. \glyo 5 alle.
(Ti) TL Bol. (M0) at $5 “Be

I. 13

(See Go MaP

DF BL > Nb See New Fe ah ol Sie
L— 3 she | SN a S + ot ol LL te a, ee
95) de 6a Sel SF GE + FS opt 5! ae
Sees ot 3V oy 2S lee LE SL ee
5 yA ele syd pe 9 Ce Le ca ‘
Ge Ob 3 oe oe IS MN Je Nh Sv
wk» Bese Jr ols. hale 53 go) PP coal MF:
she slau 4 5 24 ols MST Nd 5 oat
sey gQlhigss LA att og els Ge cel Jax = 5) Jie
) SA SM aS is ey) We 5 ol So 3th oy
op © Secue cy \s S\;-3 » ASI ae 73 we KE

1M ol eae yl ole p ovrat Cs | 985)

i QLlt 02, gle} » « & a uo oS si wT? 5
vais Als ee ly US =o poet's irk J! ot ost tire
ems) J 9; Se Sol te es Sal ay x o che
Ja Bes ee <a) Sr ep clingy cx) US oti) cme
esis gi) et GE Sas ee ws

(Tie) ABR Bul.
ale SS Gh \ Stat ly S * ul, Ss ae oly 2 pol 4155
and so in L and in marg. C. (MY) A lay, 02S.
(Ti) oC Ue € io (e) \ ye gels with 3. written above.
(TH+) © pas, corr. above. ABL om. 5-
Heading: B om. 2id¢ yy!. AC 2a. © in marg. oie > for sist yy! ole -
(Mit) ABL Bal. p>. (TITY) Lugs cal Ae.

(WTA) Blas Ghee

49 t J5} pad

_ $= Sls 22 ype re ty eer d33y Ls lees
ded eg oy ods IT ei. ee y lel oe ob ole
aS ge elas \ Vk cog el ly oy hee
sy oe Neds OP op 5 eS bt
Le ely IE D> Oe? Sf, les 5 O53 Gy Cor of
Lesearinas sa 5d 64 yo ccd af aga “yg de j\ gle ys
du ty 5 s+ J> 5 fr os StS ysl wis,> 2
ail.» Lato Rs pre w Sela) Lele ) Lead te
lage + Ul 5 250) Ges» LL Ligalj peat AG pou Be
Ace wy Ie » Ji Sse les rj ov 5 su
eS pe a) ASH Sots ee te ie ule 3
Sip Else oO oFee Gay St 2 oF 3 , dy Obl oF ol
wiley | Le S25) te oe yt sl oS eS Sd ae 1-
ot Ue 3S a We) ed ise — BD a
eee ely 5) Fie). rs oF ge Us
SS S\dls 42 Sheree NE ae iced apa > LEgite
ae jo Lin! . t jglemes S555) im
= — \_. tive

oy dbl jal OF, + 35 a

(TV) L lay. * CTVVE) Co alyle. De astey 5] 95) Jo y fro
(v1) 7, ole ot F je. (T\44) After this verse L Bul. add the Heading:

shee 3 ola) QLD alo: gs Gee oF wh.
(TAY:) Z glass) aygley asaygls
(Y\) ABL Bul. pS y c—». B has:
Lt 52 ae ae et Bl Sag obk 2
(FIVE) TL, slae |. H¥8) Lost bl gkjy-l. In A vy. ieee follow
vy. TIVY—A, but the error is indicated in marg.

(Som Cy itt

Be PT Vas See Aas «Sk cess (A ash ES
oy rp al ony til; oy wy If ULL +}
11h; 4) sls gle lok uy» 2 5 \)\. Pe 3\ 35 or
Nl 5g Weld see ne Lest SH le ot re

Bp skye sar Vy le ib 0 olalesk sli
‘O55 opty De verte

she wal ov sh ot =! «+ oy nok Ve \ Lyf laltol tle-
Ds ce oly Js <b - diel hide in

shee ht be Je ahi eben nb hl, oe
J; awh ail je aS « ct rf — Lila
Se 3h f > i aniL. pss» $3 99095 Lalo oe
Sie: dye cal ob age cra Ne 5) | Sp te
aa SS 4 UI ole Ske » = Sx ath nl 3

oS Lakes 5 ALS) ale ey Hy obey ool

whee 3 | Ge ing 8 hte he lit ja

(FIED ZT, aceal. 5: (TAY) L, Bol. in the second hemistich 35+ ¢"s-

(TitA) ABIL Bul. \ je x&. In C the second hemistich fs obliterated and has
been. supplied in Mare. (Tver) Eul. \ 4 1 pds lL \ ls 4 12m *

Heading: The words after | -i5* are obliterated in C.

(M9-) ABL Bul. wale oke- (TV3T) A 2 lal 3 4. ABL Bal.
sate) jae oe (Fist) A oaj Jiro ee A $3 2 5.

(T129) To Ja .) 3. (Ti8¥) Bul. yk.

ity ‘Js\ A

at i ee
wi 5 Lele _ | tro 2 Ve let gk at Sey oS
View SG polit) «al Ys fr lie! ae oi
tee wor I 6p \ols . c: wr WS ile Yee
(42 Vues — PF ws Gee ery! oles S. Cage Cte ley 3 THO
gts om es Kas og sce
ce oe a ep VS ae Sel ce pt 5)
Sh te A ore si - J 29 eg Sa SH b
—F pL "FF S99 SF Be sty) 21 =) onl
_ Seta SoA) qeegs¥ Ls « Sn ji gra Sige pe ere
SP WG ST ss “pe 3c 1 ae SS
aye 35,| 2 » WANE + 258 le SP 3 ot
we le hil Aa rp Ay eiles og i tale au
tie Chau ls el ac de ust 5 SH
Det ue yo Sass ae Fc tle Shige tre
foo L, aj — bol oe G. + Bh sel o—.t\ sli
ay a2 S\ sl, Ld 7? 4 2 55, LA) sya Ss) a_>| 5
AS cb nic jie wl 2 8 or oe = s
Heading: A dla. ,l. i ;
(T\37) B Bol. \;. 1:4, and so corr. above in A.

(V0 Tt) AB - lll 5 (TVA) L z= 3: (it) A 2 5 Ley wo wie
(SPN) Le oly ym (FT) LD Sly3- (TT) Bal. in the second
hemistich “es. (Tt) Desk ale.

(T+) A ay 0.359 » L 355 jp Soap. (TA) L Bul. sly 5 y9*)-

(Syme Sym We

ay ASE, tN wey Ue OS 5 Lhe ES
ves ky ox Samgd GN 92 yO e og Cano Ne pS Ky
we PO ee he el NS oye Sal
hh ce oh Ng
Lees ol watchin 3 o er MS sal gia ' lA.
So al W225 59 sy; 5\- Sy Ope Peo eT ole 32
Jilad, 59 LENE 5: \s wee NS eh ii ne +\\
fLks 2S Lei 5 JF. els Ves Hs Ss 02% Je
S 5 ak tS el te
by dg wrt g 25, Tae UY o5, He 6 dae cig te
UL) Se et en Lele le 9 ole itty
343°) - Ais 22 5 ALS 39 + 298 sl lat Ue Ln
SWAN 25 onl Ge VU. ft Ah
oF Slat) Sell ats Nee e gee pe owdl als cele
Le og ol pe oj ote « Uy) 5) IS 52 » 2! aye MM
223 3 3} al, ZS oNS oot di \yits sus 5

(TW) In the first hemistich (which is obliterated in C and has been supplied
in marg.) AL have 5 Sue Lyte ley 5:

iW) A sag? ty! Was pe

(TLVA) Pio 3 dim) \.

(WA) AB Bul, po js), and so C in marg.

(TIAN) Bol. Glee jy. ABL Bol. uy) cose: b op acy.

(Al) ABL Bul. zl, 9 AS, and so corr. in C.

(TAT) oC ls for Sa. L woe Gly

(TAY) A las.

(114+) AB Bol. Wl 5). L lel DY.

v4 F Js te)

meet LE ke Sn th ew eS lt, Sb
ae Jeol) ole ole f5 oly» Gee cl US Py

— =~ : a.
Oo) a ap 32 er SE) et es =m oa

Hes pee

dg 3 GI zs eae 2 tS Whe 5 i) tn
Gis sty |p Vole. DES ai as
BL —S He wi? a) + BG by Le Gy HT
Jrtl » Jat AS 535 ei Bp oS> 5) os
Sek 50 ERE yl cca Ve pe pret idee) wSus ¢ a=
Joi ile L 29) > wy Jy 93 outs a7;
WL CF capes: 53648 6 <i PS oy FUP
oy 9 Sl ok eee og + 298 5S ule 2p _ Paws tito
pad oe ear adi tr FS
es |, tN zeta SS oN 5 cx) tig Uday b ob
ole ues vk, gh ee PF ast on

“9 3° = ag sl 49 OF * ‘| ura Sd 5s ny

ctr ty 1 ees 4 ih T. 1 - ; | Sas
(TR) ABL Bul. >,)a.. CTT) ABL Bul. jem soe) 355 sur
and so corr. in marg. C. C ysl. B ty. (55+) DL tng yd 2:
(TITS) Instead of the second half-verse C has the second hemistich of y, TTTL.
(TTL) The first half-verse is suppl. in marg C.
(FIT!) Bow 3 3 a, C om. 5. (TT) In CL vy. TITY precedes
y. TTT 1, corr. in C, (WT TAY AB Bul. Lo POLE and so corr. in C.
ins mel hs -
L foieg: AB Bol WF yl cele oS 43.

sa OS SS oS ee ep Sb or al
Se 5 5 Ss) > ye ee ies tus) Leis
BN cee y ao > yo rk al a 23 Vyas ot,
ost ati og JEN al. est, ao Luar vt Ap
IT Noe se CIT Se UE 8 et ed <)5
J¥> 8 ul g We jth eet ILS pls 2 gle
Soy tae yr td BB 0 250 oF UA Slew 3s do ame
cnt SIF 2 Lt 5° ue yt \ 6 Lil ul ote
F235 5» gle he Nae GS UH oe oF
wily 32 20 SS ~ he ltl 93 LS Sb oF
Ls — ie pw oS BAS oe S
Sex yu g ol Slee + U's ~ = pay eee
op fe dee her oS hh oy oS 7 wo!
tty gl le alut gd > bute Se eg
x Jel 4b a iia wt eee Lips au) om 3
Bae giayr 35h oe Os Mea F AD My ee ah cee fl

(TV) A lie gy). (f\') ABL Bal. \a, for »lb.

(T\T) ABL Bul. a.) od, and #0 corr. in C. In L this and the following verse
are transposed. (Tit) ¢ oka Bul. 54. In L this and the following verse
are transposed. (the) ¢ sle.o j5- AB Bul. a5= oyn-

(tT\1) In L this and the following verse are transposed.

(TT) AR Bul. Sux Le ut lakh, and so corr. in marg. ©. L alge

« 1 7 Th Ti. =
Lek > ure: (TT) ABL Bul:

and so corr. in marg. C. In C +4y., i written without discritical points.

(TTT) L as for pS.

Z\ >= ye Lt Spoke yee
oo a's _ lel, lyumtse » bl, » jx Mi pe oy
pre eigen + FY etl SS. bh, ya
eS iingst POON 4 pee eter Nt er wl oF
Yate 2S ot Oe FL 6 oi oF 2 ot F
oe ctl Wh nk Gp + te cary wy 9 P
ome | ppt a op bie » 25h ol mall BS 58
623 tel, ps , , Lt + gy je LU 32 5 az tre
a ere ose he bse ol vile ws oka Sai
Shen 3 oS wie oy She 5 UF abe
3 ot x 5) es 35 3 rag oS a5
le 5 pot oe SE * lee 5° > asSu a3) Pres
Sie aa ee eS WS pS ee

a sen <S a-$ 5 a5 Nae

Gee el 59-29 GN Ir OS 9 pr me, i+,
olen le ee JU! fn 6 eel ee We sbi
Ww oe Geer ow gles be es VEAL or ole g slo
ne a ele biweG oy or oO" fro » hn

(STA) Boys of. (fot) aABL bi, jw 42 5! dll, and so Bul L
a\u laol,. (TE) A as usl. In C the second hemistich begins:
gia » 2\4. See the next verse.

(T°) AB Bol. csc 4.5 cet 5, and so corr in C. L ae Lj ke 5.

(0) AB fl isi. (CTW) Bask ost of. (TU) ABL a, ol.
CTV) TL gle 3 5. (TY-) Bul. ciligs 5 Gl. B in the second

hemistich shea At 5 aS S. 8) i aes Coe

(trve) ER Bul als yh (iT ¥s) ABL Bul. cn Ja) Bide

(Sym Sa Des

Sh ae at gt ele Mateo He bl mE
Es ph, Sas IK
war Vey SIN A cose ph et
BG Gcee wlig\ ea ot Sse Na) Le S,
a oS js » rye Ap meres Ca 4 S55 Aess rene trio
oa dant > uot \ oo e wt ly ue lg e—\
pos KO: cl tl ob St le, 3
yo nS ails yor Re ele ped cls pearel Se
Se 34 3983 WO) Us 6s se ST ax) V2
Bie a oS auth os > oad ta 3) oe EN ts 5 te.
Bas Sony eyes “1. der wr ai 3) 2!)
FS es Se ol ee VF LE oe tee & J
ew Poh) & mek N.S LN ye Heo
$5 NG pL ce og 6 Sash Ld ol eS OS
ea eas g ak EG Oh e eetyle eaSe Fp oly ol tee
a2 nil; ji Paar ey wl + eh us )9 wh Sg Sse

SK geoye 29 0) UF ES we FS

(TL-) ABL Bul. Lu ,gi, and so corr. in ©. (Tel) oll 3S. Bul.
Lingts (TEN) © Gls. In the second hemistich AB Bul. have air
3} ceo uty yee, and so L, which has , >» 3) 4, and C in marg.

('TL1) AB Bul. lta, and so corr. in ©. (tF&¥) ABL Bul. 3 *)\ sf,
and so in marg. C. (TE) CO 535 lye, corr in marg. B Bul. St: In
the second hemistich ABL Bul. have 43 > 7 dad ol 3 ae and so in marg. C.

('TS-) Soppl. in marg. C. B ee (ree) A om. 4».

(Tey) TL cw wlaltol acs o! (SOY) A ol Se.

ek i és) ote)

Salid95) sale! US opel ole DB ae ie genie
ost ae ST aye Sed Call JL ble 40
ctl <=? oS = | or) aut ewtls S 5;\ 4) pol Ly 2)

S3 a) HB s or Sz oe of e
ae oot 5 >\ re sleolo leo
po et hols Oe ee

Jeg ete [Pages Oe, £3 Fog eas tas

wile 5 ee ee Set elt > a s uh! sla se
AS 3 pn poet cath SE oll ala Soy Wes cel
Cee 25> Ut 8 pl ayy comeat hoe oH) »- >
+ wl es ISS 2p ane Cx nas Vo wu!
Coy toghe la NaS nea aegees Je
0)! py Sy) S& Psat 235 5j\_ oy) a 4
53) WU = jhe Luts wees ce slag ae
=~" wis oa wl at earls, GH, Gs 15 yl
So pe 3) GE Voll Ue 6 BS OI os Lobe Ue
a5 EN oy WY Gr ie + te? Ae th, ap
WF 9 5k be 3) athe ob U5 elle Ue
(F701) B Bal. jul 5 oy

Heading: After ast ABL Bul. add Fi led phd quietas 5.

(TF) A Sb. ABL Bul. a1, (T-") ABL 2) jlo 5), and so corr, in C.
Ls =o al. (TT) B 3 o/Bee.

(TT) Tie eyle cel A adele 3d.

(Syme Syke rk

Lake AS atk 5 wl. Li; on, a> > pp
Ladle . er eee
5 ok ol ln on S Ss oe ayo Soe _ $l

si ert an Sey te gy
hs Lal ibe vis a el pa =
— + ol, eee pe S ;\ Kughe
oo 5 eS Sem: Vo gh gS 5 es ul Se oh
dy Syd oF p> lee po oy pe be > $4
SE G95 5 ope wt. wl \jag= \yq Pi ee

cele L$) S! la 3 s ele > 1: Jo o> \_S ae

A a ree sie oar Fey a IS ALS, ssl oul
wigs Whe ut Let yo e eh 32 UE obey ly 5Zi
end F242 SN Sins Soy ny p ok > 5 sie de
“2 St ohio 3} Sh =e “7 =) ws S»\s\ +e
Oud py JE log Fe Ot NI ey Uh
we Jy 2,\ Ne SSL Wey, 655k ole 2S oe
et ole ole 5 A; o edt cm eto sy

eat Use el asl er jah aS Lx. 31 ieee Sl edp
— 5 alos jy sel. 4 Ly it he

(TV) After this verse L adds:
ope whey pues 3h * nae sd gins j a is

GTYA) AB Bul. \yo ol- (TTA) DD Lal ple. TAN) Co LS L-
(TAL) ABL Bol. oe Pty and 90 corr, in C. (fTAP) L = 23 tl.
(FY) A 2 lo ol. (TTAY) A eles J We is |

(TMA) © g,59 for sjgy- (*T**) ABL Bal. shy OTM) ABL Bul. 41 p-

(TAT) A lig). (STAT) A Bul. Le ylaiel, and so corr. in C.

T.o c J, Ao

ee ay A ole Se aye gL Lap il) lat
Vs 2S te 2p ae pe bt ES GD
e—* 8:15 wh ty Sd « oe te pet 85h) met
ws ale Am eae OF Se Se te BY
am Se j) 55) Get. Se > I? t= 5! ee
sah ee Zoo J) eee ee ie ol 1) ue
ser Sl al S be | de 3h kG aN ae
Py we pe HL Sl. ert yy! tro boas >
—__ ie — 5 oSis Uiale AS 6 Sb ,& F sSu une oe ALS ttt0
Veo) Cty ole aS eh ae 2x oly gpl Sve
WM, kl. , de 26 eS Shey Lk wl p sl
Sy Sa cle ree oe ge oN Se jad) 2
why 24 I jp Sle pos « Seles gear sub) Ue
oles! s5y sa) hy po ol a) ee UB, » ye Mm.
Lub oS fits Jseu o\acghas: ple si hi >

TY) B els cl jl. A Gls S (TA) B tu a S pe.
(tT) BE pe ot) 3) B i ke 5 i. (TIE) A pesos.
(TT) Bee Gl eed. (TTT) © in the second hemistich S ole*

cag). pik i le, corr. in marg. B Bul. 5S for ‘s

(TTL) ABL Bol. “sy ,je- AC ath § 5). A cle a. B poll».

(tt?) After this verse Bul. adds:

SS te ae A Te hs el oe oe SF
(tT) ABL Bul. lol vel ye. (700) After this verse L adds:
Dine ot ote 2 OF * AM oly bal cel one

("Tk-) In C this verse follows v. TViT. Vv. TTL-—TTLY are suppl. in

marg. B.

(Gee Go fr.

Is ies Ce a Ll
Stl DEN Se ed LL ek ey
oe on ot ol otk Pie
Ct Bie 29% ny 29 Ue + Ce + 5 oS als jo
eats ajo gf Gide eye 253 3 wl | ancce
rae hi Sh ig des Sh eS 9) 2h wt gor
CJ =e ve So ocie e + US ae
SNe je sh als, ij 5 Sarde OAD e 5 sca

St =1\\,4 _be 5 oS. Sie Jr 5l ay F fe 5h or.

a aa .* a a re
¢ yolsl a > stat \ > Luo Jal

3 afl —s; asa, ee 3) at? 32) Fw =
Usa LS slesl at pe ee a I ley wale

2S lo i vt tel. ese ke se ei \ oS
es lel Ls j\, = a Se; he Jee tt ot F
Si iin ae BLS joatle 525 Aa \ne 3 wu yoy? am 5 ttre
ooaraede § be shloS fy + 4 a3 te I AS nd

(T\T) In the second hemistich ABL Bul. have bbe je j! t\ f=» Oar , and

so C in marg. After this verse L adds:
Vjee kta! sag | ylel ahi; ei, 224 Lae oll ox

(OTT) AB Bul. — Say pas, and so corr. in C. 1 awlea ltl.

(otto) a a LAs oe tit) AB Bal. > 323 5 adie og fli, and
so C in marg. and L, which has ae 4 d5 jas. (FETT) A nt by.

("tT°) CO. for a. AL 35 4 chee) pe a 8, EB Bal. -jue! ss 5 AS
aS, and so C in mang.

T.Y ¢j3\

Je a9 9 29% 22 GS oe oy ry SITS NS tre
Ve oe erie tN ots t bs ES dle gs
I il, 3 Vy ee yt Liel, F1 ey 7
a ter Ce eae eb ie Peer Con
nas SLL hed; oe NS OG 3 a oy

*

Bie aed) WLP SF OB, Dobe
ihe? St yet, V5 ake os Qakyy gpl oS Vs Se
le I oS; Ler ter M S | S Sop oF
Bj ees LA dy wh Bat Plies y ud we
253 ¢ I ws sli wr oe le WH! OS jw IF
Lal. Lb Lat oF wb. Liens ae St oS on te
wo 5 te ab Ne eS ots OS
FH ay 954 21) tbe sh alle Wo cE
yy cole be j= Za » Lo pas Pa Ly) aS
op 5. J a4 4 3 uy 2 2S cel) olh3 lly gpl
Ss 5 5) 4) 5) es oF ps, of de oS trv.

(eo) BE sklaZl. (To) BL ay0%, and so written above in C.
(TTA) C os pie. (t7°t) ABL Bul. old 3\ ‘d 3 Atl ghia, yy, and so
in marg. C. (FPL) OC ol for Ee GUN) Bul. , ad le
(TY) TD sele. A pel oi (FT) AC possibly read Li) so).
(fT) ABL oty a. Bal. ats y ?.
(iW) After this verse L adds:
eed ANP te oh pe * Stig at, Ut, Ll 5 S$

Fe yp Sl Op Ou, ~ Sak oes et Fee neers

‘Sym iS Te A

AS Ly oye S ho aS She Ey 52 iol NS ox
ols us| Stas ‘5 ay) ile » 2), 3h ou, +! it on!

ND agi 5 SG gy hey Sy lo Oa GL
‘Si de Luo > 2

NF 32 SUE 5) ste e ole lie Gg LE og
fF GIG of SF #\j. AS) Pretr)< int wd tho
25 ge 5 25) 5 WE sy ay ety J 2 wy) 49 vie
iy = (975 <3 2 Ess rok oe 5) OF adil
LoS yt ge 32 255 6 WS ol) lye We eae
cmp jee SI lS. Soe is be ee
oy She 5h 5 cage? Gh sels « LS le 5 ol oh ae: ec
Le ods Ar YLe . Le — » cs INS
scone Heim yet S65 Ne ely 52 ULE» ret
wo! yo Le ag Ge og ov 28 16 ak oi J

(Tr) ABE AIS \, sil S; and so corr. in C.

(TET) In C this verse follows the Heading.

Heading: L Bul. aad «i. After 2, ,\. A proceeds: sels oe
eelsl ad > 5 ocle lo bl.

yet om. ». In the second hemistich ABL Bul. have ,2 » » wie
che} Oo) geey, and so C in marg. ('¥£9) Coin the second hemistich
(read c+) ee ; SS Vyicna, At (read gu, Ais) Cu A), corr. in marg.

(TTL) ia in marge. CC. ola BL 5. I som ecaaal

(FRET) A el pe Orel) Com. 4. Boj « '

r.% i J5\ 2

eclatiege Wya5> 9 a9) Jo 22 leet! il s\ 2% oe
123355 Weteedi BL eel. oS T all GL Yo
Bu Lye J Ue GE Ut Sm.
Lisal jhe * 511 a gre) ee o> en\ 1 3\
L, — 4, “srgle jie Loy oe ct atl air \ ej 3S
wet a JEL he oe - a BFF oS SF sls 3
op oe Vee S gee Nh 2 op? Oe ld we\s> s\ ale

oS 3 oust us SF yl eye pl GF F oo Bt me

23 ok) A) v3 Us abi s S A Js}
Sy ume) be Ob) ee + Lis Ss Sil J3\
1 Sos gly hs eo ete Hg SE 5! Ob iS
p—ttsy vii +15; 5). Ss lel pH ol
rule ieee eee ae
eli sliatle Col tye eelnl slaty Gl oth

—_

cha S 3h at oh Wl 9 © OE ory Dir oo! on,

(fTAY) ABL Bul. £23,|. ABL Bul. ¢223!. (TT3-) ABCD alan. AB Bul.
Ly woke tly fore tylel, and so C in marg. OM) toe § OL

Bul. jb it. After this verse L adds:
Sg le erane Fey Ke tlh Say ely
ie Ls - es as =
8 ty or 5 ui £ * Sz bse cba

OO) BL ose ie ji. (VOTE) Te es gm pal.

Heading: C om. ,>-

CUUTY) De cee ru Ne. (th-*) Gin the second hemistich ce ass)
conto ly'e, corr in marg. (TEND LP UAyly- (Ti-T) ABL Bul.

sl a Papas es
oleae 3 ue Tr oO! aH! and so corr. in C.

I. 14

(Gem Sy TA

ent STN 5 oF LG Fe et bs Ge 3) eS oF
BAS og SF +49 oS 5 SF sx gp | HED) 3) oe
pe ple NE 9& « sh Suleb 5 oF 3} 5\ se
yp lt hb wk ES fa ele Nal
cp gpl SS a3) wo & egos shi cha ra diss LS tte
Lie IS 4s piss Laas cake oe 5 de cyl ya as"
Bl Se ois Sd ie od gE
aS GG ps lye. ae yl at FS SS oF
FF oat ee pe gle LG - SS 3 al
oo Sed , ir oe gh et ed ae
op ee ee? ole = oy OS Zi oye peer

coulS 5 eee molt ep a weal st wale ~.
a Saat oe oS 4 oN Noe wt tw -
3 WL! V welt 9 ber Jo + 2S leals o yal SNS
—p ab. Seu a5 Sl Ce atl aes Gulie 355% The

ans «ha ans weit, Pate Fa) ope

PA Le Pose aoe J a aS dé 4S gh <eutd 5)
(V1) av Sy ee oe ees

c—) \. 4, which is written above in C and in marg. A.

(YT) B Bul. a =t,, and so corr, iu C. (TtYT) AB Bol. a1. 5. L
yp uly S. (STY°) A laslt 22.5 The original reading of C is uncertain.
In the second hemistich ABL Bul. have gh} cpl ciel» p28 3S $+, and 20
corr. in marg. C. (FOVA) AB 2dy &.

(STAL) ABL Bul. Glus. B deny colle} slat ohS opts and so AC in marg.
Bul. ,) oly ,. B Bul. 10 for 1¢-

(TAS) AR Bul. ae sy! s 56 5S oe and so C in mare.
(TAT) Bul, coy Sep (STAY) L Bal. sls.

rvs eens.

wes roEre Sse) GLS sid? uw
oan ae “lt Ar —Y) ere Las 9S ce \e
é% OP Em et pt Sh £22! 1 ols 3 fF a
Ms el oy 23) p¢ Ge ley > pel fo L
wie pp ol 3 xo Aye Sle oR wa 5 Sle uy AS S) rere

eth ah oles 2 ge 9 2% Je ttl ob >
odale 5!
ye wh S05 Lele os cop, peeee BLN 2
ie Wael Asa jh 9 pedo © Dod SM Ctigge Shae gh cme
— sl» 235e 5 a ye ay Pe sw! 438

am

a

BE G53 5 Ce 3) ta 6 A ot) OS 5 ove 5
Wye i) ey pee le eee oe ee ee IML eur.
We sols el, 5 = S25 « Liat 5 emg 5 aa lo od
3 3 63 sa). < Sof <3 ery," coal 3)
— 8 eo) bal whe ee. he ol 3b Sib gle og,
we 5 Cee ple lk. _ ih oe oe Se ple
woe 5 pd y Uva de. Weis he on ie ee
Sal i ae
jae ee at vp oS lide

(T20\) A om. Suppl in marg. C. (rere) Suppl. in marg. ©. L gy jae-

(TEM) Bal. Ss zl se oe! ph. (AT¥) A gee. B Bul. olde jh She
At We gue. (MOA) A, ep pt 9) Ady, and so L, which has 5}
for ,). L Bul. ,, 49. (TE) Bol, aSoS. (CET) L ray sd. Bal.
28}. BL ath. Bul. 55. (ETT) Bash, 2. (TET) Cotte Le.

(Spe Gye ri.

hh
+

ms 30 op SN ooaly he ge 2 5% sl;
BG wel peg yo eo AN; _-
#6 ow) 5 rl wile 33 ue oS Jay AL
alyacd wic\ ~t ee Ave stadia) So mash oS
oe si aL | yale «> pn 3 pee CSO Yer
a oe uA [eer s 3 o> 53) gb'ly
\,_Sh53) n= ly autls ase « \, Sou) > abe eel
el Hioph APg GAB eg — gep\ cyet sepia _ pla, th.

ing 4s calal Brg SF et 9 VN oO)
ee slush oy roe a oa 331 Ay wes ay aa
Baa He pak nae eho 38 45 Us bee eo
ar all Re ed leg Geli
ge fo nt nd 9 orb > A3y,\e a= 8 rte
Sous Ft 5 WES ery I Get
3 2 SBN Soe oe shal wre lle ov

ool ¥ op GM 3 lag eel gk Le ol aS 42
ae yesh Let « Sigdoek <oNebs yO EN
sh stuttt alba es iad Je 5 \_s ter-

(Mt) Oo Ls be. Th-9) © | te. (Tea) L dle.
(FET) B yl, for yj. Lb Fy 3%. B aa je, and so in marg. C.
(TL) ‘The words 2)> 5 Fe wp are obliterated in C and have been suppl.
in marg. (Tiie) L cad 9 yl (TEV) B Bol. cud ed se
as, and so A in marg. C has cm, 5: but the remainder of the line is almost
obliterated, and 2:5 cod has been suppl. in marg. The original reading appears
to me to have been 35 .. (81%) ABL Bal. ¢-! for yt. AL sas af.
(ver) A of. L SE ie

rit iJ) 22

— ES. 3 ws) aay 2 S, 3 __§\j A)
o> Sle cae ols be be 5% ctlo,! 5) oS dle \,a
ccmg) pare NG Se Nica oe oe cl ee
rae 9 maton St oS Fae oe nt ah
—) Et MS ee = eat lille sey oy Wb Le
ip ol eo ee a3 5 tebl 5 ee u

i eo -_t
3 \s¥ CoA 6 hk Ger al * =" a" Listes eee | 7 HY
wie » wiles in + le co 5j\ W Sle de oy

“‘SSyyo 5 gb fe ” liz 9 ols eS sy was
pd 9 Gee Ve ae ey - pl Ls Se
28 eps pp aS le S$ + yp PF cyhesial ohhh. iS”
distal JS 59 Es jl eee re
le oy) th, als ob. Lie ale eh aid olin ww
585 ay ae Se wy oe wile 49 3,
Aina ae she ae oles A, 2 hie
Lie al oy ot) Loti L&, ae ee ee

(641) ABL Pate. for S55, (T£1-) Bul. Glo , all.
(F200) ABCL pela. (iV) ABL Bul. gly sv- (Feit) BL Bul.
x \,,. AB Bol, a\>. ("20") After this verse Bul. adds:

tre of ak a gai, 4) * Tis 2? sos sg 5 UM»
Heading: Bul. oe ls
(VENA) T, ule pig \ 8. (20%) In the first hemistich A has py, al
ss
Saal tt > cee y BL 4 ye Ger typo tne jal, and so AC in marg.
Bol. wosel 2 whetay \ che In the second hemistich ABL Bul. have les;
Ads fully Pa 5. (TEV-) BL Bul. , olé. (TET) AB Bol ape op

sue ;) oL as 3M, and so C in marg. L Seay yal 3% 3h.

(Spee 1S rir

wth 6) aa. — ll eS a 5 2\
as RUNGE aod Nib ge ner es s\,
AGH SEE Mi peli. eilig ach p51 Pm
pews S cpl Se eo" en ee an =~
sup SUS ob Se tay SB > 3
Lense & (all Gi3 Y. \s eh be cutie!
ae <3) slojl Sr HF CNS tos
Ls SS o> Wb ype Le el yO 5S 5 fy
eel c+ 3 | islovle monet a3 | (S\Laele
do yh 35 oF oe ge fee ay GL 24; Jo _p cose Je
Wp ad 26 de SAN. Lu ey * Soa oul it
cg a Sern
— se ker 5 rake, i BS Lyk wl oor Sh) tee.
Sag hes + lt L leg ol ye oe US ov
* FP 5 \3 asl) 5h am + ole whi Vee
> fl ot db wel. x feeb SL 5
Sle, So ew ls ol - te Al; me (8) G3 Se 3)
fe 23 le atl Lie es 2 _ Yo wip tee
dor J IS V, oh i. ous iim 2 sb @
=! Vota Slo, co «5-4 et o Gas rl.

ES we 295 bier ays on Flt G> » 2 Ss

= ————w

(TLTA) 54% 4 obliterated in C and suppl. in marg. ABL Eul. Ja 3 2S pe
(THE) Apr cull. (Fe) B Bul. de jla! yay2 52 gw Uy and so

AC in marg. A Me ales 1 obs
("£°T) Suppl. in marg. C. L om. (FEOR) A) am.

cee eis) feo

as Cop 2 srliv + 5 — CO ee sa\%
Sie b ae He 9 8 1 Bg y jl Jie Jal
aut) oa) oe eal, e cL ype yg
soil gh) sy 8. seh ght, » i =,
SFr) Son oe woh aS eo alee, 59 gl de oS 5) we
aS ps gue 3 Sie, + tb lil Jo als hse
See | Beg CL a ilis \, _ i es
ately: Nya Vy MS ves ariey ue |

Ls jlo oe hb ulti eg » Hw, ESI wt se

= 3 ee ~~ 8s - ae ale ulin Gimp
2,

Lies \ te us ne Las ae oS t0..
ok $M Far .\ Mi 5 eS vials ha lis

La j 5 cee ad) a —s Lejss Ee Py a ft
wt 4, 235, a 3 S. al py iS — 5 js25 &
(F2M\) ABL Bul. , yas i jf and so C in marg. After this verse L adds:
vw sole JIS Tale © og 5 Ss, 5) the, Jeo sl :
(T8%) C probably 4 5 42, corr. in marg. Bos 5 of. Lot a. A kl 5
(Tie) Lo dle &, (TE) Cl, st. (Tktt) AR Bul. om. L
Ne ara Instead of this verse AB Bul. have:
Ls Grose NS © 1S eS a te sl ogy
and so C in marg. L has both verses, the verse z= fy coming first.
Heading: Bul. \im \is 9.
(T8*:) ABCL sla. AB lic lL 23), and so corr, in C,

(Wl) a oe tah.

6S pm LS ge Pit
Si; Pe Ls a:\ 3 ps S, sod sf oles.
Jas gle, ol wad 6 3je Jie 5 te 38 9 1H
ree Sua 1 Or S, sty Su & Ae 5 3)
NS ey lo 8 Ne ge 8 ON 54 ge
335g Liles e—s\s 2 jhe But é% JF | Vr hie
le) 3, 1, Je e Sy out « Ly ke LA s45 ee 18
eke Niatyy catle: 2 Wyedp ect glans Cyn AEH, 3 jh mt ThA.
Layo ot tle ry 95 - LyhS ll 5 ny is
Sy 3 abo 5) \ous. 54 «4 Leal so Ll a

= oie 8 —\S , 5 brats ol ass wo! oles,
eS Jas ue 55) 5\ ae Lee et ee J)
ork ls Late urge ¥° eats de YO! slic <3) tee
wir 3) >,\> “je FB coped ey
ae > ah " Ae ‘ 5 ed gdas 9 ceedgtt Kb;
J> emg) oe b engl b Jo hil; + ae Le al oS Le! Je
eS

—

(TLVt) B Bul. SS, G5 st o 3, and so corr. in C. Bul. Sa} p>.

(FAVE) TD asl wile y (TEVA), Eh: \e5h

(FLV3) ABL Bul. | Lint? > 1, ye and so C in marg.

(T4A-) ABL Bul. ke 5s) aes VW Vyadp and so in marg. C.

(RAY) CL St 2 a: (FEAL) TL, Bul. rT jak.

(S2A°) AB Tio, for #lt J, and so corr. in C. ABL Bul. \jleug cu ,0
cui, and so C in marg, (241) AB Bol. 2} os » <3, and so C
in mang. Le ype 3 ten! PP su. CO2AY) ABL Bul. ot) 5 ur 3
le ,\ 52> 5, and so C in marg. (TAM) DE lis te. (TeA%) B om.
jo after AL15. C oe (ty b. (Mt+) AT ale.

ny i J3\ *

ce eh Vg) omy, 9938 — i a, hs xy \ tor.
Er > 82 ve ws J. Ge > oseeh ie a) Je!
Ve wal Sas fh ls. sar 2 yon Ca pecan or
be, jks 5! pale: wy glee oy gh FF ot
oe sul. $5) poe 5 ye ae S335 A
Sp oo} Soe sul) de. _+\5 ig oe Jtls le my 59 tere
35 9 2 OE oe pus GE oe ee BY Sy oe USE
ut Fg ew Ga SH. A pe at Le Se
_— i as | Laer le 3° anal _— cS a) dons L,
nS: oly Saat oe Lae pg Lay’ ls Yin he
om 5 bs e—ts Se ie ae ees rar A555 | tot
jet ts pe, law, lps, a pt ls
Ji SS, 5 5 S, alwys jy“ Woy Leu
Gle wie 3 he cle oe GLE an ee iS |,
Liesl pS 5 Sb Ape Le) DL — al |
wi p! IS fr ot wie 2 pro oly , uate
‘e AL 55 ls Oe tot > mos ly
25. Fb Ao \jl. +1. Nepean e ut hil,

(TeTt) ADT, Pe af ee 45, and so Bol, which has ly

= =
and C in mang. After this verse L adds the Heading al Js Liles Af alee

cat Oat cp DE Spel & play ade. (FT) ABE Bul. 5) ole jury
G3 9 2p, and 80 corr, in C. (FoR) aA cle Gc. (Fett) TL om. y.
(Toth) A Bul. ah lb. (Tete) 7, che py \2- (Taty L ee

inion AL ese gi } Jae éL.B Bul. have:

and so AC In miarg.

Bo oe rit

Ur aerS 9 Ue lip se. nek. Aree eNcy Ss
STEVE yes coentl 4 \, lie « oA Lbs) og Vt) cet tone
Shs ae OG dich ls £25 wryly Sy wy) of
aia GP fet ne lel tt oye oll oS
= aca ave haat Oa
oe ane ae a eee

4 jo

> op A Ye eS As S& 339 92 0?
dy mF Nd; 5 >»: Sr ae ee ole tee oy) Se
a a ole Lee Me gH a
3335 9 ewol) 29 si ~ abe Lite Jib job ety
ple ole Ct aay oS be ke tT gle Se tere
o\ owlng suS ley, eg) eal 5] oF 2S NS;
oy 9 vty SLs! sh agi ee ole 2 2k oF
wiles Gaus wy, >> eae aoe $3 9 WS
ea 3) ate 22\;b near ALS 5} bb

—— —=y

(70-4) ABL Bol. 26 os ch 3 < (et) eo tae

(Fee) ABL Bal. 1,4) , ly \jl ss. AB Bal. .- lj. A om, 3 before sla.

(>) In the second hemistich ABL Bul. have ji ce! As os ih se Fs
and so © in marg. PV) AL shee 5 oe dal \e, corr. in marg.

(To-%) 7, cp for \, (T11) BL Bul. ig cel te Va oe} vel, amd
so AC in marg. (TOUT) CO age ge oe ei oo tej) pw, corr above, The
words following «,5\j are illegible. LF .- (7OVT) ABL Bol. ol. oy
a l= 3 p's and so in marg. ©. (P12) 7, r ee.

; =

(Tow) ABL Ful. ntanalge 5 Le aa 5. (Very) ie aly aus L an | wr Le
L Dery jl ok. L Ale us (Teva) ABL Bul. che 5}? a Fay pau and
so C in marg. (Fev) Do 6 sls eri gl #1.

rit i 33)

Bete WS) oa 8 eg SUES VL ANG
rH pp St 2 Se bee SG ul J 9 _
le * stp So ge meen s Sth 5 Jal ate ye
salt hts be 9) SS ale eel SS al oie re ile to
wi \y PF) 5 es bs A> ls \S
we ¢ os 5 Jo p> 22 Sato hy te Lite 52 ol
ssl So— od) DAE ye le 5 85 Sy 5, wl ye &
sy Shel 6p 28)% 55 23) Si 5 ey sale £
cee ee ee See Jal yy 6 sl, Ee ke Sy~ S| Stew
peal tS I x—\5 Ny petge open) Cty Ue ea LP One
ee he) aah pete Te pF at - oF ol Je & ib ip
Lt oN rp SE ighil gpa LS galilaio ly poe
vats yl oy oo SL. Lay 53 a) 49 Ly sl,# Jo
AS 3) surg Ls abel lie she jo aul eno sale Jo rev
eloilty yey it Oy? ole elo JL ae
“37 le Os a HE ay oF WL gas ule 5
53 oS dale 29 +5 uF 3 WF s1|,t 5,
—ie ile «3b cle, ih eee ul wis: Su & Jo
cent | ae = ci oe 0S 6 cid, it pees ae

(eV) AL Bul. ees ee 55. es and so B (which reads Jia.) and
C in marg. (Took) A Bal. 55.2 4,9. (Foot) r, Wie se

(vet) Tol. ja yj- In the following passage (vy. TOUT—ToYT) L always
as\,* for ts\,c. (ve"k) 1, Bul. Jy for = (vous) TL Bul. 49 for §.
ABL Bol. ohyy .-=- (Tov) ob. Bul. ul Ne gs

(8A) ABL Bul. yy c—3, and 80 corr. i" Cc. (Te¥-) ¢ pill L.

(F991) © 354 wh ds »- (FOVF) TS for j oe

iS gm Fy TVA

— RS ye taut le cr ws - wey Jo los
es 3 \, Sa 0 oS 59 = leet lj pete iy ee bl
x, 25 Ne Wy £ gud 5, Su a yh; Saud come POL:
Lie bey WS JV ody. Billy AS yl ae F
I~ aui's mo He 1. Jy 5 4 cS ele El
eA AS aS pega: Sve) ohh meme pe se OREN
moe 95 a VRS oa Tel SS 52 os oS
= eee hy al en § 3. DLE 5 nYe, ae Flt
Se ul , 5)! peu oe LES ee ee
Ee RE OE,
I Le 5 Le i es CL lee ey i 5S,
nk « Mic, win ik gal odo
elit Voie le Le S. sl) oi) is\y \jhe be + tee.
ISS Sy, won! fot 3 + obr slenple lL wh »
Pegs Vga: o, se ie Se ra
SS sete 9 Cae lel. Ula 9 aed gt st oi
Sed they 25 Cg do 255 4 Lee re Le
Wt Ulle Std at tee ee
a Mgt ols , ag ee

(Tel-) AB Bul. «i! 5). After this verse B inserts verse TOT", with aur for
2Mi,. (To81) ABL Bul. *\ sl Sol). (Fer) N51 I.
(TORT) ATCT palin . (Tet) ABL Bul. § \ee, and so C in marg.
(To) LaF fy). A de yo. Bul. dy oy Lays py.
(T°T) Suppl. in marg. C. BC Je £. (Feet) ABL Bul, |) ju ly je> ?-
(Vooo) L peo! AL “i. AB ak
(Tool) Le yp , for l1,. B Bul. «i wp.

a _itleo ee seek > pS NE Ei
— re coal . a Sails cee “\ aa) fole

a

Lm yes SS es ee ol oss) ee sake) yo 2
dle ol wa)? Nsoly osc 5b 21 52 Voll hi ye
oD 25 eS oth eee ed wo) who = bil eS
Sere ger SS Les jt . Lee

- = gg

Sunkes\ Lion. jl ate. 2dS Ce LE ig ne.
wt ylodal esl ht WF Se SN is S51, 25) 3\ Us
BS ERAS 5 patel pie de te Gi Se OF we J
that aed Aiea Oe
eth 5 ee at P| peak} © ene tll never)
= wlie ; Sep Fe se ee fe ot

22 9 See BUF a? + op rea Pl 55

wi5 “ies ae 5 5 ee . a oF <i Fl By a5
‘SI dude any le yj? wy 4d 4

Hd :., r , : |
L—— cls, d5\ 5.8 . —_ i_s|\ #\3 rea caw ail;
(Tete) ABL Bol. Ye , A ol 44 59.9, and so C in marg. After this verse
Bol. adds: yltél eel od hii a5 © glo Le po org hdl
(te1%) aBCL ,\,J\,. (M-) ABCL sail, Bul, nail.
OF) Bol, be VS ee ety hy y pie eZ. (OE) ABC Bal, ya,
(M ected pe oe 2: Re ie clio, (1 A om >
a i\ (Wles) Bul ray ab,

‘Span ph rr.

> Nee eee > 3) a eee
om pS Cube (AE 5? We a IF
i ete sks Fa 3 ‘ica © x5 wo sp Si 2S cc S
Fe yr 5 SF oe 3° . pe rine dle ah 3) Sm) ToA-
sl & lL tate Nee 5 yw hee: Kart Be Noe sly des

Gy ee | hers) . 5S | yaar on Fg

(S\e oes oe S \;\a > ar ME WS oo
ales a 5) €>03 le & x55

eo 4 ’
me at ereN aes a s ple | 3 Pe ‘a sie es toAS

NS Geek Cj ile to ui tae OV Pol >
le ewat* 3 Aa Pomel Glaze be 2
M5 oie pbs wh ye 8 205" ae |e
oS lols HE 52 ee 5 \ Nd 2S Gast ie
La gots wk oe LS Le old aS tr
oe wl sl go p> ke) ee ul | eal oS Cs lausl
hos vla Le a gp? <a aS ol j\ de

—_— SS —_—_—_————— ie

(TOV) La) p> ot bin TL oh gt oat Jl (Tovy) A L pial.
(TA) Ty els. (TOAT) CL pps. (Te4T) In the first hemistich
ABL Bul. have os rey A Fr x er Se, and so ( in marg.
—— ba :
(V949) Bal. ipo y |) tae (FMA) B oli <= |5*- Bul. 28 ue
(Ft) AL lle ale. L le ne: (Me) L Bul. oly for gM. be y ale:

re i J5\ Abs

iy) Se pale at thie . -5j) Rsk Je af

wei OL gy 4h TSG
L— wae 22 ilies vj \— sols wally: ¢ 943
a i SF Os om We + 097? Jo er igs ASS
o cin 35> rere cree © Setdle , + \bl. un ssa |G
ie hala: Ah tehidl is » Ss

weeds ree er 7 Nal. 3 asa * “em eas gee Te
eRe sk Sty we acall eo tgkeo 7) \jiunll syle.
Ls, a,l> aS: 3! \ we ws \s iu AS ‘_e 3) lt
ills» Biya. cami S AS oy ae Ht 2
Nyce desl) ele jal S « . je be 33 gb eee OF

aa 353 he ail Ss aa» ae 2 ig oly 2 i\bb TH:
a eee we Ut 2% tro ait 5 et Shi
DB gle SS Na 1S oe UF Z\ gs |y cus jrly ol

— Ee

(MM) coo die. AF jle. © ae ay. ABL Bul. a+ sls, and so
corr. in C. The following words have been altered in C. The original reading
may have been 25, 255 je. (TA) A om, (TU) A om. BL
Bul. in the first hemistich: y5)> 2 | Lat joe Gee, and so corr. in marg. C,

(Vu-) ARL Bal. xt is, and so in | marg. C.

(In L the hemistichs are transposed,

(TWA) ABL Bul. ay 4 5) a2 44., and so in marg. C.

(Ti) AB Bol. w pyle 1 5 », and so L, which om. ,. In C —) is

uritten above lL.

(oe Se TTT

ae ne SE EEE———————_——————

Ny J me \ geo cul ATE re ah _— sas — i TU:
a — 3 Sa : ar ages Oke US 5? oly &
93 Sf pe he i) ol yg oe lee >
3324 IS, > jy) de repr Sh ety) 2
ame pF \ els 5 oe se Pe tee ee, !
pote 4 wth Gey Le, be lay 2 S else & mi
39% 9)9% 0, wl cn LG « oy yo? Ge 5 Le,
Wal sj 55S bate ly, Se F 2, Seg? OFF
L. Sa JL we . Lust 8h gh oh cd
mee HL Shee yy et g 2 el att
hie, A Cees ae Jo5> 3) Set 4) wx ail ee.
ty Net Not HE ps 8 5) oF, ab i 5, 90
en 5 9 pat duel pee 6 5 I 35% esl ja 3S
JMS ole ob gli. jo» ky ob bi p- vl act
jana REN us 5 AS OT Shige
lask - 2 3 “iF coh 6 celta tylS cada! cree

i

(T\\") Avter this verse L adds:

cli oc Jame © olgole GP

(TUT) AB sash 2. Bul wavk. L axl y. (PMY Bul. ay say ,-
(VuUY) BP Bol. y re 4 ne and so A (which has “a and C in marg. L
py ays gS: TWA) CEL 5.

(T+) Bul. om. 5. 1 jis AE 5.

("F\) In A the hemistichs are transposed.

(TW) ABL Bul. ye gs) as, pits! 42 Gye, and so C in marg. ABL Bal.
ue, atyi:1, and so corr. in C.

(Te) ABL Bul. 2x60) Fy, and so corr, in C.

TTo J pas

3) Oe oe) SV ,05 > ALN le le at
ts o\K cle » Se

Jy 1 | | p* 2 *
Ar Vole 5 a Liles» at. eels jah ak
J coe. hs 8S Fo 3955 ory 2) V6 SF \ygS a
3555 5 asi, ds & sss rk ¢sl , ee
ae ee Oh 4 oe <P x cts Ia ols
oa yg Ove pty eo ‘ ee pe bb NE oe ™-
or oils 7—t: A 39 eS L, — y> _ gle
5) ssl Spt = » a, 4) alo » ‘i ota ee
watth oy Se tlie Is « ee dit
WS ag 9 JES \ee eww el oa | cles oe
Sl eine: DM Sy 7 © lye 5) SIL 3 jee Jo ot te
daly xl Jo ak oe BS > ek} g 3) we Jo, &
Fale S Gre > be § 345 aa oth oF yl

ty NS KS 3,
ek, bi, Ili Cie Mee. 2 eT 5 as 5,5) 13;

(FW ABC nshas. ("4) B Bol. om. In A this verse is followed by

another which is evidently a variant:
Je2 a) tat oe poe Se LS ol gle ol F

B Bul. have the second verse, and it also oceurs in marg. C. The first verse

has been stroked ont in C. (Mist) ¢ SNe 5 pls. AB Bul. wks ee
ad} gee, and so corr, in C. = (FIN) © ee cele &. B Bal. ‘ Gs oe t,
and so corr. in C. ('T9) Bol. Soy for ws rr

Heading: ABL Bul. =. Ss Fn):

L. 16

(oa So Ths

Ns reriesy isi ss SN ovshkco te tie \ ey +5) un
ile po ge WE ee A OS oe (m *

Je
z at2 4a

Reems y\ ea cd She pl daly ats al) Beh mits
Nie NS jal ot Lb. 2h 23 S > ob BT ox
wl > ull, Ae suk ne ol By, plies £51;
Va) SNS soy ye pet SE Ce
ol \aetygt Sede + lo sk & be ge LO On
il Nine ae oe + pk aL} a Wi a
Dip pb hp no ate lease gp
gles Val i ey ploj | as a Se;

wale yal hts gt Se bil Ue ole,
Sy Hyp = s2 PE, 245 di PF ot
sls oy » wie yl JENS: ai S5\S iy a Joa ue

(PUL) Bol. oe for oy 5=-

(Tike) T, om. , before lal.

(VY) ABL Bal. wert gya=, and so corr. in C.

(TWA) T Bal. Vay) LS,

(THY) B ola yk chale =. L glo 5lP-

(Wl) ABL Bul.) & \ oy Lf % Gye, and so corr, in C. BL Bul.
ow sae 3 JE a, Ji, a, and so A. AC 35 yy).

(Fer) B om.

(Tet) ABL Bul. rye qd Le &. and so C in marg. The order of this and the
two preceding verses in C is ToL, THOT, TIT, and in L Ver, T8L, Te4r,

(Fist) AB Bul.

wily oy 3 st ax | gi els ep Lae thee tf! fe.

and so corr. in C. L in the second hemistich em ZF La os ae mare

rry J3) A.

35h dl , —| ieee =e yal Sy LS a 93S 5 . i

ol re) yaa 5 NS se.
239 Ls Fogg
jgrcd Sie 1 a as .
> $6 pie ly ih "

at 5 » 239 5 ee ole.
SE op; pase hts
er oe eo cgi ae okt
PS 9 St YF ee ay
— 5 LS _ Se tS
are tip LG Se Fae
eae 53 tj? feat 2. a :
AI 2 Ls | "wS>5 9 ,
Salat | yet os
52% oe ee aay be 5
eves @ 32 eS tk S|.

cle , Ns 7? G2 4° \ he
x3 238 IF 42 \G cy Jao
Mijas wal ye ~h yb at ,2 MU:
> Sw Si 3
Set Mis aay Koll 035 —\s*
325 _= |e aS be 5
——>! 4 ) wl arn ne
\ ie ae ee. ur! ar
he) 3) 3) ae
whe sol bor oe »
> oy igi _> bes 2 i tv.
1s op ' We eh Peers
yo oF os wy; Lo
1 pp el: Cy cay

Spe 5 RN apes

(vis) AB y= for ee- L a

il te pp & b

(TU) In B this verse precedes y. TU4-, but is repeated after vy. 1111.

(Te) Aner this verse Bul. adds:
(TV) Bol. 25.

i ee a et a
Fe ed OS

(f¥-*) In C vy. TV¥** and TY* | are transposed, but corr. in marg.

(TA-T) C orig. dn and probably Spier corr, above.

(Vt) a Tb. AS pepe

(oem Go rr

= il A= 37 cl ene; art Aj - =e
Cyl ye a 5 oe a
a Laat lad 2 er * aa 3 aoe 2 Leu
hos Calle wae ale St ere:
8 Las a 13 3S), tee i Send ai rwe
Speers Je ee oe eae
mh eas pw 45 J5\j pte p> Hh aolt SF ieee te
— “or A ks hat chick ee Cake 22 pts) ee »
’
ne I:3 jess aa -. * Re aed el
a\05; Sones \y:2 gt 3: 8 al we | >) po <7)
we lee Le 3 po b | 0 7 ale iS whe cy oer »
€ ae Ms cal ail Pi (io ed 3 OF — ih ata
aks ue ji 5 aout 5. . chapel ve) _ 56 Sate a

OM) aA SL SS. (TW!) AB Bal. le ght abt 5 ple ot. L abl
es gh. C om. , before jai. ABL Bul. ilo 49 94, and so corr. in C.

(PWT) Clad 5. (OW a at gk aay Gk oe with § written over
doer and 3,¢ 246 written over aby, he AS GL og ote = cue B
as 3s x5, me els Gee, and so C in marg. In C part of the first hemistich
has been obliterated and only the words .— jh 35 are now legible.

(YWA) Se as Bal ae re , (FTE) A uw i.

(TU) A 3) for 5). (TW) B yas. ON cole. © eal op.

(Ue) Bol. 35 P- (UY C gle. L eagle $s.

mrt iJ) >

aN, yer |, _ = Lae cog p= oe:
sls Na ts gh eed « lols mole , e 3° gh as
Shs g SB ig Wi kk 3 6 rt 3 Fo re Fe
Ome tajey gt ee 3? Wp oe gt pe yg eee
wo VL gt i tite OS Sol i ole oh Leo Jol
2-5 6 ae | S a) as: me giie’ 29> p33 oS Anite

a, a | j :
34 Je ose) wl Sy) 5? aaa oFel) 435

a Fig oe LE Le yy esl 58 5)
Soe > 5! HH >,) Os + ok 5) S _ 3, Ba re ac 3
PO ANF Gal 4) ope 6 be h_wate esl gly 50 ne
SF ery 5 3 prt 5p oe SE Sy le ol ob

SBS Vs REN ae Ve SIN py

wr JEL pe Lee wr 1S 5) ee Sao & J

cnr 5h eee Fee Be eet ett one Ks49 J
Sunk Jal det, whe 5 gS 6d es WS BSS as 5) tv
ree Na S, IS 5 oF 5) Fr GA? & ON
gus ach S35 Shp js gape — eee
apa 3) for oh. (T+) L aylas aplye

Heading: L gavlu\ x.

(HVT) Lg. AB sy, 59- (WE) Tie.

OYA) ABL Bul. 2 § sat |b. (WT) A sls 9 ae.

‘one Sas TTA

os i —_ —=
2 LF ae | LS ys Ay FLL aS pre Shige tye

PEE NSS se «ae ey) HG oS aS

tas all 43) 0F UL et 5? oalsl (35)

-J =~
We et, Ceo rt
Sib Pyar. S337 > 5 ak ere
I> 3 5\ 24 \yg! tif is out 9) ek BY oy
—_— = ey —_ :
| 2 aaa eer a fe ee = = Ce | 3+
aacales > Coa Nats = ee ohh ) 1 x w! | es
('V-¥) After this verse L adds:
wile Wyo ot Sules Sg ag alas Lisl,
a ae s ns erty eS * in se Ly see
o\> te cy FS ty 2 oh * ob ast ol avast £
2s a che 2 ro 7 Ail dn hak ole S
OSs Bb yay gH age Oy el © oP ot oly Git fe ol
oye og cet Sl, * ros ax rere
lt a! 225 old S* he S> ()> a gia 5
ge 5 Np OY we ye * lt jy ie ste 5 oo
opt ley sho SE * at oles ciel Us) » oy
uw da) zl ed y * ap ola bl
Jy ath to oy uy dk wt " 2 4133 oe Se yy
(V0) ABL Bul. 2—|5 ,, and so corr. in ©.
OVE) Boas yl slat» ope oN, and 30 © in marg. Bol, =—- : ne =i

a8 23 2 \, and so A in marg.

rth i Jj\ >

ahs oy ath Sa gl fe ds Le ls
eS early Fp Hoe JS 5 3h baa od 7
cmt 52 pp 9 SS GBF pt aS AE op ents
O93 ote ott OF hl eee + eg = al pe a le
at xgue Lall eu alo) ees tbe | ah
watt oy A pK Lee sh ale AI TL GL

wie ge or WY 8) 5 or ie Ob ws 5h
Se ak 535) hinds ayes ak» I dle
SE SMe a S58 ls Bas yd hg Bt SEI
Lae yk We hE AS ise Meaty ose aS ech cle
Lyle Rneery a oro Viple See ol ub J oe
al ya) og g shoe, Ee oh he oh ol Ob 5h
Os nie a ASL edal Le ee, = s\ al 3k me
esays tot SST SG eceeae age \ye
AS sl 14 Se oP °° wba be» ue Ss, Ls
29° oR WS eg % + 2 We GP? at oS oye

tits ot M5) olay 8 Ge © =k ST ley St _ pe

(F¥Ot) C 5g an 5. C35) 5 3), corr. above.

(veo) AF acl. A Om sy. (PVOT) AL le Ot. AC oy) ates
corr. in C. B yy) O@ cel eens |, lei 2, and so Bul, with dj for a2.

(TYOY) A sl. C ys for. (tYet) ABL Bul.

wo a te oe dg * le BP re 8 ow 9 5S

and #0 C in marg. (TW) © oo) for 5,45, corr, in marg.

("YY) BL Bul. & for $. AB Bal. \2S. (7) BL Bol. yas.

(TY) AB opt oll, pe 5 any! E, and so L Bul, which have je\, and
C in marg. (*V1%) Suppl. in marg. C.

ea a eee -p i) 25 >
a eee eee aS \s,'
eT pies pathy Fe

—

= Ss, adi. ee aa ee wt sap
APs Ae oF > a) 49 Ge ek o> bo! 3% sé
Lhe \ 2 ii 7) Agere Lie . aio \ aeek st <4;
Saat tae cee cj S Jo + ey) Je pints Toe ee
Ws ij aS se pes bs) ery dsb Yo
e435 fa | ab ty Wit ste bie le © esl trie
oe wl 2 2S thle UL gle evle 3s
a9 = male ail, te
Me Ss er 2° sy re se se susie 2 olla s6
AS sine Lo; wlvase tb. AS ee ur 3 ls sl 5 jk we.
wy se slaty sy! ZEN Wg San
er ee SY Sb ees
(tyte) pol. Pj it oe (vw) AB Bul. cal

(S¥tY) Cole, Jel jl, with ol suppl. above.
(VT) BL ste. In C the penultimate letter is unpointed.

(TVED) a Ls tae yh. (TVET) ABL Bul. com 4 je i 5, and so corr. in ©.
(tvtA) LL as lp: After this verse L adds:

op sy Neo dod re & & ty Bee uF able to

ret iJ) 28>

Lytle sso Jo Sd ye bye le ct oS 8, ls
atyl) Gos bet. ess 4 Gb al FL
die Le bo SL ul. Ls Slee GL ra ies
cmS sly pls ous Vlas) eens ey gl a J Bo

A \ bet 38S) oe Sonal loo Ol
alle cy \ ay 4

pas als le Oe te ee oy iS
ied ee
oS PGs, fe EEN A eT
PALS) pt ow bam pe pth 55 & ee ety
ann \,5) oe wile . = Shdt ite A pitas
epee’ Mie Woes see
We fe ae Thin Naha oe be St at
ay, as suk, 2 3 WF ol 5 He 5 pes oS ET
ee Cy RE PA aL, 441; 6 ante ee wert wal 5\ 21:1 evte
Pe a ee gh Spans 5) eet Lg Bo

(VAT) ABL Ful, 7S) aos | 1 in the first hemistich.
('VAAN) After this verso Bul. adds:

Cf ae ye | pels . es OS wee | ily

(TVAt) AT, etl > (vt) T cr cla. Bal. flees, dA Asi}.
TY'T) Bal ei Wino.) aon
{ } Bul, aS, ( #) Cc | —— * C asl wos

(VT) A \el a5. After this verse L adds:
Seal age Sper plage Soa eS Ng ok BL
de bel jh opt $ Ul on # be ok y Ee ob y Ler ok

In the second yTerse jo should be written =.

yan thy rer
>> st aor =e ct ee a 3 — $4 903)3 > ty:
Sse SS se we Ses Ct #
or 2 or Say NES £5 ol oF Se
go) Ose wd 5) \ re SAS. yileie ds

ee Nt ce 12 be call pl GG od

= Ss : 2 ‘ - .
gh ou) age yp le jhe gs we eee bor Sr
i 235 cle; o asl oe ole ons S21 wb, thi ve
=—_.4 _ =_
ils EP Cle YAY Nahe eLdl; 2) Ctl 2° oe cyl
cot at | Ls oe wo + 5) 2k _ el a) ls I
Lal lem As! 6 eek Ge 5! a9? S ole oy 5!
gj) ah ah Ba aS By oly + gj) of Hb se OI
Wohi se SG, SH be VLIW ol te S$, os
(TV¥-) Suppl. in marg. C. (YT) AB Bul.
Ke Coe ob + nbs ond Get
and so L, which has ju « \s for an ls. The second hemistich in C has been
erased and the words » Fj 0 eet i suppl. in marg.
Heading: A om. yj9~ before ». Bul. ce y oyr+ After the Heading AB add:
ae ks od) 3 oa a) * ds shelnns ig) 25s UM
and so L Bul., which have ue \.. The verse is suppl. in marg. ©.
(T¥¥T) AB Bul. a pis &, and so corr. in C. L lay jh.
(TW) ABL Bul, gate coe vie ol aSie * das lowe ps fel ois

and so ( in marg. (tY¥°) Suppl. in marg. C. BL Bul. 4 ie.
(FYA-) © oy for A, corr. above. (TVA\) ABL Bul: way o' in the

first hemistich, A f= for ¢--

TTo iJ) eo

9 Sous cart 5 Ny o> ols 5 oo Bal She oS
ule plail » a5) jal pe. ode a Sj'3 soap os
ya engl AS ly 6 ees GF VO LSI _ ae 5
sy plug ws oF Peg ot AS Los 2 eslil ee 5°
d52 og Vb S33, ee Se og 2 o5t cyl & ol SSH
cml SE 5 Wg ue cal ge S14 35 ot LES yl
Sd 292 OF Shy SN Fog + end 2 HF SSjy) 294 OF
cad Je oe SF ath 4) Joc eens Sot Ne US oe
PAF NSN SG pp 0 wt Os
Vo Ge ple & Ln!) oa cat \—- 224 faee pm thi ge tare
— ge aie oe aes
eke 0 ie S. opel SN gee AS gy 538 =
#* oa ky S x - 5h wLek, nee
S on ad 285)" 9 ae el rs i s
el > iS pores lel. _ gle p» ila 595 ean TAF:
299 Gly) 2 LS wb; hirspee Sh GS caper cues
cNe ARs ee So sway as oc lee
wltiy op a, 1Su- igs lob =
dgF ee NES So ot ly okie Oo, F
oles ep Gl 4 cel ee, i Nias 5 Lae eA 5 rate

(AVN) AB Bul. » oe. L op y oe.

(FAV) Ley pyle - (AM) LT Bol. om. a. AB Bul, 2d for op.
(SATE) Ce cy ee (SAY) ABL Bul. jee 5] 3).

(TATA) A ity. Bal. 3 Aen 3 aids, AF ome L 5) for >».
(SAP) After »¢ C has rs oS \. S, corr. above.
(TAT\) 1 Bul. os dy aS. (FATE) Bul lol ass &.

cmy) ok pl Nye sx ra AS
wr Sn 30) GEE Ge eee es Sa wa 3) he
AV a acces up Watt « LE Ve gt WE yn pt
eer ne art ot OE
gal pec ee rete mal
Sear Ge ae gl bee oes che gel 5 Ose
ilae aha) cant aS US 0 op ARCS i aes
_ EU eine cee
Ol ot ety WN le. og oD Us oD Jee
cet wo oe of 5 eet pl SE ae
Net old a el ee 6-4 Ay aL
JN rf yas ee 3° (ie a ao
oe. Sear Waa
See Ser 5! aes \)— 5 en hay OS SE Ls chu MM.
eS ws oy su o95 ee » S¥# gol (os <r
>> aj) osx als Ss. 7S ay 5 er 5)
Liss 5 spo 5 Wy es We CS Se
AS Sealf 23) gt + YF orth oo wile F

3p So 3 oe 3 . a tho; —_— = ar TALS

<i —_—_—_—_—_————————_=_£_ —_=£=_— ——

(vvt¥) ABC sane gl ok cou. (eve) Li aA 4 ee
(TAs +) AL =—1i6 res oP cp op (FAT) ABL —
and so corr. in C. ble ie: ler

(TA-) L we for fe a ‘iis c* for i
(TAIT) AB Bul. 5562 <5.
(TAL) ABL Bul. ‘KS Lyles a dain ps and so © in marg.

rty 5) #>

#3 elas — eS 2S; « “7 we Pe ey
By ot Ns §5 oF + > eb Sol
ie = J 9 3) Ped. cr gs 5) Ula Sun et
wl, wk,» 35> a1; » lel 4) 35 JS aS § TAne
Seat ry vial) jeunes 59 hil; : 35 js pet ay \,5) Le Lael
cog) pee Ml + Mle 5a cemeyh re Sobye Gat tl
BS yee eS DN 3S 3 Si Yo,s oli
Lite, Whe —& 5 os ab « 4 5 er a) py
oe 23) PF 9 2 is LS to g) = lone
Lis slo 12 eer ae + Ly ir an oer —
jo 85) Js nie am Sei: 59) 27 SA Ej went jl
het A seni "999 bo ees 5) 3 Jja\ calle oe 5
a+ obi ak 3I Ee sa 3b Less odb oh ya
Lk elo 2s wig. ee re au laa, Lae ; af te
Se Sy oly AT g) des at de rage
er bl NM lls Kaz Z oblp se
4 3 Lgl jf aul, 2 ea ides Ss ay lsh
UF urs gfe ae LL. ee 8 gL, 3) a Seu
wn ylee 5 30 3) oe, US amen CN) hp io 35 cg TAY

(YA8T) After this verse L adds v. TAA: infra.

(A) Bal. | olad ppl. Bul, om. ». (Al) A om, (TAY) A om.

(TAP) B sl; for js,. ("Al") AB Bul. fo ge, and so corr. in C.

(AW) © Liag 3) oly eee ole ol, corr. in marg.

(TAI) Cae for jh. (SAI) Bul. om, 5. (TAI) AL a p91
EB Bul. rey) lata, ‘ane 32, and so AC in marg. (TAT) ABC ps lau -

(TAM) ¢ 7% for yj, corr. above. C #4. (FAV) A om. 5.

cds Sle can 5 AS oe 3 et Be eral
mts ot DS Hl gslh. we , \ Sia Se oe
(2 22S sly 4) 2 59 + pry let! Poa:
5p) Be VL aS Oj 0 ays GLE LL Ee SI
evetlas sho rere ae olb at aS 5, AS dak cope TAL
Woe ee ad yy Pe le wr No
fed p= ye we Ge Gh HY pours Lee LSle —
EEE Dla pg pe oe LS

eS oeehl oe yo, oS LSI ale _ryelins st

Li nt oe ayy «ae ts Se oe

— on! \ 255 G59 ol + prs > eo rea. aS tHe
sng) Sed ps eet oa por oo Jr ol S12

Was SE sl yw si ub. Wks Ree

cae de AS oe oF lees x £ ee

cep edi I Sb: nS site pint 2ANd

of ke ny ge ule 3 (LA ol ig de) as be.

em

eS oS we BG oA Se SS

(VAT) B Rol. eich ao 4 BS oe and so C in marg.

(FAT) Suppl in marg. C. (PAT) El Sy ty:
Heading: I. om. AB Bul. add ,j¢ after cms3il, and so corr. in C.
(,AS*) Suppl in marg C, with » for )2-

(TALS) a gat. ABCL elie (TAL) A | my rir

(TA2-) B Bol. aly &. Bul. gy jl for ye p>

rr’ i J3) #2

jy aw 2 pee oS +50. 95 \y deta Sa sacl\s oe TAL.
2-33 Pe pe t G ! Sp

# # . =
le og ae Se lo ee ot Se Fs 4D

coh tS 5) AL ake ol eS a
(Py9) ae 5

at Ss ai) Oy ali DY 0 conihd gS goth 51 99) Sige
we) ll pS wn Sage 3) 5 oF ee
—— ek ur je WS > ar 2) SV we
FT > 3) ae le - FF HL oes
259! FL 93 pete Die ie 58s poe NS de
> Ase AS oe we 3 pS ag pled

a Ba

— sb er Sy cleat Vo Ll Ce a LL
smh cat «ssl 3 ye\, ‘ pa, aoe WLS ps ‘J te-
Le, TS We po bs Lalli +, ‘ae Ais
Sule VL. wey \ pare eo LL =m) Le ey
Se oe de oF F OW Gg + ye LE Gh oe be

(TAT) Bol. aytS pete Sa.
(AN) B Bul. Pere ee ? So i \S and so AC in marg.
Heading: ABL Bul. cna she
(TAIT) AB Bul. eo) ms amd so corr. in C,
(VATA) After this verse Bul. adds:
we on pie + oe a» * Ss pe Oe) al cn) ay
(TAN) A lect. Bul. Lal}. (t+) Bul. ja wir.
(+1) AB Bal. lio cy \ye!. (FRE) AL oy ole Gye:

Cage Soa TTA

Ss el eae Vt eee 55 Geeks Ga
AF a Loy aorey oleae Son oF
J Soy Bly 3 ylil lo » Jae st oy Gor ube gle
we FAS SF ay Lo oe ov oe oe Obi gle
Vr sl y ath Ce et ol ls 5 te eb _ je gave
8 op +515) Ge. ), eet yy Oe Wj
wok Wyle > aah 5 Vs, Mes pote? a eee
Sa UN e-3, ” wl dn She age Syl hj
wo F E59 & Uns + eu gle ob 5 ne ols $
a) ate \ oS 53+ GH ul lS 3S gytnle MH
Vo > Gree » lO 99 rt SH o wot
gh SAL ok th 5 us gh ee Soh Seas e st sym
Lg eer wl F HIF es suS _ Ss La 3
gd) SND Vy Se ol ate th gl > RE re)
4. > Fae: mad y 7h i De » L,2 Js 4) ees tls _2\5) tae
ges SS NS 3 35 ayy Vole
Or5 2° 90) 1 a able 4 et 5) oe La S
ig tal colaill 3 pe ae _ glad Gays
aS eh 2s NL BA 5S

=

(TAY) 1B Bul. Wwalj (A eele tl -

(FAYT) Bul. \S ot.. C in mary. ip + for ---

(FAVS) 1, jas at oo». Bul. om. 5. AB a5 25539), and so C in marg. Bul.
had aulgl. L |e t35;i-

(TAY) L cya Ot Oh eye:

(FAT) A gh a Sl.

{TAAY) ABL Bul, \S oy.

Tih

sary DN ES Je ox

| ene: xs 3k

ae Us bl eS esl »

See ia L aS whe ‘
eh SS ae ea 9 52 *
dj Hl pea) 92 Sp.
Jy LL o» Soe Sy -
$3 ys) pak.
semis lty +53 5s has) woe Hs

A Re

Ks 9 WE Se 99 Sl
est J Vi _-_ 35 tite
ee = pe ¥ aki,
Se V+ ay Sed S»
$45 Sr ge So pale

ae) \ oe Pj ey Bes

——\— Sa ee ow clea yg GE Jel se Le ue 1
ag oS ah Wt 2 VE + oy Wut Gh 5 we 235
a) ot a FS 9 A oy g pm Jl = & wb
coed 2 ya get” i ee ee Vie pes
Lal Tie W532 Oo). LY GL kb 325%
WH by 5451 At 4 L Wile dy LL ne

emee = be ae ise eee ‘oe

Heading: Suppl. in marg. C. B Bul, om, us).

(T1T*) Soppl. in marg. C.

(i?) ABL Bul. | y:.> eas. 0 aad a3

OF) ABL Bul. Sant ues oe =, and so corr, in C.
(FAT) Bal. pole ey 2>-

(Tt1T) ABL Bul. SS for $.

(MYL So.

(TY) B Bul. ~> 54, and so written above the line in A.

16

bissms Sas Ti.

ae) jlual Bln A. Ayes r pas is \e jes on cle Ss ag Me
gee ae UL, ANG 6 255 ble ely os ue ah;
ye op sh 0 Fa sie oy le . peg Ode ole al, ES Sia
A ol ae Jd Vs + Ws Bs Wie ob 5 S
L5> ad Ls 3 = » Lie aS le 5 Foy
oe ad \ ur 3 aris » > J) | UT 2 ue oF ag MH
es Lbs SUT yh eG 5 IIT ee
se 5 oe dump Likes igh jy ee N51 SF 5S
Aigo SS Oye ae <2 By oo totee ale she, 2h)
ele os solos, Ns ae — rye
> o5)5 9* 32> -S3 o ef jl \ st Or este
SEL oy ul 5 Jud gles eels eS) 55 ue Go fF
eS Seow es Se ee te
oa MET ie Ey PL
a al ai tiaal Le laa wth) <5)
oS FS Sis a» le ge — cs Sp A Slat 5 mr

Boas ~~ 3 S5-e9) . nt el 4 emt ye Gr FF
3855 ey Surge eke oe Ls ie
Sole 4 al Set). hb ai We Le >

(FU) AL pty ole. BL Bul. ly ye 9 vl.

C's) ABL Bul. ly se 5 tye

(FRIT) Ls geuine 9s (FM19) A om. 4.

(F1) Bol. xo lye sjh-

(TM) ABL Bul, eum )S.

(TUT) Bul. ge 5h.

rat ‘ J5) #2

wile cia Le GLst ot ee le 5 o> 3) wis a sbi
F eny> tbh Wy oe oo) me 3) LN eee
> Sak 4 fa Ss & Nel Nut 6 eal
Leb Cal 2h AD, . Sj 2 be pe 9
3 GL em bee em 5 A re LoS
J a a Jal st oe Jo 5 N38) Gliese chy 1

_slath, Ss gh ek we els g ES the

es — se 3) 5 vl J. > 9 pk <ely ME Sh
LT og he ye yp Sl gy 25 OSI
ome 3 aS sl L3 «| y2a5 9 235 <tet Bl Sh

oe — 2 5 1,32 5\\ a, ee | eee — SES pS _ tt
HT ge et SNS oe + ob gd oh Sy hl ae x

BS) el ah le able. Lobos Cae 9 Gb
aoe) on & Oh aby = ope tet ol ot i ui ¥
oy yy 5S anil ip phe eng ge pt Key
Bote sa; a Js = mae rs far Ae > Ljo pt te
oyry Qo\jg ib set + ley He Sp stl She
olaid 93 gl 6 Vilage Ss ilsle Gb Sh sly 3+
de 5 PS 3 ae Se S42 pe GIS ay es

(7101) Suppl. in marg. C. (Mter) 1, int 3 (Tte¥) AB Bul.
3S ay pe y ee UGS © 4S 4 aes wy A gl
L oe (er > ee J. (TT1*) T, axth sl less. (Fel) A om, 5.
(74) Sappl. in marg C. (OV) Bul. gi for dye. After this verse C
has « lacuna extending to vy. T1414. (eu) pL Ss ez a8. EL cslatal te ylae

=
(MY) Bol. yo Sp y3)!-

(eye Os rer

Vy bs oe 3 Suey all Sd jus, 52)
‘ley Lad oyl ss US:
Ss ae > ol pi Le AS (233 de ul 241 GL
jem wl en Ae te LG + je é* peu > »
32S be ple Fr } wo + en DF FG 5M we
pF eG poh Se ee EH A FY
asl Ol oe At Ia Ud US oF oh om it
or ESS 5 AS ge Bp ory glé, 4 ate 4
aS Fase , coy ps sai che Cade Wye gh a) rite
gly HM Vole G 6 Sy be pal 85 ple oly
pH |e _ Je 2 >. So _ ie 2 buenl
peg \S MN ade bey gdb es ST ole
senledye 3 Oye yd YP AIL ge? Ser LG
ad 4
ar py, cb sere sl S

wtoletl 55) eet x dos Ore lel wie tg 5) gh
ee oe ee Ee

Heading: AB ones! pel wh S aes alll ‘Ss & ues Sy r. pals, ull
rad um Les and «ao L Bul. | | |
(THT) c a \ je R's isl sé. (TXht) BL Ne.
(Tk) Bul. S le. Bal. So \,. (MM) After this vere L adds:
le oad ase, 3S * ole o! oY) ge el oe
Heading : ay is suppL in C. A a Por a
{T10) BC palan. (tt8%) a | eb\j.

Tio i J5\ wo

5 jl p29 V3 pte yt S\o2kt uo J Os
Py 3328 Ge slik . | 3 wir Ss a.
3s ee oy j\ a4 by +» Lule Se ie cone
re ae 323 be SS ot) pe fe RS
Bt oopil Nj) OSS te. eye 39 Hd Lao ul
Syd se plied BS og e GS Uyol ate 0
Sve. doit ge gh hee Se ch 5) S Jo ald oa
ape 2S oS enzo Shige 0 29 2p GH Ox Gm
28 ol = 82 yx OY . Ses ge He > =e
oto; Atl 2) yee Vales IF oi ahis gets Hed ae ab
5 oS 1 355 ole ome is) i, le +,
#5 SBF TF 3s a9 Shige + ie 3b 3 “7 °F ati
og 235 é.\ S2y, 2p sisal ota les VS sole Se 3
FL gw cael ON 5) se Loli Spe o oles
Baan eS S\y e petS 5 tls +, vide Se

- —_

Fi en "spas aero

aS pile a af ai 1S Ve diS te Sle jk Gabe b

pally, aie , op pao Sols as isa! >,\ —
caSgall esgill ow ISM aM #

(TIAN) In B\, cle and |, slo are transposed. L pte , = gl
("t") Suppl. in marg. B. (TVtt) Bul. a5 eae Sas.
(WUE) A es ke. my Li (FY) A om. 4.
(TIA) A gages. (tT) Bul. Py a8 eg SHV. L ten.

(Syne Syn Tee

a. us ce casts coe Lae
we 2 BLE 95— Woy Sh hj siete’ 5
dpe bb sks os S. cle 5 an JE Shve
BLD Se ge eo cee a ie — ju eet Fete ao cp)

Ise Sr pS ke ees a\}\ “S de eM oh oS

el; Se op Ur cp Sap 0? els gd

(5 ols US pl wk Se

chle 21 aks Sig a o ole AN etl onl wih tye
wor 5g AE Sg tee OB ee iy 2 BL 8 or
Wie eee Sse Wit yt ee
Re ce OS Cb wl Ct SoS ps5.
O3 eye Ke sy? Seles pe OS oh P| yo oe
Jy LG 262 & 4g) Jo 52 2 Ay 28 Hy 9 284 gl oe FOr
pix, S> ep 5 wre peu Le go yr =
“7 ws eb 9 pereleylg
me ee pt bo +e Aye 9 Sel s 6 ¥
2) Sa ae Tot 5, cilg Ss res ps pre wr

28 > 35) DP ot ps xe eo sls, a} tT pe ce Te
(THT) BF awl). L epg Ful. wulk. (TtVt) After this verse L Bul. add:

dats piai cel yo thy * ah, jo 5) A 52 7 a

to! rs Se tase Se i Goel - v2) Os iy
Heading: L ,# for 51>. Bul. +» SN for ab gl.
(TY) Lye for 9. (Tut) AL ae i. (TMA) Bog fa.

Set pet ge B coal) de 9 out ps eet al Te
52 BF Crt rt 22S ogo 5 yp Ss ee UL
lel ae Ae Cees ju « ye cna Awe tl as. os
dy ASL Lane le ge oy 25, ali cle oe
aes Syke pat Bee « ents 5h Jol see 35 oe ©
oy Cait! Sy) GL Le. op < — ae tes
Dot 9? p ceeds tatt wl JL op 5b sl gob pik
ai iy Shee Ne fe ct GL , =, uit hh
he gS sel She gah Sg Shey SLs Seda Sms sen Wo
cen yp yD) cad Lent) tinge ewig gy 1 05 5) 1-
wls Lae Fae obo eel + bo 5 Ge ole ol de
52 SH a F ole + $)9 sh oe F Te ol
we blee oly de we up soe bp dL 23
LIS jogs ye F xe beet a dj F559 Ue
urd See 2 5 Ate Uli Sy yous) po! 33 3 Ah, 12
Hy asl o> Jb pe che aise, a ge
a0 Px TM ory ee FSH y th of
eae 22 C43 po ye 4 op a1 »\ —

(*) BL De aid. Bul. >» aids, and so A im marg. TA) Te chee Sees csi.

() A ay for ak bis. (\\) In ABL Bul. the two hemistichs of this verse
are transposed. (fT) ABL Bul. .¢)5> wij. In D this and the preceding
worse are transposed,

(iS es Gas rt

O roD afl a po

el SE Ole SS p59 ale ol gt 2% 3) ae ol
Se sab A 8 ols j\ Qa , Sh Au\g3 52 M55 eye \,00
Mai Ge Ga caja JS gla oF oles Ly! Abel © G> olkao
FS WS Na WiNig Oe 5 \ te We abla So , ee
islee: 3) osle 1. pate Sa gold 1,3) SN
eee Si, @ pS cde oN see 5) Sige
9 Wag7 256 she F4) ise 25 OS) Bile gar es Py
bs “ ve bas, si ris or ahd (D dae 53 & 29 S on he Si
atl, Sean oe 9 298 tS ool a Se pd, ype YI Sm
4 \ysie le 482 ylint Nall 239 ey eal at eS ¢
Gans los Jo 3s pes j\ SVs nv da le 4
ce 2 GR FOS Blot he, ne tle &

dle sgt OL ws S. ne juke OS S rnp
mit (") Sip oie Sala oe ale doe
(eal S Eye Gecicake ne soglt Oe ce

L omits this ey

(a) D adds (nstjiay. A gl. @—(e) A wk 43 4S ih j\ a \g3 52>

(q) D saa. (e—(e) A Om, uD) D al XS. (9) B a8,

(ht) AB gy, () Aom. U)-U) Bul 53 5 297 f 2» ee ie
NSE (k) A iS: a) B Bul. op. (m) Bul. &1, (n) A om.
from here to end. (o) B om. (p) Bul. «yc,. After a Siu ‘Bul.
adds chldl ., a atl.

Tit c x ao

ee kb S ee uly e eel Sls b oge eee wh
ra ae oly oth. 3535 me oe OEMS Shige &
agin Sasi eae + ool ee ASO 1;
ee ai aad St SS po S55 List
conti SE yg le oF 5! ee ee ee —\s1
cmt Seta 9) NF wet 9 59 comes EMS stay wie
ree és et 3\ da 0 Sy Adu! pl sl one pile
dyf 58 cep Lad to oyt Gite 559 be oh 5) om
cele) Gt Bee eathyds Gee be a ge etl Gm
> + zip o \y cals Le tobe pipe eal coil A, ue aly
um oe eo to nate u> gh ol pe tr &
a+ J 53 u> oF bo om sr 2 le 2) wt ole
eae gui 3) we uP eee, ale or ws) OG
Pt a3) On ty oF en EF S- Lia Sy is)
sie J) a Cun lusty ed ne Oey lie el
ae aks JG JS J. Ss Wa gre
Se te jy ty 5! on Gl Ae old > ds oh nls 5
We SF 9 wit Li bey betel 5 sole Li oy
Fema s>5 at Pox Sa hs uta ol F 5)
sa ell ge Weep 3S aiSLe acy oe oS
25M cle Le pees Hi J gas ASS
adie Ct lile 24% (eae) pase obey GE et AG

(Y) D cul pple. (8) Bul oo, oj us ; (9) B ys 5s.
9) Lue cle. BL Bol ye ly. —(**) Bal, ete Ja Wh gl
C8) D pe ure ay CO) Dh wy ol.

(oye oo

wo jie 8S ted 8
reer ge ee _ jb ps
d+ ju » Wo war Je:
<i aa a
29 F Le be w2S oly -*
eal kas poll pies

Me sl 52 + um * 2
a—t Uns oy 5 eat Pog © Oe
oe ole oj eat oe) ode + 3

3b + \\, \,5) Sle 5 u> jhe
ch Se S29) = 3) Yer a
39\)
ar Pe oS! wa: po:
Bs oe Sal ee
oth oly Nj ee SL 5 “ls

2 yl ie 5) *

“et Ee ah ce
= uF uglier
od cpr ray 2 eA i

(T\) D Se cp. Bul. ix J
B gal. A jh for yk:

(Th) L ode 52-

> 3°

(t+) cet so yocalised in D.

OY) Lp cee

In D vv. FY and TA are transposed.
(iT) A Bol. o> Ba \ Ly

TLA

Sts ee NS 1 pt
Ab ce Ee oe ie \ is; [-
2 + 5b gr 8? yi ot
Se Gy o als; FF
ee: x» a vegle Las 2 2
ge — ‘<3 al ; ‘sue ro
Liye & Ses Se

ie 3 sh | or oe

eh sos ss as om

oy ote Mt) ry She
wre Voile colons! 5h
its 3) yo 53 gcckigy As
oak he SE ei ee — 36; &

pet 3

cae SA Lt

2 eds So Jule

(rt) L zs for os AL ~~ for -*

<a Bul. wos al
(ry p go> ie \ ie B om. »-

(TY) AL Bul.

(%) A oe for cn.

L in the second bemistich Zab capa gt

Tol b 639 te

Be ON sak Dias phn Lae atl, ol 0 =
=o 2S 5 le 5. Sal 22 #5 Lr 5
$eAM iy a ntalll olh l.alale a Lageonaem
Dy peg LS | aa 6S 5 whe Sie je» ole a
deste PN Nl 2 sis 1. Sh ps
3) ib Volo obyg . 24) ile Lok bk ial
ait ES W492 IF 5) ade ea yg aE LS oe ge oe
235 ay sp Wye Le 5, a ee 45 Ae
LS sw Jo te able ciara
psa e-Lis Art Rey jb 4s Ar 2 els 5,
late BS 345) wb» olsy J 9 en SG o-
o> Lit oly ab. sak 23 Pw! 3
pense y | ole GY. pKa iia Ye dale gente
DS 55» 5) ade Ath ee KoS yd Westy oC BRS
— or bk i Sy eb, Sess tal >> Sy pe >
we vl ptt op ia Be gt Bee se le Us

(YA) Ah oe 4iy9- Bul. pe & ce cee
(Yt) A S$ for s . After this verse L adds:
wt Spe Gh tb ob Gl ole 2S aye Oe
(AY) A cyck. BD oylll. L Bul, cut 4. After this verse L adds:
sy vole of Pos © at eh ols p NGL
338 ten leas f Uypas © 238 ye NSS PS
(A\) B Pyare? es (A°) Bal. Viljy P. After this verse L adds:
Sem pt fe | Sy * Set BG ES she yl p52
(At) 1, Bul.

St re hay at SN pe © a eaS ole Fo ae te

(Sem Sem , To.
el, 55 Rage ui bid «Neel. ade cnt Lo
Je sh a © Lue « el bl ol Ge
oe Np ree ae Seo! Se nee

rn Se Az oe Jl eels ee UF 2 og Sa

ea ee 5 AS Sede ote lit Cyl ie eo Sw
Dian eee ae lag So Gree S
ee oe Ns oe Sn eh ol
meteiny Siyg5 ._3 aut — Wels snoa th cs suas jt
oat) to O31 9 See x. =e! as ore yok
el ele Jol 35 a ot aw os 3
eal Se se F aj Pe sar lous wleo,
ale yg ol 3h tee ge AS ON, g thecoys ype Jsoanh
YA ae yg bel tS Wels a, Ge ae ”
wi Steg) Lge oe bye» Ge oh Ss el Se on
2 oe Sle be Ns 35 6 ao Jt Pier we iar slaz Xt ve
mgs ie Se; S uv, yw le. at eu Lio = a\S,0 Je
aces} woe be oS 4s © 95) el pik (> >) as

() Suppl. in marg. D. After this verse L adds:

—
gle Ky eee ep 8 Bl tee op Sia

OW) D way Ss. (™) D om. here, but has the verse after v. A‘. L
poe \y pal. L Bol. 22, 50). CO) Le yee ly ype. In D cus
is written above 5). (Y*) In the second hemistich IL has ,) |\e 52

Bm, i> jle- After this verse L adds:
Ady aye Me ole le 29 * 4p oe 3) os S|) jane $2
Y) Bol ce fe 22.

fot

‘as NS) pe ee 5? Ls La# ol

be3° ao

~ ) ee ere 2 ae Air 2 “cb 239) ale

Je hl ye ol eS I
div ¥ dle. Nay tS:
yah, Deans co of,
Sate Si x3 NET
Beli Ad ae cia td gel the @
3) 3 SNS ye
35 clu a> ri are

39 wha 8S lal ar ue

woke! yl aie Sl Se

2S lS i Vail i

Bs gies 8S :

vl hs
eS 4 . SM ski, .
sain je SF 5) stil; .

wow 9s ot GL.
Cg tule i pl \o1 :

Jb ut Vey Je

: ial Mae lel OF oe

Bs an as ease
eh oe oy 55) ve

© 33 oly Vihdd 35 ay dle

ay o55° 22 os 3S ee iT.
\Voljet wT ely
oS cody gi Lali
st “a gklk LL, «ss,
thd I py. iy ito
sees —' \ 3 5 oars ;t
es yo Re fist) oul
we ot! oa Lb oe
oS ohh b ok we yyl

wheels 5

(4%) A ch
(\\A) After this verse L adds:
$F Spe yl yk gp le JSS 8

(1%) ABL Bul. » S oer D ay 2, L,)-

(WY) ABL Bul. yx)» 4. Bul. 3 49.

F Sagh 3) Se Ss oe
OW) Bul lhl oj.

CFS) AL (sl lel. BD write .-\, as in text.

(TY DT Bot aLS sl

(Vt)

=
Bal. tote is hs

bSapne (Saphe Tor

aS cme F oS 2 tly be eae pe SI ol sl af
es we ule Ll. Ley ole Gal le
ve hj 2S 5) J a ele Sy) W ons Wl rae
Rae ee yen 25> ies roy Se cs 5
Ao GF woli Js a2. s+ ous \yd> oF 9 aL
2 HS ay Fe ol pa su pre bs 8 Lal.
pk i chy ete 52 oo e eth Gs Ls >! ie
ee oe Ne 3h Lae ols » ok eit Jie OS Py oS on
sLél jo Le FF us « glo hl Ft jae eee
Ne ah Fly Vale le hia eee yal
5b Ne ol ge FI et pe
ste let ya 5) ool » Sot oy gad) Kee Eby
pr) sa ee Le pg elle wk ple
Js eG coe bb + JUEN 3 5) > te Oe Ae
ep wth GS als 2 + Ae te 9 Math » Sb
ee ae ae Je 5. 5 kt S51 Vert

ols Mole ¢§ Gh be Hote Sul bh 2 oh

(4) D om. 5.

(%*) B aly Ube. Bin marg. cued (A ya ole el.
(YO p als, (Y) BL Bal. yj 4.

(1) A oh 4 \do- Bal. o34 ,|> cel: 9) A ate
(VT) A la gs A le ge fle 5). 0-9) D oad,

(1-9) p et Bul. 3 for hs (\-4) A om. 43.

O°) B anal

(N+) Bla. Dag jl. A dle.

Too ‘93° yao

CU as pT oF soyl lo. ss hh els curl Lat
ere a Ses oy ies Ved eel, eed 9 Lae \ aS og
=! Lieb ob* 2 F Fe 1 e5L- er oe SoS
Sale AES wy? at) el J wc lel olin ae
Woe ol ene ole Fm ube ol oe ot Fug
pote 41 ee, a ee ry 5 Ly, | Pol eas
er Nika Os) * ‘ ean ene Setaal r oS
LIT 59 ye 13) ols y cleo er yo ales Jet aut
2x GL O5) va Ben 49/6 oa 5) HS oS a pig

a J

I els a3 ae _ ‘+ as cae be 3) SheS 20

J-¥ Hy des: enti >) ks > Viele Bye PF 5 pil
‘pole oe

a ot Me ag oth Bl Sys ies «ie
seth bh Ly he jae he ee 57 5s etl ay A
dr Jk aR ee es 4 LL, eS Lil,

Send 9 pt OF Ase pier oy a Lae
pt AK i we ay oo vL) Jz tils) 5h th
a , pt 1d 2! As. hm awl e a woke pA
ay 2) Gb oe ol jl an. ye 3 2) tS wae

(lel) B x zuol, A seems to have had originally ste yi gual. Bul. os £3)
(19T) A om. ,. (°*) ABL Bul. om. ,.

Heading: Bul. cttla ,\.3- A om, a¢. A om. pale.

(lA) D tiye for Ay, corr. in marg.

(18%) ABL Bul. om. 5. B ait. (VY) ABL Bal. 4 5.

é ai oy Tot

SS —

—\r¢ “< as BG we Fe Me oleles ght p00
so er of 2: So gt SU Less i};
Late 5 ole ee Ue oh cine o Lgl. 4 pe ah 15,
—\> at aul ores pe oba ule > uh p= Jb
Bay ath he Ycdiy eB yg eels SF

| S> Sh ;\ Vise Se 93959

Spe a ety els eS js eS je 5) — Fo;> \To
15-13. Vas) 859 5) easT ye at) 3| PAY as WW lak \5
ts cole jie o Tike 45 Sh
a3) flEn Je plan G& +55) ple ele Le »
‘i aleng ae a SF ye wi ee Sg Les oe oe Ss
oe lop ops pS fy @ Sag cecdley OS Lakes Gor

Vel atl po Sess AN ake we Le eS Hdl

a ee ee suo Lylpaiel «33, ON OS ne b et
iF 05; bam F js. sm de fe sag o\—* sl) onuiS
eS ke ls ven aS wihot Ls gal Yo
Saas gir gl Lil ob oe Ye ces F we NOS He oF

ps 59 3 4H ip ah, hh; ke uri yb ite
Heading: Bul. ys p3)\s bis. (Ve), Bal. if \y3) for \ 1.
(%) ABL Bul. om. 5. (@)) D \plewl. L pF ie ,
(1) ABL Bul. Sy 05 3 ay ols S. (48) D syle.

Toy be32 7U2

oe Jit Oo elt gre 25 Jl apd jot as
LE Ve ye sah oe ae pee
B85 lee 5) 8). pee lH! 2»? 7.
sl nat Ps ath > fionk > se wt oll jl yg
Mob auth sSy9! sas ee eters Lery on age
Lglsal Ws stp well eer t= Sp
en 32 oll eae ee ui, + en 9 Wyld Lok 32 ss OF
2D go rb Bene be 2
>) ae _- 5s op + ty paras ) — Sb
Jle 545 Je Ge, cS Gee JI. oe et Ne ey Al
Be Won \ dle Je 2% er
f G84 sS> alyee 5. fi ue Je 3) ce She
ous She A 5) tt Be ee ee til yy 9

us 5 Ye 3 é\ Skin ttsds AT a) _ SF

(\AY) Bol. 4) for a+. (\M4) After this verse L adds:
cotucle fie dle pay * sel, to JL 75)
cet all) pe pe + yl Wl, © 1 cel py gl ae le
IS we Ge ke able IS + Be lan ee ool | Je
[L has >\j > 5,51. (\AX) B ge for s). After this verse Bul. adds:
Chale ji — 3h C2 = om], ut oy il er
—\pall del a, edo ge 8 het 9335 ug 5) ie
dpe we Up Wplyak “$ © a5 by 5 2, oy Me
(M+) A Se. (1) ZL Bub yh jie le.
(VE) A city, Alt. A (sic) cuiny, 35. Bul. om. 5.

IL. 17

é LS sme

jt) 2S Ss mays perl s
ie, AS Ja so jl & »
Leb) ea SLE pe os
aS ines HZ.
51,5 \ dy ow ote tly
oe hy 59 oy CO) oles
Bas poe pd eth ty
Basle sto: Linjo pe) ARS
Keb 2,3 = > obtile «
“PRT eee eC he
at ok, Se oS 5) Gs
slows
435 ee ae are eee
aannl'y ose abel Og ty
i ceaieetal ses OF *
wld ae om 3) cy
5s ee? oS 5) HR Re >

Lins yt I> 3 ‘era 22) 5= *

wk Leb 5h sty

CT ae To}

dang yg 38 SUSE che
Se \ ae 3 \
ms — —1 Ps é\
dod pile 7S sol lel
ssi & la & “ 5! ue
shes ole OE jl ity
_ 36 3 s«\ 2 SByee wags
OTe | pe Ae oe
A ee ee Ot i
ales LS 2S, oka
sa of 5) Joy gl a
HIS lub eri ols ol
a5 a ee 3 she 3\ _- S
Sales | bw re S) 3 ee
ANUS » USy xe OL
Lis j5 Sc) cals yl ty

12

—

Pl

ve

OW) La» ty.

(11) BL Bol. gla! 5.

OW) 1 oy rt
(VVt) A azals y la et corr, in marg.

2 jou. Bal. G)b (Ole.

(\Y-) After this verse Bul. has the heading: \y dai las yoS cy pte on he

Ge slg) > oleh).

(iW) L om.

(\W\) Suppl in marg. D. L om.
F, —_
(WT) Bol. 651 5) (tu, and so L.

(\¥°) A om. 5 before \>. L Sor she ist
(Vw) E cyhttte « Ful. nto 35 \el- I) cy Ph sil

(VWF) Bal. oy Jp:

(\¥A) Instead of this verse L has y. AT.

Tot Cea? yoo

Ses Ge lide Meee aS Ae Se ee
Ae dhe 65 3 ey J Ox 29 Ja 3 Ss.3\ wor Vole 5
ae FT Sul dry oe S Je V54 ol I~ VY ere
N37 o sl Jo Vas. Le seer als olen aS
=F »,| 7 = a) oS. ce eet Vile 5 oF oy) pak
a by oh 355 wt + ok ae aos gat! 55 <3,
MF Hy dy? 534) SSile w= -l,| lL pls oy
‘ad —s Ly) ase Lele: « 5,9 AS 5 Op OL oy 5h dy IT
oye SOL ese Lajk + a» ob SF Sc i ea Iv
eS fe ok ol LF ol religboiow dla Sem
gS ST, hss tle Se sie vo Be lew 5h
cell, ) riley 2b . dh, Ge sos TU S6F
dle ajo are py Ales o dle ye commie ele = iS tre
Jkt, a ass a Bhaslss o5) ekt el eee sh
aD GSE AS. Wl ° wt , Gb YI ss, | PS oe
AS xia Ls et Spe Sa — \yciyUc pa

TS

(TV) A ap | | ttle. ('\%) After this verse L adds:
Aue ag yp ay yah te ae aS LS it

Sor ol gue tte pe ee ete ot sl Jee Yat

—_ #
Je NT sh eles! STS © goy5 Je 2S gis
sf 2 oe ot pe bel & te gt ol Je VY ait
met gp Abs jl Ve A tee 9 oe GD? tel gp +p
pam or oS cr eed} ce © pS cede hae oe | 5
(iY) Dy | che
("\4) In L the hemistichs are transposed. L ais Gyo clu.
(TF) L Bolo sidle de cel. TM Lys aly yal s OV. LS & als yo.
TTS) DT acl ales. OTA) Ty Jae ddl,

(iim Se Tod
Gh 7.2 ape a Vag BSc pe 0 $US iSda 5 35). GMA GeO
52 gle Jo 25) Vipin + & at Bh ee xh Os ol
55 bt 53 Maye tls 38 S90 Sy 24 ae
Je vies a Ledl ct Sane 0 ee oj wa, 5h sal ot
be 9 jor 3) SB: glib ya* 2 pt lh ole eye 3 ax
2S 3\ ge 52 5 Sp F Fe cl lay 9 5 | er
Sah 5 WN 3A ae oll Le) 6S NF oy
yale oS \ae S 3) ow “Ll. (ye sll — — gS pan

a

Be! Lk se viet » ti nae ol —>
sy wy! 35) a) + lets ot 353) e le
Fo Sts 4 LF cul)» Roe — \ypole oSt-2
—— oS Las _\ 3 5) et yy 3 4 yy! Jr ¥ =<
am pleltio s Je I. ok 5\ Lue J S55 oS
Lies y wry) sayy! wy jhe ee hole ae
Bost we JE wy) ie Oe Sta oot os
yp ee i) flue § Ue + USES ol BW Sel adn:
ties b ule ole cue» 0 Le ty 5h ales, Lol de
pt oi be \ d> Y oS «St Sd, kal os

(135) A ge for y= dis. (MY) Bul. 33 9 Boo. (4A) D Sle Winey.

(1) B pede.

Heading: Here L Bul. have y29t il! » Vyas Sas pole o2F pl.

(F-°) ABL Bul. aes >. (FY Bul. ae gl pole oad
(Y) Bol con AZ. (TA) DL a jyel, FD de 5 5 te

1 ee rat (\") D Bul. 0S oe. AB ¢5 3).

ru f e5> rte)

oF oe EIS 2559 8 ob + i om, 3 HS Sf i
Ss; AF 5 \ te > 5 ob Pins Jay I ols
RRR hae aE cho viaccess sh oak a siSes 5
Ea GA Fae tie 8 ipo eas Oe ee ear Pe a Perea PA ge ape Wl
ce ate og Je Vee + 353 Shi p> fe
MF SF aE BN ices 33 lye ga)
ae pa 3 3 3, oss a? 2 y)s 2 4
BHR MN PPO RD >= I> Y 5! Ai» po
#32 ose ey? 3 s— 5s ©? oe dy Lo 59 Sia
ih hele Giaip- 0 lie dhs pee
i 2 Foy al we plo» oe Gxt ge Lays
woe gh 59 Wun) Lol es on oT Je VY bl ole se
ccaeyy cain SV 2S liad ye Wp cingd 5 he esl 1) 4 sas >
dee + yy hits 5S g\ ely 0 3S 255 u eiey Ges >
Ni Mh pen Sige LG eo p> o shel J GL, 5 ag L-
WF BF 9 Ul opt 5 S Uae loge dee ont
SE +885 We Se LS ol, bo pe
WH oe MS SF 34 Ae Se ea oa
Fi Se =) ol je 5 oH ws he,

("2") Suppl. in marg. D. Bal. Si 5. L 4S i ys (T&A) Suppl. in marg. D.
TE) L ole. B ay al). ('°) Suppl in marg. D,

CH Lay) ogy tp ol + ee

Te) Tt 5) 5 gle jo (7°) Bol. om. »:
(A) Bal. 2-5 gle gl. L 23> 5I 38.

(Pot) In D vy. TO% and (1: are transposed,
(+) D too po. L yy Sap, bs.

(Spee (Sy Tl.

op 2S coe oll 2 S ory aL pl Se ok
Se ee eee re y eiit
Sete See oi s5 Ain oil a. 5 We cael, ae ee
cole Fe ee Awe ee
Sails 2S iad Bu sei vd SNe I
wales le lob ie se let oly +55 4 de
Paes cet 5 Saar alls. ole oS ¢ Jl tte
Bie FA oe Cote et Ue ys
peek ale pe al sl a Sen $3 ot ed a.
op fe 5 > oS gry tik hohe Se guly L
Si nyse So xe cleshslae ~ IA
il ex SN ole + WI - eel et Ne Mee Ua
ee 8a A 2 3+ jy,
Cpe ee bb AS r \ aS ede hep ae sp 4,3 >
ie Je a8 + bo hej a eon te gl ed chy
whi 2 5! 23 yaldl p> 55 + obs Hy et a dy Sig
eee 2 oF) atm « Koil po _ He pol; pf The

(TT) Bol. ol. (TT) A om. , before 41. Bal. » 5. L lab gle y 6.
(TOW Loy Frat a (rt) p Gite.

(ft-) £ ut for ur After this verse L adds:
oe OS Get Gl eat ae a 3S a\\
Sart © ole 5) ope WY * Se 9 202 59 9 = one
(TEX) BL y 5 cer:
(FET) T euge. After this verse Bul. adds the heading: S ll iS yo, of
syeby ipo “as, Which is suppl. in marg. D.
(F) LB Gly jo 21 gale way *-

hy ear ere> ao

— 3b Vg ov tere WE 9 He Spon
ge 5 23 Le acs 2ily US. pa domly al bk ol uty re
Oly ose hg op tor + oly By cle 2° SG 3 ls
cdkey 55 trslad oli pl calles au) gale
NaS’, Ajo bel) acta we re pee en als pie
Lacslil see 5 | Mt w Wythe sy op SG als pans
FE shy 2339) HE eK IS oe he
Vie SN a Us 6 Vice a) et Se
213 tI ae Jul. joo + 28 jap = wt Gould
colle age oltale uty 526 cowl} \ Jam joy eae ye
IF phe Re re jy ah & 2 Jy US
Ale. goog at : i wl nF ee aS ph
coe) SE Pl SB L Pe eny o-| > | vd? oS Ko Js
cobs oF GY op Li og se eas AF 55 i ny,
cnblall - > dale Tae ile daca ieee 3)
BEN S35: 2 Seow ce law hte ee echa Joli
SG oh ah, ee Sn coun aA
aE ale at ai3e oly. Me we 3) eS bin Joy
seal NP gees ye Jee cade’ NS of wile jos
Pee 5. eee asls pe Sais cn, oy Si

(TA) BDL Bul. £24 oh at le olol he: L ale.
(TAA) TL dy ule. (t+) Bol. -»! for oi. wt) DL Oe unk:
(TA) Instead of this verse ED have:
de Sy pl ale Se Me ol af Wi ty
In L Bul. the same verse follows v. T4A, Tt) Bol. nic of js. Bol. t5,'3 3.
(-) L Bul. 25 3\. 7) B ys for 5

3°

(Syne Byte rr

NE

ws set Wo pee) oe ty we bo § BI
dy Wo ie er oe yp the ole 5
41 53 a ph oy we le. ee ee
eo eS Shae silee y
lida 5S 3 Wee ser res ee
LE SR oS enemy”
Be Pikes on) sie ae Blo » \
ceria ee Neh es ptacell 6 ete ee ya Jy cela
se WV ooF we UE ie sw S oS \ SN le oS
Fc ee 5 ES FWS > eceiea a aes
Hy oS op IS ep sje sb Ue wt F529? 2 FOF ™
35 > wns Jel es. aot ek ok lt Le &
Rtg gat Ck Le Ml wile 5 la ol
— AT Leg oh 29 39 GAS Fal el 5S
353) cay yp dy eg 29 Se a igus
a 03S oe ne Le ue ee bile ay > LL
a_siu5s\ ts SE Sy tel Lie LG Li
BES Vth th Se AS, oF wel »

(rs) p | Pe < ss. A om. ,- (mi) D oleh ss 3.
(VY) A la ppl. (YT) L cae sly Sa), De canlentoe) colecall.
(TYT) L \el fe ee (T¥*) After this verse Bul. adds :
hal, coe 5 ath g Ute 8 pb ol br be F op
and so B in mare. (TY) D o55 ge Cab. (TVA) i gad glu.
(TV) A Bul cue - »- (TAN) Dente y=

CAN) Bok. 2&9 jl tly th Se ASE ese onl 2 F

T le é r3° pth)

of Ve \ jk Lol ol

co Tay eee ar eT re SS cash ok <
a1 IGF GF MW) re LH) 4 — els ees (5
55 0S fis 5 ‘se yee LI oe FAA tre
jo at pb , so 5! ssde o jl a As pal as
Bee ad We seine 52) us aaiceae \Jale wit
SASS Oly oh Sisien © 1S Sage cee nee
tidaae SAU aa 8 9 28 9 P38 Wi: Saag
cs pr eeoT Fy Geet < Ae oe
pen S ala alee, it pe st j\ hl cle —,))
AS 2S op oS er ee ae ee \,

es els eel Fs af ob 23), EP ape
2S $5 ots et th 0 AS pele at yi
E ln j ror i <j. Le sliSs S33 , ry}

=f

—_ lil 2A \ ppb as oe . ee Es sae a>
A 5 wld pS bo oh on . 3 yp leo 3 SS \3 —_ Je
ly asl ONS oxy S - elas los 3 er. OFF tt.

WS 5 kh ts sg a a eG “5

(TT) Bose Fut NS os jy Je, and so L, which has que for oo,
and A in marg. A =i) >,). (1) A we ce, CT) pu.

(1) ES sl. D ath. (TT) Tsp S

™ bless a ute (8%) L om. 5. (O%-) Bul, 5S for $.

(TE) D nti» Sy.

ae oc oh beet p23 2a 2° or sl oi oes
Be 9 0 Oe ae ee oll 3 pa sls 5
wld 5 TSH Co Oh ee eae
es. ek 206 73 0 ee ell dy cutie gy adit
wi te], 9? J—4\, a ‘ oi) te Se 42> sh)
diss IAS & - AS gp 0 WAS 34 Ce Us d>\
3) Se j\ oh Ses_ 5-5 #3! wots 2 5 a SS
dye hah 2 Ho Bj) FS 0 yt Cla gy 1 Si sf
GE dy sh AS ce Galo © tor LLel Jeet ol Ul GF te
oF —' LG aye s\su —> sil > SL ls uw
Ssh 52 SS HS ae ene + ST slab » »° ors ob
oe 3 3\ op bil 5 oe + Oy! yee \ pene, 5
5S BSL Be Gy SS BO Lt Sy
HS 55 jp AE res par ish aS 855 pel tes
x jo a ee
Lens, ale —5,\b >> Lang\b nH sul; 5

(*-4) Bal. ees, (*+*) Bul. spa J »- (TV) Ty sol el.
(T-A) D apparently 2% for |i - (TIT) Ty at ay.
(TH) DSI ys. AL om. 5. (NW) Lo for a Ly slo.

(MY) D Sus. Finns ye alse,
(TT) L sy a 5) dist.
(TT) B i a. L leg ces ™ at, le ae.

—_—_—_— SO SE -:ti‘“===|e=’'ss, Cie ———

Ss a j\2 Ls US \ Se 2 Wy? By D5 1 Sn.
oss 3! ab A og a, ci uh ree Ss
— a ly pho 25- L. on co er x sib Se

yp BaF ph bod ho ON ape ee LAS
RO Se LS Uo alee po trl eS ee te
pe celal x Gis pt F Le) ES B25 WF
ml WG GL. fe OS 5\ ey by ye oa
Sp) sly ee OL os HS AS yl Ut aS
why b Ld go ole Pe ok 5) ly og ot bw.
Wak A ole yo S> tt 5! om £55
ae |r ole aS oe oy + Jb pg tule we © sly 2»
pov tte Os I. par, tet fLR Oe
BA Jo ee 2S ube UU 29 als ole
eb er ety ANS on : sled ise wl aid free

(") B Bul. oe 0s 4 As pug. De ke D,S 5).
(UV) D cli gh. B lod, b.

(TW) B Bol. age |, 5

(TM) Lo ye) Baie Bul. 53 ye 9) alee. B53 yp jl.
OO) L see sy |.

(4) ABL Bul. 3, and ,).

(TY) A ce jl eo. BL Bal. o\j,\ for te.
(VT) ABL Bul. 5s 5.
4
(S¥%) Bol. 22.5 outs % are
(T¥°) After this verse L adds:

Ese SA AGEs ste Sib 8b

CS me LS gm rv

pote DLL Fp go pte SY tl + sh
pak, tse 2595 3S Gary F Sat 9 SF Ate 5 DN
ruts FA pO ly th og ot tl SF

=

sk jo 3S § ey ee + mle er Se pr te
pS Lele SS bo pS WS tt FS
np pean Seat tlhe ae octh) Fas Oh heel
S$ Sno ly et Sa 2S eh Wo § Ld
Gite oe te Je oe Fe > Ge &\ 533
slant xy oF 3 Np 25 + Ghat hb by 32 4) ny
Ba 8s per Lge GT oP po 5 59 JS 32h, try
Foe g\ tS \: by xe + 55) sah 59 ES er oF
pt ee Aol ahi os! oo
F 939 4 455 Se ee aera
pe yy ~~) yer ah) ie ee en eee 23>
sas 2 ce oS o> FO Go or He
ents, lar, 3) iF). ene, goacrol Gy & uae
opeaere 5 255 Le 3\ « Lé 32 bo Us 2 obs
Seoetba sl oe ee al. » emu ery ry le ad

aa . 4 . ’ Th
(Tat) L eae A= as J x ( ) rb ey L §X.
(TEA) a ee. L uke a>. (v4%) Bol. a> 53. L a of. L i=

ue vy Jai 3. After this verse L Bul. add:
dp at ule» w le > 4) * a9@ Nike cae cos So
(T-) AD om. 5. (Tl) A chow, p> (TT) A ep tct,
(Toh) TA) cy. ABL Bul. p56 ,
OM) A ae gl bot yl. b bel. Act, ory VI.
(TOA) Tht asl age aye abet. Ll pp Al y>-

rt t (> Pte

ra ye Lie J 7 Se st Lek = ye
us ot 2? 63 345 hs 24% blo 3) Se okt lb
Jj— Wye Ls ope Lo yt aul 7 le Wj o> Me
s\ 4 lar ¢ tbS of. se Yo oT 1,,\
gp So 5 So pe ls Bo By glaze fh Gad
fe Re ob oe Fe et eg al ol _ 5b
D3> Vyowl aye te sys oh. Jkt oF Coke lL oe hal 555
Spel isl bc eid eid « stil Ot de
oe A? bye wy py LE AUS et
Sa 9 2y9! Yt Fy Se ns | Va 25 & Sl be
‘ie eon slo ch d05 oF 3) ou Ses

pith Ss cule Ce Vr eS ASE oe SE
rib WS ot 9 bE. pri ede lye te
> AS os Ie ty oe LA 5 et 5
eS shel Ye Sb ok Fo te got cl TAT gat
tie ojbl at Lo 5). est em sl te rt ps
23 <> KL OF 22,1 Get 2) + oy LL P ke
bm 7 So fb o\ oy oe he Be JLE wg Jus.

OH) Ldel gon A de gl 0 AB Dal Ye ol be Lie:

(8°) Bul. 53 se 35 oly, pole are L 9} 401. L Bul. pel lke de.

(A) LT ie ale. BL aly wylus i, corr in B.

TU) D Nye b ole of A My gl. (-*) Bol. a y ul.

(£1) A apparently ps9. (&-%) ABL Bul. |. 5S.

(°°) Bol. j\ab. A Bul. pad 5. BL syed. AL yee ocd. BL
Spe 9)- (&Y) AB at iS. () A 35, os sj\.

(t\-) BL Bul. a\ os L sap for gaye.

(Syne (Sch ru
pepe) Sm all 438 492 gel ee ods | Jo
Sp Wh ole cer

PAG + Noe: «E> asa,iler jl aly oi Lele ~ mt 2.4
wher wl SoS i * wile 3) oF rls Le =
aL > ALB gS) 5 wth pike — elie ry rly: -
>,! 4S, 3) jle st Se . o\5Sus L Ys — > \)) te
Ls jah Sa ae 4° * ls, \s\ 3 =o ao, ee
ee ge ee Mer ars
oS Gs is og gle. 5 Gl Ub ST Gu ack
LS oS ali Uslle oS « 4) Sslel 9) A Wil>

= *% oe 7 =i ore F 7
aoe pee mt ll wl Fe Cee egy 4) ole uy
is 4 Z 3 & ;\ wf ors is ct oMinsls a> OF TAa
yeni 2) ee cs wis © Pe tae WIL. —_sh5 B ca
—e ~~ —_Je\ aay 79 Ls . _Sel 2 * Ls 28 us La
aS 4. ws 29 oy pres Al BF Shey
to ow uF as ay pte Er ae) 2S bel
Ee 355 L a A Ves 395 0 85 oy aS —-\, \aaly tH:
23 jie Le , i= | eager re ee WH) oS Get
>; Es Suet pat be ese ae> I + 35 &\, ee Te) Ve 355.

Pcaning: D om. irl.

(TVA) L aile ole 4 yle. After this verse L adds:

Delp san ote able o 6 ot pl Say ty pee se

(TY) In L the hemistichs are transposed. (A+) ABDL pala. D> J.
A ats J. AB icSis. L leo 541) sald. (TAY) AB Bal. ys! for uy.

(TAT) Bol. oS for ole (TAL) B Bol. ops 9. (TN) Bul. 35 3 yt?

T¥ \ i a? yao

By wssjse abs ele jhowwlklc glo e yl
ee has) sso oly gh acaSie er oe
psa Vidas pW). oie Lelos wl, 5 «> L.
whe oe LS il olS ye. Gis 4h woh obs ge ett
2) ES Si Ved. 5 pS 2 75 L
Sh Stee Ve Shel kate 2 o Silty NS cin glesk
Lal ae pte le | ery aad cate Le 5
Se Ll We ps Jf ws Sb LES Sanh
a \y ope ppl. a|> Ge oS 2p oO exh Fo tt:
S35 eh hig, Me ce Sail ace SV is Re
GF 2H) —§ 2 eh) pte Gar ble so 3 & =
ey s19 5)\p aby 2% eS eet aa a — ie ay sl
I> 0 Sib EN Sale Day eal wy) Sele 5

Ess} vex lb 6 SF. = ej 2S \sital; ico
SNe sla lL ee pe. le ee sve 92 jh aly CS!
eed 4 OD 9 > ley 92 «eek He oe oy ee TF
FSS 3 Oe oe oe So Fe A le yy

CM Aah: FEMALE, CYA Jtes ble. b je Llals.
CAN L si pee. L 2% ols. After this verse L adds:
sols isl) Gry oe ss © Sn aheS ¢7 i ~~
oot Jae IS see * 25 fe Sales F
(48) L in the first hemistich 2., 235 3) gcolj | cule.
C9) DL je ,2 a te.
(4Y) Bal. oF wm |) 5 yy.

(uae so

TV.

a SS Sy p> 9 O19 pad o emt S ALS gl _~So 5 b
ee ee

ho “ai ‘ee jl e 35 ge Ons tint eth

4 _*

ae

ete fas Sas ey oe lil tts

» tLe > Lae ke >
es Wee ere Ye ee

oo te Ng SF o\ Ses 2 sles

eel 3 ae Ele dle wl
a_i we oy Ss — ole aele

— 335 21\ 52 Je

3) oe = SLs ._ He

wl S99 pt 2g ilu >
a rity —. = pa
NeSon Sy od pe lees cet
hh BF 29 sai Boas EG
rr pape pee Hose
az hls +S a5 sat?
= = N35 dos eek ‘fe

2a. gle SN 53 a

mH Ves GLb

Ug aass poakaes Jo jhe
Ve on le Ge ab . 35 LSI “* d_-\ ce

— > .

Medea ce

(444) Bol. kale.
(20%) Bul. of isi fe ute:

(Lif) AD ae Js.
(11) Bul. An ».

“(AND p an
(1) D at aye".

GY) L 34) AA Wet sl. Lb op cal S.

(eM) 1

oj ae ee rt L ok gals.

se SF LT+

Ty?T i 23° pao

my Svat 02S 5 45 e350 oS ox ter a 6 BS ied oe
Mei, Ly Wes, gh Se ye Sew leer hi Gees eens
es Ses oo oe et ee
jl wij. 3\ pate 3,7 oles cpl Leen | nt 3 ih
Mo» \ Ly GoW oe oy lee Pt rex Gia \ 5
AAS 5\ op > Pps ee lew rest 2h shzm cpl tv
Petey yan lg Ale 6 gk ae elas re
ey SIU; a woe Gp LA sls 5
WF 05; LL Nel ls ip
S55 af tad he a an, oly C3; yas ue RS —,"
wile tee 3h on Ze gh ple INAS Lapsed Sle eve
We oe an & Sl sbeee © HE Cor oll, 6 x
ean Gtr) aoe Lelatl; 0 eens ctuke UT cute an oh
plas S oh eae & y+ AS AS VL ge
oh COREE TE ns
2 9 oS 5\ om “il; 22x 5 pe et AF aly “G
J dl (Stay) “hi; e WA Ls J5 i5 LZ
aij vli, Nd) Joe. slik als 42 Golal oti,
53% te pte wl 3. a el ale Ut Jo,

(3°) LF for «x5. In the second hemistich B has: 5) asey see5 G) ee
o,3 s. After this verse L adds:
an 2S 3 fle b> 2 ke * ere aby je 128 pe.
(1) AB Bul. ok 52 by». L Bal. \Sy 4. QW) D cas,
GY) AL onc OT) ABD eyela,. (8) AS for 1.
GVA) Lily al. OH) ABay Zot. UN) A Jal for Ja.
GA) D sa 5. Dwi »

IL. 13

cal pee SREY Se ee li ee Wee SNe F
cle sot Sele 55 hoped « eel se GF Dy Let &
wks Ff 4 ot See . Slat 4 ~~? 1X Ji)
wll, pt wid 5} Pee © els acl A ol
ley 3) ole Wie 3 le . alee jl #5 + S355

ae a ae ae a“ § oe Joy
le Bets cs) Nee lLis es rey) AS > wide ty) be
— 89 5 sb o- wl . _ > duly sth ye 5

EN ade cout estore Vp patel iat ests Wad told
ls 2a) vl sl jle —lgatel op > fe oe +15
oS 053 Volstel ange oa (I Vo sl ob
es Wysods oS 5; nats nt eh eae CN
357° Gj tS Sjox Je © 95 ay Lf pe dS) ee
ws VI LAF 523s Kee ASN on spe by ST
Bot) 45 5 > 9 oy i ; 0 BF Bolt or ot oS
ays Bip pra se 50 Ss, 2 or 2) = ws oF =
ler shady oye og he» NY nS) 9 OS la ol

(8€4) Lge for 49. (£°\) D Be.

After the Heading L adds: | . aoa

Be tinan o> cid tear be
(2A) Dy oe ple sly J!
(£\+) Bul. (spas 5. L wa Bhi Se- D , 8.

(VW) D soy
(0) Lb for oy. Lod y+ Day Gu:

r¥s 6632 239

At is\ oo hae Swe sky, vse

Sennmaeed hue , 2 yy GIS ot ‘ ++ 1 52 gS olay
ASSN et eer 5 4 LS nc Ps) 2 3 gle»)
x53 ASN ce eet stl » athe aus os
SAE Og J> 5 CHyre Geass GE, Zl 2 Vat od
pe 1S yp J+ ples oh CS ove wl
paleroatS oy ps SF pe lS SP &
— ie — pktl gta. Sal Ces Ubi Je
Sa) oe Se 5 ice dt om ly seh oS NV coy shor
tre ye Sk ped Ek al pli 5, i)
So* Ble oy ciel j\ okt a + wy By oj) aot a GT
Prd 3) Cae Ge laisgs | yg i

Ger ete | dle dee olde Oty 8
BS sel 555 Fe 23 Sp + Sy ey 5) Lisle 53 -_ 352
Gn ASL S dye, whl * Ue oe jk , als S51 ote
ed Sedge te HN LS ue 2 LL, pe 5 oS shbol
mH Sw WIS 8 p83 5 day piso

Heading: ABL Bul. $b ,9. B ous ,K. (2%) ABL Bal. tile » 5.
(9-4) Bal. 62S ol. B writes as: (°°) Bol, wat ps,

(7-4) B yy us s6. AB Bal. «15,

(°l'}) Bol eit neiiil, . EBD Bul. ,¢i4 os 2 Alo 5 as oh ond so TL,
(°") Bol Tcl Om Se 2 oti 9. A G= for oe.

(9\2) A Bol. om. » (7\°) ABI Bol. ol de L oH pad €.

CM) L pee 50 for nat. L aS aS.

t (Syme (Sake rye

Sis op Sl als oy ee nd stis “lil;
‘cone Nz Ob rel, =f ety ew Gt Sur
> oy LF Sy A o e ehh +5 woS Ps
ly ol, ie LS 55 5s 1, oe SH alo a
Side ET a oil ole at gl has oh a
rl 5 cht eed ge Gh Sb; oN Ss lj oF wi
aS ej) > Jin #1) eas dal; ak — gh po? ur.
tet ol Le os pe pee ete 2 adh ah Sey
at Ne: gels s Js ou oe ald li5y ees Be wu$ Se;
swhieSo Ny 35\> % oF * ne lg J cuits Ls —_ 3 5\
dpe Spy las se lye on Hy Gol oS a
oe oF ns a Sane ees: Je oy 7 te
a> 42 sth op Ly Steg 6 lt sl yt eee stu»
Aj cme B32 le >» HS hs ey,
le ws j\ls eS ei te 5} lao oo FS SN
SH SEAL Fs 3) pe ee Hat eS Gil
ales ip \ Sas ge lob I We ES LL «-.
oil s5,— aris 053 05d tH oF sil > ae pre

Bris Er ples Fo Grol 3? 2» Sp ¢ 3

(41) A om. 5.

(1+) Bol. iylj g db. A Ge,
GM) B poe.

QM p fe shi jl.

(12°) TL came ear,

4°") Lad Se.

Tv¥ bes? pao

oye 53) 9-5 GI o5, Fe oP Wize Ww ae a) 5)
log sue , 2 5,,- sleds Wore Uy ol ot Suge
skis Sag oy my 5 \ 5. sok Wd , 2 te wl t
Pea Paes) Sau) 4 Bing) Siy) Cian eee oes
css Loe > =! > ed,» cdlts ol —- le)? 50 3 \s
wld y 5 50 ry ash Fs ce carey ical pole iat iat
ot _$> OH Ay ple oS. elf + dye oS 3\ pe
Ben bot ae da ed be
de we ble pm gl <F Foes bee
me Pl 4) > slit a > ~» Zl Pie 3 5)
ore om by eile 42 dh o ay ee chee 1 pis

ap PG wk Foo cp Sho ee Al, BS jac iT
we ft pr 5 Jtsj5i wee lsye py wl aif 00.
AS oly Ks 9 HH a1. NSS ts ea Se 4
REE Gearon Sars ie eet pS phate
bia 1 rps bos <> 0 L- — s. sie
pod wll aS iy 29 * rent La» oy Se sh s
Egret eae Sh et hej cel 3G {36 ge 35 4 a io
Cr pt sl 5 3\ og Lah yl oa 2 9 Weston
te sl One ce Ml ye et cl a& 5G ox

(tf) p ola? 4, corr, above. (7) ABL Bul. xf Oi ae AB.
(21) In D ang is erased and J . written above. AGS 5. A cy al

ut un lb pled pt - EL Bul. td pods In Bol. vr. £14 and “LY are transposed.
(%) A cel. (SLA) ABDL puslay . (P8-) A lee fi:
(0 D vom pile.

Eel ryt

ig ea gs i! ) eS RF ox 55 Sy ol
af aa) rons gre ey 4, 39° Wo! sts 3
pe Aa S99 s Salas aos » cL 5)\> at a Sf or.
cote a ae 3325) os) oe Ady Js o) > vl > dg
Se ek. onl hal pacelcer cali «33;
Be oj gy oti) 5 ne oy) Jee e ee ig? ry Jj) Oy) >
Ls ¢,\> te pa | | = 45° elu o> le ele 5) — Lu.
Aisla, he at le 5 A sue, stl Sis zen 3\ \, \bL Ya
5b 5 Ns Ss 5 oy eee le by gl pe SK hs
Be aca es east, J, éh (slie
39S Pye ed ob $F. 5h I toe og oS
Spe 25 38 cats bale 6 3-5 JEN gle 5 ae eel
ways | eo does 5 GE » cD Lac! 2S glee 252 of
Juni ct late —— is 5 Sug 3 ylaitles AS
Ses op bye we yo AS 3h 5) dye ah
33 S&S jh ee, g) oye re op 35S Le NS >
Sj shop o> Lh + ty oy 3s) Nye I
NS a —), 351 2 \e ‘ ASG S53 sui gle oy, tt
2S sll ae alm 3 - 2S x san > 3 St
Pe FS) > OW BS. = BONS ch ole wy

(CVA) D cone 9 8. (OPT) A yl qatal.

(TS) In ABL Bul. the hemistichs are transposed.

CT) ABL Bul. le 5. (CF) big tile is.

(oF A 5h, JS. (TY) DL oplsese. -
(TA) D sis. (OT) AB Bul. ol».

(TY) D has = written above the final letter of +)! =. B Bul. us) =4)_* 9:

ry* (952 >

wie Jo at 4 og Se ee ae st I UO
GF pe et ee SH toe oh Fel 4)
294 oty Jos pe ST ee boot SI eb wh Lee
7 NS yp 1S th ghee 6 5 5 Le Js \ o> AE
oy > 9) be 34 5. op Gr NS gw SB pe
st ap 3) oe lee ole At lye sb jh eee
>>: yee 2 wer pred» oy. 2»? 5) dy wl A
Bre UG SN CS vine yee

2 OS Velie 28 olde 92S Gs
wokl g de 5 gj 2 Oke kg gle Gg gti gt Dy od0
SE eS oe bl le Jone STs obs; ud
He AE ed Abily 6 ye hb Wd SUS a op;
> i. $1 aaa cemetelS 4) 6 dy ule, 5 5) yp Ses
Lijok ey S59? oO) tS. L, Pe”, le bj»
st ul ety pb be el a 62S So
ay y) — > Bade p> ee eal
Pvt 5g 9 Sg ead aS Mee ey eel
ct nar eer Sa 6 Sy) 0? Sy tor i i,
Sele sy GOS eg J jh ee oe \eso)
ail al Ay ao aSe . Fel Soli ae jg a8

cov") T, RP hts (@A%) L ys 91 for phn
Heading: D y= ,>- (fA) Bol. lle. (AV) ZT AA gi.
(o19) A le Js:

CS pas ig TVA
Ls A ycusy oS i), Wigubes. @ WongWee # St hy, _<
ede Le NSS os 5). ym was, eS. SP ge

selidjle 5+ oisl) Las uz; ec cae |y 2% 3) «= aSu 5h
Ji 3 2 : as IS te oe oS, ale Led

aL, ali 5 Bisa, Sh ok) 5 SM Vp aps
Be ey ae et
Site 3,9 US J > s+ se asl= 5) 3,5 USE ove
Sa) Sea -* 3) oy Ss ava |

SW GH oot tlh use * ire 55 SS US
Ra ols pliccis Se ae 3).a as Ch je oe ood Lo
Sig eg ate are ene
tJ 5 den) Se. eee 5) dye 2) i »
ei; \y3\ Se ai Sh peal ee
2 Gul eeesl ol SA « = 5 al 39 gb

le wey 5 5\5 ri gon bel d—3,) ae ire
Pete... Le MeL og
Sr 9 SD > 2b + 6 LL > pis ty 8¥e
Mri se KE 2 oF oh aecid a a camoemmiied

(7W) Ag) oe. AL sap. ey) i Rie 25s pala) ses
COT) Ete oll gl. A ge 6 5). In D (S is suppl. above,
(*¥-) AB Bul. om. 5.
(YT) A at ». BL gule _y. After this verse L adds:

2d yyele tl pV Zl © ett on pel 4G Fed
(°¥t) Bol en (°V*) After this verse L adda:

ab ol ab oy + LJ + Soy oe

CV) L yk jee oy oe i” ap. AL js de.

pa =) J 5 jMe,l pm | ak 4; wo
A gy We yg —oli, edb a pst pe Saige
wt ES SN Vo tS S80 US cnet cy) comp 3) ys

Wea SS ol > se yy Ld car ee cay ae
ISLS as aso +l HF S or aa) ve oly 5° T-
toatl wz) LI, Je. ols ols Le bf ie 3
ried _ B55 SS ask Lie ues ol ots Glee

Js sli me eee Ll Ps 53 Pt 3 is\
Belg, Picea hed aca ea ne BSE Np NS 5 tae esta Se
ry SSNs oS yaw yure utr 45 3) oli \,,\ 25), r80
| als Sh AISI a? +5) S98 cut na
Cl a greys wk sy or 3 yl ae A oS
Hj pte IS pe es, gh! us yb 5 oe
ne mir — ps a ee (355 5
\ ox —j _ at i 8 oo s\ eSes S gh\ * w-
= 1+ Sal Gor <= Le 6 CF oe Se os) alt
Spon S oy aly tld Sy Odgee cH yee Vuliaceue
po Sets jh a5) a ern eee
wa pts Se 4 dy B eer dotaay Sg) ra?
aes ol paijlone thy. eo eet 7 dd a,5 We
BLK 25- sul g Bs? say Sage He 5 99 9 JM ,
Ee ae ot Li Sis 335. atlhe ° ye. AT Sarat
(WD AB Bol .)u3 ppd. (%) Bol. Le. (8+) Bol Rare
OI) Loy, lye A tues gl. B tilaab,
(WY) A Bul. gla; 3). ABL yy rr

(Same So TA-

las ol Sls sls Le. bo 5 p55 ob le oe
oy ut GLa ole OW. oy x WO pS 9 ob
BN ee) ORR Oe cere Dove 47
Pe ea wld Wiad © 209 59 el sa\ ee ae,
SS ee Oa Sareea eres
ships autls ope 1S ols tl \ Slade: pos ee
AS So NM pe o4\ by Pook He Hh SF pre Sd
ge ee So" JL+> ob coy) WS SF ent 2 Mi;
Coty A Ne 3) +b 3b loco padig chcimdae
cpl Mah vrs te oy ry 9! ces
Gs 5 5S Ee ee xed etsy oa
Bea hike eee
SF ace i NS 3595 tare od sl Sa
a F ee on ys) B) P aay el a oleh fr? Am 9
BSA sel Pe Go fe $950.8; Nya Se VW
Re wy) 23 So toe gh ee « ob dz link ob fs
oS SAS Bn 98 oh IEA F bel IS +

Beis us, Saale i: sla 2 ej pe ee ue

_

ib ole o> 3). 28 JG Gy ob Sal wf te
S54) eal yo 3 Sal 6 ae ttbal <st JS ts
apd ae a WF Ihe a DL ae

eit) D ca. (V1) ABDI pushin « (e*) Dinas,
(\-1) ABL Bul. wilap. (-¥) B Bul. sa. (Ul) Bol. om. rt

(M4) A tale 4 a ee

TAT { a ya

Le 318 59 2S cole ple oh ed Loli
SK eh, oS sue. Eg eel thy bo Ses
Gy 8 bs 3\ se 3) wl le. <3) wl, ly) “3
a9 ps esas. 2 ety 5 Loe 3245) tle
ee See Ny oS ols oj phy
stl soe gh lel, oH bb. tle AS HN Ase, tt
wie a tl ele. Be 5 sent AE Lp U.
sashes le Et eb. asl 5S ST, sy
Si AG 52 Ue pp — aS. Sib > 5 Le
kj Bp has 950-5 Vee hy; fd, Srl o
py | bgt oS 383i Ml at OS ch eel Ud
a3 ies ct gle. > ola els» pall ve
SS Kae oF 35) 5S shige « 8S Fe ume SA ol 5 ole
Loe ls oS PYF wr + ee wl 345) Ke d3
gu el Ae eos 3 ut as 5! tf oe
ya oi Gy) celal slau _- SS a StS
—e vl > me cog Gn ve eat M5 Lp See wb > W-

(*) BDL Bul. lye Splis. In A > has beon written above the line by
a later hand. (9) ABL Bal. \s,— for .sj\.
(1) ABL Bal. «lil ,
(1) A> for o>. D § sku. Bal. § | glu. AAS, 3%. After this verse L adds:
at§ lle ah oS * ails » Masly) lode
ME) A ola gly AB Bal 1s) 5 tax bs 5.
(V1) D by ple. A 42 9 sito y- After this verse L adds:
lest Fy alool * Lge whl J oly
OM) D de ok. L 4u3 Se SF tit the.
CV) Bul, oy jl. AG 3h for & ats

(Some By TAT

Set 5) 5) 4) Gy > + a7 abla py eal & oh
Sa o5 ol oS Ne co rae FJ 5 ol SS orye Sp
hy 52 ols =¥i\ okS be SNe, yet a JS yg ke
ws» ge af, de Je ©. 2 3, wey Je £
wile os j\ ch 6 le obj sh. hy pol Ul> YS ob
‘ce pete OWES a a Well. ples 25 8
Rees Ss 5 oS as ip eA les
sade NS Sol, we cy e doa, ly LG Ue duly 9 le
Gi Soles a el aces Vacs ES el le
bat Ghieneg\ ans Mpa vg) Ve AF an, Leop
aaa alee 28 + GG b&b =F
tea Ne, ow Jb ese Lele | Pe a
yal nse G2 U5 either
oe oe Leash to) Gs <> Ap
us fas, BE ocd call 5) KT a» Uy
dy cull | Pe sy LS odie coals Lie oe gal

Oh) D aye tly.
M1) Bot. ole. After this verse L adds:
igs SOU ee eer as "es
oFl ss jrill x Je &° 259 BI oF SES
Ns plots JES Hot LI Ie sd
fe Uk ee oS * Ue SO es
Asay sue Je Te te oes Of Js &
What oye ,)> - Jw oe * Whe vy! 73S aap o
(“") After this verse Bul, has the heading: _ ‘<a ‘Meals
Ck) AB Bol. 3 jy A pe 3: (D AB Bal, \S sl» a kel» P-
D Asus) 2 el» Pe Uw gahok-

rAe i p99 Io

5 Ute ory cel ee le oor ae rs ce 28s gb
ned SIS os eee tee 5 ple AS, 1S «.
33, ul or 245) r) \3 ea slae (ie eo ola
oP ake a 3} Cale yp eablig ol Ure
x Ws Sul § ale. pad eee
WF Gi ox oF Sr oS. WF Abs S ols LS
ct | Vee) te Vile cal aS Ske Woe wl ve
3) pol oo uot JS 2 Ij tie Le 2 Coat
fo Sle s ssl ol. ge, Je, ee, wh Us
ab Wabe wlt, £5. wle —ils, game jlo
aj wo yh te 92 02S» cate 9 Sigs 9 Ute 5) ay
See ae Bly © 2S 25 5) cul LE de ee
ier 29 oh 3 ye ls le tiie s ‘aa 5) Ge
So 99 2S yy ponds be cle OS Ly og)
lee ol ole ole con) GS o\5= eS) ae ge? nd game é
wate le ole En: oF © asniS) 58-3 Sy é\
SSF Gym > x |, litle + ees Bey! Viewer tye he
cet Cpe \h ace pte sel gtee 51 oN \ nytt @
iS i$ S> 2 ly se iy Ae oa He ol by Loe
it sy? _ sk wb o = 3t olno tte pa

(4+) In the second hemistich BDL Bul. have 2S =— oe ;, Wash pr
| ry ae (VN) A ad ot ole C4) D aks & 5 sls.

ON) D Ve sie. DL salt styl. OY D oye tage.

(VF) In D vy. ¥°T and ¥-T are transposed,

WO A els CSpot Sy:

6 Acyl Spine 1 eudytee AA OY) D oS So.

(Sams LS TAZ

ete SS ope F ene a eleety, > 12> 5
ea ee ‘eae ae 3f. page SN At OLE Ce
lz sll foe by =. AS, AV Verh GY
ae pilont £9 es per a te Wied
Nes See Bog 5S, eo | oo ti el _Jrle We
PLE sl S a FS ee ue be ee le embry 5 3 SF
Bie aN icl Gib pace) gpl She Gla Kee y pb
ja es PN ST OF ee Sig DRPAS at \
Wee nt 5 eee Ut am It ee ae
wats 3 git pe jhe pte I wily sels au
op jg Sy jl, gle 5 ‘sso sl, wc é\5
355) cele sls ase ls. Gg NS SH 5 Sauls Spe
whe UT aS ge ere oy lst ie oS ee 5 oT
rane ORs eee ee er Suk Nay 4S ely .%
3 pS ae oe pes S at by Js AJ ve
Oh sy aS je Op & OF i, » uly os\ \ Lee
wet le Vole gleuj se + eet Le cee 3) ok
wel sand . sat Sp ee 5! S25 AS
one ‘Zz isin © ht pulsars.

CV) Bo om. y, UB LS aby. (OM B ops. AB Bul.
ole yl. (WA) Bul. om. 5. D » » 2»: (A) D pony \. D 3, for 3) y bis.

(WN) A aie: i él. D s,\4) jy. In A vv. V4 and VAP are transposed.

CUT) A 2 she 5. “s Bul. om. 5. In L this verse follows v. VA.

(Ut) ABDI len - (Ae) Bul. ak Hi

CD) A Vo. BD oS as in text.

CW D peg yd cee te Jl a; dle.

TAY ip52 Jeo

sz he 5 1G 22S Site e toe Utite 2 Ft ee
me 9 Eley JL 42 52 o> ° cant dy 5) pShig ne He gL ea
at sine Li 95,4 Us ge tls GF 55 3b
eS oy bd Ape
IB SS Pe Te 6 MSY oS sk 0b
ap y Lb aS sak oS, emi & ly gl en je
cl on 52 23% ITN UG eT Gh VS a SS
FSO NN BS eal IVS s SV Fs 63,543
SLE j\ ome Nei, See Gl, Le Jey Vi $1
278 pe 5 AT SI 5, eo ITS 5 Ge IT

no

Hay tela gst pas. a ey ae gaat
GSS cas Vas oe te isto es hat \ \ oS v-
253 oF gts le ys Si eats 55 JLe p
sa ole SI 52 ob ol A)» = Sh Giles
a5) NV pF te 5a — AS Je ae yl
Ke pte ls 45 5S) I. Ae gy er 5; Ib
SBN Solas Meg Se ley ay» Yr

(t+) Bal Om. y before ble. (vit) Tul. eh ee 536 4. L oto ia \ =.

(Y¥°) In L the hemistichs are transposed. (W) Enol. ol oe
Heading: B JA\ 4g al. Bal. Jib Lele eh he uly S Ae gi ju
Tn 238. VT) A Bol. ar AL. (Vil) After this verse L adds:

\e be SI ple f . \5 Bia thet Samy 99
Ve hens sl GIy » we lp un! GIy os ro
(vil) L Sa for ——tf-

(See Gy PAV

a) 2b Se bel ob. doles Jo oS.
FeO lye» Ut + Ut JE EE PG Sl
Fore mt eth te ee oF Ge elie ce
oe, F DAME BE ope Hype to ae 1 285 on
a4 ik 235) ea SW w Sa Bgs OP 29 4 Or
Jl 228 “lis sail Hi) 9 lam oh Shs jah shail
ee WSs cecal 3 beg
=n perlite ll ctigos caulk Jle alk Se xt Ss
an ke pg ho. 25>
LW FF Soe Ls \ ie 5 LS
Ba este clin “ayaa a se
3 Sess See Peas Jlsu ago il, wh pgs
XS gt ee, Re ea gs
Sols ORS a -r mt « cle at ar
Ja5 por My yp Sees pS os ode bs Wali o>
Seo, ul 5359 oh oe ee 555 Fw cle J oF

Vs gle 2h oe ob 2S F-L5 OL od Jy) cn ge

eb see WL al Ja ee, JL, Ws is oe

pee

Joy 4 ST, So ay so Spall x Sho pr A

Lak 33b U5 LA) bo (SS 35 Ll

OL ae ah lS. OA) AB > oy: (WT) A acts 5.
(V8) B Bol aslo. (WW) ABL 15) 3,5. A ood for le.
(VIA) Nils. (VAT) De auld 9 - OT) Bas» Ls).

(T°) Bol. \; ou ay @ atl > ole. After this verse Bul. adds:
By del by, ST ay + pekS Tj day aM 5 ey
OT) Bul. Jl GW. A Bul. Lk ole jo. B 4k sile je

TAt é (> rr)

eee Ba sere suk gS Sib
“sis V8 le yp ett rl oy 5 Sox Po A
ENS: Y ASI ssn .S w-
OF Ly Mie otKy 37 39 * Sle. wy lee wer
end NN gh eto 5 per 2g o emichn 5 apm LU! 5 ge OF
ge FS 98 ye she sh sy Hy ed = 9!
US new ons ee ae © wh 7 4b pil Ufa We

ee ty 2 i Sie Ki yphe f I Fc5
Bo ck ($2) 5\i Shy « G05 jee Ht So
Fos l Fe 12S — 5). i
5 Je Be i es oj Ub whee
po sar ds wes ati 2 ree ss = 95 YAq

3 5N me ie sl obo le cl ey 5 fol as
ret sy! - ee ' bs ea akg
So BaF ah i as SU) Ke

CVV) a i: chi. (YT) A eel td Syn.
(WE) BL Bul. 5) gts (20 5 ee = ol:
Heading: Bul. \,a.- jo\. Ss 1 L, Se of sak.
(VYA) After this verse L adds:
yt Pome set re S pie e ase gl yolk enitS , Som
CW) Tous gle. L oc lk. After this verse L adds:
peel OF dle o> oye GF Pals ls x ae ~
(YAY) L aoe sl.
IT. 1p

cSgine 15 et FAA

35 S \Wwotaye Lb 255 2 Fy Sot wr ae £
on 3 LS oe oy I aye at le ole ah Ge |
SENG iy aly) 23 Sh te Gi gy) lig d aj, St
OT SV eee oh aS 6 8 ol JF ote he hie
2? 5399.9 292 y tile ra ep SS se ra Oy
dels pe le ple J. S re) Je Sie Noy ox
Lajl, 2 Sas 5 ees Lojh) ol Gt ~92> 5)
joe SS aN USS te jr Wt Sh OT eS
us &, 3) gle 3h Mis 4S, eis | gL<s; Ne me
Bos 5 ue cee Ka ak . SS, lh oe, uo 7S 35 ‘
Gr — glen ep aay be gop —b re
le ie 151% 52 J Fe Die +t aS Ie
doo ssl jlo aor me + 2d 02» = SS op tae 36
cel 65 iV cel ty 2354 g-xcwulal uh se Los 55
et: Watle , ae i Ls. as au CEE ux Sa us
Sait, GE oe uy Srety gle er OS
ee: ee FALTIS 3h ped + op = at = tb Se Ee
>} ja\>, 55; Lila Ls eof 33 gar ed Ne
JF) Po ees predle ol ly Lad o>
Nis or sop be LSa 4) etd Jib oll» +

(YHA) Bol. i pee gat & fll. ABL 2S S$.) Lyle 5!
(YT) Bul. om. before 9, «1. (9A) AB Bul. 05.

T<\ fe? yao

srs) 3 ep 2S Wl; je pas wr ob Le LSS gu gh
ane ae gard Fo AV EW 0 Sis ety Gad ene
Space p 2S igs eed ok, Ks SI otk A
dy Vorge Sb JL © og « oy JEL ee a Sl
=| 3 IL. log 2 556+ ots Bate | Se ol
at Sali sem 5s) lbs cl at Jee eg te ek SA,
2S b= jo sale. or gee ole D pei ye Al
LE ey eer Cee sl
Cer ak é > sale 5 o55 sl a> || wud 21;
gb pe ee hh ee ob HH, 2 Se SS
3 3 ysS sub sn * Ses Say a ce
cate tat cS Ls oe eel sah9 15399 pete ed Ale
(ai SEN Son 8 yd eeiey Ach g Si ey \S »
sale Mee Mele a ST SS
ee 2g ke Peel sl 15 is ee
eungh S,45 553) F oS, Wl ey) Jue Sy Sas oe ol
eee eee Voges cols oe, & jas cH) Ei ar.
ae te b> 5 Baa Se gd a\> 2, tae lil;

ee i

(A**) A isdgem 55: (A**) Bol, os 5ou. L cp.
(A-1) ABL Bul. \,, A: 5%. (A-¥) Suppl in marg. D.

(M+) A So. After this verse Bul. adds:
wie Ge 9 alo ene I 8 ts gels Jai Io
(MM Bol. gel jh oe. (M4) Bal. Joey» Sy p-
(MY A So. Dewts. WY) Ad Ji 5h.
(Ait) AB Bol. gd, Sly: Bul. 45| os cs 3).
(f+) AB Bal. “kl,. A 355. (AT) A tuatie.

(Syme USaks re.

Se je Lg & hole sls S55 Ee SW onl by 5)
Seas esa alba eo be HS
Li) , Li el vi. Le 2 49 SF 2)) rd
Qe yoy Ykeo we pt 2 oy aut (pn ase 1
a yetet SEAL repr er Mab sl fo GS
woke gla! soje Sig Bow Re eh ileoy 29% + eo
ss Ble ses Serie: ese 025) gle ad S ath 3) gto
la aa Ss | os jee Nema 52+ Be Teer ee
ae bore |, 3) bs aul
Sets pens ete ne 4S atl S| eo)
ws we pls VS Oe Ge remha
3 FE Slap ge Be 3533 5) ee ole Fw
a Lat cele ae 5! amit ee Pe Le
Vale 2 oS ih; as pas pl cca cee
ol Lo wale aS ER ee wet wr? ole 29 5S
= 29% Loe ole a Oe oy + 25 Oy ity ee 5
5 Se se SL ss); ah gtd iS rer
sh tle. og ace colle e 5h; oe Se 5 Ss 2
hy ae Jas) f= . te
_, SNE et ceatee ke HE » ec ger

(YX) ABL Bal. b oad rt (YAY) D ais ura.

(YM) BL Bol, c+ 5 Jeti. (V4) Bol, wletely oa'.
(WE) ABDL 5\pulas. (We) A SS. L Bul. § 55.
() Bal. 4540. Bul. jc 5). (At) L Su S 5.

(AS) TL, 2S ayo 5. After this verse Bul. adds:
a
os cet ils 3) 3 pt Sate se Sripy- a

arty 8 Ge eS ween
By 59 pe S05 WS so oy ae FS RS NYS hk

‘Jo > & Ye 3 5k Lal, oloets|

ant» oS oe 5 3; ws be ee yh ee 3° ~ Slot
SE sly op SE 5s ret » Lhd Uisth
ole A Sear cel ody Shy ele tuk 5 ete — pa\ae
aot Ley ats 1? ST pp ler, Col , the
as Gale Ui 5 ot Sh WS cle Gl al
wll & 23 ae os oun oS pt Be ema 50 \L
Se Sh il wy Se he OS 3) St g
— Gly S 8 Lays ole esl ok 2 _ Git 2.
Ga ly a3) Sek yg - so bh a rd Yo
ES hy IG gti eS we Loe GSS Gp ulis op
SIN ole Pa. dees Grit le ote 33 OS oy
Atl jo 3 gl ele ne « oe 3 UALS 59 SIS 5S be
ss sy ay 65 eee hoo
REG pot US one SR 1S Se
Se ll et so Ape St sul wes OE ale >
WO) Dy. Bal, op i S
Heading: Bul. 425 glal. BL 42 gl &. A Bul. lye 5 yl. AB Bal. om. y.
OY) p aS. DS. (MA) AB Bul. syle 5 cud.

(AS) A ee: B “gus DL Ful. “8. (ot A om, 3). In A vv. AST
and A&% follow vy. A®° and A®1, but the error is indicated in marg.

(A°)) Suppl in marg. D. D § 2285. A S oS. Bol. § oul, | 23S.

CU pee Sy rar

cul ots, ce) bl Ge Ge. pus \ywits) 024 un 3)
ey ge we calle lite 6 ae pind 5) sl Sie Jl
pn ‘dt, yL TL. a ~ de 5) nt pe ob
ctl 8 og le go SG) hee 9S © sty, are
det oO ae: ial ge @ 35 S233) ai\ LS!
Sep eae iy nal De S$ 255 ol tel _ gil
te) als ak al og ae side ajo Ws =i CP
scealinasl oh CAE wigte So ccldet Coy! coded | bol Ji
UFst-\< lH, Be 3 . Bee 7) Sy cee AT
aba!) 3 955 iy Se ene ST de, wi ae
Us ysl sh Se. oT lass J! er dg
—LL uy p lle pe: ails Ly 2 «3 ah,
Lis shit y Nine Opts e ee lb le 2 LIE I
SarAachaily:( tosey: y \\gnd eo beclely gS ead) AS quate

ere 3 «el alasle j\. Aaa we geig aie Valicuas pen um
Pg the Gag b+ FoF sl | yg ath Jp
el 3 db Jo ls 1D UU - ania) 5) plat LS
cota Ss cole bo be es oe G5e Ulelo I 5h
Ke py pb 6 pe We WT a) le ots JE Wt

(AX) D ty yy. The reading of ABL is uncertain.

(ATL) D pty. The reading of ABL is uncertain.

(TY) ADL sata}. (AN\) DSi) ele,

(ViT) Wy. ATT—AT° are in marg. D. DIS 1. D om. , after ai.

At) Bom. bk. D jye oy) kL. (AT?) Bol, ctl, Bul. 2—tel,.

OU DS 145 (AT%) Suppl. in marg. D. A om.

(t+) L Bul. (ee »> L ple gd

Tto ‘> Ago

Ss Ss = ——.

dye 05! op Ser Dye Vibe gf jlo S58 Gloele oh ae
Wey cle 5 ol y i> nS, oS 5 339 3) =
DN Fe pee ee GSE 0 Feely ee ey oF
comigt 25) aS oe eS eee erties oly 2 fel,
YAH ope wo peer brat +S wo) foe ae
Be es as cp cle acai ee
age ciel jl oe EG Se taj Gao oe GE FS y
ee, SF sass 8: pred + jt ol oy 5h le Wl ak
eR Cas at et te ot el Vag Boo ees
ae SLB 55 5) 5) a3") HF Boy Je 5) Ps)
Sy abe Bund fdus Zhi; eo» «2h 4) sos 28 5 Me
S ry ee er Fo Sy) + 9) = by iN 293 > BY
pot Sigh AAR Si) lc cS
we NS 5 eS Sab. ie Lhe Fe fu LL
hele sole» loan Ss Glas hy ct ul of
wists 5 LSS 4 Gre sh ot - Wry 5 Ly 5 ee 3)
sau Lule Sia oS ps AS tle ti wee
AV Soy Sailer ae ot SNS Ul olla se
do Lenk. aa Or} ope Wet il je el
cA? pe 2? 2 tak as ek IS aS rey if Me
(Ave) AB Bul. < for 3S. (AY) AB Gye 9 col ue, waa

OVA) TL cee gi ge = AM) ABL Bal. 3 for S$. ABL Bul. oss for 42.
(MY) Bol. j\ 2a) Slt. OM) AS ¢ fla. Bal. las,

(MY) A 4) for poe. (Ak*) AD lig ne.
(AMT) AB Bul. Fi? L? Ae (AX°) ABDL alan.

(iS me iS Tt

mc

JB ll BS, Jeo cole ge . Sle, Jal ee, cols ES
ols So 5 Lane ae ie Ae, Wa AS ops >
re ak 5 x oUF 5) tt on ode Dd Bh a
BeOS Mb cteosl Sigh AV Sys ah coat ied &
oot Coast, ES 59 J ing 6 Spt Od oy LG oe Jf
ope SL NL Sb. 9 TL obs bh oe ol

‘Oseuy & ors) 5 Me a ol NLR As es ely
LS GijlLN sce 35 ol che 5 _ Ja ee Valve Sl
sent BF 9 Sai 3 coer aera eer ET ery re
poe Eee Sh ag a 2 A dukes ae
3)! 5 Pa 2S a> 3 anne 2h LS 5 as eel — 5S
wooly ep OV SW oth 5536 eo oF ey JS ol b oF
Sa sabe ge 5 rie s- G4, ai}, al FS
Se eee Ss) wl pL bo
LH 59 Ou yf 5) BY cred oie eh SS ot
7S le oye per Le S& eS eo 4s Ws # |
HM oe 3b S Wile 6 o LS, oh Le oH oe J
ee wii > — se se 5 F ZT VI ~~)

(AA) ABL Bul. 2!Yo. (Al) D ays for o-.
OW) AL el. B asi. D 2a.
Heading: Bul. om. st. After 44—,- Bul. adds gle 99.

@y) Bp u% se. L Slab iS ge oe:

(OW) Bol, ot at tek =f - (KU) Bal. 352 SU-
OV) D aS 4 >. OY) L ao sf jo: (AT) Aelie y Cape

(AVT) Bul. LS ot uy| 2 (AVE) A ree Crs:

dias | F e352 pao

=, Li deged i Sie 3 + 33 Ol ws Malad Jule
Se poe slat: hey rH e alizs ie > ell OF
Spr les jal wal : Adin telat 3 j\ ayls ve
ey kL} os HT 49» ard, buale, 4 ols og
2 5x 5S Hy, de eae ole —7F agin Led Es
re po 5? oy oly Jt. HLS! o| su. cae eae ating
2S ed th Voges oS. yt Tey eo 5) Let og
kt ple 3S iG 4p. ily fae ii rhe;
es axes 35 \je PAs es Hh S| es sie al
At 54g ele et ole Lb at Jy axl Se ge) Sor
+ x8 > x aah er ere = oF
oS iM sd 5 oy ual ap o eS ot yy le J ole th >
we cp be nt 5) a ul) oe sip 3 OF
o3e jl As yop LULL og . ot Bae sles a\ oe coe
Jae 5 5i 3b Loaded pie Xo ol, cae pol a, ph
pee Nyy GaP ae eo ee Gail, DP EF Sox
s\s vk. ib ah oa, sls ail, ro a pede A3i ay
S52 ) sl, Say 5! oS. =} eo ole oe 3) Gi Ss
he 6p oh ahs He le oblol Golly ae

CAT) Ad, at! ol gi. BL Bul. 235 )\y!. ON A ols trys Bot

(NT) A om, ,. OT) A edletie pyle fox Jl? x», corr. in marg, BL
Bul. auf (ih) AE Bul. a j2 PL aS (irr) A Om, 5
(NFL) Lyd for yd. (T°) After this verse L adds:
SNS cee hth ensue oe teh ok
Cry p AD Dye ax ji. (TA) Bal. am ail. (rt) p aul >
(+) L555 for is. CW) TE oat 5h i.

(iS me (Syme Tt

sly SS ae oly we ule Se 3 LS =
Seite 2S Yr USF GL ese Lg jl le o¢
Lule 5s a5 51S sos e lee syns ual _\e
ht a os oie OS Ahly.» Se 03 US et dl
3 ss gee IS yl Shae aed A dust gio I ee ee
Se oe 3? 3) cw Er one S os \ So ae
lo eee a NE ele, g Genk ayes er elie
Ra ege rece » > K srl wed
\3 L. 2” aes we elas o\ys es Nt glatal De ae ~£\i1;

135 Ge Sle 5| eraRP Sls 5 G42 pe ras
ogre 9 2 tL. taal Pics | Wes eave ote
Lys 5 ha} coke oo La pl olny ae gle 5)
See ieee rere ye —)5 tbe j) ss stiles
ASW 2S VLAN. WS cl jl oS ol,
i et eres Sil, o ctl le 55 5 5h j\ 255 >

as ci 9) sae ie <a »aS> Gy ke ol t-
dete IF pal oF pluie uy 0 de tates cn5 pl GS ol
2y hor le oF Sle o> + on slurp se pf 3) jl eo

fav) ABL Enl. isa. (AXA) DD Lele a a3.
(AN) AL oy je: (1--) Bol, os.

(%1) Bol. S31 Sus, and so L.

(t+4) p py for el Bi; ov BV ath, saat. D syy le 9>-

(+°) A om. 4. Bul. om. , before all\,. D Pater WY aL S for S.
(tA) 8 ols rly 3. (t+) Bol. yo yi 3.

(U\\) AB Bol sos re (Vit) Suppl. in marg. D.

ret

i 4 ee ne.
jee 38 SS V5; Ge «5
Lis t\jF FP Pj «
Pp od | buss =o >.
SSN a Wy —lL.
sy os IA us 3 5.
com 04) jh oy Sas Ss

Ai pol oke JI

Us Gels ats oe
Lead, AF eS _ bee
peas Lalt S $ wn
At th se pS ele yl
matey ON
mR irae laltol,

a5 _ i Jb, Gay Jabs mre Se uae 53 5 re

>> WF oy db te
wil. ».— Ky.
cenit ute th oye
BFL git 5 sie tee
Lilith ge oy oe Oe
a ee
Lyte 5h WU 9 yy! cll.
ath os p> 5 Jie p>.
ure 3) = 1 jee 55 52
ey) ae ke de = enka
dye yaeah Pili Sk os
ee) Bes) sl.
cole pe pe SP

(CT) Lom. Dylan 22S. as in text.
(V+) BL Bul. 13.
(4) Suppl. in marg. D, B ou.

CM 4 om. D ae yls. (mw)

()D 52 55.

() Bal. «J. Bul. 5.

oSo i} 2 Js Lys yl

GBT Poy Se > Si
Smtyye ute st AS oS,
PE Bx FG ay jail S
Lalit” 9 se nl 8 te
Letty USF Cl aye sl

BF & bole olel ae
e.3 soil el pee Js) 1Y-
Sah aA lo SS gas Lee
walk, = soS Je oe
abl eg Sr ee me
(X91) A ol for | 6.

(iy) A, | Lue Fs Tr
(1) Bal Gh oS.

A oom.

(WT) Bol. ee 32 re. Boom. , before i

i Signe rtA

SS

3) — oll git a ede ole ge A, 5! oleals
isl oP A pt. Ly es oF a) [tn
Erte gp wi ess BES MF Ue oe Be
ey ge th gk ee) Maja ecm Ny cel oS dl GI ee the
re MS yl S, ee Se enh 0 ca Deg thes sie S
6 ol pce = 55h ee a ess phe J
dw), wo) ol aS ae 6 Soe 5 oS) oS
ysl 5s _> Liss 4S z\e yee ig t= 5 jlo & F
25+ Jo ok = Blo gl 55 + 25: Jb Coal o\ S ja *
ey lug S fl cetee PBT i |, Dee oF st
Spt we GE cmt chy ee O55» uk 5 cu S | obs 3)
sols Le» eal Til ye . ack Cib> oe WS ¢ pe Oo
Sa Sn Sp eas an . nd SS es sel e.. cn b
Sere At hs aS Lee ol eta e Lact hells be
3351 li be lige « Veta) 5. jLz sys sl
ee sy vy 3) Loslsl oS ly - oi
ae 4 Ny Ties or Br Oy ae ST Jab
Sas Sat, je ko ue. SHE te At ty,
atl \y5 3,55 5 c-5,\> » 1 wt Life 1); =i te
Ly dt Jeb 1553 1 LS ot ss yy So \
255 seas ata PF VA y he S cir

(8) Bohs ol ge» D Ee (19) AB Bol,» 2th.
(A) LL | ae stich s- (47) Bul. uo of. (40) A om,
(et) A om. Bul. |). ae (the) a Sy gi, corr in marg.

(4) L Bol. sl, MEY) Bl, sl el ay.

= 9 i fe skys glue " oS Ls LG | oes ae é\ tte

eS je ont Lye 88 oh ate 5h j= cloleli |
Ae ue At, a oe det SL LE YS
BS oe wor 27 GSE Fy wT wl at ¥
ay aly FN yoke ae eo oh ly ge Tg Coulee el te
Fhe Nalol.eeate sls Noe
Sal ji sy Gl soe lb . ae, Lal ve 9 ILL
cant yg? pas YL. ahs. eng 559 bor lt 5) aa
AWS r et rs ai) ,> UA Sy « pe ar scaly iS; wlge Ne?
I 9 wey 5 2 - eb a 2S Lr 2st
oF he SP AS 6) 2» way F Lay ol
wt) ler dl aise yas 21) 1s eS su
de Nh y sly © Lok sl S 5 cy of
3,3 ie Ea atlg » sais”. 2 Snesise ies Js aS 1-1.
2S tor At oly oly 32 6 SESS 5 oe Lh os

OM A sds. (\s**) ABD Bul. aly os, 3) 1.
(\--1) L Bul. .3 for 4}. Q--) Dl. BL Bol. ou glu i693) Sy Lb.
(‘--°) AL Bul. om. 5. (\--) After this verse L adds:

we Ly i 352 So ol 3! Ge pee 13) ska SIS ike py
=
oe aul he gm ish ead Sl 5) ay © pr 5 ciel ey ply, ute
roth sets aed * pth pte _ gle
(\+-¥) In A the hemistichs are transposed, A aK py Sly é. Bul. 5 sly S.
In BD v. \--A precedes v. Ve*¥. 9 (+-A) B Bol. ko oo5y A lee jh.
B Bul. iu. j yh (+1) D ‘sl phe A Si» &.D f suppl. instead
of « (its) L S355 = esis,

(Syme CS gis Ce

Bes LN vay ERD po ide dom er
SEE gt pb el al sl Joe Se, 2 oh ot al el Je
i ae Lge Sys. SAS Ap 2p pe Ue
oS. 53 ay & DP 3 + 323) aly oe sheer!
JH3 Mee 5 elt on Jes SF Se Nant SS Sh glee yi
why tl ye it dee Ld lie 3) lls
id O33 5 eH dS le 2S cole Lk Sle U-
SH yp At ls Ls J 0 OS sett etd ye clos
Ft ahs HV Ng NGM glo hy alee I ae bss ol
NV aye +) F ules a PN OS ae elt
deg hs ole cel ab og be Se uth _ ot
PBS BE typ 5 JS. Sh JLSN sat by F chil; ve
LI pe S29 S 5 > GE cel Ab hid d Goe le on
SIG el oy eS rae «xy Se yay fo ced
Lbs 5 p> ASS euls.,5'0 Waals wut) oy cul op
dg hele hac ake Vel. a bh ge tty
Fetdy BN a lo a old ho ol seh, > ght gp SE
ee hin
elLiné Sty id ee pes \yolis o Le Als cp aS LS 5
Sn Oe Gis SMe F age + cate agate oe Ney oS
ole 41 Cen saw Sy glee oe ees a id

nee

(YE) A yl Sele. (WY) AB Bol. 32 op). Bol. 2,\5 bis.
(MAT) Bul. say. CAD D cy ale yl. C+) Ap jlacl yal plas ‘?
we\, corr. in marg. D oh al jh. (10\) A oy. BDL Bal. ,,.

(t4%) 1 wis uf fe Bul. = aes

teh it (> pao

Bin Se 9F dle 32 + ay, Be cy
ae Pe yb Vie seo ay th ype F Mh PF nec Tehl k
ee es Sy SA a's JO i le stipe 5 5 5 3.
i ly de tee mates oF olla =

25 - blew isin sills Soon te 44) 41 aeom

quits pe + lee al aces kiasigh as. gel
Lag yg Leto, LeapS Leja , Laced , Lekbue
er 3 5) gee aN etal ed
er eC eee ttl 5 ee on
SSS 9 Gr oe slew. ACE a
eo 3) S'2 Be 9 5) 9 aly e pads 5 I 5 Bo 3%) te
sa SX x ik ee 5 Sol GS Vole jy 1t-
5S Se a a 99) opted 5 iy ge EN;
Je > Sh Fy tt Ny) oe oe) Ge Ute gy Yack
Shon dl? gilt. Se, SI Ts5,, bb
S92 ons oe oT enh ee A oe Ot ge Lah

(hth) a i i Si.

OTT) AB aual; SG. D Lass, (VF) A Saal 3h
‘yet 3 . ali:

(ete) AB las, airing ae

ee A sey > He yl.
(\+£+) Bul. olir 5). AL Bal Sx Here L ndds:
uly i oy wl e Woe 34 55 ct ehh;
Bol. adds:

hye Se id) pe a wé Jie er 5! sl)
(Veil) 7, Sy js sat Lh. come A peels Ly Sy >i.
(\-2P) A ve} diay. AB Bul. 5
(ET) AS GC sjay uth.

oe Sa eh

ef so 3\ 4) fo gy St Se pci oe cat eee
BS yy aks Ka ym s op hr yw Lee Ss Bh S
wt S Galtit 2; te OF om 25 SUS OFF
gles mh 3s ct ee a ae 63) Al 2S \-t0
x ork , 1 3) goss e 3h okeoS cl Go us
\_S js\ an BS tim gr olay Mea S el apse 59
pi th 5G JL By ye cope Sole
a th oe S& le oy. Orr +e dll 5 i eye oy 43
Silat> oe res sa 2S Log al ay ye VT
Fe NSS ee AE 5h IS pee OE i DEES aa
He S$ oF 559 Gro je BE _ gays wai Ue
oe 6 5) les de oS. ee 52 Ly clase gl
BEN is aie pe : ee eee pee eer eee
Se ee a; mee » use ay)\3 a= ory abo of \-Fe
a he a ae iS cca
I Fe GB Bee de cme o Fy 259 Syed
Af AN pig go Mash ot Se NF th Oty,

(\-1%) Bol. Jab si: Dy for 4. (N48) A 33 fy su.
(4°) B Bal. =k. 3) iy saad (\-") After this verse L adds:

AM Jaie 3 GLY deol, © ole jo 81 acd oT
and so Bul, which has je hue > sas ely.
(4%) Bo See a hen After this verse Bul, adds:
ceed Ney ASN 8 oe ath USI piel 4 3!

(\-\A) a S ro (\-T+) p yds gles After this verse L adds:
of eo ot gu th + Se ale Se

: —_ = ;

1) iy 1 pee ee (NTT) A So. Te Ayyoe OFT) A ke i SI

(T°) Bal, ced |,.

cme LSS SN ep eee), MS 5 953 WG HST
o5t ley + 25> NL a Ta he cA 92 oly ee
WIS Gy\> joy OL. HG, paints Ou1d5> ie, I-10
J¢ wl 5) lo ee LL. see sk: Jie oll 40
so Le i} ak =f ug tek Gee los ols
a9F 6) om OL ESNh. 52 6 oy Oe sue oli 2 3S
Ok 24 |, wo) RE ee oo Oy. al olga
polar ov ycle in souls: goalie eee
ask 4 So slyer \s cua gee oh | oe a»
Setih en 55:51 emt oe Vi a's ee LG ln 5S 3 sub
Gy eee) ps aS gla Me lO Aas a
13 —— FF Si, pet ip SL . oy wot wk 59,\> wt
ten ee, pen St) + 4 ob ol 5 ) Se sl eve
$45 9 = Wl ps ets Sle tp at
WH! Bp 3) Regt 5 Se gd LS fle yo ee
CSE a eh one aa eto Bol \ ype ig cola
eee |, | ya) 2S cord Uy se emdile 6 2 38 IS A
gl cag3 35> j S o,\x tS oe ctls SS se NS oS oe Mere
~= 03,5) Pr 9 49 Sap 0 enlea S AL del a8

ow Oo ote a) canlso 95 - lS | uty

i! Ws ibm oos' eel og 8 aye =

(leit) B oer OW) Le Sul.

(1) AB Bul. coh we. L opt 5,

(1-8) B om. D gives lle. | as a variant of oy Sl.

(\+¥8) Bal. cys 3 2S. = om. 9. In D the hemistichs are transposed.

(VAT) DSi gt? lo 55.

IL. 2

223 = me wares . “F mae 4 ia les 4 Neko

2 et ky ks up S ri) 1 cle Wik, ry + OL
——3,5 Sy 4s 5 3 will, Le — = 5 — Jl rib JE 5 :\
AF 5 yn Fn F oy) ae UF Jel p 4 ry bol ow
ee a Gamal me
Few A ale ea ent AE
wane) a) “ee oP “ y we. dn ~sls - ~192? 9)
a) as” Js Ss oul . AS aie ot 23 divsy s
see's 5 ye aie e952 ce Voit eS ANS ge aSe
cele g De LR Fe cela 5 JOE 5) a
sm) et) a ort of See LF est on) Sli
7 eee «co rene da ; oo, WS as 3 OS

(V-8°) Bal. i 5 sel,.
Heading: B slisl ple. (YEA) A hood. (h8) A wes Jel

(+9) AB Bul. soy. AD om. 5. (\-0t) AB Bul. raat.
(N98) a ol, 5 cunak. (\-00) Ral 2. 3,4 3-
():°0) AB Bul. transpose gpl and I. (\-9%) BE ah oS,

(1-9) L Bul. 48, (4+) Lab for 5) P. (U) A 3S.

T.V 6-52 aS

wits wid) Se We UW. ps 5 Ll sould or
ee a Nig 2; L. ul. 58 Tr te on
4) ols Cone ae Cee ee ph =~ 5! hye
eae 5 aloil je 3 Pees wes aly uel eile
cee ith 2th Une 5 Pe = Se ot SS shy Ve
phi Lie > aj) v- qebles Lege par Juth Gat
3S yh le el Ye ISS). sie! ps gle Ue ie
oy Ps a pb ee ~ Wl fe Sh
om Nl 25S oF oi ey Sey pt ay
2k on Sb Noms pa ose Ble ut 5) ge og Ile
AP 2% 3 Gb de S. Bie 435, oy) Lyte le
cee: | ee pa. +4 bo) NYS shih,
2 45 \ys\ o> ! S15 6 35 55 a AF 9 sty I
ro GSB or Db py ot AS
ZANE 525 | Wye ag the AMS oc seaal ce let) Ny eed comet MIT
3° 3S br2Ke « cal F aS oj el lo Sons
pS Le UF ol 6 be Gayo ps ge ts 5355 |
— pt BFF Bb 0 995 5 cal > ofl ‘Le gl
<i i Siwlesyk ox boing skip alee

(W-1) Dp ons: (V\-) AL Bal. aul oe AS g wilt, with ali
es . Written above. B Sis Pip (WWi-) B sesh,
(VVit) A om. zl. (Vile) L pile pe . Bul. | F gle. D > > oOo i

(VM) After this verse L Bul, add:

dy smilj lady, tay © oe ol SUS 1 al)
(WY) D Let. (WE+) Bol oOlS 51.
(M1) Bol ex gl. A ae , &- (MT) ABL Bul. VS yl le.

CS sme “US

v.1

S5! Oty id VA Ss 3d OU WAS ele 3\ 4

Nes) ob LONG
= 3 Ae ee es Oo) spe
i 252 5) ee 5 ee
ape a hy gles 4 1,38 5h
Ss gle _f 5 jp
ele me vi or
Sp Se as old Jy
ui 1); oh Pr we
oY oes als Se oF be
Lely 5 re 5 Lp
ws 5 Fd 5 Vr
LL wl) gag Ocala
Le le pe al of
OF seb oF

aout Uy 51 3 a he Sj eyhy

Basa: Asks, 5 cut: ops

Gls Jal yo

eS

oO sos

sit S.

.

a
a. J> 5 om uh > 235 622
csc “97 —_ - Bok. sit RK

or a9 5) sl SUF 3s
~ * ie a” -

wo) te be 2°

jes Ge wl BF

AS

cant lal * yy y#3\ _—s 5° it:

Sie ee Ge sce ote SI
ee _ eye LL, bin a

ye dey od a te Ok or

well bee oh 5

La aS lL, ow I 19
\. ph 39) Pa re
oy oe 3 5 aber

eo Be by hPa ee we ge jl Nl oI
sSamint le ae 3 ale |, 1 * eels jl wr » gle Lye
3 S,\> » F ral » ats | > > ge & 5!

: , as 8 ae
49 > & 3) what 35 ok « 3,32 ei 92 — 7) po We

OrA) A + js, with , suppl below.
(\-4f) Bul. syle » sylu.

ChAT A sul 1h ys

(V0) TL aly.

(\-+) L Bul. as ce3 $-

eo a Re JUNE Oates
os * Nt ol al. 433 6 Uo | bine o> 5) aye gl ite
i eae gh 55S ont ee gy Sarat | ay
$4) ol Se oF yk. Sort th oe we
pe uF GV lL 2. td uit by 5) cmalt nie
wr shor ge b oll er. 3, Is, Sa aS gi
ES. pid 5 ls. => cos aera elt, salle al tte.
Sem yg 99 ae FY Se mall jl es io | Sp
Ss As 5\ 6 Sis, > — «| jp ij 5) oe Ae
ee til lesen he he ge ae hed
Lie» Li aS ald, Jo, L— wk Sl 25 ap ae
5 Gl 5 ot able tee 3 5 eet de wg 3S 4k sN00
oo 59) hE pny oye S i ces sll _-». woke
cle tel. So ee SNS do pe Se ll Jo
SFR er Je Eo pe 55 L— + ile o-
py Lelet elas, © pnt Ll 9 ele =
pes VT sla, 5 SI Lis © gy in.
Le 5 a by ae, Lie x 32 25 ole 5 oh
dS a\j\ ars Colle se. a,5 ob 85 oe sly at

(VW) 7 Bol See Sy - (\itA) BL Bul. a 55).

(V2) Bol Py fue ay. L & 5 jai} (\io-) See (\49%) TF has:
ay WY oe J Sr #5 \e © 38 ce, Ah i a
ire Sle ible © aS, atigt pa fa

(Mee) a oh £1. (12) AB Bul. om. ;).

(et) L Bul. p39. OVW) Bol. la oy 5l.

(MIT) A Le sly.

(Same Fm T.A

Bee ns 53 Vp Ske alk 5 A Ae SANT
2 28 Fr Bp 5S ope & SMe Vol de

S We pe Bie ob ee ol of La pe
meat ony SoS. 1, 2 Lil See BN} gl 1
ol_— ee a\ ssh eal, A Sele es 2,9 er |
A CE etnnnt Se SF Mt
Ay ap SF at AT oS 5 he elec sles ash: 5| 3h
als bie eee ee ee wes v5 iss va,
Ls Ke oS oa ws A. 2, or lye 4 GI
Se lay 9 See ile joe 3 aly G +\ 593 ete pp de
s5S_s A jb Nk 5 3559 oe tile Srp MWe
er a Se ke aN ly wa ae hie 42 asl S35
ee F 3s 59 Ss jl ey Ae SS ee

BO NG ae aes ae Ae A
Pr ely LB 6p © py Let! 2, Po
wi, ¢ Cae yt aa 4 Ly : 1S ola os) 2S ote 116
Lash ot sel Ll a, Ae 2 oll Ls cpl
Bee Poke yoy Viet Gecol> ji, Lee ae
Fee sgh ams pas eee 0 p= ape Se ere es ue

(life) p a he iny L co ra CVITW) oa kt Fo fi. L pe Js
(T+) After this verse Bul. has the heading: “hey Ollie ole Gb ott ASS
(WN) B yl for os. Q\T) AB Bal. om. 5, Bul. «ly, ,3 5b.

CUTE A LS ot Sle Dye gy ya (WIFE) A aly 55.

(UT) A pilase . », corr. above. A woe.
(HUY DT oll Jy) 3. L le fou clase. (VITA) Lg for a.

Tih t¢3> 752

ett lS qe lat bk oS eG “A 3) Ole wy ee
cai rls Spee ile ews his , ek
le He 278 dle Wve je gle SS le oe ule ole

Cyto SM |, Ya ah Se ee ah sina
2b 15 woo. pet 6S ry a
Sere eye ss eo La ei | et oe Lie cx!
ent 5 er ST Bie 0 5 SF oe Un et OS gee we

el Sym > slur ps Gh add Ge Ll cS

Rey Sa yd pe pe th wd on ed

9 3\j WSL > 5! wl gt Ne apt shed I lt i iat
lt oF HS 4) OT SN oh 59 ste 5) coll \ lst
Sg ge BI s Ashi NOS cand a rE | wet ok ths ue Wie
— Sets LA, eee Spee AS eal slic ;\
Se WW Se as
ee ee ae

NS te VB» oy Se 1 eS, ele J5I

oe 2. bere tt Jal Uh 2h ose ae
os ee ee ee ee

(Al) Bol. om, > CUVAY) a skis dle.

(Vit) Lowy 4k at. B weet Fas B vewte~ D suas una.

CVE eye pte OWN) A ae les. CN) Bat, AD yet
(9) A Bol. Zl. A gjss. In D this verse follows vy. \T+-.

(MF) ps Si.

6S pm Syme Tl.

2S 3) \letin =» 3 jlo oS jlo Late | SG
we Shy atte 5) 2S etd © oe Sh 2? S stir hs I
Soegt Nhat aasltin Fe dagt Ub Bag) Ge 0
mat th Vie ll ne ee lt ok LL ath, tht
id Goths SN eS 6 bes 1, $2)9 eS JOSh —)\ p
AS Vat sie ple Je eb Ge SE al
a ro wr We. rt a J ie
a) v3 ¥ » a tH) + 55) 99 SS gd oem
i 43 Qh te te asl NS Se 69335 nie ne
Are eh Sandal ue \yawb +A Pe coat ST Ge ix ol
Ls Jeb, 2 bet.t de coke oe ce Wipe
Sp oh ct ok Ge + 23 th Ib ot ASS oy
ssh wt (Se cee ol Sli We at 4 Ve ive

NSF gels os cx) ly 7 oily ke
ee J j\ ty axe! sie wee RE Jat as LG
3 Ae i ge Gad 03 ol, aye a | bus a ol
cmt WL Wd | Ne el Eo ceclecngy ott bo fel pal
ie i obs 52 Jo ag eee el ay l fag ay) a WA
le 38 o Je - SS pee gal als
95 Cie Hb > Ue - wor 9 NS a 6 Yds ol
5 > pode 559 ih Ie OF sett gle b J be

(V8) BL Bul. ast ohh |b. (WT) A oe ath \s.

OW) A ob. (MY) A old BCs. (VT) T codel.

(hi ¥¥) In D ,\i3 and (jo are transposed.

CW) Boe cle. D cule. D tty, for sols, corr. in marg.

(VAT) A Gb ofor «. (MAT) AS age.

tit 6939 782

te 5 BM ay NS) Joe. ah Hg ope Se
ee eo Sy ts Bey 5? Gare MS A; i) aes \IT-
ee > ols yet SN 5S ee gy olny 9 228 nyt Ae
gain Vi WIE 5 As ale Chie ot ol 53 Sl
ao -) wl eS |, ut Ol 45 pall wor by!
lj elo , ab , GE ye ley oe pe 45 eit |
Mey oe Ge ae
Be sR, IS 5p 333 oot o Se 4 oe cle

2A Sole ol 52» 5) dy ores
Fad ~

cn & 5) dL a) ee )- * LF Ue yl gee
oaSS 13) oem Bae Ce Is Se 8S i 538.,

j- -_

. # i 7 =
622 oF x oN 23 5) GS sl 4 yl oe yo! 5»

(MEWS) Ty oc dat. After this verses L adds:
lie 4 rts, ole $4 pad Let thal 35 pe os
ple get Sy ot oP - * a sl ily o> oa oy
OT) ABL Bal (LS. (TN Ly, for ys. 9 TT Lao,
(IT?) ABD Bol. psi. L qt as in text. A ests ae. After this verse L adds:
Oley ore pee? gts Foo We 5 tome Jo ot bys ee,
ame ob pals Jo pop Fe ee Se AF ol oem»
OS NG) st ee oll 5 Jo 9 ot LL ol, ole
ax pe > bo 8 yp ly hl ge ala
Sp ot oli) 9 225 alae » So gt) Sr ome pn Sy
Qtr a oS » 3 ~3.
Heading: A om. yp ae
(TTY) AL oy ol (MTA TE ob Vil Sa.

(Syn Gy TT

ed fli Ge we ho 8S, gel (sca Gage
3 ag ie —Sf ye om Sl JS 2» ol, . OFF
Soawye 2 SlLit 3 lw SS gg Sa al sy oe \
GF opts le 4 jt e GI gs ny Se oe | ire
wane BLS sy etl pS eo SS _ gts 2 ace So ob
“al eee dye ats LF 5S
~F $5 wooo 5) bs oy ts. 3 si? st
Bal eG oe Pee 7e oe
ons ae wal pi. Sree Se Ceme -y\ aS Lb in-
oh Se 5 wy ple Fre OIL oS ls of
gd 5 ete SS 1 55295 P58 5 abe 2
AF NaS W525; oH she oI SA 29 55% a> 2
ee Se ashy ond gp Lswia g cal SA; 5)
Cie py oNeS ols eek oct Xl) ace UT ale lire
24 oH 5 > Ab 6 ow Sepik ee al ool
a3 WU Wa bg he + 5 geo dle Ob
wl SF wy Se ies why St! 9 OF Cet

_

(\r-r) L aig ce
(F-°) Bul. ida) » o>. After this verse L adds:

ciacl ob shun tle is . ls \s S55 et \

Log adil 516 hey Se 8 AS SN aie oe eK
(T-¥) D aS ands re £. (eA) D sete Ley, corm in marg.
(FR) A emg. Lace 5. (1+) A Bul. 53.
(i) op j= tS: corr. above.
(MY) 1 513 4G, corr. in mang.
(M9) p 3 Mg, OMY Loy yee? eile lk. A Jo 5 505-
(T\¥) Suppl in marg. D. Dy -L. AL irk.

Tlo i “3 pao

~ onl Sy, Yas po 4d a ch. el wre 23 Jk Vue (py Ire
S35 al at eS) 55 IT. Jase jap Hb og 32 4h
Be PN os Fy a ae see F
=) ot AY cy obe oI . eal ye ey ol OM te
a 5) CHIN BG aN Ge oI UF os
278 mig wo! 5) AAO. ots ANF 5 AT ly tree
cul tot 29S Sb9 tet im ood ST oP 3 S54 o>
ten AN a 5 \ te ee. eh ae ely I
om Ft chk eu ol 24 G2 op 55 SE 5 the the aS age
Va tll 5 — We 33503 |, 3 pe Lat jy Lo
BERS jp ees) ESI ON easy ES le \ au if
eae Ge ely |e sl 5 5 ome oh ul fe Ley sl
335 33° Soe 9 SI oF Se o> GI Gx 2 <p i
Nes Te he eee ees chyeaS «Sy je
=~ Lee 9 AS Pak ls 5 stp ww 12? oS
oa <> »F ee soe) S\ om 4 im ime
ay~ al, 5) Bs lst 3 © D5 ean 55} S Vliey 5a cy
54> oF 3 59> 45 Heyy ‘ 0 jl Settle aS nF 33 yl

(ref) p i) J? 3? (fot) BDL omar A ol for |
(Te) Bi; | sie. C9) Bol. most shige SG 59 te.
('°%) Suppl. in marg. D. A om. GPU) T faut:

WW) L pay. L ype st. L 53 y59-
() ABL Bol. Jj for « bis.
(PY) AD Bul. jlsl .. After this verse L adds:
gS ll ge ple B 9 cath Ope gl
(FW) Bal. se.

(5 jne Gy rit

23 3) weap. Sls e je; Pret 3 ime int.
ee wS eat « Sere gl ees o> a OF
spice | AS esy2 2+. slo or, ls, ls, Rep ee
7 wb 31 iy jS0e, 1 Sb oj, oS
Lite ULL Ye os, igen wile LAT ae

is sols = Sia wee sla yl lo, S ghy ane? ite
dyed ede y 2 OT yo oye oye Le Fy £3
LHW > 5 Spt o>? HE eo WHE 4 2 3? Ve
Set 5 Mj jy A WHE eS Po iy » WE

_— a as ASina gy Gh 293 oP Orne il o!
ey , Ls wh p> Lol. cre Ss — hs wile ir-
cul eg ee whi Up ew a ae Og Gl lah
okey oh Sanh gf Sm oe So NSS es
a a ee ee ene
ae 3 ol de F * hy 9-5 x |
Woke Lp DEL IF Se, e\ye —! iF be, oS Wires
Be 8 aA 8 da o's BS ape |

wah Ss os tl RS el oe 5) 59 Se

eat 5) ers ae Melber ge’
225 Leb dx ag AS OF * 99) le eel 5 os BAS

(T=) After this verse L adds:

ee ee | Oe es gel wk ade inj ade NS thie
CT) AB tw. L in the first hemistich che os \ yelp leas.
(TTA) AL 3 pe.

(T4) an & for S. L pj Fi o$ wi.
OTE DT Vek jl.

Oy ceed th okt te ge se sl Ll eS asl
le 5 uk Vile Lbs Le ede Da
294 Fl, > Bp ob HS) 6 953 51, FF? a oy It
es NS SEU ALS wal, fo Bo Dg el
——>\e ES ay 5h Lom» 51, wu? S55 ae ta
2 Stl ox — ye) eo Oe SF bur 55
<P o> So og pte, 3 5e fo oy
uarercinyes Sa Ly? > oy} colle iy> lye Si; Ei
—> , Hs NR a ays 8 aug lice al
Fas >\~ ca we enh NS pel bk So Oy
55 WS wl og he uy Ors td re oe Shp
Sabo FNS 55 Ses ae. Sale ol Oe oy
Sey ee ek, s oh Shc Ut cigs Glee op ites
A ee awe 3S gal &
Ae GS 3S HE © ol WN Ss het a
abn ek 5 Ye o> ol + Skt ob, Oey eae
we we les by le » UIT , ee
cmS) sat; eS ee ee hal PPE yo IT
Se Se AR ert ieee i~ oS +> Bee ecu 3 a

&

At pwede A ed \ te 0 oy 28 Ot ee 3 cl

(UTA) Au for i>
Os) A Poly g ces Beds (24. AD Vig sls,
(VT-F) Bol. af. fic. After this verse L adda:
F POT Se Ss ey WW one ten £
OT) D she ote 52 9 ak

(\P.o) E Sp we - Bul. alty er A nebo 3 Bul. Sennen js L 35.

tS gine Se Tit

#33 fu 53k he ~~ s ~6 \ ele il eet
aro) yi Ss . JS LG ei Tabs Sos S ow
SE de SF ogre oS eens ef SS th wt
es) ea Reus oF Jee So Duk td
ce ap og Gee eS Lat
st on El Shee eatys| gine 5) cea Ue,
Lie par Vaile Flt gh no Lye tl xa
BA JAKES, a LT ce oy LL i
fc ante le oe eels FD py
crt SS ge Sl Ceey 3h o eed og LP eae at Viney:
Joie fe Oe rae De Var (ne, re —
BLS: teas) Gana ale esac ele pe Lis
Ot hie ot cmt lee oly « OF olen Ogre kee cpl TAS
soe, é—jl_ dp i= » kaw 53\ wl ~ Ne
omg) Jel 5 je el hes Ail, ceo NEE oa oe h)
stl 5 a moe Pe) Sc Re 3D) ope “Le
$> F33 29 ote vl os a) se SE te
hyn ie! sls ey) «sla cso SS Wyezecl s\s CL) irae
AS suk 3 al le Bo * she os g elt >

(ATU) B ural. A om. 5. After this verse the Heading Vo ys otal ne ye =)

is suppl. in D. So Bal. (UY) T3535). (PY) ABL Bul. #4 y.
(HY) Bol coltS| ae. L asp. CFV) D am ge
OMY) L oe, svi. Bul. gj »- L o> 3- (VFY%) Bal, aT.
CTA) D eye for pt, with ,-, written above. (\EAY) AB Bal. uj».
(iTAT) p sigs jlc. (\TAL) J, ce =.

OP Tle Jo oe 3 SF ae: Ls wpe! ie! glee a -

a i

eek LS a; ES aS 5\ nae
e534 wile a
ene £5 A EN, 5!
ake dE Jo oF Wy 5) SL
SH al te lla se
ope oe Lote 22 =
=e ta LL 2? rin «

ya tre) ‘eben! ret
a liga 5)
42 <a AF me sino

a5

As

AS y = rod |) \ aS ne i - oy!
i) Su \s ae —' se Ay

3a_Si\s ay al le a
cent ge ph s ‘eho ol
Sl PNAS i SS Shp
87 eee tie S aor” sly
3x5 o\ OF 5 UE 05 0;

J sip) oy 3,

i p> ao

ery a Are oo Je
z ea tS <3 uy
: SSG wy) aay asl : 3b

#
Sac

* 32? oe aah we a_j \tte

*

-

dhe oS Soe 5 ot y's

en Eh Wo S52 Lee gpl
aS Ee YS FT oe

_ Si sialyl ae +\ oF slay it

dye Wy 0y Will nN &; oF
ay — Sais lee Asigs 33
F Snel oe 5 ede ob
aa ghise itm JL ole; re

st at 5 —- a
ws els ly els gl
emit) #5 5) Re exh 42 Sp
Cie OS hye S zt; els ol
27 Ie A or PH lt
s+ jb i orn ee
a3 pF pel »

(WT8) b os al.

(MPTY) T, Bol. Sy) bis.
Ss SpF-d iF.

(TE) DL Bul. WlaSk. A ole glS.

(MIT) DE Un

—_
55%.

(T+) AT, slays.

(WTA) AL in second hemistich: cel eal uw

(FT) D 5 cold oly.

\ite

Se agi ee TIA

YH ale a fe fe * We Reg Ky ae
5 woe otis tos A Sots Stee
er Se az é\; "ph 9p Heo perk Ai
ares ie ie ES 6 lS ul Ore ol cSt ein.

er .. alse i a pa sis wu) 3j59e 2758
Vj hs AUST al; ee Ibe Bcd ae Fa ie
Ad 3h 02S dle 295 6 « ps; oa ale Mi;
A a Ae EF a aod Giisy seul, sey

ool ah | Was Ve sn a id GAS hea tale Salon
— 2 5 3) yl Fe poem) 5h ae oS (de lig
S45 SL OH tee eat oF 3 Ve
tp Em oe 55 FA od re NS ie
525 lel. at ee oy hiner 6 Gat lay oP 5 345 ge tT
oS, Lew Lin, 2,6 > Vero. oof we phe fle olf oy
Pog > > _ ete Ads 3} Shove jl 9 tee 5!
8 a la lay be x ol g ets +

(FV) ZANE yg (\T-A) AT ood cies pee at In A the words
7 5 have been written over $-, app. by the original hand.

(5%) A Bol yyy) ay AB Bul. cy.

(\T\-) Dp ie = ~ atu L plas ath.
—
(\tl°) Bol, write a: | (with isdfar) A dd for ais. D , sis, and so L

in marg.
ONY A yo Load ob.
(\tT\) Suppl. in marg. D. A om. Bul. a L Bol. ¢--\ rie.
(1T) Suppl. in marg. D. A om. B er lly FY
(TT) Suppl. in marg. D. A om. L Bal. sabey

TTI ip3? Aa

2st of ae aol -- e Ji sr ye 3552 St Me

ay FM; wohl peer ads ce

oa hail § die Lidl. ot le S off + LG
st th, Lb se Ol; Godt MM F se Lb; Jo
ee ce oF UP “hs ole “ol 25 Jo ura” WA. oF inv.
wks 257 ll. » eee a
Se th ok Ht te 0 3S th B, lth 3 &
ee ESS rr ee ere i eer A wigle oth, lee 5". oble A,
Sot Fe 25) pene let oy G 3\ Soest oe lt
1a OE Ferg cee ger a So e-\ itv
eal SE Ss OM Se eel os TL alan S oy gle
Sms oF ash Pw \Sp. stain a 5F 0S
x Sp 5 ak we Xt 8h oe ls Soa S&S
S5F cpg 9 SF cil M255 : HF asl sok & ly OF
Soa br a 5! 5 la, eat Soph oN NK er. A\ TAs
wet aN ie ptt tla Glo s ub ol ete ajo jl
wy So se dle 6 5 93 5 LLL ol gile
ny ee p> pe | ar areal area
Jel yt al 8s 52 wee Je ot y x) ogee 3th os ut
“kas pas Sn det 45> 6 Kw esclng «leo ols “yk war TAS

(TT) A Bal. wh ae. 2 L had’ a. | (tye) Parry Ce |
spl $5 G5. Bul lye gS le. OMY A Bod 2S oe le,

(VE) A cnet Orig BL cet SF Mth oS 5. (VEV%) Bol. seals
oF ofl Let S Syzl colt 6 on. OMAN A ed yo.

(VFAR) A Bul. os sue Sat Tee (WAS) Bol ak oS. L ste pas.

II. 21

bE gms 5 gue tT.

a 2 Rae igh SS, soe cat alli Z Zhe tte

nat 3 Be uF ob 5 PATS, a8) ol 3 OFF
sean y\ >,\> heath &S pee i Li a5 & & !
cul Be 5 Bs ly oe eel Ul BS, ot wl KS,
ha oul Lil ug 6 oe
IT ye ail beh Saag a res & Bg Aaa Nes
7 ot 2? be Soy! + ob yp Hs Fe Bil
AS oF Sy 2 OF By SH ELS ST
Lisel; Li. jy canto NI 5,5 558 “ go)
Alt y lab 3) tile ath 5 oe FS oe
Jue Ww et eee ctl a HI ite
Md Fhe Ln cn #6) tere no:
3) cee ee ee
za ae J ® clog «ke 4 cl i» J 5 We
Se file ay RE or + oe eb one my ee L
Sess yt Ai oy 35 aa S allo ee opel; yle os) u im.
2 PI cas! oF F AN. 5S > 3S aig el
SLs) 553 & te wis go 5 oe Se il Fh
Sy NRE pel Sh + on ble oe =)
~ 3,\2 oles a\, L. 5 Gy * of 52 SS cael Je Jbl;

(Ve) T, Bul. 2% S0,. ABDL Bul. ty. (14) AL onl ab). L in the
second hemistich 5:01 5 3,)2 Al ai. (VPN) A oe APT. Dae
ABL Bul. op gp: (NT) AD ys ra ABL Bul. uf 3 en

(Wek) A om. 5. (\fo0) Bol. asl. Bul. gels L at » te. A ue,

(te) ABL Bul. S. (TY) Dao Sb. (188A) A oe ole 9 J:

CT) Aom OTA om COTM) DL se bj gl. (ITM) Bol. oe.

TTT f 652 22
aor re ra ena oe ose olty lt gh J? os
pore we = 3) sth. te | J) 3 Valle ay
eet hed Tie ok 320 sui kt; ty 5 ) ailing ae
sunces NTS, ing tee Se tile 52 oll S 3) oliny
5; mS end ytil tam cele 8 ee Gps ey » te I
gg Ge AHP ep etl e de opis SH 5 pred
LAE AES Jp on oh va ae vy ae OE
em jad Liles oul. aa gle jy FSS I as Tae
Bg BE we Nvock SF dle ycug gS h Re peas
3S NF mye n IS gs 3 55, ee i;
juss J3) 2 55 ayy" © ala oe a Bl
—_ so8 ay ole l¢ po Ae? tt;
Bes rt te Bh eis dy Ws Wht ca aS \t10

92 Nj o) 2ory 5 9 53> 2 ry 239 so)
ir+ > ae casi tle » Ne 5 SF Mek a5
aa F 5A shel te 5s Sie» en ile SF ee —! \ Se
anes Site zy 25) 4 foo eile 279 OF in
pl ee pee i ep 45> ra] re eer ars
Les 5 ple hi » she Lee 4 Ler 3 oy
ra ph 5 Lb ou - F515 > v3) 5) 2 tL

= ee LESSSVSIo@8F_eEea Rc —

(VEY) A 25, for 255. (A) D glo SF 5 cyte.

(V8-%) A om, tum, CAN) L 3d #5 «= 5, corr in marg. B al.
(4\") Bal. jlylae 5. D Lee <y,2, corr. by a later hand.

(1812) L Bol. od bis. (2) A om. 5 before oe.

(WN) A Nye GT SO. Lage oT 5) SS. Bul. eae il &.

(iS me iS TTT

‘xl or nit ue wl \S eee Delo Gla? saa

NF et a oF lS . Lb ue | \3 ose gpl
wii Na S> ey \ ee Al 5g b ST at ae 5p
be Ue a—76's Aba sl oF oe FH OF
ae «ht leta, ri ul 5 Seo og —' \, 3
oy a, gases ay » WS ah Fle wy 2? Shee
¢e aos \eg Ss 2) ~L4) ee (SS sl etd Sy ool senses
Stirs alles 0,5 OS OS « le be Gy Ghls gl an
at IS op NS pred 6 oy ly GS jal SS bye
cae “3 — —hib iS J 8 ‘oman at 73 eye:
2? yi) _} 3st es 54> le Lye & > si
its cg |, S50 Sa) Asal, . op 5 YA Ll
Bb Fy eS om sy jh fe et F Hy pW — N35 le
“3 6) mt ao NS ie 33 NAF sx 9 rs
a . ayy eh sd YAS 5 3 ge oboe Coe
es lee Sel, pi oS Vl it--
ge Tei SF sibs Oly e eS) ON oe LG ee
sy 3b aS SA Ya" ub * a3 ST eae cy! J ae |

Heading: Bul. .¢ pa oT) (open) ce and so L, which has 52.»

ay) 3>- (TAY L Bul. opt) 53. (\TAY) A ll 3.
(\Vt-) 7, a\y 4) hp (401) OL sige L ple Js yh dys Sa.
(TIT) A lal y cn) > (403%) Bul, ey) >.
(\Ft2) Bal, olf isky> a yo. L ole skye So. Lal t?:
(VU) A sy VE 3 ps (44) D lel ghleg |e. A Bul. 4X5) a4. In

ED vy. Ji: | and \i-T are transposed,

to ‘ es pao

lt, ul aS 38 oF ooh we gh od) 33 LL
JS _s'5 HS SS ype oOo ue 65 ot {rs Ls
a= 2j + apaal ut a 135% pr Sat OW}
ole oj | ox |p - LL oS 3 cane wad Vh.
soleitl gaat Pp yy oS tlt! ole oF sty =
I -|) ss ws AG oS o> cl 205 tS chin
Vyighpaaek Ngee: USNS ire we grace thay! we
lass oe pe ali |e bee sobs sul |;
Gis oe uae A . jlo ' oe top 3) ome HS \F ixt0
ity ae Te. df GC’ 5633 Ya ee nS

S4oy, MN 43 Gell 1S le C5

Wish AS 3 95 3 Bho gh thoy BO) tie oe
wilt (i! Pav ee ot o Rtyleego gh La het cash Iss
age ele cath yl roe Je ch 222 5) be
wie jl aocSs les 05 of eres jo Sony gh Sue
BS gi DOr Low cade ake oly beg Aol
25 49@ > 5 - Ly oS 452 sls Viole _.
Le —ile » S so Let wy! hai avr By

(VATY) L te 3h, corr. in marg. (STA) Tn sa D. B sey xX; ats.

(20) In marg. D. A * - “pas

() Aa wast by.
(E81) Bol cele gel. LD ahet » peat 52.

(442) Bios 5 lee. (420 D 35,3. ABL Bul. om. ,.
Heading: L Bul. os go

(M49T) Bul. 3S yee Jé> 5-

(Syms Sys ad

pho Pp 4 Sy Sik ee « vy 9 ob 2 ENS el
ieee ee We Ok be ee oles th cd,
Sy aS Mi aL Li <3,-. Sa, lj a ale Se 49 ‘tre
35, Sull Ss, gal Ci fe owe
cet, be Lee ple Ls ST nt ye S ate OE Gj
Reet op. 3) ce 5) ei ete ge oy? aN oS wojo
Het Wh sgt ble dhe . Ghd 53 ol wb woo the

ES Jal eu lexsi also +43) IS f° cy day WS a3

335 al) iss 5 Sy » at og NS Lad 42 gluse 1.
een | Pye ene rseae Bee eae ode | aS aol SUS
3) alg ath . tye LG e gl ih 53 one SE 9S 559 59°
Peek tee MeN Enea Ao MS BVI A
sb als ib Ky gy) ead pa) ok 35 I

mths asd 5 ent, LS oe i} iS” _\s ae; sh 1
A<\ yikes Ca et at 1S 5 jp 6? riley «Se

ee... = =
(VEIT) A om. 5. (MEY) DL ee os pee gol) Se 5s ody. Bul,
AS he ks (47°) D »,3,. BL Bul, 5,5,, and so apparently A. A «s,.
(4) Las 52> £m F obls F. (4) Lint 3h S.

CREA) Lyle he 9 52 5. (Vk0%) After this verse L adds:

Sore GE rt 333 Se 8 ay Gp 4) ke»
Heading: B gl ». Bul. gy cas » sale Bol. looli atts ln?
(VEF-) Bal, se i L OFF Qa) byl ee atl!

L is a

TTY i e3° as

etih og tht 5 ae ob Bly Pane: C Ae
Sarge acu S 3,\ gh dat 0 ews ld 8 S yh 3 oot \tv-
hele i 04 ete >. ele ole UW Lely
cet MF EPS UB 32. es yj 6G ee Oo
oe ay po ph gle Ls ee a
alae ;\ Basu S 1s » © cw ltale 5. 3 ws le
ey; ur dy Lo aul yy 2 aU; up reg 4h ive
Ne yc Oly DEV SS kale jak oe
NR ag DNS gh ee eal gh 3h ed > 25) 59
willl Gee Oe le ot adi LE
JLe Ze Ath GS | ss we + Sle og A) 52 Je 92? 2°
Wr bis ie Nl taty 25 Se 3a Sn pe Ae gs , > tA
re ei eee ee
39 Guy ey OW ne oy HL, I hi
pee sh 3\ 5 50 ay oS ees See gO os oe
tals) fpcal 5a. Sone Mink Stay CN oy
i wl, ot. peo 6 pth isis a>|,> D9) ge ihe
pil, a3. 1 fo pre pe PLE +I isLpele dg 5
oy S51 6S 55 BL Le oy ay Bee oF OR
wn oy oF ST Ss wt 8 SF de 5 ge ol a5

OW) D cal §. (V4Y1) AB om, the Aamsa of ou.
(EVN) A Sy eli. CED D ad jo. Lad jl

(\4A-) B Bul. jl. y Lf j\ =. In D this and the next verse are transposed.
OUL) DE Sele KE. B talk 5.

(\4A°) Ty os ns for a> |e. (RAY) TD originally als 's,

(VEM) A 4 On sl. AB Bul. jto 3. A oti.

faye Er oT

yaa )? = a oe = 3 * ae Gaen = — L.
ue ae a wis 7 ils eshicent dod ages
we toon Atle é) iy Nies > « wf jt o os eo ye cyktneg >
—— yp \sl sn? si é . aang” a—57 t23 6 - ols. §
. cs ae er pha . . Sa i 3? fs) oh a_i Vil.
ls i J> 22 ude 55 SAT oe Th a5 age cmay2

Vol 15 old tele SX olan
By EIS S253 Ps Jay's 8 UL oe SVM Sas
a ob) 64> Ares Ye a » tle (ple
35 a\;| \5 rt 5 2» s_>|.> * 35 2 jo a ee | mary
ea cry — a * al yal | Jer — me
Apa Fm pe rl pee

ent Roy A Ne. 235 J leg 59 hat od

(Vie) Bal. jole —-#. After this verse L adds:
ie ole dai 55), 6 uke? * Se ole ke 3! Lol

MEA) LT gle; at dé. (4) A aa8 ol SS.

(812) Dy originally Sail 5 =t 9 bo, and so L, which om. , after
— (V0) 1 Ss ol coh gt. A jay:

(Ei) Agila ll ale.

(\k%4) L Bul, oa'j es. L Bal. ijl, After this verse A Bul. haye the Heading
oS», which is suppl. in D.

(WU) TE 2 55 gle Bul e205.

Jj) Ot 25 5055) ot a A) ar => IS me
“lly Wii lye (eS eS BS ol. y2 Ad dale ea sip: tligp:

(DOS ¢ wlsts) pe oled S45 5 Js ost alb

es solu 3 hed LS Oe sy BI I5 5 ~_ gab _ Veal.
25> ee lS a> | 3 G lawols * sp Rds LF gene een clei _— s
Ss GF OF Ls wan gus a 9 G2 5) Po
ieee add oe pi ret
ra ae pees pe " cy mee 'y 3) % 3 Sep ge Velo
Ae pe . = ‘s
pais b LS 1 tm bs p53 |, a) 212 25% «> ss 5)
me ol canle y wat Ve ne or bol oS aS ah
O°) L has in the second hemistich: 25) olbgy sil. oS. After this verse
GL adds: 45% IE, des © aS5I a jl ey
(9) Bol J for sd. LS. After this verse L adds:
Mm 2,5 > 69,3 % * slo er a pat hel oa
EOP Se & sé | by hi fh
aceite ee alloy on © colt WAS oe oll Sle
Bul. adda:
get tt jp sl bk * hails ok , J 3!
am i ath = 5! oat 5 iz * Fas Mbyist oy i ps
Heading: Lom = (1°'") ABL Bul. (Asie... (1) ABL Bul. $2) $.
(°%*) L has in the second hemistich: le 3) gla oy sult Al). After this
verse Bul. adds:
ole ele 25 or La © ole old oe cle AT y oe
L adds:
wit ei =e 33 733 * wh se re |, ole wit
(1) p i. L A

CUS gms (Sats TTA

as Spd eg ls ne wo ee lL ST tp
gels => = Stk 3's aatls Fee eas —s \it
solo hal 5 ray at bs silo 5 be ees Sls
Srey sshepS VL. Sle jl » oe nee
Oe 5 SE Sle op RS - 3) nS Me Le yl
oS ety Cy, sha . — 3 S\ °) al 5 j| re
Mae cpl GS pp cami Veal o coke dle ew de oI 3) ups Mite
WS By 5 oy 82 ih oy + Ole Jie sj) Dbl els
tly ON ke ols ih he A ethe 5h
mee | Nid trogte 4) ent 3 eae abl Ly
Py ti) He a eo woh aly old 2b;
S le 285 7 SE ol + Fly 5 oe SE
ae 5 pe WF 95 | Ge 25 wilt 5) ¥ SF ole IS
Dj Gre 355 Gd Oy 5h £1..% eee SF i Vise
HT any Hl WS Se sess 24 Voysl 1 sy
sae le 4 Jgate Jy 4). 24,20 151 - j\ +S» <3,
oy duals gle 59 We 3 ile ay dhe Jo S 6S oe oF
it ea rere BN go cde ae rare —.
AS 5S 95, Sie pi Ve eer ay + a ge unt

_

a.8

(MAN) A nig. (MAT) Bol. om. 9.
(449) Boom. AL Bal. yh ces L ev. (E02) Bal. hen 5) pe
GE) Tol col. (441) B om.

(\2tY) ABL Bul. us a

(VE4%) 7 nt. (\e--) ABL gated os

(}5-T) A sas.g¢, and so D. L aS wae:

(N97) Dp Bul. gine sl lead aqua, and #0 B, which has gas os.

rth

é e352 eo

a:
JH Si LS ri 3
Yo rls sty pe
Nee hai 4" J? I»
ae, o BT ee ent
tei) yg tel eal my
— ae Ne Jes 3
or ial Jie hati ; \ ale

=_ Fee

oli Fle ¥ 5.

]

i.

-

» Lol hi daly 5 0 Shp ste wel LS Bails wi

54 = Vile S, sale »
\
Joy Wusili ihe ope che
rm) SPP oe chi;
eee 4 <b) onl es ba
aes oe Foo <i 3 ee

oS rena’ lai +

—

yGr 3 2G pasl (sils tote

Lie 2 Se OO
OF ra DS 8 gS 4 iy te Fy
col Fae Yy BAY ge 5) o eet
wb geal oe LodL oye
ts | iF 2 2 rar re
cede os Sie» 5 Joy»
S$ oF ej sh Rt GE CL ke Ss
IS 32 4 2 FS 59 Pron Ser ole iF Way Pte
3B Be Rp oF) M035 F ON? ES Bw J

Jeet. Po AS os a! <“v? « JL« — te wil 5 2 why

Lo, aur 5 a4 ah G4

era wr re

a hay | oe Oe eye \olo
i), b- be = ~
ewitwoli Wile — > 3)
=e 5) i elon ok

(ett) B Alf S. (Met) ALS for aS. D ge S be). AB de)
A pg MSS. (SEF) Bol. acl. Q°8%) Bal. «= st.2 Gp

fy ose. Bal. § 5.

(ete) LT Bul. st \3_.

(84) Bol, G3 YS.
(\eot) L > Sa » hE ger L Bul. aie 3 i cpl.
(Voor) A os us.

(Spee Se tt.

pd 5 at at Link - 3) 3 5 ay ie ur sl
eae al Go ? 1 9 wks ? . re i ee 5) ys oer
shee s cle SVS HS Sh jh ou 6 ol tg 5) ot ogg gelr-
ae tl 28 woe Sb) Lisp S25 oF urs
cm gde Sle yl Y os S\ emg ly? cpl emnne & cpl
he 5 cazle lp Se so a on —7
73° fr 3} i cleo pledge * ¥ Faw weed 3h cr iS
cia cele gel ey oF Nee SST ¢ yt \efe
35 ails GF 5 slay oF pl djl — oF
fal fina to ete ai fo as h, 5
eA F sh gle Wy! cs it SS eS
eS yy Les =F jhe opt et Lash ee 5 \
Ses es Lay) ee le oye 2 Lins,o ment jl tet
ire Aine Ate Polis Dade sb Tee eg

(NVA) 1 pg tte od. (\oF*) Bol. (tgie gel. Bul. gle wie.

(\TT) AB Bal. sno « cxl: (Nt) B 559 95s 5). (er?) In the
second hemistich Bul. has =i3\, 51) & px St. O°) Dom. , before 5 F-
A$ els ala ae. (\°T¥) Los yl ae. (it) After this verse L odds:

S pte So VE ele js * 29 JP lwle = 5)

(\27\) After this verse L adds:

yh et iy adi dime 8 ot 5

a

Je ora | als ot 5s . a 5 ge ot 3

1s
sete onl pe Sat 8 rts one Jb St Sl
all
2g uy ee Se de hrs cay 1 a Z
apts sole Je naa jy * 292 ae aj 3
Sa itp ae ee og ore

* a a. i Pha .i
2g ey AP Se i * Os ae ee J

vTT ‘ p> Jes

i wily 5) yg) eee Pe liek Le i
2» <t se > gh fete Oy ok tile > Iie ce
25.7 NS ft pe oT ah, NN i ol
IN 55 <3, als Sig « wi 5. + > stk Yo
aS 53 — le \ at as Gb, awl —_*53 Dus share Sis loro
UF ot sai FT lB 5» NT a Sol,
Ans yl 2 pen ree ele t= 0 slo LE cl jh
ae ee | 5 ojLel Spud o tre all | ac oSlt Unt
ie 9p ee Wh a) uy + le ole zu) sl_s\ fas |
Nae Vite dlisted J obs cee
pS i ae ot ae er er ee
nee es iS jl. ae DIFie 2d yp
By rhe HN Ful. Yap ies shah cl aS
MF orf Sinden AE Let (ose:
obs 22-55 ash B* aby a vle yo Satyk ee 5) 6 tons
eal sl AS ae os im eu ot LSI -, “Po

sing Hh OV ts GS rie on 1
F pS Nasr oF So FP SS dee jy) Ml
FA PAE thn et ee ee | Sy oe
Beebe rlerah de eae, 5d) sey hie

Gov?) Bul. ps. (VOVA) EL s2yul os? , OA) Ate Sle.
(VOAT) Bul. slik ol ead, A 4.5 oss. (PAN) B cand | 3 6S.
(AY) BDL Bul. #5 gla tad. For oS (-+) of 11%:

(IAA) L, je for Si. Bal Jadu as. AB Bul. SS inj. L Js for ‘$3.
Qeay nt wi ys a2 ON)

(2%) psu ah, Dat, A oat.

Sees alk on ld wil. Ren ae al; a3 Ss
i tr rich te Sush ppl
Lt eS Ls yy ee oy La o pee n> als Le AF Ley Li to
SEAS 4 abe Sel obs Je ale ol ee
a7 5 cps gL oti) see oy Ls ak A we
23 dee ctle ge EL wat 5g hn ry 2 OL
ETT et FT SS. ete let sl Ne oe

Bat fy gts SV Ge + 2 Ge GF lee Wt et

; | —_ —_ -
‘lle. ale ME olen > oO! dom 43

Te Nel 5 el OLE e te 5 V5 Le
Lis Vit Sn ce js o ph, Me pe 3) hap
esy> jh asl Lee og e#s SHIL ob lel
dy dae SS AT 9 dy 22% SS Le I
a> wntle rss + Nite, Joe ee pul 2,3 poly _ Sew
ae sie et aa 2 eee ele Dok E>

ee ee at ti 4 HE Set
Ge 3S) LST ye i we te Sen el oot —

Sale ind a —_— a a: deer d cy

(eo) ABL Bol. 41 ie bepS oh, CmVals Sal. Ly .
(VPA) T, uy ya dle ay lib. (eV) L om. » before vjlsl..
Qe a Jal, (181) AD satia.

(WW) Bul. os i. Bul. ot 3 |
(4°1N) Bin the first hemistich os and in the second caigels D trans

\ev-
poses the two words. L in the first hemistich cmd) th (iets) AD om. 5+

To iJ yoo

ld Shee VSL iy - By pe on
ail GSI, Sy 5) HAs oF +8 lal S342 VF
GS coli to LU 02 + HE ele 8 2g He
ai\ il. ae 9 SSS (Shane ew date Al Nicene
Bats te do ttlys yt Wags gus ca Veh
ga tt, — 5; rts! seh Re wes \a3 ale 0
WE 00,5 | bee «2d fern erie gis 2,1 Weil at 5 “33
el SNe Aeb c N igh ne jade Dees joe 3S old
2D op pe Beale tin ol Ay oe $b oS F
a Dy | Bek uot > AMG a hy pT le
SyS OS alle iden S Vode ase y\ coh eal Cae
cot het ap Fen deel as aaead 5 ‘\ ate
cmt la, gow ss 5. sok SF Megs BL
Aa aA Se ) Sh +b; Lows Wo. Kuss Ss
\,o S553) 3,2 WSs ls Nidtond ee end lo
2S i ed, Sp TE VL , |e
SOS ile lig vet 2h pre a byl WH
Seth Sgttcccseedg koe
st Mes 5 _ il ue: ol 7 a — sb ok

OV) L Syste pile, (MA) D lye \el.
(V+) ABL Bul. 3 ». (VUE) DE dp
OU) ZT a0, Sie. OUY A ps jl.

(UY TL Bal. 3) sui ls. A 33 Os) 2
(V+) D om, In L verses WAIT: and IIT) are transposed,
4\U4) D om (Var ey L LL. Pre

(LS game iS TT.

Vj NF 5 yy A. ee at he, Lio.
Vir 3S IS oll» ae Ls, ol gl ot 5
ee 5 CY re = s\> als! . . jest Ls; > 3 J? oe
jo » 3S ajav! Fn eyle - > + if mes
3 ee pol 2S Noes ¢ MS ty \j\ja ae tote
ok E aa 3 Loe Csr + cle 5 955 °F ne a cb
aS Dope se bey) ake nu go et lit
ol lie oly 15 ha J oe Ue Las55 \ayLbe J
SF 5 \o—- 5 a) sa, Lb Sr Tee ao yytis 5h
ssl 59> 8 BS oe UL we EN eee"

50 3\ th Joo AL ale Ge pin, pas UG

* pee

ae \ Le ake wt: A . aa ime ay ¢ ae
Spey dt a SS cyl be et le GL hs) he

a, -
30 tho Joy > Boz ue + eo tlie ole » to tee Bp

(OU) EL gli 4. (lett) AL Bal. jl: # 5 ke f-
(\°%*) After this verse L adda:
let 2 Out jy de ce * shee J) lye Fe GE oe
(OW) A le. LOWS yo".
QU) Bal. ae yl 5 Ade Gls Demlyl ie. (1) L Bul. 23 (p33.
Heading: Eul. om. clans: Aner. the Heading Bul. adds:
haa sh th Sb Ghee 8 tls cad thy bee cy,
(\\-) AB om.
(V4) BL 25 tate pr. D CaS pee Te iS yes core, to aS ox

Tvyv t r3° oe

ery peer sere Te
oS ig ol 43 BEE ge o eH Be 55 2 gins Jo tte
WAS olin 2h HS ng b> sl Vb SS et oe
Pet yard See Je 2) mea oa
had Meee as iyo Ly
KS ple yj AT me oy LS 5) USE ove
lam , SK nee lj sls. Led o aul (eee
Se I eS eee Soll ae GOR ed rae
Ls 42 (lp ag See. WS 5 ee SH let ow
Las wile 5 dy x4 by eos cals ees Basie
beet ol Ge so! ri) woh + ley» sL- NS ot
a HV su 5. er az! os 5 J> Gy sly b 129
JY wily Late st “fy » JLe, — 555 ie amt 5H ay
wom ky eae te Te ne bb SGI, SEY
ya oo BLS} | oF 0 ba yr elt Sake. § co
jhe (Ul 38 2s io ett yt scot
wp 5 WN TN ES DF om B NW 933 Fv
AS FF os Sh ~ Fs 5y ye, Sedla
ghin lon MO athe a. oe I I aid aS 5

(Vitt) In BDL the order of the following verses is 1 14Y, 114, Ihe, 1144,
TEA, (NU) A Se 5 uy). (WET) B sue

(V1EA) A sje yd cb. In A ve. IV VLY and ILA are transposed.

(V+) AL lea yl. (121) 4 om. (VT) A om. Bul. fa:

(Vet) D ple 5 gl. (VS) A Bol. 54 5»! ath 4; . Baul ely:

(Vise) 5. 24 &. Bol. om. , before 2 A tJ¢ 4 oil.

II. Ft

a cee Anthea Ee Viele , Serr
sk un jecing wp Is
sy Piggy seahe =e rh | 2p woke
FMS 5 ee Wy fl ES - ro baw S LA
pr AH Por cs | tera oe i cs \y S
Lm pl Pr ok le: dit gt yh Le ol cS ne
dle pile i age ete» Hh gl \ Jt coy tes
_\\ gto dey bc ee bn ohn gS 52 oz ty ms ee

We 5G Gel gles 2 Gs JS
\ \ pds 4 | es S50 0 HLS 55, al ale ae
s wk Sis , sis Llete - aS le La,é 52 wl
ak ie ag a he pS 2) Fe 4 \jepl 1100

CVS NG et Ss « le Lakh aes
Pe ps) = rere 5\-5) ree jets hie

“oa

73 —s4 oi os wel ep Erg Se L.
oS oS Aete oo 2 lb 95 » opent ch ol ao, ee
— le 4\ 5) Sy oS Le 6H Gl ee Ste wy oS 0.
Boa Gite 59 5) Cab oy 6 boos ee o> 9 Ser x San
Gi lb p53) a3) op ¢ GL tims 5 sot, 5
ee te 2 Sb uy Bde ep 2 Las) a

(WY a he j. (WY) B flags. (VTA) Bul. 52 for », &.
(VY) Ls! 53. (\1) In L the hemistichs are transposed.
(9) pr fs 351 S. (V+) Ly a te 52 cH.

(3) B Bul. oS fete soe Je anaes
O18) bene 9 Gy 4F UP.

Tv. ‘ 63° eo

= Pe ate 99 3 wit 5 ash Ley
2 pee Sy te ee OF ot 8 Lill jo ae 1
PL jo dcsi 9 cuslioisgh eo \guarde Lad lew cose ops
3 53 1 9 Jy praia! 5 BE jg) G2) py! ae Shige
se ts Fo F viedy yee oF iS de
Sle ab oli 5 jy) 050 Fe ch ele S, rae
Vd os 5 oS or: Pear 3 ar ge SS 59 LS 52u8 V1t-
canS 5,\3 aS Voth Ot 8 6 cee yal yl ee elt
on oF Sly es sl LS. wr et SI as AS
32 Sy 23,95 34 Ql og» tog ALS +b pS ST
sb |n2 Y— pSin SS» sly St are gg se
A 3) Gr 5 cee eee DOS Fi noe
gla 2s ry es lee e-\ lol ah cdo
je 5S ee , aS Ves ae pS el Sey Sb ge
err ede 2a Nye sl co EU
3h 5g gl es) eS sy. cle WL, Gey ct 5
aud as mae) Ae le: r oe gt ce! 5? -uu ao 5) We
aay BUA os & 1,55 cole to S ach 3\ G » oh eh
eats je we WusF stew 4 uy 5 oly »
GISSV EA Ob LAS peal ool aul ois Uelans calls

(1149) Bol. a By: (14) A om, y, After this verse L adds:
or) ares Sy JU} e lle uae ly yal ab

CVU) TE geste 5 ils. (VW) L sjla a.

OW) Bal. fl 4h. L glu 4h. (8) BL Bal. ,\,.

(VVIAY A hye (VIN) A om. 5 before sal.

(WT) Bol. uss 3) oles ws. L Bul. tune bis.

a es 2 lel wey re el ee st 3
Cig oc pean» Le a) sho) LE I
ee ule + sh; wi la an DLS res Lasll) _-; 1 ite
ut) atl \,,\ JS ste ae 5 aad
Seg dito GF Sy hoe el (Sie Sa wi
2S by 28 8 5 2% oe + wt 6 FS Sp 3 ||
seul aM Velie als sen ee
Dad Awami sig ewes
WG 135 5 al Gy + OS Sl ot FL
JS of Vp GS Ah ee tk, en) is 3
Fy oa ee F MS he Fy Or ES ls
oS tn aS las ie cas a a
= kant ee HS em RN) Pe Cer
sal g@ Fath ON o tab 3 de) Sut ab aes
F dyale wal ae? fas oF j3\ 5a) + oF
zig Jo +) \o Lou mee Vols eas
Ss tls ae ath we _- I SE aye GAS LS
a Presse | ee azote oS oy OS A vu
doe SS Cy Si, 23> buy ease 2151
Ee si cesS Shapes a+ ANF ap da a!
ks, bal - oS} ope + ISG > Wo ee welr ice

any A \gl) for GIs - (\VW) L Bul. om. , before 2+. AB om. 5
before =. (\VY) ABL Bul. slo rae (VW) ABL Bal. glu ‘Bey:

(Wi) a 2h, for #h.\. B 4k) 5. Bal. Ads 5.

(Vive) F ais Les} * & oN sip. Or) D sri fn.

(NWA) 1b Bat 2aS Llu gl. (QUT) Bol. S71,. A yl g sit.

a ol pS eis? ciile eo Sle we pt Lb lf 3
as ish Br) ma sesibilet. pein A es oi 6 tla
ee —* wol gle cy cley a? § Sls ul
oil ol cos. | sy ee: okt A eie edege et cpl \¥fe
aa HN ate 9 ol aT Lh ee STL oS
bit 36 ash sie Ss eat ut bh oy as
N43 97> obs 35) Lg 15 Seg eh & yl
VS oho ve 7 5. S051 ee fp ES
a em
idle op se) le Le 5 Ue Sy cts
eet 359 Oley att 4, OMe 0 cee 359° pl ae ast
cen gh tage | Ss RB oe eel? Coby aS dls? iS
eee ede Oe oxy dl Gee ceeso of oh su "G5?
oie an Mine 9 mle 4 prs Je, eh vl § aSe & \, ite
suk cle || S sty 5) Ges ag 2 Say \
is wahot es lil. 5 528. » pl ee ltow ol, Pr,
ee Nat pt or a et oi

(WT) L Bol. oats,

(WY) Bul. eat ane le, and so L, which has 5 .» for sla, and B in marg.
(WTA) BL Bal, 2 aS am ysl, |

OV) A oS 0x Like 5 AS US.

(WT) In B oy a (7) is written above acl. CYT) D om, a

(VYTo) A we S\.D sa'> 5 te: L wlio 9 5 gle dp:

QYT) TL Bal. 2.) os

OY) D shy 59. AB Bul. ¢ oad yl. L 3) ym Gp

b Syme LS gies vt.
SoeSN Som Vale oy) Ce « ecligel 45) <a Wile us
vl> gyi Jou mii hb . sliu > ly Gail C+ yer + vec
= 2) Se se $1 _ ont re LY TLL
VED LLG Sh 5, Logos Le HS Nees
aoa JS} ot oun: Se
Ses eS a> 51 abs Gad lan 4 L obs UH
Hy hy af ah ey e Ags na) gen f ld
Vrs yee bl» Lt Las WUT pe os
65> 9 sol_23 5) Se Spe Dut «Se OS alll
go yo a) sd HHL aN ot 5) ES ob Veil,
yo Ls a Gil; . \yelLicnl Jed a) pos 7
Seiji Ao Pi pdai\ « Sha jgted be Ls alll 125 at Wie
Lin pyaat Vie ee EY eg e Lt od lh SE on
ie 3 ls ails aly os Sy rei ee Se ol
eunloalls Lets) allt pie, . elLail Jie whe sos
Sa NN Sool ccinonde tm yal oe ole < gS hea \yolt

cle » AS ae ey WSS
Peru sibel Sola i! fh pty Sug

(WY) AN 3g oil. QV) Bal. >, lps ie sie53. AB Bal.
op Se wy 5) te, and so L, which has op, J? (WW-A) A igas,.

(Wet) a Hi: (WIN) B Lek,

QV) AD om, L fi 5. (WW) Bal. aS.

Heading: ABL Bul. .,\4.
OWT) A (gic) os S. D ce S. L (ric) On §. Bdl sl, ae ul, and so A

in marg. Bul. a! ,¢! ’ cs isi.

ret te 3

os Sk, aS: heat. SUL, UL ls, Le we
& wr Ss — b+. SL 5 pl pS
To pee peel wok. 8 Seeley gee! ae
eee oleh @ dh. alte sl tN Sy
> css | yt? Le Ji 2 pee Vols Le

Da) was bi) i Tz S, Sy! ee Pas —s pli
oF er BP a al Jab us BE KS 29 age Jo 1;
jl 6 AL jo Mle 5 + Le Le, Mal, LW oI as
jy \yo, ls pth atlecindid os Oe 39 5 J i)
33 S39 eed aiGbereteys yi a3 Ser nkolealst Sau

sia CF les Oe ee urs es litle ive
to Walia ok ot an ay SH by su F Ws 5
Sails wily? eo sl Mee le ee AL! Oh Lobes Ce
come atol bole || bee poet ns ee
yy ek Lowe ule + 5 3h 5) es ba

cael ede gee Vyliitle «cube Leo we 5) pts cede VY
oop ALE chy p gto eng hog ae SV

(¥) D SUL for Sve. OVW DL psoye gle p».
(VY¥OV) TUN ee, (\¥o%) Soppl in marg. L. AB Bal. lls » for Lig)?

OV) A Bul. oy pslol. |

(WU) DD in the second hemistich oss for Ase, corr. in marg.
(WW) Ts le lal, D 5p rite

CWT) D > lel litle, and so L, which has LL:
(W) AB ee L Bul. 5% ly,l a5.

(YW) L ols. (WY?) A Wo af 5i.

(\W') BDL 4s, as in text.

(Syme Syke ter

cote Fe) 08 ) oe eet ee a eg
Bs oe hes ele lhl om oS aalgae
WF 5g op tee th a SF. UL 34 lus — oS
el Se 5 po 5 Fe FS + onl Se b aT 3 Sr Sune
ke 5 oy WaT Lae + ly Se 52 eee bli
Seta uals en $\ ues eel keel Le fee Lig ee
co BME Votes 5 ye eg yl ot, Fk dn
a Som 8) 9) Smog eee oe ey) pies OO, ae\ eae
wah sels (beet, eoltok sine g canls yg 3) oii;
We pe SS eH Be ~> sh =
Sy 5 bl jwil ol + et gy a Eg 2d Lule

het ge 5) NN ale Lise Dl > we ls

lace. ss Lay VL Bese 0 Nie gh syn Sy aul _2t9 Wve.
fect wo pete 5) Oo LL scat we Se, ul 2
GA jet es al) Cals Gln sl a Lay t
pels . giel 1, oS ps ~ slike wie | ee as
- 5 og De ol Gr PF Po cH ol OP

VTA) A meet gts pete gts A Bal. =the. (WET) Doe ali.
(\Wk*) Tn A this and the following verse are transposed.
(WE) BL Bul. ie 38. AB Bul. ai) 5 Gbl-
Heading: AB Bul. sy 4 dls i>.
(WYO1) A cael oof gsi sly, and so BL Bal. which have ai for pa.
(Vet) After this verso L adds:

Je 5 GP 929 ol Gee ° MS Poor sl

Fe Pariser’ as Hb

Tio be? pao

sk ry" ae ta sl's whe yy Lae at wb Vt.
aaa Pee let cx\ ee oo
Dy yy 2 45 oe ss 63, is Sn y r Dy ee
rt Lhe ol desl yee e , shes Fal es 20%
cel PF ee ol AU. ee le ee 5 am ite
Sith ~£45) eds SS ee Atle » ee ye pb de
comin, aclain. Jue xs seins 3 9 JS 8 A
IF» eS af y 3 ‘i emsSlies 5\ 2 jl Lo
o7— Lgl Loe 23 3 Sa a \" 4 dol J
j= 2» oe fee Flies eS NV peekd 2 Mee
we 35 I Lie gh TS Glee nye 5s
> 9 ae oe ws F eile _ hii Fr $a) st
ent Sy 5) ey) Lo > e L Amide 9) 45 L
ay ale Nehd 3 rap yh oS Imo Aso
a vase ae eRe
ne Ub Se pe Ba Se 3

(WM) Bal. le fle. AL oe gle. L Bul. <5. «Zi.

— _
OW) Bol. eens ane) gl 3) fe. Lal >? pe

(VAT) a ae wads. (Wit) p cS ar. (vty) A $3 chase
(vat) 3 In the second hemistich A has ayit ¢\3 ye wid «|, corr. in marg.

OAT) A page SS. D originally ,> for ay. A lye 0. ;
(As t) EB = S. (VAs 8) L Jey paul Ss. (VA+¥) BD —-.

(Sem So Tut

iS sly oF ls), 0 it eat joys Oo) oe
satel pe WAS a a Le Os» >
ert Fr gee IN 3) it deg Sh Sol te er ee
cough | Shy 2! Tr our 4 Se — s cx) tat Hyves
WS Ln LS ptt wy 2 eS are &.
Hey? bee ey 22 lle 39 + 3 > Sl te ol sy Sie
ie Oe oS
oy loo Se LS 3 2 2g Out yy? en sh res
oe ed Ne ce Oks cr 8 My geben
Se Shy Sh oe We Je I 2 Cer on &
X53 of ee DL ee ae Dm ty I ye AS
tay Cay ed S od03% 255). Sutus 9 ys \ sl we cil
S& Ss > alee ee oF ast 3 — asi a
wll 52 Sila F io Wath» SP SH> yp enh? F iT We
iS ot nals 3 Lie a aie 9 a a

sais, eee oS wid « ei an~\ ns als j \3

(WT) ap Pies Sor 6 eat Pour and so Bul., which has Pee lash,
ee ee 56 asf sw. (VW!) B 5h 3 35) du. After this verse L adds:
yal! op ol tthe Ee ie Glee (5 os

(WA) AL bly 3. (uv) bp os ski P.
(WAY) T a5) Jn (WAT) T. Bal. ats. (VAT) Bol. le ,el.
(TAN) Boge SVs , je and so L. L last” for platy

vey ‘ f° Jao

ai SN ie Hae Blo emyll ope alld 5 a 5
35> 5\ ome aa! yee Ae \. 47334 34,4 ~ Lies!
NEI Ll 65, Sat pe lee AA, Uo a7 wr
sl. Sal Abs Veh» Se eskt sol Lies tet 5s
ae get Nok wd) oe weSale Gls en ee
ore rL. Fite DONG Siig eat da 1,» &
om e la) slag 1. |); Sat S WSS cele ;\
ts Fa djl it » \ pL de NGe 53 Sg
se WlS Bigs. NS leg oes
ies elie s won Gh tole TL Sm sate
or a ee wll LAS xe
Lglati fas ser ve Lala S ial
eS 5 Hs, . HF fe os) LL roe
em 5 Se) slp wl ett ns W453 > dp
tt 5 IS sl wl + ely> ed Epa 49 aS at.
35 7? WS eS , cao old 2 O35 pn 9 2k Gin \paS
> EF yom gr 3 > Fo MOS eae
acer oN Lge SS va, =~! ve ite 5) Ose sil
Ma s\. 3 ee ae WR poe ald Teme eee
a ee Se Fe

OAT) Doty je. Aco J), with ¢1 written above,

QAP) TL ahsl 5 Vs. (1AN5) L. 53 for us}.
QAM) Beal, Beal. CAN) DL 2 tt and 23,5,

(VAS) Deod.s and Wie,
(ALT) Bul. 24.3. In D this and the following verse are transposed,
] —

es I —_

39 5 aly ae em Ay Ve as OFF
Poe. Jj eee ae eae 35 -
jl-3 5 G42 taf oy yp? Ba 5! ser GE Need uth ty
los 4s dg le 5 edie 3 Ws SA oy alee
SE 5 Ae a Ss J 3 ows Spe pm HAS the
aye Lai eae dual 3 59 0 Sy Te Se tg em Je
ore i [is ae Y ~_ _ i ew) > op slik yg vAre

‘Ms ale Sn Dei G3 MSN abe eee Grey

A> FF -S> ¢ <te she LS = po es eee
Fae ioe Bs ssh" 5 pus jo te
a ar) wr ob rr we ei ed pale 4
I olsoe 5 2. Ut, 2 a » ay
Lj. s\ 3) wpb fer \a\355 5 nan ee ao ee LAr
m5) gs US cue te e
SF Gor 4 put ou5) em +S Uige - Rs ae er ee
Hk ole wih Vie WS gs baad 8 elle a
Cokes LYS th I ne le Lele wo oo
a’ 5, jp oF Per Sore re

(\A-) D a5\ alle. (VAM) A sly Gae. After this verse Bul, adds:
ae \f\ ath wile * AS Wy Hib oL F

(Ae) TTY, i. Peers

Heading: Bul. \,\\\s «8 Se J

(AV) ABL Bul. . <i Ss wel. QUAIA) AL Bul. 223.0% es

(AV wv 1 ASoee (VAP) TD cae x, L om. »-

(MATL) TL lS oS. qate) 4 SF for 2.

T.t ' “53> mr)

ow? Lie aly ee eect a) 1 5 e\ ae
35 9 62> 5 cle, sl. Or Ay SS Se 5
wn 55 Sy Lio .- y\ (Pie wles Ling S' 3 ju L je
re pS I he 9 seh pF Le poy 5l 45,
Le ssl oe de yal So ly aul le bi) ae ul
SRN oF 3 as per SSW G hay yl
SN: 295. Sh ds a9 lth 4) si;
ae Mey 5 be 5h ch + 35; HIS 5 59 soe IS
any ene bene oH S wos wl 4 5
J? rl. 2 yn ae Fok oP 5x Sl 2 IS 255 = a
La, A) yi § Glie ole Lie VIL eo jp oy
op) le li, 5. 04, 5 Lilie ok 5) Sui;
Jory onl 5) = Se 5) Ae Sse, 3h a apeere oe a

Sp dy Hla 32 Jl S Vas onl gasld,

55 ows Wl ak, L. cilety, 44 11 ol

OAM) DL oh el. AB Bul. sliljic jl je. (AY) ABL Bal. alu Li.
QA) D pe; a a. De pez 3) ei. QA) ABT Bul, An) ;5 4m.
OAV) A Bol at,. (AT) p originally Si S$ woe oS. Bal. “Sy city.
(AYE) A oy 5 de lb. (VAY) Asa, DD S55 i<
GAY) ABD pala. After this verse L adds:

ee ee slau jh a ils os a 2 Ss is po le ers
Heading: A na!. Bul. \yeit G1. B gles o> tl. S-
(VAVA) I hed Po.

GQAVY) Bol, a4 Ls). L ewe ole, b.

(Sem Go TLA

si gle Les wh ah. —b + 5 \jetl—
wis tL, RG Yop S Se - ob pit GL SS I 92
dS sys gi SetlS 55 ot eile 3 jf be lo asT & A
Volo 52 S> ay pore Wek ahs egie t e

2 wt oF ee prowle 2a oS ge 3 we.
cee J Bh one rashes: pe eet alle
sis ee eer se >
: Be ae Se eh Ar Sot rh
M ae one wk ES) 2 233 3 a sb _Ss Vat

op tly 5 Oe DI oo ee ae LS LL ee
ns elie , DN KL Fw cel gull ions eres
ae s\ oor omy Je eg) eet F eve
ob SF _ Si ile Le jeusd J cr st > 25)
vie se 03,8 233 dhe she Ge & 52x JE ot Jil;
Lino eaettS oop nde Fe eter s\ Je * 5 jo“
Se |, o) tem, cme yj) ge S74 aS gts =a
BE oc Nap jitlingd atm £5 Pitt ett bl Ge
= ea RES wien 5! 3% * 7 2A Js) et ol Se
a Sitio Sig et a ee fF 5) 590 9 F

QA) Boy bs. (\AtY) EL 3, for alk.
(WALA) A oS ol. Loy for ol. D oe (WARN) TL. ats Cagle,
OAC) Bal, st. (ae) D | pi aly.

(AS%) AD Cile et L Bul. 2 e,)
CAV) Ts ie Via) Or:
OM) DL £55 der tu OO si.

(VAT) L wi Pr aT a iP nel a iF aie AB Bul. I 5 ex

Tol i p35? aa

55 Ly 253 STNG te tore hy og oe wg:
F 6F 3? NE sl ple $5 dee SLT As sl
Wes tape oo J AS tee LF a NL et
Be SN oS» Jee AS yo pa, Lig y au,ybs a
ails eVieogecr® 6 guile 51 Sec a
Nes Sur jy th bn So. Ne tye ol eS cult ga 09
eee — ailiuls , ale = Res ~£\h
a eS SV glob, cone pe 5) Se wt sa
HS js o> 5) aS Z\ » SoH 9 Bee Sh oS ge
hy) BT NF se oT Vy eS op 51S
5 535) yo ek cg gait highens vile, ies See Su.
colt gle 32 Soto NM pte ely pS SF ops — jaw
By we Fees By Ce Beane A ulonoky
SLE 5 5p, cag Vy hs at hl ys ah th Pre! ye
a5, = ;\ SS po. oy gee 355 mS ion Sig gt
wus or abt So ‘ ery 23 Sothe acke al gpl te
£5 al 59 alo oe er of) FL Sy ows
dt dhe Va Sp go oot So me cer sh _ Se b
J! oy ot ceo LL cuss oy ‘dec a3 a_i me Se
ete ot Nye rer eee onto ry Nis sed Vos ig
pees £35) & -\+ ie nel 98 4 Sigh a

(+) B Bal. 2h) for sh. OU Ls ise je

(Vt-F) A om. 4°
OF) A oily Di L Bol. yemilys 0dy0- (1%) B Bo, ut:
Qt) Dayle. VY D sre 5. (+4) ABL om. ,.

(VEX) DL ylay yo. ONT) Ls 4 Lay. MY) Dkk, tee:
(14) Bol. 3,4 le jl. (1) L Bal. gal».

Co = co To.

23 4 ee ek ap ara a
— sh >» & IS 55 ated ur wv) or) ce
a%,) 3,4 sl os a . ai hg — bea ee
sles Wyse GL ytiles j= 2 als a) 59 Loy lk sou
Ui ee pS & GS ye dad eee tl vl cS > sis sly
ats fe ef I ee +a fe Ly wa tel; Ls Se
Be ad as es
pe gh ros pole el eT, He ge Ty eles
S25 5 UB ph bs ole ye lL flo 3) oe sre
po a ee 3 us) me I 5) ok. kj
sles 5 jo glo 4 dope + ke ge Ole es poy
te doug ake 34 acl g ZMK ge
ss sy x 3 3 Liss b ese ality 5 soatSie aS 1S
35) eee wae arg J L jhe +S 5 ee, La) rene 92
Ly) S55 mz) 2,5) os ; \,)\ Oo gor 2 5 2 OF
5p Sy \ laajo Qh ed ope 2 255 ty tle WL pt
sei ly > ibe Le Use Ue 5 opt 2S
mote 5 we ny pt ew 1S wl tbl. et
wis , suk #3 VAS o © lb J wie lL»
PR Say ee ae 5} 24, \36 5! 205 Pa

(\AA-) After this verse L adds:
= = > @ me oe
Spal ess ghee Pay eT fF oP en op)
VAAL) BDL Ve ask ¥ oS cp Jas

(MAY) Bol. Vs? gp yo S. (at De ahlye gale poe
(VAtS) B Bol. 23) 9 <4). (AN) A og g oad. D lel. L

as \ oo Ls. (VA) Bal. opt

Tot é e352 pas

ae Ve eae a2 sees cies, als euss os ee
Pe ey LP ASA, + 5 ent 5 SIL Om, pol Mts
— sll 43 ee _& ger sul omy yl om,
gle Sil, ls 5,5 sl pe. ple si 5 \ 75 bir
Got yp 5 5h a eth OSS ee oles <
eae a EN ds gee Le et Sy Lee 5 SF Al,
ples 50 4\ 42 oS) @2 sb. (LS5 St 5p 5 5) wS pp eg
oS pe ler 5) gl 6 + Nie ys 5\ AS
a a ao) 9 32 3\ Can Vie Cage ont 2 - G2 Gy)!
wot 5S ye ET. KS oe ph by WF
oS tr » —b 35 > see roe. eeashhe Je
role 2 Se 52% eo, th) aS _ iby 5, 1
lel 553 ey eye lal 6 OS, 6);
ay Ns | Jie 3 5s “2 poe oe pe 4 «Hl
Auiks cant sety Balls pagel Yas Ge
tae las wos) Ls ole hy ig 2 ot
a > 2S. i) lo we a aa: ye Sah te
este gine aut yal | Oki O35 pan i

O°") Boom. AL Bul. a5, Let g ; (V4+) Suppl. in marg. A. L — 3
(1) Suppl in marg. A. L yy si. ABL Bul. els aps |
(VTES) A om. 5. (V***) AB Bul. v3) ,- Bul. a1 mi el
(VEY Bal. gle ,>. (VTEY) Le tee wtlaye 5.
(\TRA) y, in eh 25, and so D in mare. (\te-) 4 dls 2 L dla j-
(VION) A ely le. D culale sis. L cuulal. A culals.
(7) p gk. (Me°) Bot, sh esse csle.
(291) A poet. A,» for ».

IL. 2

(Sm Ge tof

sly Fos pot lind bs ele ies ne Poke C
aly wel i, St ee bE Bl a or SX 28
HS ee a hyo 0) 6 0 SI yg OF 4 LL
ply ed 5 BS 2 e pb Ss US pte
ee AE 7 OF 3 agit De
cpl Yall 233 ate eee
oe Js Ls sy ook ss . 65 > Ww! oS Lease
wie? xl oj oS oH edt cl ele gh 2 5!
= keane Jol by IY eS & LS
op le hel lel 95 oon Gb os ile «gto
SEN oh oS oh De 9 to all 23-55

‘ne Bly 9 GE» wt Je

wy" ols yess) Sra mer ee ae ees jess)
nyt shegllas eS cyhsj 3 ~ od Js jo sb
3338 ety a7 OO orig be 5 lye Kh
ols clase oleh OTe ular bla Lee ul itt
AS y=) By ole a et Ry 9 Sp 5 ee U*
oe a Pte SN IS SENS Sow ile acyl

29 + + >) 9h lve AS 3 her

ae

(Ti) «A om. 3 (Vity) Suppl. in marg. A. AB ls isl.
(VFA) Suppl. in marg., A. L ot, slaly-
ONY) bate yo. ON) Lg ble G2».

Heading Bul. Lae aa 3h ale.
(MIT) A om. 5. (104) Boom. 44.

Too ‘ps? a

ite a5 sic. Co yee Ss Bre eer ernie
MS a! Soe SN eS 6 es ast pS AEE sty itv
idee JB se oS, OF BajheeBithag yee
Ba tiie Ye esis! ew cecad oe pC geile
Be oath werel Ses ace jy de aS ecuil
St 39? Wey IG 5 Ts at ye le wh Sh
5S SS 5 ws a\* ae i gi ile i YY NV alyes yl Ao
a Vee ple uy styl pth e5\ x5 |
°F Late 5» oh ol S\ ii ej fe sy pe
255 om 23 gh WU ot UG . ee” jail aS Sls Lo ct
pki, eee an die tls ish ive) S ges]
tae Nis ale a Ft Be ie 8lt oe S10
OF ems) By ed FA + Ob cml 9 5 sol Ub 5 S
ee: x +3) eo > oe 35 5)
Peet ~—2\s3} mn JLA 59 Se ie. ei.l\ dS ~_2),8 rT
a pr BES cs we Ma 55 Vs sl, soln! iy
sel, 5 Se - OS hie © OR ey ay} = a th 45 V1t-
FAS or 29 MS ne 2 355 hy ss I r= 3
SF preg ae VW Ub eS eo WK. Le sl
(WW) B Bal. je jx). B Bul, | o,) |
OW) D dle. Den SF ete be ae IE SE yt.
(VV) D laleuls. (N4A°) 1 BLS an.
QU) Deut i 5 $5, and so LL gly, 5) ob
WY) Dh tye he welt S 5 ¥.
(VA) A ble.

(WIT) L Bot Ws yl ae ol. L Bol. ps 5 VL tldl.

: ys

oe So Tot

J, ral 3 ae aS » Sj ah! 3 curds 9 Oe
SS NN oe i coh teed Wy OS poe
2p pr Sole EF: - 2 yg) war LS S ils
Seg JP pe elec oh 6 LS shy 3 ene ah oh
es, ge sal oN oe
St ideg ype 9 Fe et SF) g5 DH
ss 3th ne 5 4,3 le « G+ 55) 3h cuLAl 1 iy
ele go el Las JP oo 6 HG Seer oy ly KH
G8 Ged on} oS s ais 2 UE Seale Soy 5H) at aly
oot le 5 35 5 or a). gr uh » U5} ls K.
wei yl g Sem jh che, 33 e eit by 3 S223
FR | ‘ns Me Pe ee GF 5 an kj 2
pe tl op SME ge tN 5 cpa hye
Le, pt Sa j\ oS Saxe Laosl 5| oS ok ose ce Me
eas is wird 4) Vlo5l « on djsis fc: dp gy ele
cmilot> 5 ; ae js Fa et! ails a cae \ Leos
3 al Go sas Ske "22 oe Ca wae! le

7
ar) Bal. 5,4.)9 (AU) D al ‘ i
(VW) AD om. L Bul. ,* Got gk pt. (VW) A for tf. In
Bol. y. tt precedes ¥. pata. (\Tit) B BN, After this verse L adda:

> Ss a\jt Lint Gee * aS oly lash 3D oe oe
(\AV-) L has in the first hemistich: Leogl gl) tlh oy at dhe. DL 5
lin ae.
(WY AL ale. Diet, at ete cate. After this verse 1 adds:
gislp gaa Waohue men G2 Sse i) oe ol Sb
(V8VT) Le ee ake 5 ie o—-

Toy t 63° pao

—

‘oy, 008 deel 4 sli ign © al yy eicuaie cele as

Se Ob he tb cae SND ee ad
dhs wo! a 2 Wb 24. hj we J aS le Son
— SJo Sk et ale a Ses fale, ile 3
eb AP ANI Ste thorn Sei’ aa 8
Lal So ae sep ei. Leal eute y 2 SJ, os
cum i, wil aes de yg) e cod’ Sh ct a_l,\ * _gugo T-0
OY te op SSE ae (Sy yg e - yl oF 1535-> 3 A, iS
Smt Ute 3) ot Sane idl satig ll pe i
Beat UE ARS Mi ob ol ne be
- = Bigg ewe Ft Ee ey, 05 oS
Be pth am os Meat cles Les \ F yr
Mu 52 5 > Le | el; Pie > 5
BY 6 Fo 4 ol ee SAE ee
eae a 5 ob sot oS Jo
35 etn Vo NT, 2 oo AS, oS ap cp
mae AG oe & Ss. SAS hy 5\ cand ig edhe 4) eas Te
BG FT 3» Yall 5» GL Lie wybemF Fo nb
pie dln Fe Gl re F 5 AUS oh

Heading: Bul. | sls, ,>- (FI Dh, ge ay a
A D aly gaya. (F-\A) AB Bol. la cas.

(OV) L Bul. 353 sat 5».

C-) aA Va, rr) bs

IX) Bol. pe 5 for , ;I.

(T-T¥) BL ¢ wesc. L ae — ila! .

(Spm ss

Tol

a\e S55 5? ‘a ae eg

wy Sal ol glo 55> o «
ole > xs pl SS 9° O°
Lé |, ath et ho
LS5> ss 9» Silylont
Fyn oS. Sh as oh
dys fae ro oe
sS LS Nb ove |
Yeh ery, by — + Ge
\3b) u> Jb) as

>> Mage Sy? a8 — Soir

ee tO bys
Jt eye ge ouS > 55 «

ve 14) eS ye 5 ut
L. pie ee 8 112
« eae 3 Able oie
Seed oe ra 5 Sle

do) «> L> vere a aj

. aS Liga | Lan 5 >

iia igen
Lib dS or & +2
xy acs clo shel 241,
La, A)

i—- pga s> ah Jb

geusck a Sw;

~ Sue oe ety ts a IT =

usr ag Os s-
22 Geb er 25 oll.
ye 9S wy 3 Le
F ls 3p at eS cole oy «
OW A aad pis © sa

(T+.

Se Sy oe

‘) Bul. cp op

“Lady a ii
-*1) After this verse L adds:

ce) j aad. i db) oaks EA, ol

Soe st j\la2; Poe \os\
ay sar, > Sh |
oS SS 5 Gey le Ts

S pas 22) 5= 3 a

ala.

hae

rai pi tbs plop © oy thy ul SE 3\ 2 oh

Tot (es? as

Santa & 5 i co lee jy + Any my lS Je Jo dlely
aS 5 as 5h = 6) g jle ops Ste 5 Unde Ae 5 cy!
ing cp SS aS oS ae, en pole A aI > =S\,
at by cial 55 ae we | poleagy
gen} re ok _ wa Oo. gh 5 > ea S2ge "age Plo
> Sr pon J 5, 5| 793 5h ab ote oe
lee 5 dal sy jas ==, ms ae is) ath ae sg iS pl |
GIS Jt Ly we 5, ut SS 5) 55 Wy? Oye
SAS) 22 oe ye Cb) 9 6 GIL, Vile solutes AS
Syme pte, — lie al 8 (5s 5h eS oe 5 4 [a=
oe —F 3 Po Jer ol - DUS 53 9° 395 GIu252 A

ie AS ee ISS og el ISS, Se IE
ae oe aA Lislials, oS ee 3135 Sil O55 s
gah Yom Se ot oe 5) cule KE Dj
~_ pol at urs oe Lek — del, Duk, 1 Lael, ree
Ci C- Evstge wh, soir a Mil;
= \, 51 b j-S 3 pte jars 2,5) 3 LE chy cl ss
2 le NGS KR Wr or yb SS ox

(F-24) 7, eit Bul, ol fe After this yerse L adds:
Yael S336 4 At oe SI Mea3) ot Se? 92 Ab yy
(F-°%) Bol. gosle. Bul. isi

(T-k&e) L $55 uk Oke. Bul. si 25 is!

(20 Le 3 Sind. (F-2¥) 7, che si.

(T+25) BD Bol. ts sos Us» a J?, and so A in marg.and L, which
has IS BS oe 5. u “OD Vas, ue. (T-e) Anse! s cas.

(f-of) Bul. 2.) a>. (T-°A) After this verse L adds:

(sie) |yrale Vie iS ioe to . eS Seo be oe

‘ inate sae ToA

g— Lie ler: oS 055 5 WSS in pole
ioe neers Tren rerre
ob Sey act wes WS aye lel Se per
Os 6 weal na
bE ig Ne KOs hea ANY atl SEN
tp Se ya AN IT the ae et oh oo aU og
27 oP ioe ge >) e 9 ep Se SG Li
sto gts gab casts Inne o ole ane oS vl ly perm

aL 5 cm 9
Fae ol 9 hex on b+ ets a 5) 2s oo
wy She 5 3530 lS Delany SS ea UR ae

it Movies pt e's ssl Ss oe ae Ne Jl> 3I
SAS 53 5 5) sty Ge lt jek Ley? 5 )\ ofr. me

(FA) BL Bul. 5) 5 ,)35. (F-'T) After this verse L adds:
op Jl 350 Je oe os oop ok oe) syla tu |
(F-T8) After this verse L adds:
> eye pedee pl ult 5p * or ibe se ges ie
259 bt 9S so ok + a4) oe 5 ol age 9 £5 ye
Jee ea cle ay) JF He OL bos
(T-Te) Love se 3).
Heading: Bul. 34 a) 1s.
(F-Y) Bul. » for jo. ABDL relay. AB Bul. 5 lige D le vase
(Pet) AD om. 5. A curs ay BDL chisel,

sia 42 a ee 3 ae ee woe Wosle Ui ob

Bi sha a5 5 i pe an fie eg Spee — SL oly Ll lala
ks ees Vil iin Saka 5 ig bea £\ ta
35 I st oe oS _F ek o Kat Su V3 acl ac go A
tak ae Slt 5s nie et at\ 4 sa
Fer ll Wt > tle sls Me Nil lois
cmt tee ge Sa JH yg) Sol 9 SA) et

— \ie kh ie aa i ° —_ is sh — Sas Spt [- Ao
gees ON Usd ys stg tli hee ete
pels oa alos Bigs 2s es Bog gS
le vi 5 2 cs OMe Vol jay si sale 4 259
oe es cael, gl tg as 7 © oe 3) — lo Voy! Fo
oe) ya elt ls . oe 3 > oly eo
LS jo Spee pS LS is WU AL

2 or rel So do un * ry ILS Sls nS a

SS etsy oe LN 5 er | lh + 2S ae ol oan AS

(TAN) L Bol. a5 Se (eA) A LS aay,

(T-AL) & ety cs 1 4. L Bol ry e

FAY L see au. (HM) A 59, d. L ler » ale.
CAN) L lle e- AB yy 3S Sb. 1 Bol. W Sb.

CONDE he Bees OA) DNS oe SF las a.

(Pe) A 3 for = his, A Bal. Le. D 3, for a2.
(1) L Bul. oe yp &. LoS 2i,.

(gm cs Tl.

les ‘es gree A lnk en rs Aes Ss re eee | sr
eS ash 5 2S ee 3 Pa 37 | 3) Ne 2 ne ort
—_ Ns - a ole oj oth ssl ob ae seid
eatin ree

<3, 3h OL ee em
SNe aulje Ae || Jo 42 + Jia ap ps Ae a oe
te ee (5,5 y\* Sa es ee og Hy) LF
WP be nS EY Ge us ep Ashe a ae
chee ae si |, V8 oe el > > wilh _ Fi hie
pee ’ v res Be lie ty er
ADS te git 1S wie» ad
Sen gt Lael wrt ung BO, one oh lh cx
BI as be 2A by ds Dope ential
Bah 2S 4 4-5 Se 45 ae pe WL)
Piss ody 5 ILL; 5 o ee ol asl Fees un, <<
ae ja Sa cord yl pais Sa: 550 asus poy hve

\
is pad te 5) Ae» La th cash US 3

—_—_
(FV) AS I.

Te

Heading }Bul. y5 44 0 Obi Sd ST az. Lea S ey ob S-
(F-1°) AR Bol. css —- Ts je pe (PW) A te >

oss (F-4) DL 5= ye, corr in D.
‘ #
(F-T) AB 44s 5% 5! (B #,-4).

(Yt) Bol. eos xa.

a by t e3> sus

SoS eh Sa > ol sear oe \
AL 459 lee) CF UE aig re Ce a a ee
Fe ITN SAN MS lo i lice Ly 3 teil ys MP
ws Fig we 9? \ Jar ee ee dee be
SNS Visa op po oe oe eo etls AL wah 5h as Veneta
say sale EF Su I or 72 0 kp Lilsae shen ¥ J;
em s\ obde pe AL, a © U3} 5h oy A po) ws 4h,
wes 2 Ls fe S_- Go oh J oT Sis oe eh nr
Gi ors ,\ p>! Roca Ye Gt sol are Pas él)
5 glen se SN oet pe ens) gle 210 Ls oe p
SS a \S - * it 3) a 5 e—

‘ ak wee Oo Pore

.
i,
a

ur Le 35 Se aN je jy oS ail Fone > ee oe
b> sls 3 4a) | Le tle Soy 5) ai, vt " = Tire

= —— |

ry A pk jy » vel (F\\") Here Bul. inserts the verse which in B
follows vy. T1141 (see above). L adds:
oe cll. St
Sao Sb 38> os : = uwelS5 gle LS Gl
rie Sle 4 » > cay * ee eb ot Jo Se ov
(TW) Here L adds:
(PVA) 1D om. > re ol. en Das seid & to
(Tl) ABL Bul. Ai ut (T\VS) After this verse L adds:
ae AA VL se oF Fab © oF shy MY cag foe + |
and so Bul, which has 3,)a gli gs yl. (FE) BL Bol. palsy

a

CS gimn 5 xe cr

‘rye ose5 5 ple aly oS ah
AS Gale NE Vp eee el Ly Gone ee
ort at Seale be ols os 3 bl Sd) oi 54
99 hyo Sh oF yy 5° of, 4S. > wil 9 J 5h yy0
Aa? ow pol 95 y peat + Re tt Say 2 8 ol.
ee, calisSys) p35 «oi! we > oo eke
525 3 oe we ade sal a3, ui Go a $n.
1 \ Ri ot ome ll. jos ht eg 5 PD gS aS ae
See oS tel Gece Se ie

“Sed 9) Ue > S iy L Ep Daye 9 OLE
oe a ee $2 pe Fa 3
wl el ie jee be lle pe pl oF, 3
SS Bay yl> Pp 2 * So sole ot thog p= Ge |
oy stb ys) S sae Ss orn
og oe SF Ble SG oy 0 oy tke ae SW!
Os? SF so 5 S$ ng oy wie ro Cy Sw!
ss Gee oS S$ oy + 5 9 3 SS SI
Tats SEE on at pot Seisine
oe nal uals 52 S “ns * » IS 5 oO ol S& ww!

(F-W) ay? oe 3) se Hending: Bul. £¢ \s ri
(\-t) 1 Se. BDL Bul. 325) y LEG obs v2.

(TV) A om, 5. DL Bul. yl 32 - VY) DS sl

(\-) B Bol 45 oS 5>- (TV\) After this verse B ee

Ste ONS Oh ¢ ole S © gu chagy oul»

Tyo ‘p52 FHS
Soma 9 L Mes <5) a + thls y i, oslus »

ar #

Bue, ue. As 20 - ae
Fy al wo a Ser MR 1s »
roe S vol, iS ath sco. ie 3 ny Mk tre vv
B sce abn ga yao dics
dt ime Vases Sy + slise| hi -
i; 4 al pie iSj\,o 5h
eL. ose Ae oan

wk 5 ey 3S; | \,

oo 5 ee wil =

83 Wb le

3

Bb i cea 4

Jy pd 5h pa —_
Be or

=

5) 515) .

cade hel ent atl, ose rr
j= ROS teed 23S J9
Ey Gilt ome 4))
At er 44 > cyl ee Fis.
258 hs far e= 2? OF
ér ic j2 ee _ Ss be
ANS 5 oe * uly? A a

oo gl be OY oe tt

ats 2
saul ogee y — : at ors Pei 25%
he yk KH ol ey & ols bs TG gg Ll od

(TVET) TL om, (TVEL) 7, om.
verses Which conclude this section of the poem (fT 1°T—T 10°), In L they follow
v. TInt. (ris) L By oly. Ts eae gc 35 208 ys hel, b.

(The-) Bol. yk i 5.

(F\£°) Here follow in Bul. the four

CN Lae tpl ON DS tor &

L 335 lye fF okt <>. In L the hemistichs are transposed.
(Tiel) Bol. 2s .yl, and so L in marg,

(TIA) a 2) oe

cel. L ole oy, k.

(Spas Syd rt

ee aan oe ee
jl dle a FT ace Bars! rte Spe ens
Fb Gl b US p19, HLT) oS,
Re ae ee a ere Pee
Be SR ok ot

Hs elk, , 3; gig + lela dy newhonn

i eae ae © 2% yok » 1S; ye S
fot BIS yu 9 & Nak gs Eyy> & HS a_S, a die

ait i

Fe hake Ain-aes 3 SF 5 eee 3)
SSy aS oy S SS oy 55 a chien
NF 2 Spt sae SF a » wy) aS sell Gi ob
Jt tye 259 4 | 1 Sle» de ple pn A Se) se
2S 3) by ye: yas ol G5 AF tno
oS \ LU SMa hil pt oth L555 5

43 \ a5 , ,b yg 2S nF S Sig ate by cigs ul oi,

Ole 5 yd) Le Sole AI le Goa ow,
Wools aul

=]
—_
a

heen AY J tok cy yal, # : CN Ea s_ >|, alt 5
# _ F

(Til) weal wi} gt. (TAT) A whas pt) Ces
2 - )
(VP) A aS oye ye D AS P OMa SFvdS FS.
TE) AB toe lee go eels Lge 4\1,, which takes the place of the second
hemistich in D. Bul. § \.

a j c : 4 Ne 7
Heading: Bul. a st Bul. om. Js) (Mit!) BD a. A JS 6 ie.

Ty i 3° oe

els ML ba ce ee gia ee ee
jl, — wl, sah ge kes dL, 6 3 Wie = 9
Da ee sl Ct Fe ok go b ole 2 Gy 3,
(- foc ae wil 2 fee ae > Syne \_. rive
woelLilanwas le ;| chee ele + hel » eal jas 53 crs
ute MEY oe bog Ue oat SLES te on) oS
D3 EL og GL Ge TL, Lk oe
sl ee ore Ve ody NE le cele oil oe gl og we gh
sit sok LL 5 ‘\. ois oleh i. 4 oS dengey SN
—; jie Ga eI
ji 5\ Le gl Mth. S lj So lad
Ria od ge ah defo, Sige cog!
FU 4, aS LESS is Le » la, 235°
hj) desis 2 ork lis, S\ oe AY e855 yp gl bo iS te
et yy Ll ae ok ails JL sl

ie

seat Siz Sa OR oye Se os Py é
’ ma” Jae! sl: fo lef 6S5c oS, ee S ole oy!
wl re un bj Fle he OSL BG oF dyes ope
BH x otk +) aS * Gh, Se 5 ht uss 1
Vs 5 gh, wl ol. Lee We gS wk pS pat
Sas ol seb Le Fe Ss ol iS | Sor

ULL Aas (IY) AB Bul. wip cs. (Tv) p I) Dp Ss. D D
Fee i (WY) AB Bal. Gyo 5). B j\S$. Bal. pi 5,
CWA D355) 459 Vy. Bol. 53 ce BL glip ‘ia.

(TM) Bol. an, , (TAY) a Cre cpl. After this verse L adds:

a a zs | :
a a ey Pw sr © at PIS ey od,

RS agen ru

a S95 5\ 5 Sy oy pages 2S mip ol
“us les Lo let es wb
wore $5 oe 3 2 HS ocad yl i ELT es
wt Bp) At te et Bp Ade oe
LYN opie > LG Lh pts tl
Fae AS) Te 5. Sa SU, wr
24> 5) WA ok 7 eer 5 \, eS I p> |S. e
ne Ga gh ash | cNlat $f » 2S vB, ae 5h co ch

‘Sab MG 5 Bs do oleh 2S ly
es od hace E352 42 2 2S gh yo Bi oe dle
Se eV eed SG pte deg et hg ts

ASE lod meaeleueaari gree! 8

mis ky Beale FEB NS

(Tot) Bal. sa—9e 5 5L. (1) LAS yee gel.
CTY) A ole. L oy « |p, (VT) In L the hemistichs are transposed.
(FV) pa le gti’. Bal. dats §. (Fi) A Bul. 4S, and so

corr. in D, Sl ad AB is5j-- Bal. y=. A Bul. Ber

(Tie) Bp 2 \,. Bul. he utp i: D ay |y-

(IY) Doh. B app. 24. Lowy for _—4. Bul. 4}. AD Bul. scien te Sic
“3 ole Sy 3 p44, contra metr,

Heading: Bul. \s= for \s. Bul. \ ue for | | eSele. Eul. adds S after Sat.

(0) Dae, tle, and so BL Bal. and A in marg, (PUVA la yee

CW) ABL Bol. Sil it ce Se a+ Verses TIVI and TIYT occur twice
in D, with o different reading of the first hemistich of v. TuV\. This agrees
(f 59r, pennult.) with ABL Bul, while on its second appearance (f 50r. 1. 1) it
Stands as in my text. AB os Bol. , +~ tle ane + LS pe S ols 4

louse gal ra ee cel Sunk L, * dates 53 sult aay Oe cp! TT bh.

os te aN Jo uly cols 5 Lye Lat car,
cowtlle east we 3) de Sty o eeetle, Cinl sly 5h ls ppl
te es Se lle . ee eee Sey At wale 50
se 5) 22° WS ie >. LI ar 5 3 Hs oF
oF 3; bl: By OV 3 «ent able FP nog tre
sh pap kj) Ge Ws ket ene ba

gi SE 5) Ath a oy se ae eye ape pe.

Se ee

Me ce EE) vide on PAP ie

("T\\) After this verse L adds:
Se oh 3) pau L's Cre tos yl tals tm om
F un at Sb ‘Farle ne
—- Paths uae 2$ Seni, GL
Heading: Bul. 9) aan oxtd 5h.
TM) A dey Le] BF 92 Sk? ol * te naley 25, wale tage,
corr. in marg. (FTV) After this verse L adds:
da ele 28 saslji Sy © de ly xl »
(TP\Y) After this verse L adds:
woe Soo Sw ee eS 5 aes 3 2>Sis at
Mpally Jel dy cand © he yo, Ws aly b
Heading: Bul. 3\,b. D (% j',b.
IL. 24

(Se Ge TU

Spada Dye dG \y,\ Shee Spam to dS oped |
sls! GLE, ust Se « see Jos bi so
SEE OW 5s Se WN i do es ee
SMe CE Ss ol och WE
yer sg BS ip gy Lease 3) Ut 225 —
Sony Ys) 3) 499 3 3) Jes Spal » cL th i 2 Ai
ie ul, LS oe SF. ty a_scs | uae
+i. Sel Messy a Bae Goel Vo) at Liga) ile rr.
sk ave zones 5) 59590 le S eth vals ol ad
Re MN Ree lan, Siig gS Skoda Ves
Ke el JIL ASS _ at 9 0 Fy) Gt hs
Jew ae, Sos dee dt 558 t 4iy\o oS |
VN ee eS 5) BL Oe WE Ol 5 3) tp pe LS T+
SS note 6 ot 7 t Se og - 5 28 sth S os5\ 53 oh
we Fe bs ME ie he ot pa» a, aS
ie ps SS 5 sl Rab eB EL 7b a3) 4S
ant sl iaiges 5 a! 1 al east yee Fh canis cul is

(PUTT) «A aly 5. L Bul. as St uls &. B of «.

(VE) Bul, scel, (FV%) Prod, atlay pte) cul ay. Dailey jl».
(FAA) Bal. 34). (TVW) Lae jl. (Ts) a 5 6ac.
(TT) an os \ > of ARBD pale (TT) aBD lay.

(tt) nL for gio.
(T°) AR Bal. aot \., and #0 corr. in D.
(T-¥) Bol. ea? a. After this verse L Bul. add:
ao e2$ gels pirole ct sls lp »

(iT-4) p ” 1 eS

ta

ty | t oa ao

dat Me Eb ses, sph ellyrs oe
25 Ho oe |b ov oS. oS als OS a
dy 158 pe Ashe eke Sg? 2B 4 Gh plo caf It.
s+ = J), 5\ a S wit, * oh es 7S iS ab =
aN ye AL jel , Sos F Jbila « ahe ul a et OY \ya55 aly
sks Lie gS Sle. th Ci tk wo Ss
awl © op ep le See col ie ace Ub >

Be hw co edly wal Ge de
ci3 > o| oe <x wl» oy tS4 32 Lac® lapse &
MSS yas Scud ja oS 3 eacas Ise was a te
cole ge 3) Ge ace la be els Bey ctl yp aus
rN oF Ce VS SGN SG
els EF yo lao O55 6% etl Gee LL OT a gh re

ee) Sky ee dug dle alll be ular Grillo
Ned > culode FES

\,,Lé i > ily os . ee Pao eet J Jee ge

(TTA) ABL Bul, \E \,24 2. TTT) A We 33, OTE) T els,
(TT) A \jo 3. (Th) A Bol. Lele ot os, ke.

(TUE%) After this verse L adds:

Bp tose al, te * — Pk » Lae la pl
(TF?) AL Vis yo pte. Heading: AB oy 2\.¢.
(hel) a pal.

(Spee (Som vy.

yt G2 Ib =r dul « S55 rer oa
28s 2 a8 52 8 hs ye el SS wd 20
ele to ot) og le 4h pS ai a) ae
Ay ae SY pF iF oily a 6 '=& =
doh Ou Pa _ gy Shige 2 oy Feds = iS eS dead ro
ox Pb NL AF EE oP oe Sep? Bo qlee > 438

¢ ai

BE NN RRS) gage e Daan of Chay aly wl
Was $ wl oS lath s Lae tue 5 wl et iS
EY +41 Pooler: ee +53) ll BS = 3) obo
pe: SON gh y wal Wed She eel cand ah eS wre:
Soe sss ps Ul Gs gt gee o3\ sgh
Je, Ae 555 Sy p>? 22 + She yt” 58 Gy bo
wel lute oo — bp pee CAL ee J> 5 Ll ee
2 5s ae I? Js “ ee wot ebe 2 FE ue iit
Sens yo 5) Be g\ alae» te le see cole ot)
Be bg lage cette Be dane wt thigh

(TITS) AD om. (TTT) After this verse L adds:
Se Ws nt = og * eas oll jel a! a
(ITA) A £3. (Tt-) After this verse L adds:
sale gh & Flies * ohh ps ol o¥ oe
(ITT) ZB pee ese qty) p yhine ghee. In Bul. this verse follows
vw. TPTS. (TTT) Bul. mall) ye. (TFT) ABL tee 5.

dTrvy) ABL Bul. a= nu oh L JE ke

tyr ‘ e3> ao

ee

ro gor Sr Ay 5 5} ut WW) Vo ow
Fe FAS gs fi SSF yell Spee
= \y 6S ony a ui» thie ojS3 «(8 jl —
peg OS Sine 6 SLs jal as Ga b oye
Ser ae ee ee Ba Be Ae Ca
A ee ee
a 2 = 5 yo S. Loin po ot Ss >
aS Val ol, ole St njL5 15 A ay ites
Tee diag pi th cE oly, oy JL so S$ UP ims
Yom Sd ops deyole . lo, less, wrF PS
LS iiat Ship hs) Ae Le ll em Gel Ls et
23,;\_Jo wart og vl. oe SUS wine) 45 FY
BS cum’ Vas ys ls Sir. roe sb Ls a bbs I
elas edl_sil Sy es =i Pie tee ol A eitf Laas) irae
Fo oy le Pr gat paper nice js jay L_mos\
Lear 5° se wiwdy laps lack uals BYVUE <
dae Golgi, PF tee Lal ol Li Lae 3 oy
2 Lis rs 5\ $ e a_\, * Ur 59 sy 3) S59?
Fede - pene \ ig? 6 AS yey Wo LS gt It
F pth dee Fee yj LG oF ote > ait Li
Spt SS ate Vn pe op el oS) W* Niles

THT) Dom. A ck re (TTYT) D om.
(TTY!) AB Bal. \jlje S. (FTAA) B sles ch. ,35.

(TAY) ABL Bul. sy». (TEA) A gS adgit 5:

shal oe pr lll. . 1 ay. sea le wl st
wut ._3 45 cr os Sle walk 4 Saas a \—+ |; free
wt ib 5 yo thle ul. 5 Ge g & 0 I
pm 5 2 aarti ep Gd jl oy vo Le
let YS at ate ne bt wb Pole 64 >>
ae ill jl ie ate boos tye Ht de LL
2S tye a ete 3 ei? + Sr Ob gy I eS oy m-
sey EE oe Lt oj je + eee Lewy Sul ef Z,
a le se 5 ee. Rees y re rope 5 hb ter els oh
meh ges 9 Pt oS ae ia fe 3 ly cae
\ Se ole Teele v © cbt al eee ble
abe pf 26 Sep cha sh ety Ll are
eon ee ry No tiagie pe prceaaede LeulS 5 ee uF Ji
ae a ah hein’ £ eee
ay Tyee 53 — tlie Ls sagt Gel, Lele .»
Aas Se L, su Ligh SSI moa gt scald
V $49 Se 3 ol sles Sedyles al 5s SoS F oF trv.
eit dog SA OH FT Hy Soe NLT

(free) Tle y a. (Tred) AB PF ob ols. A P for js.
(Tet) D te 5 Sh. A ote. (FPS) B cele oe.

(Te) B Bul. ates by. TTY als 2 S for) oS oe

(FTW) AD syle laws. (TU) In A vy. TTY:'—TTV\ precede vr. TTU—

TIT14, but the error is indicated in marg. After this verse L adds:
ati he cyl ole &\% ° Lol jlo S33 So Lgl
2S No Fp 9 AS ae aS yl pg 5 4S dal yee Lp
and so Bul., which has on eae pda «
(TT) AB Bul. |b S ais. Bul. a ie. (TTY-) ABL Bul. gly 5 =-

TVo i r3? pao

oo = —————————————

ly pl 20 Se se ly BT Ls 5s al a
Le aed p> otis Qe Le ad al gy os
3 oo ox ole Jou Ae ay! > wep 3) Hb ol
Ya) bp bh 2S. a ote 1 2 >
Fa We te 3 5 urs 6S ar, y 02S oF Sm
ee ee ou ts Whe LS aca 225 Silo | Mi >
Suns fo alata: wits oS 23) Glo |; Sat p>
etl, Si) sls 0S Sb. cctls WIL 5 age le J
Yes jl, cp) au Loa oss SS Wei St
cenble 5, 49 aS 6 as seks acs as _ go) tr

else 59 Se aly Ne Se oS 3h 8h wl S als 3 as
Je <5, Yor Fe a ee AUS Jb; ge lh oe
Sa: a2\ os sth Sie. ial L VS sth 5
8 ol Oo) 5) cams Sy, us * LS, wulLis Lops _jr
Saou —_ Bene se ey ule 4_> oN, Jl. I rtre
2 See tea 2 WL Sy clis Cees

\. WS azati leg cet jl el wb hy ws Alii ie

tj aul — Sho 27 ee a, — ale ro a

wr Vober ol 5 49 5 Se 23> ye (ou te

22 rls es Mth jas Sgn 8 oD prs. | | pt als Sp rtt-

(FU) D Gy for 3. Bul. oll ray Ou.

(TTI) ys, (TEV) A Ty ley.

FT) Te tle ue, 5s, (Th) ABL Bul. Sy 5.
(TOTS) TE ttal sh, CNTY) Bod. ey gle.

(Fit %) Bs a p=

I EE

> sr oI j\ GR O55 Os
5 ate Jor dys La|

las BL , pal ole 5)

9) H\2,& oF; L
> 3 iyo gol we —
vie ak Seay SV. ils
vo 3 geal so le L
oS Jy je she Pe,
Ke ehe wd ls, Tob
OSA vile AS a5)
235 5) iL US se

=i 2 aod gate

he ab ‘he i ai :

19) 9 GF 3) al, J2° \
oot Lae FS gt Oe
oot Gel 8 bp LE
I Si 3 dy og ey ol,

(TT) G has in the first hemistich:

After this verse L adds:
=

3s jys yy ip ost OU

(TT) ap aes

(TTtA) B pe

(TT++) D om.

(TT) Suppl. in marg. D. A Bul. ath.

(FS. %) Bol. a» for 354 bis,

US sms iS yas

Tyt

a

rr owe OE,
5 ALF Ws
els eels \,5\ > eS Irie
ee sy 4S pe Lb
62x jor be oe > &
o pt 3) aly ay gm 2551
0393) te Ge Lae Sed,
Neo aeaye is Wiad 3 jo lé 5 rt:
Se gel Sud ALS) ps
F acGeth neal, go uly L
a3 g LS atliy les
. 0S, ws 3 5 1S ov
Jo 0 ge al <ogh ape Ug Tes
she Us ey skis
oF ot Lue Wl te cis
» oy yo S43 dul48 pee

oy euks . = 4\

it ale ae cle 3) Lim Boas
Js pe ye ee

sop ei yg om pill. A cake gly

* oe jon Le eH a

(TT) Dom Say ate Ct Cyt F-
\. L je 55. Ls ase e uli.
(TT-\) Suppl. in marg. D. B coy for cet. A a=.

(F2) L Bol. 3 oe ee A wl

a

TVY be52 yaa

sie els et ble te. i 5 LST ws oe
25 LS F Fil |b e955 Gls 25 fe SM \y aye FURS
colt ile J x Sl \yy we stl, Os by Px og 5)
wx Sa- 8 & a i+ op Ww! aul b S
2? NS oo 8 gS ete SI oe
SS oe abs VS AS tt Le Nd
Le aly yt Jb > e kk \y 9) oe 3) ails US tre.
27—* 3° 5) \yajo sul. x Bee Glin 259 2954 a
ser IP Ss) 2 = oy 4S 4) ajo as ks 2S
Voie & ssl Boke S06 Voiiele uy oe eh ewan

ASS Soe al>
+, + IF dyyle ale, LS Ss SS 5> =e J,

ee ede | Se Pe 5 55 ‘ pF kt 52 Seal a K thre
Reged ss a zi) 0 Ke ey Shy JS jul

ns or ed eed ous ood» NER 5, Lo 5 els
fr FS wi 5 pad oF 6 SN \s “day? 5
oo St BY oe jhe MN sl 25,5 5p as
ae oe SF 5 5 soe go er anete., esl a5 8. 95
AO AS Gru i 0 Se =), \ Jt gare 3

(TTL) After this verse A adda:

sot Bye LE el oe eal ly? 9 4 ole dy oe

CED uk es. COE tayo pls
(TTT) a 2» ee (Thee) 4 apparently lis. (Fey) ABL Bul. a ol a
(T°) AB Bol. tsis —d. (Pet) ABE ol iS.

(Th) La, = 5 3 3 ie 35.

ian as Tv

Ny AL lew > rh 5! Bho Gh am 2 oe 5 sk st
re ci wi lyo sy) de. Wert iF Ps!

2S 71S \atol |p § su \, Aldo WS 50

SE ies ele cds Jol Se tS ee
te eS yee SF be =F erbe jh bol > b
pl 5 F535 dT 4. wel ele yee eS rte
cadle wos) Ot ye fete Pe deg Let Gl A
om Voge or or Set A Pl ey bile

pe SVS pol de os) o# » lt

‘Dan jalan ai\y>

SE yo gt yl yy » He ple a8. =" So
Saget lS Jie eng 2h oe 3) ¥S _F I
IGS lee ys sthow © Oe AE gh at og 5 rt.
iss , Rel : Ore, r) 1; —>Le
cat oe — Sly Wy? gle eet le Lol 5l E
Spat 2 yy Ve NLS ae pe Spee le Lilo Ue oh

(TT) AL Bol. ot Gtk. (FTF) Bol Gt 3) ae.
Heading: A Bul. Je! eee B om. ii Bul. etos B 2 altered to oo)

(TSt-) T, im the second hemistich: wes ie x es kee jo. After this
verse L adds:
hit obey ajar sk * MOS she od “ure

Tyv*%t bey 7)

Mee Sok de il ys ooh BSF ue oS US
5 oie 359 alse «a gee by ob b Jai
ty Wee sol ole S, VN ole j\ > So Sal;
Ss ot bs SOs ita a oye 5
=! 5) ox jgo) 325 lin eu yh 3 oS alo 5 95 ead rte
I> x or $99 Glink ge oC SM jo ade ay We Sa

‘olsiy, Lala Gls ee Cate gle

Ja3 4 as lyr if ohn OS ale a
EP teen Re Suge Oe ge

cn) iS ph 03 5 hil NoBs Ssae Svcs ree
She 3 Mol Tae hay
a oN eit ye the. he . xls Je cz 329559
Cs Soe eS Ne ccd
ge FMF, Lt eS. Se os SN oS
curls; Sr Sg? 55> « stn 5 F 4 2 | loot
i 2 |! ) 4S - 3 lk ye a el ee caer rhte
i a LE LES le ed
es oF 3 Sa, 5 ioe ae Bee

(FEA) BL go \sl.
(TVAT) Bol. 2) jh Maus.
(FAT) A tal ole £7,
(SAE) ABL Bul. sl a¢ 201. B at for “A.
# ;
(TUT) D o4-y 332. KPRYE) 4; r2 re corr. above.
(FPR) A om. 5.

(iS game (Same YA

25. ry dai woe cS —g ** 2S 5 Se ec S oy
SNe size Lite, > WSs o JMS) Ketel oe Je
HEM 2S Siege Se cb 5a Te ah tS Jk pS.
wee Ot oF De Ble eS te ye ST at Lis AL rme
Si SOE Cae cpl lL ew cele ad Gl Cie ee
cepa Ab > 8 5M ov onl « 5 SS Sera yt eos
cht Yo oF os \8 ee. eels Lise y 2 oH oy
Sh CaS S ge 5 oS 6b «85 > Me 54) oS es
posh els LN tae Nisa sal 5 cele tte
paki te 5p & 3) ta + Lt ts I Sa
MES ube July ot oe be Leo ii a ee
Sle eS Ge Log Fe she wy Se ple oS
et sole 5 | WF vi. ge Sth ol BE 5! th oe
rast ws. se ron ne ae a_liS sa;5 Sj) 25 ee
&~ > ss piidj32 FS « es SI, 3) 359 dS (so
we Ss ee 9 >,\si set et
=, spre | BS, (Se came'y \,,) 2 a Cy ee
39 Am > 2359 we oh Udy bo 9) 93> CR Oe
“a —* ke ey. sels SS” aura “Yh Ft

(M4) 7, Bol. Las oles. (rte) L teksty. (TE) A eee 5h SF.
(TTA) A om. co BL Bul. \yyy3 a (FEV) Bul. 2 —_i)
(MY) AL ly ol, db. (FY) ABL Bul. g2tee 5! 5.

(TT) ABL Bol. wis. AL oy 5.

(PVE) A ali. BD alk. AB Bul. pi 5! 298. L pi le 3:

mv) ap ads. (TVA) B obs Gye Lobe ce

(TV) ABDL Bul. 959-2. AB Bal, 4959 & S 4. $1. L ap o-425> — S

TA\ ‘ po ao

259 LAI EE By eo on tb A) wets oe
SF pad eel He AS oh Galil oa
js}, ae Sy 3h Loa X—\, ake Ly Hos ay sla Mle
LS dit et aL ole th Loa! et NaS fn
272 SB No hss Ss oy Oe iy Sy ol 2\, 5h
OF 37. Fen ee ee sate ol ol JE ove bt ol
whe She Wye o> isl. Ls » 1 Je shy
aS Ali ex ee pl. sje it, cphagh cost iS MH
tide AF Ls 5° 5 jl FS. tet 5 eli > ¥ Sor lL
ae —S F NAD LS wy cs eat 0
pe AS fle eo they wo
ee }y> aor #5\ as. iles meena
Ati a 2 5 to et el. a8 lye S oly cay!
BFP te ee Cole eG a) ae om il
ye or 9 A430 ee fae pS woke Powe cy
ae) aj\s fori gh i eS =) cwntetlal aes To
tet daha oor PPP eo emety, pe a als wo ox!
wee je 951 AW Oris pea fe pe ol ge

(217) Lom, 5. Bf bls %¢ ABL Bul. 35) yl.
(tit) BL Bul. a) 3 y. (TE8) AD ice le. BL Bol. 29% 5 she.
(TE) LAS. (TH+) LD woe, (9) AD of for 9S. B eS.
L in the second hernistich: »i+ we 3 3 ee ve5+ After this verse L adds:
po Zp esree . ptt Lt 5 alpa Lal
(2) DS for S. (FEY) A ale el.
(T869) DA gt (TA0-) A for a. D Syle>.

(iS game iS TA.

i ae ee es
8S lt oes LIL LL he \, 81 .-

3) Je’ \ Sp 0) be oS Ub n>
20 Spglas

rN naples lie Cel aa de Vics He.
PS elegy S- S53 we 55) 6 4)
Gb S Be sre = 5+ ot
225 tT 52 5 a5 staat) wa RS Jo 3 29 JLe 5)
— Sor oly 5! GV eS ty ig S gus the
obs Ss & ry eee lee 5) Aly; of a aS The
cule Lied VY nd S° Fy els FU or VES
be rag) Me ai » S2g% ols Oe oy 5 5) & or ls
DANG ere gee ee ASS RIG
Bee yal paso oho; Shee SOS a he yh ai, en
BE 0 ah pp os oh grt BTL
pes Wh -F) sll S- ee Ss HS, 5) 55- 1,
3, Ls Jie lenge SG oop oe FN nd SH

rt) After this verse L adds:
ge eras 5 be Oe ee issu 3 gly aS:
Se 3) Pe et © Sh dx » le
Heading: A co oe 52. Bul. & 1,5! Vi. B 338 pyins .

(The) Nees (Th-T) A Ale y93-
(TE-8) Tt oad L in the second hemistich: 4.4 5 » CR 5, ere
(Ti- "ap & ps (rt. wo % tes: A Ss for aS

(Tk-¥) AL Sly. (Ti-1) ABL Bul. oT! nt . D a>.

TAT ‘ e3° pas

ee a
tea g | gr fe sles » Eh oy! Da Lethe phe,

le Ley! Let wo 25) = stg). Saat = dation ye 9 ri Tice

Ye L de all) deo Jy) eral 4s
Ws okt aS wale ye e lL wore ut
a meen ly ah . oS oe uiss a < =
ausitly ee eg a : Les MH = py! \ alo

= ol tae eer =. Jl eae ee ple ca
Ls> ya at a Sy ae eer 3 ret.
os § 2 aa ev) vl ues 0 Scots Po a

call 5 > CS ema at i, eal b Jo 5\ S oy Jj —
yal » laid S les 3 eS) eI sat >, ea aS
pie Guli> jalan oe 6 ly oT Ls F oe
dott pS wiic 5! boy Syd GIy g Dg gf 5) rte
S525 SS 555 SIRs 6 Sigh als pas Greer yan
pial her Saal)» Cd Sy pw did

we DE UN ST Se sar denm seule
cary pees Ps ae ee A <i) igh 5 Sy3\8 Se 5 :\
Curr Asm eee Je, oe smninl onc omen wilde G ety

(het) Bp (Fist) Bol. om. y.

(Thee) A om. 5. A Bol. 5) 5 cil.

Heading: Bul. Ls =e (FL) BOL ae

FEO) D aheaje B il 2). (ket) By ays

(FL) T, om. ED alias. Ol) Dede b, (TEV) A om, rE
(FEV) A ao LEI,

6S me Gm TAT

3 eS 2 3 s\, Gog Sigg + 2S the arene Se
S56e GIa jib ish p Prin HF > ts Se Shige
2 ne os 9 Sy 5 aay 1 ps 1 ~ Glas -
lL a, ty \ diel tle 525 ali ds ott yy 8
Se as 159) wd + ox le wo! Coho e
5, 5 >y 3\. > ae + 295 ple HE 4, sh 2S
2) A CSL, ae ee Le gh etl wr
Se SF ppt oy Ye » I 53 Sle we sles
SS aS eS aS sa & ws Ne bob > won ret:
Pes is eS. tH Fe WIE | Se
NE) ope clas 12 5) e be Wit Leb Lb 1 >
cele oye ae wild 9 Gad. HL Sse 6 Ht ly b
jul 0 9 G\d pot yrtp mae A ale cud jl oS cued
Jamey Vs Ss) pol e ak us Wj) Vb > 5h rte
obs hae AAS Seem ol Slee + x= 5h
29S 5 Je S > 3\y <= 2 3995 is) os _ Ss oe gl
Sop lal jh ey or > pe ee Ss Sp 2p
sey & 3) ck S WS > 6S. 2 pig PAE Pew
a i oF ly 5 cols I » fe 99) 9 US ole 4° Fee
xia) a jf uy Lt * be oF a) oh re)
(Ageia a 2ay8 + a3) Hj yet”

ee

(TAtT) BL Bul. om. 5- (ett) Boe wp L os ol.
(FL89) B aes) be. (R81) In L yg and 3 are transposed.
An ge, OO Lt A aye

—

(4°) Bul. let &. (TST) Bul. 2544.

TAo i 63° yao

\L ob 3, oF poe Aan Le 6 at sty AS Jo 53 pyge ret
Se A opts op) le obs, 5 se QUT Gs
HF 6) wilds job pV ons 5 pt 9S Jo se oy F
Soy el pe se be al ge jl enti, ob ran
ae = 3} 9) oL Z wh oh S o,\s ly, ey S95 9
Mn ol 0S oe F Ase ole gh ae oS Le aig tte
1 PS 305 3 oe 3 DF oe yj Gol Js oS ls ses
Met el el OS Ley bin , Sg Ste
pelt ch - SL wolail s fie ta),., » @2e bas
lie rai Shh Se cole | So Blips LG
srs J7 5 f= \ 535 59 : Saas _ We yp Saey to
pat) _ se a3 655 +S cl LS uy Gir
sok ono LS 5 62x paw ile sh, a eas S os
x? sb Fou 23S b. yas 4—\ aya) cagaall
com's Lajos 3 So ot I oT \e te
oF 5 e@ oo Lar ole ul. Fs) SLs 25,3 52h Ct yge Ter?
woe eS pes Le 5 ol a ee Tbs
eae j x? 5) awe S so\s crissy «© ody 3\ sleia ple kdl
St 6k gi sh re ne AS ST, Sag ee
W355 27 pha coals 4? at P\ pi wim 55
Sy \,5.% «kh wo Lt ssh ae 5 to glr-

(T23') BOL SL or Si >, 5) od and so Bol, which has Mont, and A in
| i. D cel jas
Fe) a ul ls, (re) ne als, Te-$) AD om. Bh sla 2.

To) Dy A x Lf, *. Ge) A Sao:
IL

mare. (29) p ps es. (FEW) Bol pd

(Same (Sy TAL

25° a2, oy sth le 2 oy He BL > sos sh;
Lh tg Lego Bath ee + lee Wl & city 2b 20
So Bris 5 Se) C4 2 a at er SI \s &-\
sues he Fy) ual og pe Hy \ weer, —
wit ey ols fe oye Po alle Dita hk S SP > re
jt Cil> euelysyo Weg 2? + pth =Fl) fe ol pL
—- ble cee BSP ee pon dot ot
oy de 5 Us eS tu oy ysl 5p 2S 5\ plot
Fig thle oy ent Ne Fy er eS pred F
eset ph a_lalt rey y . oS ee ee | pret Te
a9 3 ute F Mo 2 Ks ko yl og eS
duly oS ke Fp A se LP ay Si wis ash & 5
VIS BIG sake po he gy S Lb ol ms «3 iS
Son pha po aS le ba ar Fg ewig oe ve!
pa a » ke re) Po fasF © Lal. rire
Gt Won NS 9 tb UG bse A, by se J s
eM le Srey SF obs ot x So,
at le WOM ghoul: 22 + 648 lie ets $5

i oan

gaal\en < a) Soke Wyle ol Hl oe wale ole J

(Fat) a, > for Lj2. (TEVe) A olde yl.
(TkVA) ABL Bul. 3,5) 5) »- TY) A Ss yy Ale. LF se
(FLAY) Bol. leo cx). (TEAT) A lle ye.
(TLA®) After this verse L Bul. add (and so B in marg.):

Ml soy Js) pf 521 rs © silane yy te fe
(FLA) A om. 5. (TRAY) Bul. gle 9 Ge Sey:

(TEM) Bul a cli. L oes ole oll.

TAY or ve yso

ae suu 3 eye ee bus 3% ¢
cong) ade 3) Sas a 5 59 oe ee J = ci OF
Je we 3) ap ole Weer. ls cal) S25 I< ag Ls ror.
GIS ial %5) Pe eh pds , . jas. Sut 59S ind
Oe Sag Sd Bk ope SD pees
TS aa Sad oe a gor; SS ce Peter
_ alls obey sl she Uy Jey yl ct he oS
Si GAO es “haa oz. ony NLM 2 aS Fay 100
eit a} ode Ree ee wy 8 of ical JUS _- pols rat cel
Lis 4 tg te sls. Lt OS» sls oS
Sty olutl 5 ke A. otis ws 28 Gay, Fb
cag) ssh, esi amti gh f [ea j ecu! tell ie sd ass
At 3s pss; ale. aS 5h eae 3 \ \ aj pot.
ee aie ee ig RT
cul ale BE os cep e ella pS es Al bs
SV sel 49 je sibs se il ele oll 5 543 oj) on
etl g lay he 201; cntol. Bob Is cep
ca So Gale 3) dai AM. capstan 2 Ff GT coun rot

(fot) L | >,\2 ao 2B. (v Th) L os for jr». BE Ayes).

WN) In Bal. vv. Poth and TOTS are transposed.

(Fett) D ss ae oo Se. (Fort) AB Bol. le 5 5.

(FoF) AB Bul. (ey ¢,\. (MY) Bal. lio Gg ju-

(Feta) Bol. cae Ute yg yt 38. (Tol-) After this verse L adds:

Ate 595) Gtle fle ge aS us one yo Loy
(rest) ny os for , ok: corr. in marg.

(Fey) Tn DL acl aalt and 2) asl. are transposed. (Fek°) pol, al Far

(Spee Sy TAL

mae yes etee WATT os +e Re ee + gil
ayy a5) sa p> s\5) Gee Vg? seal oy e— 3
SET» Vee 9 rb. oS pind & ath yl cal
Sesh ag Bh a eases 5 oS shi i» F sls b
v5 9 oluit By 28 yp obs Se sey bawy ale reve
Vrs I a2} 9 2M. Agta doe oe Fl Jil;
yg 2p) l= al yg) 35 2 ee? FP OFF OY 2 >?
a) @ 33 ply po Whee J 2 Lytle 2,53 Ls
poorer wait} — i Lge cawtlle Jo 5 Jo o> ol) yy!
Set y Sy > sly 3)3 0 enti 29 Vt SS hls rere
ee ae Gi (53,93 many o atewdjey Sth 3)5c2 5! Mj)
ara iF 2s, » Viol Fo enhashnca ots Way
sa 8 ated yep Weal 6 pata AS Seely gga ONG
had miele ee ee iS aa Some -— ips
yee: es sla 5° 5 Lye RS oe 7 ray
555 suk eb. J eee pea
iS. a 3\ sa, books 6) we 2S»

(Tey) D om. \,. Dp a pe L css ues sl ere a\.
(Fol) After this verse L adds:
= Ce tala od 32% * xg) Je Ut
5 +: (2) 35 *> ya + ole oS at
(Fave) BD Als. Li 18 as cml. Ly esp Fi Peele
(FV) AD Sy glav. LS » oii. (Fo) AL Bal. ,\ & hi.
CFOW) A cpm jl. (ret\) Bal. or for lil. (rett) B ysl for ih bi.

(FeT9) Tl, eal God Ay 9 ake D>- (Te) A ah y- Doe CA

TAt tps 0

wee ree ja
38 MIS 4 les oge e> Gly e Ls jE le 5 inp con
Sy ty de Sie eo tte ull de gh be ie
RUN Ly pF gl. asl FL o ll ut ree
7 Sb » ur 3° OL Lt 2 yl ai , 53 ou
SMS, 51 corr | ud we yoo Aho S lel > *_ els
sg Se gighlS 4 ead O_Fae (Le se a LL gy
eb Le Li ig ee ae ae _i ry.
grt ES. Woe wes pes — 3) bs, es
cle 2S tae - eee mee ae
a Ge a Foam . eae Pee ~ 33> ~ Fe reve
$9 Loe Ls a j3 * tlytg, SL S 55 di Jove
aS ule —_JI on | ik. dice > LG Ce ma
CS hehe i. 2h... colts! Slee oleae
aS. lee 5 Sb. Sb Bo sie om

(Fe) Tom, 5) bis, (Fort) Lom. 5h.

(Fee) In Lowy. TOUL—9 and vy, TOV_Y ore transposed.

TRH A Nigh .. (PW) D xha$. D sha,s.

(Tei) a = Gk, soil cu, corr above. (Fowl) Bat. a for ZS.
(TeVt) Bol ol)! “shin (FoV") After this verse Bul. adds:
xis i \y oe he y * 1S.» hy. cthke .

(Fev) Tom. Bul. ¢)\j for rr

aS SUN is4e Sa). Lae he SMa Are
—— seit 45 as ale ° oy a iL —o G ae =

‘LX a ret, a P Te woe T+ pei reo:

Le Sp fey te all Jo ley PS exes

G Saas as \ leo

ese ta. Slee leis Naim
cope las ge LL. bs yo - Lah
al sh ¥ ap bh dS FS ge ee Vel
st Vee: al, oy t3? aS> i, Ti sh HS p> > Tey
eee By wey ca be WS sl pn SO sce te
wdo MGT oh on LE ote al Sih. 5 etge ot
oxae! arial ou Ss. pb ay SFIS OE
yd ig yd 9 ED. ow ASL, o9t 0) #399
yeh ecsil 2S 3) urea oe Wl oe
hos pa 3 —- hear eae Vy 22S ledge for

(Fk) ol, gh. Baad. L glial. ali.

Heading: Suppl. in marg. D.

FED L oye we py ot ps (Tee-) After this verse L adds:
a» Sle 2 okt ps6 © oll ls Lot Sal, ob oe
lea La all) ea esiljlee © cltol _ gltal » 2 ¥ ol

(Fl) ABD olay. L & for sf. (Feet) p \s\, in the second hemistich.

(Feso) 4 al, pre D 4k 3°)

(TeV) b om. (Teoa) a at ,2 iid «

a ‘ °° yao

aes le eae a + # wa &, =) ya ae oes oF bo
ee rin oe easel Stoae

my be ey) oy (6p Ss gl a ot 4 Sisags Gere

aml 3k 5s > § as 4\)\ us?) | gles oo oS las

= # ra " vi a =
M195 eo? ad yo hk ae Carlee 5! as al wt

ay wan leks 52> « oy a2 sy) 3\ \ pai me
a aT ole AX, Ger oa 6 ote \yy Gap ISG
rere ae es os pe
ls eS ole yy ake Le gh SI oS alle , oh, oF
3 op Ser oe yey 9252 2 SF LD | eee 2? et 3
Sots al GLE AS cK sone JS gS pee
Sg On SGN Seely voy 0S Vee bee

iy. 3U"R3D 9 al\ s® | aglas ll » 1S 55)

‘Lal alee oS le 5 ww

a5 solu 35) Gs « eT a =. AS» ="
(Fls-) After this verse L adds:
tile » Gil old k © ook le 8 ale tr
(P\*\) Bal. us us! ld a or, s (Pi.¥) Bul. es \,3\. (Th-%) A Bul.

have: Gk Rat og pal 52 a> © yaa pe je S aloe :
and so Din marg. and L. L has lew aie a5 p25 yi) og,

(TD) A Bul. 4> cry gle A 0dy 99 59. Bul. 0a, On 52.

GU ie peor ar ee co Heading: Lom. AB Bul. 5431.
After 429 Bul. has ylul «bls s* »- (ME) Bol. au, aul.

sare SN 233 WE aa .

eens Yara eee Adel.
a3 wo ae os Va ke.
ie ree
mt 5) IF ws due
nS ols 3) ul ie

AS ILS; wo5 eA
te 2 F oe ee, Ly 52+
oes) Hh cere Se gl 2s
heey so oF So cyl

ll Yue 5 be

whe .* pl ap Se e553 5) ©
—} go Lity jl Ke
FS yr bey)! 3) Sane os +
— yine cen es a) sls
eee USS eet.

SES wale Solis Nie :
ee ae

why a 4 oy oe

alah ~ JE uh ae | wee ue ToA-
centr Thy o> LS; Mai
32 > oS oy oe burt
2 sl oS et? Gj ee ¥
wile Lie g pe bo
ok 4 oF olalt pie
Satis saat g, eg dy bh ely
yb yp ee ee
ele LN ae BS ole Fre
he Be yay g Let I Sp»
5 So? sy! Ay,
SS » gS ot, ler be
eee S aera eee
Sy My eve ole re
35 _ fb , Sb or
WIS BL > AGL WOOF
ast SV ase: 5558 et

a5 Hh ask 5, USS.

(F°AT) ADL Bul. ae for oa

ToA ) ac, aide
(PON) L Bul. ss2© Fay?

(TAY) ABL Bul. agi 3 mae
TW) TL 3S. sll lus JS.

(Pott) A le.

- (Tea) I. om. 5.
(Fett) A o\ for ep

Tart i e3° aS

SEN NE ce oy 1A o onl te, ld, slo aap Jal
sly gl Lest Ylgs . tls Wyle Ghd to I
soletnils 5) Sey oh eo eeloteil Si tas i) 25
Jie, Al gr slay ob. SLES tals Lote sues Lo
soles Oleh Ge SN op dade eos 5 ST ein oe
MES eo Slc 3 pies; Lj.» SS 1535. ea pi!
SS oe es iy pee LG NT st i
Oe AF $5 or ee lO, ys So yy, de
so oth Nite gS pe El ad one dy ole 5
ee loel LW dole sok ~£\i\; <eesuah ales IS Ss erie ee re
Se a4 > dale SN 7 rSe oti Yoo piled
3967 5\ 4 a5s GAS 5) som 6 soy 5 1S rm 5\ os 5
i? EF eyo LL yt 5, es UE ey?) te 2
iS} po A aches L,+ PF Sport TS! L— eel
23 29 foe F Gb os 955 Gh oF Labi» by ne
etl J 5 Vw mh op eg 55k CSc
ri wl. é3) ol. f9) ole yh oli frst p Ne >
2H hege Ut p ea an oH ol Lyttle, ee
4 5 boy wore Sack, yb oe tt Sol tt ye
Sal £2 oe S sls}, ips) e eon et ctepgeyd gl ult 5 Sip ‘ace
2) gah 5 np Lice » 5! oll D> emi 5) a>

(TN) A oe ul (PEE) A let tay. L Bal, «lee gh aaa
(Ful) zp iy oy tp s. (TULA) yp 99s

(Tit) A 5 Tanks.

(Sine US rar

‘al a coi i Ak aoe

se me eth |} eae Su 3 eS -\ Say 25 3 Mis
Vaal e alsa As JF aja « \apo ol AS wl LE >

‘Dargles pale) oS lye 3h
plo Le leek oh elegy ts 3! ares

wets rat yar NS ne eS Lol) SSL.
35 es 355 mole He 2 92 Js GWE UN ae

3 > 45) 3 35 Newel we 12 Se 58 Ve
peleoy: —s og nad flit * meoy ej «7 xl he 3 @ Le
solo |S +; le 32 5 \ a * 4 j\eu a tt Ls ar

—=\

ghee gt} coir Pye Ne A559 3) mid Ss Bry)
Serta price) act Vjhs pre I weil la cus VL ace 6
loo, 5 Ls, kes . wlio Bile 6s SS ln
ed wi) slate «lee ory eo Le »
o\ HHLie Vlas . Or py eS Ab oi,
3 jp 237% L~-5 5! Se a ee SS)
2,8) ot ame ye) ly &. dyr9 ol 23, + \ Key

AS slays 28 Fa + pS slap 2S al> Se

(TUL) Before this verse A has the heading: Vel ds gins gas ody. A sy
lay gp ts (PMS) A ole 2. (FWY) Bol. 1,353 cel.

Heading: Bul. has 2S tna 2 bese uth! © pS) 6 5) 54 p>?

Uy) aL Js. After this verse L has v. FUT.

(TW) 1 suey Le ra riya S rhe! als.

(VA) A poe 5 3h. (TW) baad F cu.

Tto : p32 J3>

“Vaygles Call IS o> Be

Vos at Rata ema cae Yael sh null of
3 eS Bg 2H tl. 5 2S Ss 4 oles
Tessie | weed lib e ey ere eee 1,45
Sis _— | ia Ci Sa ee io ~~ Jia Vw tyes Mve
ecole © 4 Baty ie come te 5h pee Laie I
St al AST ys oe GBS aul oe AlN SF
aE fee lS be Bo tty eel, LEY
aS) A) ob ale WSL, oS al etl op
J 9 2 Slee 598 oy 5h ol) aM SO le a
Sar \ce eos ob ais. WS 435 | Lrcilstel 5 AS
=e alee Ct else 29 5 | Saye rt le Re
a8 th le iF 59 29) 59 « 5 et a rye
tl Nee Shy 52 ol A. ty oe Uile go Gl a ¥
Kiss dS lee kes . Su 2 5 ect \_3\ rue
pm NH GR Ge sb. a | Nap S 2 wos Val
ssn) bi 5 Wceicts lat oy, pclae 5 rt bee
ba Sh tis gst ie wg \, 555 25) Pan te Bese

Heading: Bul. ,\ ro for 3. (rr) Bul. US.
(Fie) 7p pales Sleay. In the second hemistich L has: Se s!
After this verse L adds:

on Z 1 obs sels « ee 3 — ern

Iyte Lela».

Did gels: (Pu) Bp fran oe soma. i
(TUr) & Bol. yelat bis. (TWA) After this verse L Bul. add:

22) CF ay S« Ly) pr 358 oe il AT iy Vice

CS gms iS TUL

V5) SG a) gles 22S 8 5h

=i Les! Fe A ) eth, Lgl 4513) ov os
isa 4 3 42 (S95 opts 635. 3 oe oe litoble 42

oy, Hele g ens San « sent gle Sj Sh 5 gt
— ers Sz F Shil - ws oe = GN Gl cab mv
rane = sl>59 ale a ls yor Sth on on
5 ul ey 2, jets re .
»Siy SF) cnt» SL. nie Soe 9 SL
esl WT oy Fp sy | Ler bie +
pd Lad og il bo sl eae SIL og og Yop

silent et deny AS Jos athe; > J 7 5} o IP
lel 4 lis 53 ig 383 ale we jy Gol ol ¥ Lok
LS se oes fag lps js och cask Ax jh Sapeaesl
ea Abs cao sae oe
G3, \ abs 5 5) SS + G4 33) oS ee
ot en pile SA geo NL 9 il eal 5)
\,a1nl jp 40 SS wth e \joly at 42+ ty sh
os aS wi - LAs Aye 8 Nees, gles; is)
3 ede ony ES oe F + ob de § DS 7
rte Y lt Ss ret ul 5 pS jay S™ 3
Dad 0 aw al oe al Eee

Heading: Bul. js gym for jy. A crib. (Tet) AB p55 of 3) til,
and so L, which has pj. Bul. gu. (Mee) ABL 2s agli.

(TU) D ah ge Lole. (TY) D om, 5 before 5. (MW) p asf ok.

(TU) a Vlas Glile , 3. D originally oll 5. (TW!) ADL pe eles

rey be32 782

eel Spal g Gell) 5) Sha gm Sat glee gal

Len tps \ o>. all sl aedg> geet (shto yl
Ut Py at Ue 4 cS rth hs ~-,
Sa oh sr ox eae eee, LOY de SS 5)
Seo) j At | ewes jo Sh wr + He bs, » isla eee jl
el bind, Rhee rm over pare Sint Lib Ls} 4 rvi-
ae 55 = le te. sa a) Sete ty tl
we Sip 8) 2 2 yg a ye es Shue la [53

Fel, w= — em oe geet jr rt I
Vee muds ctl i 5h

tS ee ty Yet) 5M ogi. atl Say pp oF
2 Gils 5) 2 ore HE Ausils S 3,5 A il he
Sos ew) \,aj2 jk Pa8 0358 clo 25) S95? GF Coe
opt IT ow WV ees OS, LI wr
Se arr i
ee Se ee oe ek ee PO he ae ype sy
ll CU Oe

Heading: L om.

(V-A) 1, Bal. oe BD 4, for. L =_S. Laas All

Y-%) AB Bul. -D Ale oe. L Bol, A I,

(MV p Sa | Lt yd. VIN) After this verse L adds:
Bd # ole 3 stow * ely aS o> oe i,

TY) 1 eS LS. (TVW) After this verse L adds:

ut gels capes Wir ome unit pai = i ee a
(V\"%) Bul. 22 for Vas

Swe F 45 wa LG. ae a teeta a
Fl pt MS 5 al lt 4; \S— PIS rit
sls xe pS Lens + save are pon Lép
sis sls ye aa ame ea\s. at cs a LL
a Sth Ke ys ca Be ON Seas
$ prr so WSs oth Ue Be She ch ae
als pe A FT OF Tite
by pS Wy 5S SIT. gop SN eS Nh
el Sis; ai pol ay jl =i sb
5 Se; 225) Cp SHO \_. 315 ale dy RAs Pa
S35 yg pols gl See peel. ge se ble zu

‘tll aylee ors as
Fyre pot y los Sek oy s\ 2 ait.
by Susy) 0 ILM ew pel 5g weet i s Sin
Fae ‘ie oe eae aa Sh
Pg cep See Gps Uli 5 wi) bo oe s———
ste wy; jb LLY ns ul. gS jd) o5-> ul alo « b
Si je gl ge 5h tha o> © 42 oo? Se te aes Sis

(TU) Bal, als lax.

(WN) AB Bal. sa, Goce pect:
(TUT) Bol. ksi yl.

(UE) Dy 235 sl. Bul. 28s L--
(TW) Bp aed and «tél.

(TVW) D ; 74, corr, in mare.

Ttt be 5

fo ee & 9) 5 = &22> Jk sys > rie
Samm y als aly « els at cel) Gyti> Yo
REV g cog) ttle OSE ade se lsh ath SI
ge 2k be-b are . a Ja cle , g, 5\ 2 OF
Spy \, gre » 1 S25) 0 9555 AS Se oe 0) Lor
of ne J et I hes of» 2S os olete 99> unl Te
aS 5\ je ms El cil ene
V3 wk SN Va 55 ety Ul 230) ee

+= Sh GLH Noe pee ae jl > Jy Moye Sp

Mh eek oS le, Ls 21 || 3 ot

aks — 5 List ili ois 2 Sis | Soul, tl
ed BIA Ne: asl 2
Seth 8 Gl ek oe we 26), S&S ge ol ad
ou 52); ewes cap \ pad 59 0)
wk , olig 5» >, wee ltl 5) ats gy celle
Pe pt ANF tke. deg nk la ee”
eh ee oe eee tl ie wily yo els els 5 rye-
528 5S aceVicle | Wwolile , oS ST iss Vie 3: ols
sss Wb, Suk 1), dso Js doollee
aE

(vt) ABL Bol, \aS3. (VFA) A cle g,. (FY) TE ot Gg.
(YES) After this verse Bul. adds:

DAS ole 1d » tha S a ALS uel
(FVet) ABL Bul. , for I. Te) A Bol. ol,

F¥e-) Boel 5 jl. Ly =e she
(rVel) A aS bi. DS for S.

(Syme LS TRA

bus hae Nat cues bell f ed oS am

a . 2 |
SRN IE Gs 30 se 5 SP is\ es NN ecg

S 5 2r So ple et le Cuts Sth any 3

jam Pel eet LG Lanl. jp plat PF we —y

Been ty her Sie ne
colataile, 52 5 ae ee pete lS Oe oy hoe s,s

253 J 5\ eal 5S fe scdyal, So toe _ ed jl

ae daglas os ciel jh
ee eb) or slo ew see _ =) a 2S ry.
Weis ; uae e\, ae > fe db oer is
close 2, 2 - . leh 135 ee] nk:

op

“at eas os 2s ii 3 = 2380) eli”

(VET) BDL \s>. (vr) AL Bul. om, ,.

(MTS) Bul. ral > gras and 80 L in marg. L laws for.

(Tre) 4 S35. ((VT) After this verse L adds:

ist 228 pgs? cel Se Ib * Je yp ye Cie sae f

Bul. adda: lye ul oy Whig a © Mia va pol of sol 2

(FYFS) AB Bul. ls 2yy=.

Heading: Bul. pil 5) \y ot ide alee oe jh.

((VYT\) Written in marg. D, app. by the original hand.

(TYIT) ABD ns lan.

i. 1 ‘ 23° pa

jG 9 ee it Yl lit jo cele jal ss, |b
le og eS hk lee gl Lm. 8, 3, Vga
Lae Shee gy pte 9 gle LAKH © 3h, oy 5 cat J
atl < j\ aS pred se _ seb eres a 39%
adn 23 \ Fo S-, je coe =: Af Giy 35 5 one 05) TV

‘sls M23» Ae ol y= Sperm ohai

LB su\g Sate 5h pe 8 99 eee 59 Sy So!

395 Me) yyy o dey So oy @ besle SL, a8

a AU \i Sea Peis FSS
els thers Fcqnak J joys ee oe

led ae oe hae ad he
Tne ei Si > = i ps cae hes

Sys ile al jt ate S> rly Shsl gl ene

(VV) L tle gs ty). ABDL pala. () In L this and the
following verse are transposed.

(TW) A slg gl >, corr, in marg.

(TW) DL Locke of. (TT) ABDL nlag .

(PYVE) ABD yale - (YW) Bol sl yl 3\.

YD the lay we Mae? bel ala, ai S$ ol,
and so BL Bul. and A in marg. BL Bul. \af. B Bul. \,0) o-

(TY) D fied. WA) A Bal. 54.

TW) D lee! gl ery. Bul jel ol. AB Bul Jeo ol 5. D Joto yy

Il, ony

CLS game Sane 7 ape

ee ee G25 ab Eijge 06 See mar 18 g°Ks
A> acuce Slavil » \22 \, o> oe lm 5 |
ee oa oe als Veal, - Fo Nee fe Ess le ryse

Vdd ae al 2, alee 02,5) 13h
ry) es nee wt ob ey been Persp
Sr utils » Sie BF ate Syl ole FP Flee yas
poe le xo flo at Fl) ow dio S capil
Fo eb ow atl, OM poole 4) ae plo ob ov oS a or
bs ape \ ease —_—s eee fe 4S py ye FY
we Velen Was on SS 3 aj) 68 Soe US ee
Ss 8s oot me ol > is She sy pte OS >
poe ese hie, Vpn ort eed 6% ol lls oy

* as 3iN\ us?) 4sglas |, Pa ee yl DS ul,
a ee

(TY) an L this and the following verse are placed after v. “pyar.
Heading: L om. Before v. TY? L adds:
# do» o Fb | 05 ee opt Hol

(¥8%) Bat, 4) ale. (Tv) : ite tj ce L Cote jaiey ye. Bal
Lest jy. (YO) TE ge 5 Se- A ge oe SL Bl Sr aly Ge on F-

(YT) After this verse L adds:

op fet 2ST * 255 Wel ot &

(PY) Bot, i a Bly» >.

Heading: Bul, has: 49,5) Glael p& ole jl y sles we 5) bl pat gate.

(YI) ABL jjc 5 Su. Bul. y4¢ 5 Ss». In D this verse precedes the Heading.

§ \ \ lerole os °) 1 sols > sl 95 > oad oy 5
‘4S sk ,> \ 195° § >, ey tho

3 5245) 2 gl av, J- « ad 335 a= | al, Baw cpl
AS yet 5h 353\ ae) Gow as ai ss y2 aye a 59 \
Gal » aie piwl, au a paul éhay Sale mt al ryt
Wo ols ee ee lw «= es SL So 50
Biss Lak Oe —peer¥. Senge hor > Gk 355
Say cr pe wl 353 625s ee 2» Wojo G,b 3S oth as
nee Geni ros ities 2°
va nee ak Me 3d a 3) as eS >
aye ae OMS ols cme Nel Sk ul oF
eH 5 5° al jb cr! . 333 sk : eee ee _*\,,\ as:
tS 5 Unt Otte 95 9) i 2° Juli ais i Ree ea

Mp el as, WS ys \» aSe — ran sh iF a»
a W 3) LV Fw — id, pas pe $F 3) \,335
SEH Blain Dhan ceils dom vy!
ph Sti 5 cont +» « pay el 5 wv ax
Heading: AL om. ile after ee aN. Bul. om. 5 4h >.
(rvtt) a

Te Gis yo.
(VI) Bul. de cect. A de. D wloja tk. L jal s,s b.

_
(YT) LAS cl ode. (OPA) De. 55, cee. 43 VT) AL 5 pe
(TA) B Bal. ee a An. (TA*\) Bn, gis. (TA-T) AD S35.
(TAT) Bol Glu ol. A Glu, AE) Dee el oh.
(Tavs) gle le byl px: (AA) TL aude § cls; cel.

bSees See 2.7

Nae Seaton hl Ais
ty ae er er
eee 3,5 Fi SIjt ® tks; 3 i= as ok S
HH, S29 MBF > hs dN, os Fat J
er Ue es ole Nj Le ee pS Nae bo
Nees BV, cpl Be \pcd pe Ala cede
WS; oi ie eae 1S a> ;\ pager cyt Tide
BV 5 al) 5 PS ci 2c) cues,
J aie 2 6 WS 3 ae
a5 kex'sy Sy 3 Liou aS ot pleat print 5h,

Ne YO ay doe oe HG he
Wk JI ath g59 5 ry fs oxi iad Fee a
27 DOS) gS way F + oy elt US ae be 9

rea “ = ;) Vis. sleeve ly ae 52 ly 5

Heading: L om. Bul. « gles ..
(YA) AL olj ne. Bul. alae.
(TYAN) “A lad gl Cie Bgl

(VAT) D om. Bol. = (a misprint for =).

(TVA®) After this yerse Bul. has the heading: alee! 5) ay \,, dul a slas lye
3) = 4 gles oS Ass »

(FYAY) y, , for 5.

(TYAN) Ty pe tkal jl.

(TYAS) A dls &

(YN) Ly for yl.

(T¥5T) After this verse L adds:

nS; Loo 55) e 9? ue * aa) ja isl Sands | = so

t.0 t r3> yao

Sas} conor Cj Glam o Si | n> pa sh ss:
Sle 5) tee Ge Stes hs Gil ET ee ol
ae le — Fs ee) pes, ik. 5 eS
ao a5 5) UH Fl pees ra es et 2 FAP
Th Al. st ie Sr er J)
Fla gl aL 6.5 4 loo FILL

a a Ae 292 | Aas 9 ot) 22) 3 cul S (239) ene

#

ais. Lrg 25 okay ak pees Dye St yd gias Ls tate
0 es L,; of oe S25 oa nar gee pe A eee — sl
She Ne et be ce Fo She tee LAN, ae
jj —\s1 well 2\ 6 55) ame ole ype ee
64+ Sob 58 5) 31 Gea Jos ee FFL wl
wkes> ol oe os Eeriog rope ee 3 dog AF as
ol) sls Reece Ig ora hit Be
#* $3 22 ins ahi oe Ba Gb)
fats Nyt SI ha Ke, 333 Sy ps _ bebe | so
Ps ute oe tos js 2p te St SS LE
3 = ELIS age 4 J> + sb 5) oe L SV oie p> Fate

(TATA) A Qe Sle te, (TATY) TL, Bul. ure» wil,
(TAT?) AMD pales. (CANT) Bal. y ee lok jl.
(TANT) Lad olb5 5 po 255 Je. CEA) A Ne sud.

(TAT) B Bol. oS GlaSs. (TATA) ABL Bal. 543 ole, and so corr. in D.
(TAR) D 3) for cal (TARA) 7, Ot 9 oy AB sl.

(TAL) ABT Bul. ap oO. (FAR) Bod, ce rr

PMO A Shae GL Ly. BL ylae 5 cL |. AB eh & an,

(See Ga £.£
See ce sissies hye Se, Pah bt
tS ELIT, rie, 3 eo LS yy prSez 1095 pad FAN
sl Fahl hy 52 slr sl fr Ge See 3
ols oe awe » wie 3) want op Sitte pie
Ble NF cg od oe oe
ae rn 3) Sey Soe HF Ath = 5 ye
~~ § Gls Gan ooh Ae ponds ar jul & i) Sy ag ih?
we Lele ae a_ale ales - al Sele LS auale lt
oo ay | ae eee ou S| tS
mS pai S58 sete} @ pety Lp! 2S lS p
Mash GV cele 5) Sjgy g eH ob op te nie Sih atti
c=. area 43 135 Be yh fl rar.
=) jl wl! a glow Hil Ute wile; aS oe
0341 oa see jl re . oS ar S jae sok
ee hy ee Soy ole SNe cpl awd 5 Sian ly Ss
Hs) a sul oe sed hey F Gy 29 oF oS

Sts cual ) 3) ci aan Je 2h rare
glis ele Ug Le obs ce > wk Sore os!

(TAs) a ah ay Xe sy $ =35. B Bul. tl ot 3. D 3 es
ails (FA\-) ZL os » pas s- (A) D 25> for us"
CA) DL 2. L fj. (TAY) Bal. 5! wc.

(TAVY) A Jah 2413. (TAP=) AT, ceelte > usp es JSS.
TANT) D isty, ly ee Bul. 2159 ¢e!-
(ATs) D shy for So.

~.V ica Aaa

WF et mes then ark dol ee pay of
tales EF whey ane ame NM 35 © NE OF sh ee oe =)
sel, wo) Les f nck Le ee 2F Syn» a8 + lindo Fate
ce ecg “Lf, oO oD ery AL Ae slau aay
Be ike Dusty: Sey oil's F ile act ol ee
x35 Las) (Gb. gS hls bo Sst iS
WEF 4 a5) he oe Le Meek Sh dee NSS yg

3) 5 vie iI ue oy Les Gh aed geld fav.
> Aare Sp Se eps Fe
as — - at

5 se a ae OF
sett Ae o> Volal bl). os 1 Sy cel | Vwokel
cui jl ass An lee see SLin pAb THe
We 0 SN oS cel, LS WS a ts
63? seg ee ol oe. : a ae »S3 aS, a
BA as ew. sind le gee ui
es yy ot ES 50 jaye 2 Lu 5h) 1S pan
—

(AY) ABDE pala, (AN) BDL Bal. 25 2h Gey 1) Se.
(AW) A Vj Je BD Wyle. BS ty at yi. Gla! Jc, and so B in mare.
(AW DE 2eet> 9 oped (po glad (FAN) Dy
(TAY) ARDT, ane - (FAYT) Bal. «Sl 2%, 3 yp Bul. al cle.
BL Bul. VVyS gy) 38 yu Sj. A Vlea for 1,5):57 Bal. shat

(FAW) sais haan (FAY) Fil. cc a) 9 5 x5" 3h. AH pee pai

3 > y9l-

(TAYY) DD om. Base a 9 re “ny 3. (FA) ABDI palaas.

es, Sb, casa
Spe bh pais é\s 6 pte bl 5 eg ho sul

drat bday ate alll de rey lb otis

itp YH)

sosthe Sey ke 5. ls let & Jn
Po Sib bn Ob a Sh he fi ere)
2S Le Lyles bl peas Ab esle . 3) 6S te.
PS. Nae Ny Dey Shee 5p) oe be! Pe as
a 5) eS Jae Und eal)! demi Oaaws,
BE i i nods | ge
Sgt le Swe le ee pe wl ope sl,
WS no ety gd be US ILS tte
Stas OF on ees 99 ot + mabe NE hs ae
SF; xb 25 Sh ate Se 2 25 oh & a4 oF
d\3, A ae OG ese es Se
Dye g eg ee FS > ae 0 Op dgrte Re WH! 3
duel, Laks oi uss ky socal fis? rn code Ta

Jyt p ols ae jb» yp wel Le ai

(TAL) Bol. Las (TALA) After this verse TD adda:
: P j
al, (ele) Sylar oy aude oy 8 25 Ler a sot
(Al) A Bul. S asi. (FAT) Bal a? ol
(TAE) A Le gh le Gee (FATT) A 3 for lt. DL 3 “ily, O+-

(FAV) A Wes 3.

Z.% Sains

Pe bak ar. las. Sl de ore Jl Ap ls
Sos Wp Oy OS 3. jle bl , HS ole Tir.
~~ sy <4), _*\, Vongislis 6 semana Oe | Bee er
Lo WN ft ot 5 a IF 20
unt} SNR BAS oe tl 3 o \2\ S\ ope
OSS) bt 58 4t ose olile . Lint , ieeune a as
ja 9 pS yg ele Wee» lie 2% Wyre byte 4 rh
wl lis aye ls ee Th ae ule
fle Jel, lie oo 8 os Gas AL rae oll,
lb 25g alu. lh =—s 5 pepe
sues S Vag ON ln ve Shs hee OS a ir
oleiy 2 dle 50 op + cela XN = i Se rt.

ed SF HG sy dle OF seme tee 5 aS Fei
Pp EX wis Ul Le 0d, So 5 sk oy oe alls
“2 Sagem F re Meo pS he os OL

aie 9177 2* Obs ILS ge Ng gm oy! G5-e

(AN) AL Bal. sip do. D Nae 3) gli. Lilet. FU A Sas, 5h,
(Ft) YL, Bal. ge. A Sole, Tt) L Bol oli se.

TY) A om , Th) A om. s,

(FM) Bol. Whe Sales a,

(FIM) p of §. (TMT) BD:

Ne Sole Heth + ob Soe S yh > al

and so Bul., which has ok, 6 for ols;8 -

(Sou Ge Z-A
a _— =_ - ; a
ey ee oly Lo. . jg ol, Le hot pe
peotliy 353 aN ile se etal > 3)5) aa £1;
toga ST pe SL. et oe 5) Uy th ees
s+ sly ail Ls” Le ew Sets all Ll ol eyo 3
Wise La $y 5 glo. ths > Cry 2 UR
Sila, Sh peel te Fe ae Le 955. 1 oe
cae kl |, oS AS 35 ated Se pas glo

Jo Sey HIS pee Ms y ae? 3) Se ose
35} Sle eo fey ale alll

NSS) aly aal Ss\ cals Pe Se wk ool a6.
Dees aes ol Shin My suck Nighy a
Leth dict ee ble te ole Sa sty te J pS Sm
333899 9) Al sly 22S be 95 Lisil 9,3 Jo 59 5h
Ble, ats lil = Verte 2 GL LN ls Ss
wt NS IE Le > ae pe as “oe jl
eee 2! wie \J> yy + Pa oe Sa Je
355 ES nip hae eet ely 99 Clg ail te a rate
lim 355 ce. AV sep ed gisk tae 54) YLS
Se alee jl eb 252 ett Gls en Gillet Lille 52 259
scot Si wi Yel ois ise tual & ws ols ry Bh ks Pd
(TAM) BL Bol. 8». (TAN) A 35 for 253.
TAY) AB wlan. D glib. ae oS. In D g,\ is suppl. in

marg. after S, (TAY) Bal. ss 9 fe D tty
(TAME) AD as, (TAME) A Pak

re | i635? ai

24% S)>,, G43 45 83s Dis les eH ly deel
ge le pS 35 8 re Wie
Ss clo Sse 4 Nel. abl Lys We SE
He te 29 oe ci 2. We, sls Oe Sn
Oe gt dle tL sls Les pe age ne
<i t eg gee en ere er
Kioto F oll. 8 +h Ou Ney G2 Wyle 52
8 3) WoGe ash GL. 5 8S 5 he HS oy
ah eee alo lee 39 th Slay 136
Sh Salt ee cd it igs Nee te LHI oy Ga rit
San 296 Neel conte tee yee ed oe USI cus Kae 5,
const gh Sh de aS ably. del ob Oe aS tT
35s gS wig eta eta hae wierd lal
hk SS Las fr Pm + Sh ee jt) Jindalee
2 APD ph se Sa Bt yal $m

(80) D kT for ad Tt) Beas neo (rate) Lt
cam yl. AVS 93 9: (TA) Bal. 504s. Dt §-L als 5h 1, |

(FX2)) In Levy. F444 and FALT follow v. Tithe. (tl) AT, Bol. uge ale.
DL gh! (T°) Bol. a5 5 ge ®- After this verse B adds:

dxf 5 ole LL 28 ate Syl * 25 Fos je 3 pal &

Heading: A's S iste.

(Tt a a— Pa - This verse, which in AD precedes the Heading, is omitted in
BL Bul. After the Heading ABDI Bol. have the following versa:

veel fone & A es SS oF eal

(iSem Sy ul.
aiken aS 2 1,5 At we Be Se el 55 yj po ail es, me
orl 5 Sah, Wyo klong ASS) cata oh lS
Pd te ptde Moy ptt 3) 5 oS Se
st 3 AS Sst + FT 5) 1 are Gh
wile ay Caged ee SR LS el Cs ge cr S
392 Uigte ile 2S So 5), oon ASm, SS olor
oe pd S53 US So ly oy Arch wt oF ES A
wt gh xy ee pe lS lhe ls ae Me) 2 |

‘Cl Ue 5 pv 243 ils (S\ynb Me ol yas Ddyee

ie Nod oy Dey» ep gS shh
we 2S yl eS eh eo oS So p53) Gb
See Sh) Sow yly eka eels gd) cd 9 Saget
she gy oll Fh HG » sao hy lS yl ey 5) ch»
ay ee le SB be ot gl al 6 ob cae gl
95 Spe LEN ls es ab Jhb & a +8
ly 8 SS gp LU S - ob, cat le » ws F
G23 Sab Ne Seger Foy aL

(T39) A om. B Bul. cnsj g- L sly 9 cnsj- WY A om,
(MY) ABD Ub >y.

(Tt) B Bol, (> uk. L wi, 4 ais L wile se lg? hips
(Fi) A Sl. ne (MTT) AnD d¥oy. D =
Heading: Bul. 425 (5% -

is ee ae (Pe) Lo ye g- A 5, for 5)5-
TTY) Tat pl ach; » ail g. (Pt) A Bol. aa.
(TM) L p55 oa dn.

iit be9> te

Lats _- yl gr oy LG w Ly, 5 | Gy, 05 LL
MGV lose: Se ST aly: iy suse ool. al oo 4!
2 amici agile ae Sy eee igh Se 399 22 Sp Mv
5) se Hk ob ol. e oaprcli jordan
Br A SE Ee ale pa ge se

* OMag Fas Re | aie’ | ieee oul en
diode cilti tt; | oS, eee ree ay oS SF srl
cules Liyslti oS ils el Ye ealé A NT dls Sr
SAN sage OSS SN ge pe 5 5I 3 2 SF Kl stil,
rlea,5) eae Sol, 45h. oS 5 xt Por wks
JS eh cil te Fel pe pine WS lil gy Lo esl jo Lb
wl Se 5 ain || elt gh ay the 2 FS
Ree re Sa Yer es eg a 30 eels Dole 3S 5!
Ue eee Ame Ch Gee | ute Mid 5 OES cul, ks cage 1
37 S53 5 > Ss) &, ee Sy, = Liz =)
ly cle 5 2S ule F pee hs = 2s ots) Fee

CTV) Bol. uJ) 59, 3). After this verse L adds:

ONG ye Sot Eg F

Bul. adds:

PF At oS oli; pds use pluial «ai jl aut a

(TW) ri 80 vocalised in D, (PUT) p sys. D se.
(TW) A yl for oS. ND A SRE) eye P gl tee 3), core, in mare.

(WA) AB Bul. |e a. ABL Bul. oy lls. A ghd ay Sy. In DL Bul, this
verse follows vy. TY t.

CML) D oo sy, 5 S,. After this verse L adds:

dot fae oS S25 Ge * a4 Gli oy & 3) col,

Se. ey
Prob pe gp Say Lala o SG Ue Sy lS hb
du 99 Jk Gee 4 Cte eo dee eS Ub bow wy
2g, | ye _ Sie ge ee Sor Lact pltle mt \_s rte.
We ae ok Woke! Ob ly ks tb!
Lets Lay) 5 >; ae ay ee ar Serer Ge
: Be int 8A + Ste ors th cart
7 eho 5G i+ 5 eo : SNe _- » = ) js 4p
ess ae Sa Zl ss Saal at eee 4_imt Teo
CesT plume ge 5 tle Wx
ae ty NE Oe
Ley 9 Se HG aul lk LYS I a, 8 ob
ae! Ss Teed tt ot Ob sts Se \
al’ » 25 Ul 5 Low epee ele kj wl, ™-
koa 32.5 LAs Gly ch « Jo be Wily Jack
=e 12 95 > 5 Shee oul gue Es oh ol ah;
Soe allay LF iy Hate oh aS
mtd lb ule ab pe dee ot g Jil sts Ee a GH
ul ase seg NS ol ge 2 el acids Latcey 5 365 cpl re
St) hh’ ja) 24. satel bby & +by
O43 Lig _ilaacel Sy aS siely ttn, uri

OY Da 43 a. (Tte%) Bo te 5 Wik). AB Bul. ive , aig. D
dig js. TU) Le *)2- (TMT) D om. Leeks Sle.
C'N) In D the = of uit > Is marked by a small ~ underneath, and «

rowel lapparently fatha) is written above.

ilo

alae ay ills As: hye
be ale Se ne
34S 310 lb , te |. >.
V— ~ di 2 53 Sl cste«
pus Sp > 2p 0
Su
eed > le roe asl 49 oss
ams a yp La
cmz ot gw bo wl 4S.
wl 5 oS ene SI obs

Lisl , Cum?) Ue Cet do

cy a A S lo

a=ealeS cholest 3] 2 lea\ *

¥ a lt We: Pet ani

spar poy dele Lb.
GS puss Aub Toke.
Pag: ae

col id AE GS Ud, okey .
PE Pn eae Wey
=H oo Al SE 51 59 35.

Le9? yas

St olslh —? st An.
eee Je ol ee)

ay 7 hey ow \3
3 fur y= 29) 2
eats Fj J? o}59 Fa
oe ej wile 7 age hehe
x, fb om sl sh Le
ees 2h A) eteg atl 53 SM
wlinZl «uP gue po Li
lee jo ath bel 5h
MN oF ee leh

ee

- 54 ~ :
3

it 2p chil ol

5S» Loh > ond wr
Dy eld Sines Jom ole
Ve elie 5 enat pal otf
set, SSS Sah sane BF
SF be oe on! wale a

(¥°-") TL om, > Bul. a9 cides:

(T+) Das il. D gis §,
knees

Heading: D 2! 3.

(T-1¥) ABL Bul. 136 353. AB Bul,

it. 1A) L ri ww ala.
(-F) ap 3,3 \ aS.

(TIT) Bp a9 —_
(AY A see IS. Bol. oye SG.

(¥-42) Bol jl.

A a oe AB Bul. a

P, A a - re
(HT) 1 ae pai.

Raa ae. Te re ue ae ie oF Mo ay i F'LAe

Pes eeu etl; oy Zain geen AN ooS 55 S533

aed pat St ee Nt? 2S een les FS ae

Nees) Spl Se; jae es ly i aes

5) sles Bone © gh Gln » doe 3) a Sy

— a 5\ ele F 6 ile nde Ee utes a wail

ata Fo) A é' Ot tt oe —i: LY

2 guts —>\2 3,37 —-r eSphope Ppl Syate5I Le

SG Ae ely Ciba? wy he ery A= Fr dole \ gr”

re Mr a WN ig og Ale eilet Hh gl ee Le SM oxi

ie 5 5k lal ae ae deus J 249) ah ps ae rate

do ps LEI ace Loge tl » 34 or at dle §

Se Ny ah des LS: ptete tS wht 5 ee

2S jl og ib by a of je\ Bis <5) j) ow
era oy US 3S Lo ale \ ad
LN 8 pel yo ig, waded cae eS

pS ie 5 5) tb os S pS 5 297 Us o!

agi Ab oe ol Ld oy ve opt wiey Wd» 5

il aj) she wi uu * eae pose aL Ls

(iS me Sy Lit

FRR) D ole 5 35. (FRAN) a $ cls. (FUAY) A gg for a.
PO) D 5 chaS IEF (NM) Bol a544 slant axl Er
CERNE) D tts ce: (TUN) Dy sa ye gh Lipa Gh.

(TU) «A oe (CVU) FT, Lies

aLY 665? ie

hs 55 0S 5 Mee SD dno the il 09 eet eT
Go ily oh ae ee Gt os Oa LL le
cme pi Ne) S oy dye) So ery LS Grid Lgl et
5) hs ie iam a. Wee ee
eg tet my Se GV stk 5) 0 9 das ep hk
way se ej So yp oe pt GIF ty Aap b
Fo ah gh, ckil 9s be lok a Le SS I
o\ oe FH pe hae Sh HS Blin gr

= | P
‘sa 89 yl b Gop Eh US Ob wf 223

AAS 49 03 ae ee NM J

Nee Sess ANE AE aa hic Us\ 3) gS 53
ah IS), ob ul 2S. sof gh
Bee oy St sl ae 5 j\e 3S 5) 2 + oe 2
BNP > fiw? Sar or > gS 5 PE ee Se coe Be
Be rie ok eh ah ee
cay \y 5) culo S sol ey Sm ey re ss
ees, ms eee pe 50 . & o> a lb oP, 9 ease
WE ba Pw Ueda wile oh S35) 2% yy 2%
esl 3s byt gt be ase oy all GES Ca

(¥-TA) Bol. S ». (¥-t-) |, is suppl. in marg. D. AB cra for ce.
(t-£1) 7, 3 sy at (v-th) pT aye isl.

(f-££) BDL Bul. 3 2. 2: 4G als) so ,>, and so A in marg.

(£1) BDL Bul. 2:93 $4 doy le at

(t-£1) BDL Bul. in the first hemistich: 255), |p -f po ae gas

(+e) A ee

I. 2

eat tink ah
cwlLiahed » Lass Let able . eullel Sel = bale

dye oh le oe le GG + og gl ele xe He 8
ole SJ b3 SNe SF = ogee le gh OS x Se 3) od
Ne Ss) Se eg L «Say wl ag Jo; the no
SH okt yap S Wing «63 Al Ste Dl oo
55S Se Se oe Wh & gue ok
‘aa tes ole 2 5) & ats:
Disisel. , Si, asl —« » Stas Jaws — Soyo ye je
oe Ss prye-S Sm Ss
cont 25, SS ON iy BS oe CSD 3A) Sty
at She , ae 3 lL 3) So Eye Ol eS er
DX oe 2 ek 5 re ne ol 53 Wl eS pe s
oS ope ©& plas 596 Gp eo Mae eS ple
ol, 5 oy ee Sis a Bt lle —_ ov eo
atop NS ot Spear ae ot S de ds ol
eek oj: lets Ut 5-89 Ny ocak erst; 5! go 23; he
Sal Sak pap n cty ene SV rr 2 tm
cape) Sle otS oS ogee wey! S5\> | bir ws et

(SIT) A colglol » yas Lowlgles » 7.

(HOY BDL Sl» cae Bal ol po: b ete! lal 5! sof.

(-F) In D rig is omitted, and p has been suppl. before 45%.
(T-T-) Lge cae. (TA Bul. p= ole

(PstT) Aw 35 € (-Te) Bul. ay: for ots bis.

(FT oD 3 for XS, corr. above. (7-*¥) Bol. Lut ws —-

£1% fea? a5

Je aS SF yor jl. Sis gs sl ees ole ee
JN ered F woe pF + J Sl j\ ef sl Jo
5 og j\509 j\elink dh 3\g Geel
oss 7 .) S)\> oe ne 0 ye Glo 5) ee ope S si
t= i; e— j\s wor ee eg SL sh ees Spe S ul tve
ee sl 3) Bo op moe aks sk shes ope F ol
MoS F wes os is oS. Le; a1 I" x i ry
Soe) uit ol pel ee ee
Sarak wl pe Fe as clase KUL
eiacls. ¥ est do sl go aad a NF ge
RE TE AS. wy Ws LN
eS) e. ASS + NE Sek ae
Am 2? uri 9 5 S855. © ol 5p i Oo! i
SBN age 2 Bie Ot OF SS le as be lS
Piacaclig Oh wk ae) e plecety asl ae sis é\ t.Ao
ae eee py 9 sy # Su ob
ene oP atl pry 9 Seva ogee ene oli 5) ew Soop FS!

(TV) A fhe ate 5l.

(T-¥") Suppl. in marg. A. Bol. 3 for a). D sills 55.

(T-¥£) Soppl. in marg. A. (*-¥°} B Bal. alll ;\.

('*¥l) After this verse L adds:

Ae i Ol? or pe * ob tiene SF |

(7) Bol 3,. (t M) AB a,|. AB Bul. 45 5 G1. L 36 &. AB
a3 2h aye 3. Bul. »é for ‘Yl.

(T-AN) A om. 4 before 4). Is wb, US5s):

; 1 = "i =¢
(T-A%) Tol. ri &\. (YAY) Bol. uy Soe &\,.

b Syme (Sains LIA

Ree oe , sear rr”
3 oh = Senb to 52 + 5 5 aan ate aes

Ll yey eal? ol Stl 5 pes Je os

I pele WL)
ee oe 5p See nye Jo jy 0 lS, we gl oS glagl de
3) elo,3 fs S\ tls jy e gh Cops te loctlo 45 F--
75 02 ot x ob age 22 GU? ol BF 5a Se
bitte bd \ yay Ob + ot LE N15 OL
Stes) sme olf Ls “$e. Je —a\ L., Job
ls o> iss ye ene Oe re lo, = Vt th toe re
eal g eu be 5 i595 af oy SAS af 5 im ah Som
| ay pole Wa Sigg 0 em . pe at 3 ol os r= 3
me ar Gis 49 dock» » ean i Lp LC,
BAG Aderah, le seeds we
je eS Mer Ls. ,\s aoe ecg, (Le Se is

— i 3S uy Skis HS jy 5 295 6 OH Nov

(F ‘v) D ie Bul. 398 5 2’ 5 cs p33. BL Bul. or, yc.
(T-OA) 7, OV jl page A wry Se yb ole oh.

(Tek) DL hte aye. Bi >. (F1) A sla’ y &-
(T-4t) Bp Nata esy and so D. (0) Ls ie.

(7-0) After this verse L adds:
(TVA) 7, vem tsyk ls. (T-1%) AB Bal. r= ne
(¥-) L Bal. 3,95 3 P-

aa | dca jis

aaa eaiee FON aah ote. ids sii o 5
OS 5 Sie Sm 9 L4® lem etd) eo SLesly 2,
FH PAH yp AF C253 ogee Ray g ee bP Uy
ie ge p>? owls te, k= |), 1 woe oe pp thee
“ie sh 2 7 HH cs =——;' e\y\ Pete , Coke
tenes! Se at al eer are aiT omens a-\ = cP
tick Sl ssl 5 6 cue; Bke we ro
aSiz 3e Jo hal als 59 - 2S does plan oa
a (oP a et ei oS il etm oy eajle Qh
cls LAN elle Soe . ‘ek d,| ol SS Steen
o,Sa |, las tots a Seah de: oy >
etl, era eae tly — ae peer)
He sh 3S sid es Cle J gil cee
wey «She EF Glo; F OFF + 5 Ce oP LS gy A cue

ise o& Sle » & Ads

Be, a5)

r- -3$u = » she 5). oe er Fe wry

dts Sle 2; 42 Vj ‘ e dw ie ME st jo aS

o> ye tal

(TT) A all pe. A wae ol. D jl.

(T)-8) BDL Bul. pate, shy etcil, y5, and so A in marg.

(t\-*) D om. (Th) Bub col ele

(1-3) BDL Bul, Jo jal slic yo. (TMT) Bal. do Jel Jo be. i Lee E
ar — a =f #

(VN) Bal. os) jf) th PF tS oye: D has 5) jl in marg,

("1") BDL Bol. 355! g\e a5 yp, and so A in marg.

(Sms Sy if.

V9) ele

ae fle 3S pA Ps S\ygeb bry oS
glo ene adh; pete eS ess aan
pe als oo pty 2 Se pad pt isl ey 5) i.
AS 235 Aes fi oS. fee cm 3) oid
Sas $V p23, oS. cuir 5) fe ee oS
ot ele 20 53 ry dey Ogre Op > pl bil a5) \ ois
Ry) Sa 55 Cab sl. a a a oa) lh oS
she he ld ps be S, obo eas. col elie ae le te
ay 4s Sa, ey
cn ME AS oy et ols eet FF cl eS Ab
ies He one 5 loots » GF tt lel , Cle) 2 oe
SS Fass Sh Cae eds Gh a7 coe ga le
fect Pe o> | RP oe he eres

is ols Set oO Se poe a +? Pk Pg Say Leet 3)
Heading: Bul. ie \ ~

11) Bal, 2 le. After this verse L adds:
< atet eee dey ae he
me ye Shenae SS oi p> Sl pte =Se, b ad
(¥+ tk) L cna for ce 2. (v*01) Bol, et}
(T-T¥) Dp om. yf and has Je suppl. above. (FA) Bal. ro shor).

— —
(Tiel) A Sant Sjen L aS 3. Bul. hs ty 4 > ay Vs

ary ; ‘ te feo

ope FA FI 5 oe oy ke oy
<0 3p al ete coe eee 8 5 5) et
lal slant ol 8 ee ped ol at etl F
cml 5) Wye ol to eee, = sll Lal ao sp
t or 5 — we + m9 8b Gg 5 ek ole unl Mt
Bhs 5 eA par Sy ipo tty Sh 5 oth cS
saps oS ged po ty Le ye Ge olel
wile Si an b LES ee + lal. X scugoil ae
BNA) Mawel 5 Se dct sed oS \oleb
on3s po eT AF ne ed ol ok 2S ne tie
el pL. 5a Sie Ee og 79 sla al of
5 BH hap a be ste Sle Ux oF 2
cong Saad ales VY AN; os es Ney cp Sie Yb
% Ne sh we Wb. Joust s\ ne 3,9 dio & 5
x53 5\ 353 ie 98 ett se 5 4 5, Lt > oye
5\. 53 |, Ae ae ee 3) 553.5 oh so $5
a eS wis ee
Pepe lee Boe SS Sl eg Shee epee

= —

—5 | Wt el Nile See ae un LS clare 5 |

(OSA) B mud uel (8+) In A vv. TVR: and TIL) are transposed.
(FEN) A Q,,. (VET) BD Bal 23 sl iyS & pug ¢, and so A in
marg. and L. (VIET) D lle cyl. After this verse L adds:
ed 0S oS clu d © tet Tay de _ jl
(TEE) In A vy. TILE and T1L° are transposed. (TH2) T Bul. pall
(TAE¥) Bal. bl» |. (Wle-) EL Bul. V4 5) 5,5.
(Met) p abl. L all yp. (eh) B om.

(Seine Syke rT

Jam By Pp % 5 36 59 be 55 ~S5 ib St pt
i Sg Le Sy p> ds Sb jy » Ele J
hos AN Sa ah oS die al, AP? Sd ope eo OM
295 5 8 X36 > 25, we + oy Ve Se, SF ope
5s sles y3 4 09S « SS le 4 lesa aoe
>, sis we EL 2 59 jy 0 oor 4 Cle). 55 xy
|= A 2, «doe at ju, Vp pti,
pet Nea Lely CoNineds « pote achhGay ly eects
Liga S od ele alee Gh WV eS. SNS
his PS 4 ye Er de ibe, ies, wi
lsh Ui a, UT A. i te ogy silo bt
LS Lil slat Ul. Loy hie Jo Ue
255 eo aer 3) a + ope ole op Kb SS wt.
wh wy ee AS. UT, elsth Ustents a
ae ob 3 rs rd sar lm oF
$3 55 x Y 2 S.J Pe. Sty ty sl a\jotiy 5 04;
eco eee Rd er

Me ed jl) ens uta sob ase Bl le 2 ey HM

(Y\\%) After this verse L adds:

Se she rtoapd* phe bs ile 3 apm oP 3
(1T-) L in the first hemistich: «le ns | chee pe 3) yo ds A pee 99 g.
Bul. ,- >, and so corr, in D. A Bul. pls aa

COM) AB Bul. ¢ pte. BDL Bul. 254 cyp- (IT) aA Sa, Gd
MM BylS ob ty pe a IML Ca for yt. A el
(VITA) L sls. A J i. (tity) BD Bul. eh (eae

(vitt) D ¢+ wa\jeuj. AL es r: (THE) \ ay Vip

“To i 3? rte

wo! <u ¢ Spe le ely ose oh comes
Payee as cel Se TA Spat ast MA
Bs Bip as & «oak Si de cet 5
Jp ul ty S Selo ss. ee
asl 25 whe $5 S35 2 oA dt A Sig
23 iS 5 FF ig o ple od Fn oe Ue oy

-, a

ee a Got Ks Lg LD Je Yee F IL. ye 0

PF ares PSF SNe o> Sy 5 ale! ai
Vy) Sp ol
Ss + jl w23j Jb 30 4 SASH ss NS eee
els bag) Spe Seeder ee Dlr 52 4 ot 5
ete Lap 2 von d) al ai, pass a tee Vy 5h
Jie die SF oS) cme Shee 2S ESS) | am
Swipe 45. Sy Cure <S ‘yer = sl iS vA
“Ae ea ale Sky ol wo ob oie eae
Sons Wo, Seite pS eae
ry Ae A 2g Se of cet

2 2 oli, WE om Fo oe sh 9 G32 7S one ol

(TAVY) A a5. (TIT) Med pr gee S OS. (TWVT) BDL Bul.
a ae ee ny a
Heading: After oS her EB adds af sit.
(VV) After this verse B adda:
et 2 2S Mbp» © AS huehs Ser ol
(TIV4) Bul. 59 0 ppl. (HUAN D Woe oe (M4r) p Ss >. L

VSeoks JI (THAT) Am Jal y Sm. “(may Bal. $3 ove be.

Spee Sk “Tt

PEON AS 5 te cole | MOS ore
Cedyali oy Sn ok cl 6.
dp dead 25 SbF at 95 0 98 oth VHF 8; “ST
we OV oy VB FS ee ls oh ob sl oS
Ve es tn el ame o Lob ie fl 5!
i 2? 9? >! ogy jks oe ce ee 5 yloy = 9
ak ei Sus Wats oN gg 46> 0 oe ge 25; ol _il \,,Ja3 3
ok; J Js — —_ i+ 2-t,* ais sl \,29> Sal este *1
we DS yl o Se ee aed) Jee 54h tt oe
SEY SF 35; ole Be «eo Gb ae Slew
e59 Ay p Sly 5) 3) orF 5 Hluby a3
wk gel pe ty pal ats eee Uta DE wb +1
SAS 52 NE) S55 Ue eet Val S4 wl
em clea aS ine cee 2 05 ESL hy EF 245 EI
iy j) SS 33, PAs- wy 183 > § Se ole y ol
AE ov 3) Se Fn UE s ah S55 =
cate le ely VE et LS, SE LarlS

(tev) p P\y>= for ¢,=, corr, in marg. (TA) Bal. 3) dye. A Om. 5:
(Ti+) a Ss. (TWN) A Se:
Heading: L Bul. 5 \g~ 3} Ee.” ol Ae Te | jlauil ps.
(THT) et ee Ly. BE ot. (1) D aS ,.
(TIA) AB Bul. Jt. In the second hemistich L has: 4.\s = wy OF
— sa\a. After this verso L adds: r.
ott a ule ede a t Rb Se, 2)

LTy ‘ 03> f32

15 Sp, aS Je yb ls Le oss
wolists AL 0293 re + by i 43 Sess
ants) Ses Seat L ghana » > ee wiljyld> treo
= aS ie, oF she ot a Ue isl 5 Lal 5 ne
eet lint SSS, EV, 6 ah AS ace el \
fo Fee ee: WA
BAP\ wn AMA 55 gee sr 3) calt wk Ls

‘\, ss a A>3) a p33 po! ey AUS

Sheen a = = Sa are s ei me | ae a:
35} ee 5 goiaeah ia eae ae a, 5) een

3) Sey 36 oF So J «3 gh 2) 5 HE 32 3b os
ee ut 7B ol Shop ‘ 38s Mi i 3S \a, i.
S59 ji Ge US oes Se pie ei cis fll. trie
wie JH! by Fo ee Ws | 2 GF » a: OF
Jp iseele Se pe sees s\ 3 ho WS Jo

(iT +7) apt 50 pointed in D. Bul. 5,. L ay (T-2) pr al Pena.
CFT) Daye 5 SI (TA) Boy, at pe S th ol
(7-4) Bol. po je tll yaya. Ns) A twp:
(ST\\) BDL Bul. gle oleh gt eae oy Go. (TTT) D segs lan.
GT) D | wt tl» gous. D; J de s (Tle) BDL Bul.

\S om Cie Jy ths * \ pial sis JL of 4;
(ST\¥) Bol. oe Pee ;

(Soe So “rt

ne ee a
Suit op Je i ear
as ak F ekiS y Se ore ol
Dee rae lake 5\ CS lak
Se Ube ere WW se elo ee AN eS
WE Sy 3 SV eS. oh > GY eny ety
ace tle iy see sca pet Nig ee
eon pt FE Vutl> g JB FL Mee hed
oh ory Se wt pe oi tts bene tl iS
Ty Wise Wet aioe s pp te as ol
3 9 JS & Job a eg JB Sy ee"
Ooo FE a ae ap 9 DSRS oe
wri WS 2 eet F Gh opp) tees SSeS Sas
mtbr uh obo: pd vo! to 2 EE
Kee sles wy sy ye Sy Se 9 pS Aor
entits fle 5 Seilg jos - cent) ble os del
og Fae NU Sau op fol Sty 9 F
JZ 3 03 UB oo JL 5 AH we S _ gS

(ViAt) 7, ale for #- L She \ yas - (T\4-) D om. After this verse L adds:

Flan gla cee ged © Hd, sey os a ot
(Tith) A Om. um * i fis da} jl ue *
(TUT) ov pp for pp Dy x for _» 9» After this verse L adds:
oe , ORES pile co © oh Se —* co ye end
(TU48) 1 for oF. (Tite) Dom. , before >,

(MA) Dp ie ee (MWY) D py 5) pot- D < ys re
M4) D xf 5) Mer (T-\) Bul. cS for §- (T-F) D ye a+

\,gja2 as Oud 59 ze L 3a sul ous he
Sane ee 35° ere * ay eal - tel so

‘ee 3 le Cy der yas 3\e\

a5, J cth> aL. a AS 5p US & ox ™
dat ee Pe at oo ae hye ot US or
Sern Ob le oles aS th IE one 5 on
le WB el abe Pe le Waele ILS
SG sj < gle ol oy 1S a, Ca a Aes
BS ce 5) 53 | hye SNe 2 oy Lipa ets ee pe Hie
gee 3 et og DY a Me GR LL
porn aebae mee agg o Sag Wades Coe
cole 59 8S bb qe on. ne gle 5 oe on SO oT
ee eer eee
ae I 2 So vo! <9 a ep iat f ar hie

CTT) Bad fol 3h ane gal ate y, and so L Bul., which have 21, lay)

(CT) D a5t Sab. L ay dl. (TTA) BDL Bul. |52e for |, za}.
BDL Bul. 34 for jai. Heading: Bul. W5jle -p}y= yok , su.

(TFk+) Fp? so vocalised in D, Bul. 235 jin. (88) Bul. ¢ el she y3-

("TH) BDL Bul. ylej 5 je-. BDL Bul. :.\ie aS, b. A dine).

(TF£°) Tom. ABD sla. BD Bul. 55, 22 ah - ALK‘.

(*Tt1) BL Bul. ;\# wt 3 04) gt Se 9, and so D, which om. 5.

: —
(24) BDL Bal. ole js) atk & |cas Gh.
(TTE1) BDL Bolts p> a the. (fe-) D sie sl. Loy & Ll pee

(Sees Go £TA

L Vole ly; Ne S. eevlb = wil og Del oe
SEN Sua ach pect Jo el uta
AE if Se aaerae y Sar in ee 3
de oF Ns) Veg? JL + 2! J SMe an
Ne ju bess o LS oe Soe oy 5 eed 6) ox
ii eed Nice qasle 48555 pp doe ghke ty
Jk 3 Ny sh gm steer e 3% Lyd 52 295 Soe fem HF
wh 4 at oP 3 Wier * er ee SJ
> clay gt sl BS. W > lp 3) 4231 2
nie de be Ls & Jo oil aM a oN aa). tg 52S
cme F ge Hyp Pp HL LE + ee ge ol anal old oh
aoy Lal lo bg Fa» A) st Oh Ne er ™
ees ee A ee NBs 4 lb oS 2h le
sj Bs S 5 Sor cd) Sx « Coen days SNF
spt ap 9 wh SU wag oe peg TEL
oth 35 Se Ty ee Ue it ins?

dl 3 a HO lla . wike jo sal Sy oe) ap

(TTT) A de. (STT) Bol. iss 2: (11) Lb Bal.) ». Dee
for 1 jo After this verse EB has:
f wg = isl > S * 3) wise ol ot) wae
(TTT A) Bul. , sa. Bie 035 oh iss (stt-) A om. 5.
(TT\) ABT Bul. a i! = cpl re (iT) Bul. 2 F ie La Te ee
(STT) After this verse L adds:
sot Ay ad pe ake» ae ates gr 2 VSS
BS te “nites Wyclef
at Cee rapes ee (Tt) Bol. 2d » ce! ote

atl (952 28>

le cle Ley at la the caSle:,3 2b; 5 a toe
Ne ee Se Ge pe 2 45 2 dy sls Leal,
sue fe lity ork 1. Soha cea cee. vs
we ee WS ee Bias 9 pa 5e 25S col 3 ahi;
esi ey os wat oe UN AS - cle 2-35, Se eve
aye eel Sixt S we cle pane Oj Sty
oo 3) Sr, 3 wet cis. PD eel oop 22
ole aul Jy Sy iS cole es ke wtipl gel 5 meet
ay St V5 ol 223 + 2 cele Lue dus ups
oy Glu,> eS 5° sgt LG» 055 cL ol eek Vhs ppg tT
Ve telLiy 05+ cob . Win -» 5») | MWS el
Se Fit exe alls a5; Corl 5 As oie
hereon Breed « Sa Jas yh wS eo
une ee et eal stil; ' BIS 92 <3 ewig ee
py de > 5) pz jl ents 2 5 Wa
SL (ise 2) 51 gle a5. Ne; rene Cp 2 S25
Sa oul ett 2 Perse. Ep yg th elas s\ kw
\y 32 eb ee 2) 5! os |S ol pola
ote F LF? OT Ol). ot; ri, ML oi, ol
Oe ee RUN ere
pk VLA oth a es pt | pil) GW os

(TTT) A oat S$ \y ale 5) Gd an. ayy B Jah.
(TTVA) Bol, 1 ee. (1T¥t) BDL Bol. as3 2/1,

in the second hemistich 25) Ee “isu os and so L, which has ye
for 35). (STAS) A eS 5. (it) «A ue on

(Spee Gy iT.
LG icine als « WS SS 49 25 50 BLS or
pile) 5 de eats, ol oH Oy ogg ew lb
cn gee ole nel Ogre pore seal IF Ge oe ee
2) 9) S99 Sem UO 8 Oot PF OP 5\ Se jl
eulo $1 Se; Sd gle eto; ae Le ee
3553 Kila Wn ts 3S = ai skis Sb
cae Ji cee Sp Al pbs ooo Stal Sl sunken eM
ree Ns. 5) sme 3) 45; +22 ole Je 5\ 35 o2
a8 le» Hho UPS tet le erste och
pope al OS je also. eS ee | 3 ro"
asf ae cand gi ys Ahi; >t ule RP Gate .
ga-S pro 52 29 se Jee JS slink ox
oh She Ufo om or Ue 2) JOH! oe LL
wee ices. sy. sy Se - dy et pp ir OF op SF
een EAS Ee Ae ey SIL ple te
55) L, 4) sul Lule - => he ple GA
iSReS\ ee a a
Syme 9 Seg. 4 Uy? > i ans recom 3) om
#2» \yW WL oS ete oS uv? Lik “ee pa
Sp I ay BP BE 0 2g eS He WS

(Tel) Bol. om. a (Tok) BD ap 3 ae. (t+) Suppl. in marg. A.
(7) Suppl. in marg. A. (7) AD 2S.

(FT) D oy \ie p>. A in the second hemistich ops |e.

(9) Bol. wale je. D oss Ate GAY XY oF:

avy t rs fe.

5 \ nie F a1, Sp © 3 2 Val :\ lm.
> 23) ot 5 eloF > Oy © He ole 5 Jie 5 298 Oe
aa oF le nee (gate F + 2p We A, o>
ae st glel 5 jb sl. des a Lore
_Sbe vile ae a aah ae.
RRS, Se ate. re ;\ PPR." Las Popes F
wot aL oe oF oly; 5 J RH ; Fs a5)
wis Je 3h 95 irl Gs ut Bee Vhs 3

as 235 59 \uy Sa ath
YP ox be oF 2 oa elt Gl, cae 1S Or

eld aN 5 nt OS, ee ed dF es De te
259 Si 9 ox 3) SH 5 tah Sale Gh cam cyan
eth 5 the eee ar ch
ofS 5 onl pm Sl Ot nel onl oO aE ola

(Th) A lib, (VY) Bol. ae an Kea L in the
second hemistich: aha. wa 95 ‘ya ies
('T1A) I, in the second hemistich: 52> 24 oop 39% hj ja After this
verse Ladds: 2 § aly ae 3) Sle + yy A 33 Ok5 Dips b
(300%) After this verse BL Bul. add:
acs 1. ays 5 pS vy 0 oad oy vt toy ol
eee om 8 oy e ae 5 aes =i
These verses hate been suppl. In marg. D by a later hand.

au i an ee (Tk) BOL ssl for 2431, and so A in mare.

If. 28

(cp Gy “tT

sa \ o39 5 So ene cele gm 5 $5 ogy

ENGRAS Sy he eli, aS Fy eb OI
Cee DO we eS
SX MSI aw » 2 3 +S Saggy F Bee cae He
Ub 9 pt Beg eed 0 yh IS or wo) Sy)
wb? + ot FL, HE jhe ly ol By
we SeN gL. 5h al Ni; ee gL jo) joa. Vlas
| Ne ale AN SS 6 cle sl ss aiar ee

rt

Pee Soya aass. 3 15 > a1 pal oOo Nt +c
Ub all Sa uly - : ob > ch SL ols Ir
mel aS Wt) so Ln e WLE oy — he ole a

= = \y Sas pce > o Le =f Let LS 3
Soe SO LE Vt ot etm ugh ys w= wl
MS oe oe Co! cyt ry 3) epee <i $6 Ss if-=
>) Le S35 on ese 3h Ge) 2! 5! 23> rsh Gs
Gi 2S Je o Le york ne
Noe Sla,5 es 7 * te &y S\ oy a9 AA cx

ol Je ae

peed SN ahls ob Fo oF ap 2 ell b> =

(S738) Bo. Se i Sl. DL'S Sisley 3: (TT) BD Bal. wr s SiN
(TT tA) D je xl ar (OT3%) D gee. D ne cere

(ST) aA ah é (rT) T Wyyet Jk gytel. Bul. 1, ys

OT) Bol we pall. (ft) DE le of.

(T-4) BE Bul. wl £. Bal. Utley}.

iTo 6 e539 Fao

Sah Ge 5 Se Ow NAS oo Ms yh 1 Oe
ee ei 2S Stl, ae A, tie
LS SS [gies Ges . Lan cae Gey bat a
es ee —— to _S ae . a a
FF dG LAE ge we 5 6 WN ete
— bls Jj3 doe ass 2 _ gli Fre
igs oo$ LE —_ sli ot ole yo dol, «& alsl te
J ee hy diane sn eee se > 3\ Le
gh 5 5 a ehke eal evs tk ok ess; S59 2 wl
sa 3) 64s oe ery | ons goed iealy aN Se
ps \, Iss re Lie ee. 3 3 bee iss Sy? oS
> pF SI are pan > . SS; \ 33 Bese ae
oytegn Tame ye
ot 1 Woy 225 9 Jo « Ph
S » de AS see IF" ie “ay Sst 5
oS 3) lk oS I * pee wr les 4h | oS
aa 3 pt WBS al SNS ef ee F og
CRN SR Se eae 5 wick aS Sc $e
(EE) Dos. (TED AL Bal. Ki. (*T°1) B i, the firet hemistich
a+ _.£. A in the second hemistich -.» and -. BDL Bul. \2s) ls, 5)
(TPCT) D pey5o 5). After this verse L adds:
Suge See Sy od wt eye cola cay IS /
(TF) B sty ae j) ary ol. (ee) A ols,
(TA) pos, y bot. OUD Ss. Buss. LEE Yad.
A awl ogy jl. After this verse L adds:

Bal. adda:

ay a 40%

ft ye j\ 7 pS eee oe 5 \ ble iS cit ttre
wi? tile pt cine Bl \Se e cae) po at ee th ig nse
a= 2)'> ond S 9); Aj we gle Abe Dobe Wolk 5 j\ Ls gle
atNiie ey Ate Ss i oe b gk 3) ae
Se Pe ae SOV eee meena! Fee —ayhs we ih ;,
hoy 5 Saas »\ oe ‘ oo “3 2 ohn a ttt.
So 9 dy = oF © Sis? 29 br Abs
3 pp aS oe ‘oS. SoS ib} , ye oes oS
we a= ule Gale. 3s + lel 3 21 iF 3! on 3\ x ole
ee eh has 8h 5
+0 — Let, | align © ils S35 lal tte

a Be) ian, ON ps Pl pel dh ad ae

J sey 5 pat gle so]; 2d ov oh get pl SLE ge
Ripe Sg Se abe; ah lo
See Ela yp cles ce} ab ew ae Le SV og 5) alls
wh es 3 Oe oi Nt 9 AT 24 9 2S OF
BEL, oe 5 pl Pee 2 fies LZ Oth
— $e ej Lie EES oe

Vaid 251 wt Fh ae oe

oN Sa BS 25 ts ge ge ae

(ttt) pol. 2 uk, (30) B ltt for 4 eo.

= 4 i i } j a
(FEY) A se Gl AE dyy- (SST) Bul. om. 5. (TET) A a for pe.
(STW A ously. (TTY) Bol. whe ol-

(TTA) Bol. =J59 5) 2b.

“Ty £ (> oe)

J @_\ a Si Cry eee a Gee LE nt 345 JU
aS ans to 2 Ne SS ate dy 9 Nol dS. Shee
Se oa Yo PA) CSc pew dat want Ss AAs ag
Re ace paegeeon ey) =, erp ee ein
3S eS 6 Sy aed . =5F 9,5 LS; sul
ls 32) Oe ats gl ee deel BET ty oe
Lie ooF sa) sol pepe et tt
SMa gee 9 1S 3t be 52» » L5,) HL os
HIT oF = 62S te Ot st ts oh os ern a9
pki re err eee ce poo . e
Dat le bod 993 Ls ew Oe | Ute Ly ll
HK JF 5) Jo > ob B55» Koy NE ol nt on
wl SUL 5S ST. NT 5s ths | ke
3) eee LoS _- 51 esl 578i oe p> 5 | L aS tr.
wel vly 5l jay Si Se 5\y ate piste
lea 5 pye sl ols coll ble My a See 2b) ls eh
wie G3 sb 3 ht a. Ns » = 554s,
—sile abc 55 +h AN. Sal, wk 1,
65.355 HS Wig) sod ge eee

z PF

CO) D al for win. A oll, us: BL Sears da}. (TEVA) D om. .

(TTA) A at. D xl for _». Bul. Si. (7M) Bol. \s; ard Si}.

(TAT) Baty yl. (FA) D Ble ce.

O¥A°) ABL (= 4 , oie- BDL Bul. have ,_. as in text. (WFAN) A pk,

(TM) L ule uss yp y= Ul AB Bul. 5i \,. L in the second hemistich:
a ae area age eT (TAN) A tes, B wisi.

(Ti) B gli 4h. Bul. 22 9 dls. (TTT) A Ski 3.

oe me £7

aloe siS 2 5\. re a ees
5 Css) oN as oS Ww be gue JK ig ag oe ls 8

KB oS 5 | Af a Shs hc shest tee

sel ells SD kes coe a4 52 aia So
US eens Aone nee:
ey ol et 3) be oo et aS oo eS dh >
I er 238 eS 5p AS. ps tue gS ac
4 SSG ge ey oS lay isl fie sl) al 5g ae OS
Be ete \e NG os nes 5 (pe ese
ls Vat 5,0 é—\, >, = « slew So si Sere , 3 S; TTY:
Lal; at 5b a ts Lal; 2 iS; ob
Si hal A> of Resa al ae
So yey oe) Stee pe gt Le, a Se pe hi
735 795 te So 7 = ¢. 359 xi wn Se ae tee OU
a es, tsp 4 Los? + 2»: $5 => Sal 2, tHe
J,,\3,5 5 \ 205° 3) ys 6 Sai aS 5 II) 2
JIS le We ole 2 ok ol oe tli gus!
BaP iy ST ad gs tty 9 S% 5 WS ome |
(TOW) Bol. aes. Bul a8 1 (i. (Tt) AB Bul. las ol. After

this verse L adds:

Jee iy eS kas” ov pe » oy wg 9 Ae Up a:

("019) Bo. Ys 4 AS. CT) Lom. (FY) Lom.
(TY) ADL S,. Bul. 50} (YI) Bot. lay » uy.
(V8) DE ts Cp. (TY) D Bul. aS F.

Ltt £992 Fe

Creede ee ayy she | pinoag yan \ AH 32
Sy Se VS re es Bx pele 6 2 he put
295 9 9S oF? Sy 52 oF + ay le ws J> y dust
Sul 3 #r el — 929 bute toy Pol xy oi
het S 1a 5 ‘| 625 wy + eS ba aeusty | + aSe Tilo
“se a eel Se pe » sh, ae Sanh 9 29
tes a» Sl fb se oo ye wt! aly bP
dai pe Jt od di 3 5) Lyles 8 >
aii ped 2° er cH Iq ghee sg gb Nes
Te MS x pacaat feu 3 op tye, ale tr-
so ys Sete. ie ge 2 LMS 5
oe VS Je pL oe. wae 5h Oe
J NARI REE of Na oh 3 F

= ae ed
mits No Z ra Jn . ak Pat Shy) a_tole
32 5 Lb be 52 5,20 - Se e— ji Es 2 tire

25 aethiasmetn st, yl Se 5 ol

ee TE eee OE

(TEN) Bol. ye 42 gpa (TST) Ty eae ae Lbs ule a S.
(FET) Bol. lus a 2,2 5. Heading: Bul. sig 5.9.
(TEE) ABDI pola. (8S) Dy jo 5 wisl. After this verse L adds:
é : j _ ° ;
ay sis ey oy \f * jut s\35-s Ya J
(20) BDL in the first hemistich she Jt £ jlo pi atl so Bul., which
has aie and A in marg. ED Bul. a 3%.

(iS LTA

pe als das i SGN Aae. gp eeaeln cas Grails ays
Ss jee ols hu eye « We on 3 peg Sb

ee > ae 2 oy) ods tab 405 Ue

glee Je eye wth, SS. soa pt shee C5)
Klin, ene yids) e ole le pte Ut
ole ost Gd ge LS * bel os ey a>, >
bo SF ayte 5 5 Se eS Lis th ee
wl yp et jee ore jap et 9 Sor 3\ Ss
doe snd 54>» Wy Sybase ds ace 1y\ atl ae,
eS ek aS i jo +15 3
a ee Wks oes 92 + GL— lb jo ace _ YG GF Tt
Gees sed jet) Gj Ss aes wile bee as
Pe eles 3 | Looe cpl e oS 2a gow Ll , Se
wl Pee o loen! AS 29d 0 ah een ale oe A |=
Sy 32S 253,41) a. yp ule onl Gt Us fe
| gle eee ocelim yi 5 Je, 5

(7%) A in the first bent aly jae

Heading: D (#ic) 1.\ before 5). Bul. = »-

(STH) D aU. After this verse L adds:

Me WS 54> euler akg s=—5 Jen =

("2-T) D om. ,. Bul. =—3 5° 3. L eer yal all.

(ve-o) A males; Sa) em? He Baul. ics \, S93 > we? She: DL his
ict. Bhas uit, bot its reading of the next word is uncertain. Ly gules
iit. (HY A 4,28, (TE+¥) Bul. sagt.

(TE: A) L _ T+ ‘ead A a (tt\-) D Bul. AF 4 oS.

Lil om #32

ER ee ee Jig aie Pee.
I HS cile 5 pr jit. - 52 » —& tt of
eee —S oli 2 Je Ge F
Vey Me Gt 5 3K Me pe I PS Gy ote.
ws a sole Ei jb fbn spe Aa py
Ws or alle ee AK Le» a Ve ol
le Say S59, ele 5) sy Vw ole 90 Ot God et oe
5 ghiS 2% or le oe SG ok xe Ghew 5
See ee the ape 0S Le I IT ge te
Le AS eS & ol or > GL str 5 GS \ geal
F Ay 5 ile Le 5 Tt) IS aS
sowdle ~\ 3p t Fl, 6 Sandip Nhs Sole
SS |, oS gS po ul Bee 2 oe RE eS ork; op
P=. SS en Say 2G Ee jacoye of Me oe ALi ge TH
Jd 1,25 sl, ee a eee

fe = ve” , , ere

ee

(TEA) Bt i: 4) A Gb FS. BD ol3S. L Bul. lS.
(2) Dl.» oe. L a oh gS = ES ol» oy.
(Ti9°) After this verse L adda:

th 8559 an tbl ee ow oh oe Eb coll he
Bul. adds;
V3 pptbl a Fh tats * Leolhl b ay au Ss
(FLO) D | seal. (il) BDL Bul.
nibs eres s\ haile * 45 3f ch. Cas pcg
(TEN) BDL os 3\ pany Lp) 4.2, and so Bul, which has 4 nie for pints,
and A in marg.

(Same So >

i LS AS ud ae + le ee sl ee ty oS
5b gia ls ola SNe > oll) 45 hI \pSoe
wee AN yt ol yy ole b TF > SF ob 9 ob
dp Sr H5 ye SIE ANF 0 29 GA Ae EAH HIF
aaa Jyh ci eo OS
Vda oe eS ee ee Sh \ alae ie es
cule \ ade © Gul. 2S ory Fy cS
OS lH ue FYE 33 + SB 5 Hobs bs
or ole lay » Sob ¢ ee lee eet gb bh Sy

25> ie dE ame 9 Le ale Ut? eS

pes Sh gl cylay > pony re Hl phe 52 Sy
ie a EF Gey NY EB I
cl Ee Vs Ale oS’ Pll oh a5
er gree Sa Sr jar t
9 5 oF Gd HES eS San, shea) Al py te
14> 3 33) elope og Ly o ee ibe eee 87
woe Bo the yy lt 3? § - Sohn 3 eM F
GH ol 855 IF See aViezalc
lt A) Leas holo pe ee

rP5 S22 ee ile G aif tu

4
(FAEY) AB slic. (TiT-) D Bul. a55 of s)- (TENT) A hyo:
(TET) Bal, ale. (TEL) D type. (4M) A, a8, BDL Bol.

os ce n- (Vitl) BL om. 5.

£4t 6652 382

ple ae Git DS Ger Uae aH oS
ony gf <H58 pete Wale ont § uli - 2S ye S
3S plas) ay5 p¥ 9) 6 » 325 5 ey SF oo gl
wok) > ols SS see eo Ghee yl aude p wk od
oly i la eS ee es) uwriss? J> ava) Wy OF
ree oe Se ale 72 0 ys Shy jl dL hye ae tre
Bee iS a a a eek 3) Wal allp so
Se oy ell 5 3S a seg.
teen aS Cate 9 ee Sti) to se 52
oH es 5 c2\ JS she Aes 2 olf oF we oe
WF galt lL, stb lb ele he ad 5 ek tt.
Be Ne Lg Ge ee et 6 DE Wy ele ah 1b
J Fim ee a \yesiee 45 2 Se Gdj2 ene gh Lie a
ii te use saisls & 3). pe el gS _Sal x2 Sh
en Ao iy «ee po ole eae ee
BARS ipa ee ears De ree
ae cal Meld Sie us hl. ee ee
se AST a be gilt pe end OI

(72M) Bal. Cite pe ES S cnyxt - L yy'+e,3, and so corr. in D,

(FEAT) BDL Bul. 238 age Gis lose ». After this verse L adds:
at :% ae pola by * OS s ae le L
ie § ae shh ko + igo § se t's

(TEA) D> ae LS). (TEAY) A rls. D 5 for I.

(EAA) L 59 de. (Tet-) A \a5 Sj. (FEU) L Bul. is pe 5) 3
(S21) ABL cle SS. (WE) AB Bul. ol pi 49.

(vet) A pipe 5: (TLty) D 3 5) 5 5i ach

(Syme Sy Lif

lal; HGS oy» f - es a) Sa G3"
wih oy) j7 =F s + jl Sh die yp — ~y me
fA pat opt ee Sh cee gd letlo 4 ox Gar
vst NL Ws ont US eS of § Se BE rr
Se ab 5 ot Ve pew tet ng ee ie 5h ye
aS ph DLs ays Sot a ge ub on
soe cel Sooo 0 tS wah 5 \ wile Lo tev-
sls esos At aged op be eh 2 oe 2S
Liss ole oS eh) ayy + el Ra Reeny a
FOES Ss colag heh ee
ple acls jp ot aL. pe er SS te 5 HI
FW Bos Paen *e ym SE eS) eee Bee
owe Noslect oy eS SCR ee Sy Ce ees
Cia SS Pert eo

(oF ree oS & js 5) NS

are CS ey 3) ale « < BS 29553 «$457 ay
c fi | re = : Lo 4
+56 - V5) 3 ha Late ee 4 3) 2 lt scthaas asl

(299) AB Bal. 45,2 y+) o2- (FV) AD on sy 3\. BDL in the
: i { cit | LF
second hemistich 35 .¢ yrs or Lor: (fe\t) BDL

32° ei) he ol si Ss * 3) [Si oe 2th oe
In Bul. this variant follows vy. T2YV os an independent verse.

(TEY1) Thul, tes a oe Sie (TeVT) op Vasl jl. Bol. Yel yo. After
. a ee
this verse L. odds: es isl dy le ,> 54 ayy * yoy a es 4)|)
(vLyvy) Bul. SF a Heading : Bul. isa ps us.

(viv) p re ye Bul. om. 5-

ae nee AS, gh ro sy got

Soe ao Lins I
oF 9 th SS oe yy o 33° gS Lay
eth ee —y, gt pe OH I 39 _P—
jhe 5 eh 5 4 Fs Li jo Sh GF BF 42> oF
SF Gl ov ob, ME og + Gye Ube Ss 2} 55 OF
op} eek ll otal 6 3593 ELE lel
wr) _¥ ul Ue as) Si rm 7 Vk
x by 5 gy olal bs 55 5k Se LL; Le

=

G9) 4... ae Lo SF ake. LS = oe a SiGe yg tere

wie So ale NL dee eS Sel et oh i
he 5 eet ott sbbe or +» br sl ols Let Ji a
eke ee ee =— eS ~'
Ce Ga ee = er jy? 8 ene 8c é Uris? ee ak Fort.

(F\9) D sy for 4». D 1), but originally 21),.

(TeV) p pee y»- A hos is Sle written above is pone » After this verse L adds:

del Ses ay aS xe = give be Lays

(TOV) A dy: (lA) Bol gy a (Tels) A a, jk, Instead
of the second hemistich D has the second hemistich of v. Tete.

(Ter) Dy Sny for ais. (Tore) A jig g. Bul. JS for 6 &.

(erY) Bol. fife a A lye gh ead. (Tt) Bul. om. ,.

(Ph) A LS oe Pat.

Looe ism aa

a eee > SF Wel plo OF pe
SIS yg el om pe ot SS eh ot
ew oF 5 ol 5 ST ws +! ib Yi ©

wl og Is aS 5 \ aes by 3) ig Ae
<n) cn er ee ue oF Py) Hoy St yy
ey pe ere oy. ew)
Ks hg 35) sth oy 5. 55 5 a2 Boy Fo ase
per oF th Shad Uo eae

‘Sct het tet S dye ol nbd bo pais
dau) ails ft pte « 3 et Ld 2 he
\,tn tl ot 35° aSeiig «Les We als ti Vp
Wels eas doe ol ad SNe ales Me sad
fo 5j\ > oo? Irs? nr I Se IF
5 te Se lid « aS Se eek
Leh aas Sse 5) 5. rs 3) ey 243! 23 e
Lab 1 s\5 Pees ali (bls i gpl) RS oe
wy su) het ‘a wi DPN yd Se ES
ee Gs lak 2,1 3p I ste » Vt iF oe

(To--) A | for «. (To°T) Bul. ie 5 BDL Bul. +5 ol ay. BDL
Bul. = 5 jy ul a pe Cae, and so A in marg:

(Tt) DO £ LC ol. (8) D a

Heading: Bul. (55 at Bul. yi S a ur deo:

(t9-1) BT, cuit. (Tod) Dok we. (T+) AL, Vimy.

(TOM) A ash Sl a DOSS laws

(TOUT) A ae se L pF 2: | 3)) dese.

L2y beg2 Teo

op Se

As 25 bey. Lis tlle aS a
bh wp > we ye fe: wl ie jo, eee
satin gle 42 2 Jo Ge + eK oF es b io
Bath 2 “Mah SAGES Sa ASS gp y2 Se og Winds 5
gs SV de os + bh oe obj lr 2 ob Fe
S35 uy L— fb 5 a oS Sao > 7 uh
_ I Ae pro pout « = js gp? wa Se glo ay jo Teor
SY a nie SR
WaT by eo! pb ti S Lysis ee i
Le ar tel Le Sti; © 3 peat esl Se
wltod 5 Joes —- wtly es dll oe Colle We
per os We gl PLE ose Jer ek Lo, bel
uy Vu op 2 on 3 - US cas ay) ge =
33 ye EES L. Hb a! 3) chs sels
obiaii 4b wT es wlio |e 5 \ of (Me Lage
ey @ errs a3 SP mete) or 3
eee ge 54 |y Ls mie 6 eet le \, Lb pata Tele
Se Wo AS Spe we auneo thas A Oey:
aus ue eet 3 Soe cle Ge ol th sso, =)
9 ie eee tee Sigg
pps das 55 2S 5 od 5° ‘oF ob oy > + Sin e+

———

(Fok ABL palag. BG plo J. AL Bal. wi. (86°) Loy 9.
(0°A) Bal. ee. (Tl) T plz. (TH) D Ad os Dy jhe
(t*12) BL Bul. 1a) _px~ in the second hemistich, and so written above in A.
(Few) A sg I. (el) A oh oF: (F¥N) A ey:

DA poy eh Cis. col A, as
noel Vite uth wh). “a bel Ath Sd geil
AN dass Veria By gts WSs '50 oth ke sletl oy Lo,
sw\ tes 2 Go a 3) + ol L_.,\ \g05 N= 8 sos
ay S any\ S sly Bie Syme geo Leeth \, g\ 2) 2 tote
pn? 0S RE VS oe Leth eee gh cle + ie
yA 33 clj 42 Jai ly Soe SSA Net 85 ences
<e ag Name b Fy oye de> OTL FA
ae ok ab & ae S My woke We shall jo S 3
oy aoa 3 3 boc \ pees 4S ) apt lel 5 La; nl tet
woke Lo .,| ee ae 0 Seah en: Ris yes ett
jai al. \,,) 2— 3 eb go 5 Ce eelee
a, SN LT cS oko Sas US ls aT
eel ee hott obk po eed + AS. sit 8 Lass ci
T ae oo, S 5 Se 2 5 > BS 332 2S ey FE
oy GL 2g Set Wy 1 Or —i% ob; oa er
a5: Vail ps oly whe A Gk Yole ce te
ls = \ we J + > ae Ls wit iy te

("°tT) Suppl. in marg. A. (Tet) BOL Bul. wi jle aide, 22 \S s.

(Fett) D om. (tT) Dp om. In A wv, TOTS, TOT1 follow vv. TETY,
TOTA but corr, in mare, (fT) Bol lett. (TeTA) AB
danse Ss ex: D \= for >5+. (T°T%) Bul. ols ule. Bul. slo gl.

(VOL Dp. he L 3 Suis ba 3? In A vy. ToL|, TOL follow vv. yer,
Tous, (TRL) D | > oa. Bol. a... (Ret) A at Slee » Wh.
B 3» is Bul. oy cel (Tekh) Verses TOLT—TO1 are wanting in D.

(Fela) B ole 6 3- L wie Neuss

£24 t Rice yoo

ie eee Levee S&T

oF op obs WF ols eee
ae 3g ooh F x pa nde Nagle Ch ANON LE cee
— oe See we: d; wal suka GF ae F tote
> 3 hy Eyer 4) LoealieBk c's we ase Poe)
Lie Voge 2S oy, At oy og + LB sh 3) ts | oa ele

=) 255 es eal os pels 3 aS cr Yow
7 ore se ol pra Al 83 sige SF ot oF
—, sl Oo Sg cel ee el oe LA oe JS LL tote
Peper on" pak Le Fo SN fe ae
a all al —_ , a
ee ey x ‘ensent Ue. er Je te
3S w=" 49) ee arses orn j\ oH OF
we BF ath OE FN lee al 3) SU ie iG

—Z — 3 2 hk; 3 a abt 3 vi —- <i

CM ale \ penne 2h <> MM ade it oF 38"
oS Bae Jr poy 3) Ae ie pe et wl
cae | Jeo > Al Jt we. cmt J ny? po ak S
PP oo Sr ee Fe FL lal hk oe

(TAY) D's for \. em DS utes sl Gt (FAY) AB lye ie
A > _™ 2 (tot -) Dp hy ay | = (Vert) Bul. - a= uret \y3) <pan Bul-
Le 1,3) 2. (TetY) Suppl. in marg. A. (TTA) Suppl. in marg. A.
(FOUl) A nen Sy. (TN) DL ais.

Heading: A om. — »?+ Bul. ,3b Sa » cdl Netle ® st ws eae.
(Tl-£) BDL Bol. cjai\) 95 uch oe le.

It. ra

“as beh or — = or ee aS Wr.
BIS Ney len & JB o 4 eS opt Oe 5 dig
Je il one ls see oe + Se ag Wt ed) Sy 3? SP

oa) aise Ge AS isyee Oo! os S .3155> ole
oe ge oS es Soi sot ule st ia fae
ee Se eee sO he is oS iS
op Alas Sh okt om + oy Ge F HE Ex 99 Wal mre
ee wre Oy Fe Sy SF 59 SF 5s od
Je Le trey S| B 2 OS + As NS Jb)! we
SE We Go! G4 » a. _ a5 | ts 3) Reo
mi —K.. Sh. Js « cao Gal Ala sl

J Lia) rh ae 3) ee 2 5) LS ay <-> | ey Fes.
ef Serge SUN. cel ops clingy Mw elem
hk Oi aap ss ch a
22 559 Go eb So oy pe GS GL —
Gil +» , fleas 5 a9 eee es plo sw, L.
a a Jal dashy Pot Dy > 35> ae § a2t,} Ul teox0
Jol — |> le 2 0 bp Ff SID By foe L_.

(Tov) TD apf hes. (TovT) L J a. Be Fs uly -_-
(TeV?) Bal. os Glo gas- (TeVA) A 5. Bul. as il ae ol.
(FeV8) Dy elht iy 5l- (teA\) B Bul, j)5) o) oh

(TeAL) BY cle.
(TA) Suppl. in marg. A. A ,gtalt. Bul. gas 5 ja\s.

(7°41) Soppl. in marg. A.

zo\ hpa? pas

soup Well §1 Whacd hy cewlalc lees
wwilals _) a, yl gue ew celailes ye aad jl us\
“a alles Ss Se 2 oo Lie Sb
AS LA es SS 53 JF SF 5 Sh ol
(5) PS tds Sle chy oS =
po el SS Gee y HH Sere
Sag tm <2 ae oy 9 We he eae oS Fe cae GS
cee ods So LE ee ass cal 7, Se oS Zt > eS
let ome | Se 1 GSil pp tl aly Lb 2 oe
JWT gt tet gece 3 6p oS
eke Lah oS bo Pe ts OO He te Uber | sane tit:
enily S er oe: Se eal, eee
i Welle xd Ps oe cml FL te 5 a9 8S
Ns 9 AS oy ie do as RS we ed
dy O32 O93 aly Hh a > 2S FF 5 seb ef

a # a 1 .= uo

CbL Jo 50 JbL y= ol 15
= 3S te p> cul ahi ¥ ren a oly 2b eid
ri re and so corr. in D. BDL 5 a one Bul. ». = a Pao and so
rr. in D. (TW) D dee. (WY) ABL Bul. sl 3) ale.

(nen ABL Bul. § for S. (FF) ABD \, +. (FW) L ed.
(WF) AD JF. ADL Bal jl. geiel (MAL. (MY A eA
Bal. 5. © () D |, la, th. BL Bul. >, t= 5) thy. Bul. 9p» |,3)-

Heading: Bul. ,4,. A om. LP: In Bul. the heading follows y, TUT 1,

wey LS ‘oo,

2) s\_-s\ “ ) wl a Pt 3§ oe \ oe = cp) v1.8
oot Sib x5) p> OF Put oe or Ce ed

Gad 95 o>) 3) Jel
Vee 5 anwFy 52 Yas US Le. al OS Fh
S45 bo Ee 5) 35 US wie Se . Se 33)
wa? als gp aH a ee ele. 3
Was. wb Spay GSS pp 0 WS SNES Cole ae
Voek poe wc ly) ak Lo ee Yas LE pol
«JEN
spe pts Vy hig SLIN wab o eee s)) Se SA |
“peed 5) any) ok ph > p35 52 aul 2b @— ut
\yewye DSL 00 thats oe Vee? Bote a Leris
tg gee oS NS 5h 6 x2 5h 4g cat 3) 6 Gd gy MUP
dy Oeste S| EE op vt gto oy Ot LALIT le
led 495 Ste oF wer eo Ud CAS, Sees
28 is a oS ox ol ts Sat iF soil 19
or 59> > whe g dis Stregyacunel ens ole 2

cll Las le USS3 oF > | HS At nt p49 Bh eet

Thea

=
= oe Nae Jaden aves Bh
and so A in marg. (11-4) D gpl for yl. After this verse L has y. T1:A.

(UT) Tata. A 26 for .. (TUT) A ki sal pls.
(TUE) A Lyewey> LS Cae (72) Bul. om. a. A Gia sl | as
(TW) 7, Oe. (TWA) B Gai is! -

£oT 6 ¢3? rr)

x ask » 5 ote 9 Ske 8 Se ee Ly Ey 0 5>
we Fp gS po SM te A ee 2 et el
CAUSA ey | Were S| ic} poke oat SUP ja Bed pod yg Me
as by ne F UF ijly 2 2 eg SN ope sl ee
natch tle F\ eee aks aes | aux, Ay
Ay Ge 5 the +1. Lt wy HS LU, i ss

‘she Sb yy esp ol je ae wie

¢~ 3 uti S ji wo! 335) = i ds —_ he = 27
pp N\A oh LN + yo oh oe ety oS m1.
wer lef 3) oe pag bee ee Lo Bh te G
oe Jil soyhe Ll. ah ge ere a oy sy
ceil. wil wil 5, payll . emi, g ay od, Lat oi
soe ob 9 alle wai oobi Oe TSE of
ess 4) re ety she Ll pS Link St
> —! Nie 3) It 8 ole )- jp —— Ee)? Ss
Msn gl Bi, he See ls +h pas ae UL
at 5° al, Le 24) ols di. et Ga, , 2435 at
kt et; ihe ale be OS Hs sh

(FUT) A jue yg Deh. (Tiel) A om, anu, in mar. 2... A ex
(Met) DL Bol. eel. .- (Mev) AL Bol. acl,

(TIM) A gad y fle et. D gu at ul.
(PVE) A ro ji.

iol — -

(Spm Som Lof
seb Sis 2 Sane g? ye! oS. con, 4 Lod >' aS SS
espe Sl — s)\> ccauel * Cosi uaF oS 22 5429

+ ntl) Lisl . Fs. SeoNes t= x egy pt
AIS js See o el ee on Lvbl ie mm

PIPE Yer EP o\ Soe" Sp & oe he 5\ rae
wry ee 2 eee GeO ee —jlels sl isl a
oe Se Sy hog Gg a) or 5S oD
— a ee Shae > 2=)> we ole 3 ae etl __ alto
ils 5h aay cyte da ue —) Rea) h) Lsls sil
GER ie Barge er ete a
Siva sad ay Bile ep pe ie ET oil pl 6 shoe oF
ay wort & tage 6S oS 6 RSG ROS Dy \S—
pile Gh and LS ps cl gail tia) pai a
NT sh LE aul st § Glee. naked ws oro

~~ \ LSE lommeee, ty * 2 So _ gio | - Se ely wt, Tle.
ato ut gy) we ce 5° « Lei ae pool Ur jf

(TUTY) A a3. D iS 5 tile 9d 9 ed cpl. Bul cso ol.

(TITA) T, Bol. stake 5-4. (TW) ABDL Bul. cate!) oll.

Heading: Bul. 955+ (tle,- (THEM) A 5) Se. A ot Boe) oy B
a4 it da: (T144) Bol, 2ol3. D yleeytce. In D this and the following
verse are transposed. (TUS) Dy old cpl. DD cyleeg ke.

(Tu) B ee ile, and so L. (MURA) TD | tae BLS ine

("W-) B Bul. B> wo ict (S11) Bul. geo le OW 2- BD GW 5
Sr ls “pA ell, — is written above the line in A, and so L, which
writes sl.

Loo bp92 a

Bale leg wr PNET GSS
LSalkel ale a8 856 6\\ 35 ol eB Wa

535 We Leb 5 we. as Se AN pls po
—# UBI> 55 dae sl st ye Cdl AI sje cote
liste 6o\, LA bX So Soe Bo Oe, le
pos We 55) 6 52 hoo & 83) BS
Je te 3S okie yl. Ue a Wo ala be
seth th opts to she + oball Ube oyte Gikyo oh me
GL VLE oT ee ei. BLS, Ke eo ob » oi
BS yo est oe cbaly ¥ « \ptl ath Gye Lt Us
cal 8 els wok. \ 5°» onlay —#\3 o> ke oF
pas ob see iT. la sk O45
Ma A\j5 Go Gos Ost <5) Hh wos ay 7S \Spu M0
ei oy eet Gel ob. tes \ £55 Gh
So sols ES we oe 1 ON LE 3 On oy
oe 3) ons oN J) on SF wrk) o ae vl, uw
3 _ Sal e oy) ASS Deny caer ft tai 53l

wat oy ely p Pade § wea unas ol
a> s,dil ells ly We * oy or ad Ea 5+)\5
(TUN) A oi [$>] > 43 Sole AB gy as in text L ges lad Lo
oH % S$. Bal. pjyl ple. (TUL) BDL |, Wl.
(CW) L osly obde. (TU) L aly jl. (AN) D LL pt.
(TUT) BDL Bol he, cuclg oh fioo « hi th sulky uke &
and so A in marg. (TW) Bol. sls.
(1M) a hil, for 4115.

C Spee Syte Lot

Pt

ste gas aS NE +s 0 tS gS 4d, cape 9 TH
he las ds pe WS, Geil Was Ls see ST
cula, pF \ UN ot. ens LI Nw de oS KS
seg 3G (lL LS <) el oo Aly) 033 2S
ony A So sa 3? 1 2 Hh Ls $5)
S 5 Ge oy S> Gr 9? #99 9 2 On Se ar A
<n bea 3 Ute or cole « ss) th 3) 2b lip se
Slab SI) 5 dyes) gf gmat eek Golo 5 di tye de
Far 9 Se Ls lL. ea rw OR ee at Me
ols Be sli y cle L «+ oli » Se 9 — 8 5
Sek AV 25, — gat ge - Ls LS 3) itl GSI

Keo kk Ko» SOS cee WS lee os
Vol oy 2S tt

Ps oS cpl oi _ % o . n> 1, ua» aio 55s lone

(W-) BDL Bu. 2 y hd “Ge CS ob * ea ul Sy Sys 9

and so A in marg. (WW) BL Bul. wisi &. BL Bul. » = pb rs e
wile &, TW) DS yl. BS for 3S. ABL sli, 5 yf.

(We) After this verse L adds:

Moe SS eps Jes pI Sheer
(FWY) BD Bol. 5) 5. L et Utes J!-
AV UVA) A sm 7? 3 rt. After this verse L odds:

gle as! —ib \ yids a3 * ole ol got Jel =e
cae? 9 gh ish jie ge Sy ol) we * Se A ey Ot che» ur
(TUA-) After this verse L adds:

os sll 5 Ge ob oe cry

Heading: A \ Se rr Bul. Lol a Ft n+ wt?
(FUAl) I, in the second hemistich: «4 oicil is 4 3) S ye TL adds:

Loy 63° yes

dt Lely on 624 oe 0 2p We La, Sl vy
Ay hk at at ot oF chy . 4) ale 0), oF
sale HEISE & Ji) o2 HL Ub g ee $F
3) ath oh (¢ =, le ped ath sob yk d cal dee
a 2? a esl 133 vk alo ,! Z\ cm ee
43 pa yy J CIF BY 6 pp aul we 5 5
a\ joel 4) Jo j' (3 \. ool lal ah ole
Peet IS rg I pt 552 b es ee eee I 4,551 ee
my wy los, aS a ‘ ame JF S)5-50\ 2 us We
uD Se > Gt ue \ oh Gee S50 \,\ 298° ye sony?
SMostl- ahs 055.4 sl\pe Ae» Witug| i eee ne er)
S55 ae +a wk oh Se, 2° Gr — a
wet why le Udl os . eb , wl lye sled) ae
SIs) ay) 26> ps Meade le go Leatl SF olls F or
Y— SoS ep oe ae Lo al > SH?
gee Le pS jh Le Evo. 53> et 2H) pd
on! lyr o> 5 JIS jo. LL. is 3 f— Sb
plat.» yh 59 j= > sag A \> ae 3S S$ sone tte
to cany 55S pi >) oat ‘tr 3 L—# 5\ fr oy 3)

(TY1Y) L om. In D this and the following verse are transposed,

(iA) p 4h: SL as. Ly u,b. (V1) BE tS.

(WT-) L Bol. ae , (2. (TT) ABT cule, 5.

(WT) BDL Bol. 21 55 oe LAs Le CVT) A Bul. Ss.
(TT?) ABL Bul. alu. (TT) Tom,
tvil) L om. Ves) D om.

ioe ey 20)

ol typ ale 5 “35 Aor gale spams ie ose
Sm; Ba ih al Sa Go ales
jle\ Sk zLEG ual StS oso Js 3) ss “pasta AS
NS gh at coll. he ol 2+ _ Ale ol

SF she & ae ose ep Sb pe Or FF
ay 3 = \yS gr yylebe oxpls m 3 y= > piwik \, grails tee
WM po 2S, S42 5) plies « by #) a Leelee gy
Le ye Uk 5 dese S- Le 4p ch ene I
ae Jub. 31 her ee
as atte s- i pice pe
OL cae Sk es ol, tysmee oF ty ite
Sith llr gets th 8 yy et Le dy at Ob rt

Je 1) Wy, jai \Lai\ ole slay be 9 dle ele »
‘Nay ale JM Je

ats eel we So; Jb * io zl -\ ~ Z| iP A ae
ie 3 I 27 ) a= , ah o giaws 5! ;
whey: oo es 351 = ke Ce et che Y5) rive

Pde

Jat t=], ae uae a “> atl > jo
ee

(¥-®) Bal. 3 i>. seal) i ane for shal

(VV) Bul. \e,55- Bul. lass: (SV-A) Bol. a5 for J3-

(*¥-%) D Jb for Eid corr, in marg. (Vis) L aS bis.

COVE) aA dos B Bul. =>. Heading: A om. 3\. D \ haat cy yt

(FY) D sas ogel, L ty a aye}. AB ary as in text,

Lot eso vos

x53 ub vi we» i > lh!) Lk ol
eae wy ral shi . carga lal! Zila

es: (ie ee ia
oy LE ge edb Lite woe WL lg ¥ § cr
aol lt etl, sasSlt.o5 ils ol Sm a
ad cole bs 5S ye : E08 oe S58 sh
he 3) 5 Sowa re » N45), SI Ail, ve

St Wisely: hes tenn —-$ _ |e na
Mieiees 5 Se clel>s «oad Lo jh le poke
TG \ \ypesle carb .-, Nit tage 3 ve > \>o _
en 3) ASS; yea e sctlalay coupe V3 rat
re} om av APN) Se gl, 5 dhe net< Lala tw-
aos Bb NaS an 9 nF omeoly OA ya Rg Si

(OVA) B lls eit weal) glee, DL oelae for 2—!is. A in the second hem-
istich lo sais. (FYOX) A 2 for 42> in the second hemistich. In A vv.
V¥°% and TY11 are transposed, but corr. In imarg. (fVM) p ual 5

(FYT) D om, ¢,\ and has |, suppl. after ey.

(1) Dom. A (Nb for edb. yi) a Fak.

(TH) A ye il 5. L Bul. tgme. A a? jy. L Bul. taps,

CV) BDL Bol. cys al wx 4 x5 2 * ole ty» OF Jy si

(Vit) ABT Bul. S for 3) é. (Y-) ABL Bul. yp for ».

("WV") BL Bul. ¢\o for ja.

(Spas iS LOA

a S5\ eS yd Gy A + po um aa Ss 3) soy 2
Fy F wa) th Hh WS og We VST FT
ed bel ‘inca. Wb » oSt vith, g» uble 3
ee JS ress ree IP gta g Els ply sl
S52 oh ape care 3 e a gat rl eae \_;
sé ih >» wal yt. ob5L ej 5 le
aks 325 ob, et {Ap ow « oll aca > | =>;
oe “ a3 i ar a aici: ra
pt ae sacl L sol + cit aN of) bie
i IF oy!) je * “ agg ar = \ Su
si 2 3 Sy Jk 5 & + Hoty Wie S ky pe
Bg yep 25) 05) GW ge AS ee lek 6 oh
\ypaettle ue al, soliSis eye phi! aoe
oe 5 LE 4g 2a) eth oy Gb uv FM ra
Aaj tS J» ul sy¢ DST se ss! JIS)
St MS a a 5 pe ighs Alt ieS ob

3) 3,\s wale som wg? ri 35) lle «aS cta ene TYoo
aes v2 js! 8 WLP S Sy >\;! i) as) <_

Yt) In A wy. TYTY, TYTA follow vy. TYT4, TYE", corr. in marg.

(TYtA) ‘nr Bot aL Zi for alS5. A 2S). (TYE-) Bol. yi for ene -

(YET) Boonel for at. L old. L a 5 (Fyie) B lia ys.
(T¥L)) Dp usa Ful. S for rr (TVLA) A om. B asl 5 5\ Ss:
(v¥o.) J, om. D aS aS. E wey cule (Tye) pb > Aa Pris.

(t¥et) B las vy).

11 fe? {pao

ol3,\ sie sols » slits. oh j\ soa, Ld hl
oot ioe aol oo a , soe gh oy ts dal; isle PY":
1) wile 92 ew, lye (Hare, 3) 28 abe aioe
Bs sae se Be By yn A ee

Sy es yale bcc, cious cue
cule Ao 5h ar by Nae ke culde 5 pe ep Gal wel
3\,5 pee > ele) 6 ole o ak 55 9) sa) sok.) te
IP 3) O35; osle lj +7 3 je GLA; oe
x3 Reis de 3 ob » 35 5 o> 5) 1Seu HE 42
cele ifaw S ectla o Vycews e NE GN yl ae) Se pe
ss on S35 5 ol) V3 Je yit ~_#}5> S a » od
wu YL Fle tty Le lh os! & Je (a.m.
NSS A gl) Rohe L's. Ee a lg
lel és op lel ass , let Sa~ oS \ gto
wee gy Sy Gat FS ee pS VO 13 \Wwoase dp
aE ae 23S O35, PEAR eee. Fe lS 5 0356 sh
SO! de oe tS be ade eho cp po 35

(VI) D asleal. Desyy 49. WI) A ne Bul. jm. AL om, 5 bis

CVE) Dom. L 5) 9% for llas|. Lin the second hemistich: , Fe |
3 L 5 pee. After this verse D Bul. add: ;

jL4 5) FM ti a6 ele cele yl ak
and so B in marg. L adds:
By Bt Sa $3 erteel oy ls
3) £8 Uys? opt bot slyly cele oT ak Uy

(tvi) A a0) (VU) A oN Seat So) gy)
(T¥t%) AL iy be. (FAN) A ley | al; ls toe

—
(FAT) BDL lel esp 25S Mtn. (TA-T) Suppl. in marg. B,

(Span (Sys £1.

osu ob bene} + hs 2a
ast ly Los: » SH». wt lg soe
See cl foNe eat ee
Sap) ass Pb uit ee ol Sp WAL p-
Se as te: ll. Si br HF
Sona Ng 2 > Le 8s uth adh, alle L
cn eure T22* H o ls 36 Ni
As Lee hs slay ~~ « SN pililgy oe L
Fr wo ALG les eb gb wt eh
2) 1 Sates wl a3 = be oe Lip 3 cl, wi &

cel y dds ore dy. ee le uy ob !
Jhb, lle, Le te gh» Sp Sule » Ses
dua. | sls Fala ayes wD 5 35) pow 29 Vu

a we! 39> 5 fae ns . ae Sr oi sent 3 eS HAE

2 ape cee oe gh ee en
aah ales

5
acals Js a sale j)? 6 aol wily Bi t_ sia;

(T) D om. 5. (yt) AB Bul. See pup. (14) B Bal. lel Je
(TYYY) Ds for \. ("YVA) Suppl. in marg. B. BDL Bol. # > »-
(YA) AB Bol. Lo »- A ed to. (TYAT) B lunj be

GYAt) BL aa pl alt. (TVA*) Suppl. in marg. B.

(TVA AB Bol. tcle yet. (TVAY) A om.

Heading: Bul. g\j~ Sey p ea! reel le.

CS pes Se 2 1F
ait aoney pore ioe . eS yah alin 3 al tome
Sa. lS ole lek. LSlele ye wl |
ton 55 wie 3) aye La NE 51; esle ob
ee31, ei i, Se Se sl, 35) uo SLAB S22 p98

LS oe Fray oylail Ae BS AN Sey pg TAN
(TA-¥) After this verse L adds:

381 end Se cue od * Sot ole > a
(FAsA) A > 9 for tle JL. Bul. a3 oh. (TAst) AE al.

‘ Sahl eee lal sid\ ¢

2066S _

Gano. @97-o) Cae |

+ Author—/ Ni Mine ee: sp ois